Managing drug overdose requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a nurse, laboratory technologists, a pharmacist, and several clinicians in different specialties. Without proper management, the morbidity and mortality from codeine overdose are high. Therefore, the moment the triage nurse has admitted a codeine overdose, the emergency department clinician is responsible for coordinating the care, which includes the following:

- Ordering drug levels in the blood and or urine

- Monitor the patient for signs and/or symptoms of respiratory depression, cardiac arrhythmias, and narcotic bowel syndrome

- Performing various maneuvers to help limit the absorption of the drug in the body

- Consult with the pharmacist about the use of activated charcoal and naloxone.

- Consult with a toxicologist and nephrologist on further management, which may include dialysis

- Consult with the radiologist about imaging tests to ensure that the patient has not swallowed any drug packages

- Consult with the intensivist about intensive care unit (ICU) care and monitoring while in the hospital

The management of codeine overdose does not stop in the emergency department. Once the patient is stabilized, healthcare practitioners must determine how and why the patient overdosed. Consult with a mental health counselor if this was an intentional act and determine risk factors for-self harm. Further, the possibility of addiction and withdrawal symptoms have to be considered. Only by working as an interprofessional team can the morbidity of codeine overdose decrease. Initial short-term data reveal that the use of naloxone can be life-saving.

Opioid Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS): The FDA has required a REMS for opioids so that the benefits of opioids outweigh the risks of addiction, misuse, and abuse. All the healthcare providers are strongly recommended to complete the REMS education program and advise patients and their caregivers on safe use and serious risks associated with opioids.

Given the potential for misuse, clinicians and ancillary staff (nurses, pharmacists, and mental health professionals) must be alert to a patient exhibiting adverse effects of codeine use. Nursing can monitor the effectiveness of treatment and watch for signs of adverse events or misuse. The pharmacist should counsel the patient on proper medication use, watch for signs of misuse like early refills or "doctor shopping," and report such behavior to the clinicians involved. This communication also applies to any mental health professionals or social workers who may interact with the patient. Only with a collaborative healthcare team approach to therapeutic codeine can the drug attain its intended purpose without causing adverse outcomes. [Level 5]