**Glossopharyngeal Nerve (IX):**This nerve has three functions from three different nuclei, the main motor nucleus, parasympathetic nucleus, and sensory nucleus. The motor nucleus is located in the nucleus ambiguous, found within the reticular formation of the medulla, just below the pontomedullary junction. The nerve runs through the subarachnoid space, exiting the skull through the jugular foramen. The motor component of the glossopharyngeal nerve only supplies the stylopharyngeus muscle, which contributes to the gag reflex and helps elevate the pharynx when talking or swallowing.  The parasympathetic preganglionic fibers originate from the inferior salivatory nucleus, located in the pons. These fibers synapse in the otic ganglion and proceed to innervate the parotid glands to stimulate salivation. The sensory fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve innervate the chemoreceptors and baroreceptors of the carotid body and send their information to the caudal nucleus solitaries. Cranial nerve IX sensory fibers also innervate the posterior one-third of the tongue, carrying taste, touch, and pain information to the rostral nucleus solitaires.

**Vagus Nerve (X):**The tenth cranial nerve contains four nuclei in the medulla. The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve, near the floor of the fourth ventricle, is the largest nuclei of the vagus nerve, and it runs from the rostral to the caudal medulla. The dorsal nucleus receives afferent fibers from the hypothalamus and has efferent fibers sending parasympathetic signals to the heart, stomach, bronchi, esophagus, pancreas, and proximal intestines. The motor nucleus is within the nucleus ambiguous, which is within the reticular formation of the medulla. The vagal fibers from the nucleus ambiguous innervate the muscles of the palate, pharynx, upper esophagus, and larynx and stylopharyngeus. The motor innervation controls speech and swallowing with the help of the glossopharyngeal. The general sensory fibers of the vagus that receives information from the pharynx, larynx meninges of the posterior fossa, and the region near the external auditory canal reach the caudal nucleus solitaries. The general visceral sensation from the chemoreceptors and baroreceptors of the aortic arch and digestive tract is carried back to the nucleus solitaries as well. The gag reflex, cough reflex, and carotid sinus reflex occur via the combination of sensory and motor fibers of the vagus nerve from the nucleus solitaries. The taste sensation of the epiglottitis and posterior pharynx gets carried to the rostral nucleus solitaries.

**Accessory Nerve Nucleus (XI):**The accessory nerve is the combination of a cranial nerve arising from the medulla and cervical roots up to C5. The cranial nerve nucleus starts from the nucleus ambiguous. Nerve rootlets until C5 leave the lateral aspect of the spinal cord between the dorsal and ventral nerve roots and ascend through the foramen magnum to exit back through the jugular foramen and supply the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles.

**Hypoglossal Nerve (XII):**The hypoglossal nucleus is situated midline near the vagus nerve nuclei and caudal to the bottom of the fourth ventricle. It produces a bulge in the floor of the fourth ventricle, named the hypoglossal eminence/trigone. The hypoglossal nerve supplies the intrinsic muscles of the tongue and the styloglossus. A lesion in the hypoglossal nerve nuclei causes ipsilateral tongue weakness, which manifests as the tongue deviating towards the weak side.