Managing excess weight is challenging and complex and requires an interprofessional team approach that includes clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, dieticians, and nutritionists. While once a condition relegated to the domain of the primary care provider, it is now realized that weight management requires the expertise of a collaborative interprofessional team with an individualized patient-centered approach. To achieve optimal clinical outcomes, the patient and the healthcare team must discuss, mutually define, and agree upon the healthcare goals. Many studies have identified barriers to managing obesity, including lack of training, time, resources, and knowledge. One study cites that 45% of clinicians do not feel qualified to treat obesity.

For patients who are overweight or obese, nearly 50% have received education on weight loss, 50% on diet education, and 41% on exercise counseling.

**Evidence-based Approach**

An interprofessional team who provides a holistic and integrated approach to weight management will achieve the best possible clinical outcomes. [Level 1] For example, referrals to a health coach or dietician are beneficial if a patient has specific dietary questions. Referrals to psychology with eating disorder expertise are essential for patients with eating disorders. For patients with physical limitations, referrals to physical therapy are often necessary. Other interdisciplinary team members can include bariatric endocrinology, integrative cardiology, gastroenterology proceduralist, and bariatric surgeons. Each can collaboratively help guide the patient toward better health and effective weight loss. Pharmacists can counsel patients and check for drug interactions if medication is part of the management strategy.

Collaboration, shared decision-making, and open communication are critical elements for optimal outcomes. The 5A strategy represents one well-studied model that effectively guides patients toward their weight loss goals (Level 2). The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach and good communication between the team members and the patient. [Level 5]