**Vasculature of the Dorsal Foot**

The dorsal aspect of the foot receives supply from the arteries that arise from the anterior tibial artery.

The arcuate artery, as its name suggests, arcs medially-to-laterally over the dorsum of the foot, with branches the second, third, and fourth dorsal metatarsal arteries; these course between the metatarsal bones.

The first dorsal metatarsal artery, which arises from the dorsalis pedis artery before reaching the first metatarsal space, splits into two at the level of the first metatarsal bone.

It is important to note that the dorsal vasculature of the foot is in constant contact with the plantar vasculature in most cases.

**Vasculature of the Plantar Foot**

The posterior tibial artery supplies the plantar aspect of the foot.

The medial calcaneal arteries are a vascular network that supplies the medial portion of the calcaneus.

The lateral plantar artery courses diagonally toward the lateral aspect of the foot, and then splits into two vessels at the level of the proximal fifth metatarsal bone. These two vessels are the superficial branch of the lateral plantar artery and the plantar arch.

The first four of these plantar metatarsal arteries will travel distally through the metatarsal spaces, and each split into two dorsal digital arteries to create a total of eight.

The medial plantar artery travels distally through the medial aspect of the foot and splits into deep and superficial branches near the tarsal-metatarsal joint line.