Following Kemp's discovery of the cochlear amplifier and OAE, he discovered that OAE could be measured from patients with a normally functioning cochlea but not from those with hearing impairments with thresholds over 30 dB HL, illustrating the potential of using OAE as a hearing test. Thus, the presence of OAE is indicative of a functional cochlear amplifier, healthy OHCs, and normal hearing. OAE are also very sensitive in detecting mild hearing impairment. Damage to the outer hair cells from noise trauma or ototoxic medications can appear on OAE before presenting on an audiogram. When OAE are absent, there must be some dysfunction in the cochlea, although the degree of hearing loss is uncertain.

**Hearing Screening**

The ease of performing OAE is permitted now with automated units that include an aural probe that contains a speaker to deliver the acoustic stimulus and a microphone to detect the emissions. These systems provide an easily reproducible, non-invasive method to assess hearing in newborns, young children, and adults who are unable to cooperate for conventional hearing tests. The all-or-nothing response from OAE makes OAE an excellent screening test for hearing loss. The universal newborn hearing screening program (UNHS) has widely been adopted throughout North America, Europe, and most developed countries. UNHS incorporates a combination of OAE and auditory brainstem response (ABR) testing.

**Ototoxicity Monitoring**

Over the last decade, OAE has been increasingly used to monitor the ototoxicity of medications, particularly aminoglycoside antibiotics and platinum-based chemotherapy agents. Ototoxic drugs affect the outer hair cells and are detectable on OAE before a conventional audiogram. Its quick application and cost efficiency make it a good clinical choice to follow patients during their therapeutic course. DPOAEs are more sensitive to the higher frequencies, which are commonly affected first in ototoxicity. Prior to starting ototoxic medications, patients should undergo baseline OAE testing and again with each dose of ototoxic medication. Changes of 2.4 dB or more are considered a significant decrease and indicate a change in cochlear function.

**Auditory Neuropathy Spectrum Disorder (ANSD)**

OAE is often used to evaluate retrocochlear pathology within the central auditory system. Since OAE is a measurement of the peripheral auditory system, retrocochlear pathology will present with normal OAE and abnormal audiogram and auditory brainstem response (ABR). Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) is one of the most common retrocochlear pathologies evaluated by OAE. It often presents with absent or severely abnormal ABR, poor word recognition, and absent stapedial reflexes. However, OAE may be absent if retrocochlear masses impinge on the internal auditory artery and compromise the blood flow to the cochlea. OAE may also disappear over time in patients with ANSD.

**Meniere Disease**

Meniere disease can elicit a unique OAE clinical presentation. In patients with Meniere disease who have hearing loss thresholds exceeding 30 dB HL, OAE are expected to be absent. However, several studies show intact OAE in these patients. It is hypothesized that the outer hair cells were spared, and the poor hearing thresholds are due to inner hair cell dysfunction or a disruption in the afferent connections between the inner and outer hair cells. Another hypothesis is that this may reflect the various pathophysiological stages of Meniere disease, where the disease has not yet reached the outer hair cells. Furthermore, Van Hufflen et al. 1998 showed that OAE in the contralateral normal hearing ear of patients has a lower OAE amplitude, which may be a harbinger of future bilateral Meniere disease.

**Tinnitus**

Tinnitus is an abnormal perception of sound in the absence of external stimuli associated with disorders of the auditory system. Studies show that DPOAE amplitudes are consistently reduced in patients with tinnitus than patients without tinnitus, even in those with normal hearing on audiograms. The abnormal OAE in tinnitus suggests that cochlear and outer hair cell dysfunction may play a role in its generation, particularly at higher frequencies from 6 to 8 kHz. The connection between OAE and tinnitus may also play a role in monitoring progress during tinnitus retraining therapy. However, more research is necessary on this topic.