HBV infection has the potential for progression to a chronic state and thus presents as a global public health threat for its associated morbidity and mortality. While hepatitis B vaccines are available, limited access to healthcare and lack of proper health education contributes to the increasing global prevalence of hepatitis B. Lower incidence of hepatitis B in the United States compared to Asia and Africa is due to better access to healthcare and better use of vaccinations and other preventive measures.

**U.S. Statistics**

- Around 60,000 new cases of HBV infection annually

- 2 million or more people with chronic hepatitis B infection

- Prevalence is higher in black, Hispanic, and Asian populations compared to whites

- Prevalence is lower in people less than 12 years of age born in the U.S.

- Accounts for 5% to 10% of chronic end-stage liver disease, and 10% to 15% of cases of hepatocellular cancer

- Causes 5000 deaths annually

**Worldwide Statistics**

- 350-400 million of the world population has chronic hepatitis B.

- The following population is known to have a higher prevalence: Asian Pacific Islanders, Alaskan Eskimos, and Australian aborigines.

- The following geographic regions have higher prevalence: the Indian sub-continent, sub-Saharan Africa, and central Asia.

- The prevalence of hepatitis B is reduced after the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccination program.

- 10 genotypes (A-J) of hepatitis B have been identified.

High-risk groups for HBV infection include intravenous drug users, infants born to infected mothers, males who have sexual intercourse with other males, hemodialysis patients (and workers), healthcare workers, household contacts of known patients with chronic HBV. A majority of the global HBV disease burden is primarily through vertical transmission.