**Polypharmacy in the Elderly**

Even though persons aged 65 years and older comprise about 14% of the total population, they account for over one-third of outpatient spending on prescription medications in the United States. Based on a recent population bulletin, the number of people over age 65 is projected to at least double from 46 million today to more than 98 million by 2060. Polypharmacy is a particular concern in older people for the following reasons.

**Multi-Morbidity**

Aging places individuals at risk of multi-morbidity (coexistence of 2 or more chronic health conditions) due to associated physiological and pathological changes and increases the chances of being prescribed multiple medications.

**Adverse Drug Effects**

An adverse drug effect (ADE) is an injury from drug use. An adverse drug reaction (ADR) is an ADE that refers to harm caused by a drug at usual dosages. ADEs are estimated to be 5% to 28% of acute geriatric medical admissions. Preventable ADEs are among the serious consequences of inappropriate medication use in older adults. The drug classes commonly associated with preventable ADEs are cardiovascular drugs, anticoagulants, hypoglycemics, diuretics, and NSAIDs. Adverse drug effects are higher in older adults due to metabolic changes and decreased drug clearance that come with age. This risk compounds by increasing the number of drugs used.

**Drug Interactions**

Multiple medications increase the potential for drug-drug interactions and the prescription of potentially inappropriate medications. A drug-drug interaction refers to the pharmacologic or clinical response to the administration of a drug combination that differs from the response expected from the known effects of each of these two agents when given alone. Cardiovascular drugs are most commonly involved in drug-drug interactions. The most common adverse drug interactions-related adverse events are neuropsychological (delirium), acute renal failure, and hypotension.

**Medication Non-Adherence**

Polypharmacy can lead to problems with medication adherence in older adults, especially if associated with visual or cognitive decline, associated with aging, and resulting in bad outcomes like treatment failure or hospitalizations.

**Prescribing Cascades**

Polypharmacy increases the possibility of prescribing cascades when additional drugs are prescribed to treat other drugs' adverse effects (ADE) by misinterpreting the ADE as a new medical condition; clinical veridic examples are reported in the literature.

**The risk of Hip Fracture**

Polypharmacy has been shown as an independent risk factor for hip fractures in older adults in some case-control studies; however, the number of drugs may have been an indicator of a higher likelihood of exposure to specific types of medications like central nervous system (CNS)-active drugs associated with falls.

**Use of Over-the-Counter and Complementary Medications**

Over the past decade, over-the-counter (OTC) medications have increased, with studies showing that these agents are highly prevalent in the elderly population. The challenging part is only less than half of the patients discuss the use of herbal supplements or other products or complementary medicine with their medical providers.

**Transitions of Care**

Transitions in care, between hospital and home or institutional setting like a nursing home, are a common source of medication errors and put patients at risk for polypharmacy, which can cause a lot of medication errors and adverse outcomes.

**Changes in Pharmacokinetics Associated with Aging**

Pharmacokinetics refers to drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination.

Absorption: Aging does not significantly affect the extent of drug absorption, but the absorption rate may be slower. Because of this, the peak serum concentration of a drug may be lower, and the time to reach it is delayed in older patients. But the overall amount absorbed (bioavailability) does not differ in patients based on age.

- Exceptions include drugs with an extensive first-pass effect that may have higher serum concentrations or increased bioavailability as liver size, and hepatic blood flow decreases with aging; hence, less drug is extracted by the liver.

- Other factors impacting drug absorption include how medications are taken, what it is taken with, comorbidities, or inhibition or induction of enzymes in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.

Distribution: Distribution refers to where in the body a drug penetrates and how it is spread through the body.

- Older adults have less body water and lean body mass; hence, hydrophilic (water-soluble) drugs have a lower volume of distribution. Examples are ethanol and lithium.

- Another specific change with aging is increased fat stores; therefore. As a result, lipophilic (fat-soluble) drugs have an increased volume of distribution. Examples are diazepam, trazodone, and flurazepam.

- Albumin, the primary plasma protein to which drugs bind, is usually lower in older adults. Because of that, there is a higher proportion of unbound (free) and pharmacologically-active drugs, which is not a problem in younger patients as, normally, additional unbound drugs are eliminated. However, with aging, there is a decrease in elimination resulting in the accumulation of the unbound drug in the body. Examples are ceftriaxone, phenytoin, valproate, warfarin, diazepam, and lorazepam.

Metabolism: Metabolic conversion of drugs can occur in the liver, intestinal wall, lungs, skin, kidneys, and other organs. With aging, there is a decrease in hepatic blood flow and liver size, and drug clearance of some drugs by the liver may be decreased by up to 30% in older adults. Drug metabolism occurs through either phase 1 pathways/reactions or phase 2 pathways.

- Phase I pathways include hydroxylation, oxidation, dealkylation, and reduction by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. Most drugs metabolized through this pathway can be converted to metabolites of a minor pharmacological effect than the parent compound; however, some drugs are modified to more active compounds through Phase I reactions (e.g., diazepam)

- Phase II pathways include glucuronidation, conjugation, and acetylation. Drugs metabolized through phase 2 pathways can mainly be excreted by urine or bile. An example is the drug lorazepam which, after oxidation by phase I reactions, is metabolized by glucuronidation. The phase I reactions, catalyzed by cytochrome P450, are more likely to be impaired in the elderly than phase II reactions; thus, medications metabolized through phase 2 pathways are preferred for older adults.

Elimination: Elimination refers to a drug's final exit routes from the body. The terms used to express elimination are a drug's half-life and clearance. For most drugs, elimination is through the kidneys as either the parent compound or as a metabolite or metabolites.

- With aging, renal size and blood flow decrease, and glomerular filtration declines.

- Also, due to a decrease in lean muscle mass with aging, the production of creatinine is reduced. The reduced glomerular filtration rate counters decreased creatinine production, and serum creatinine stays normal. Consequently, serum creatinine does not accurately reflect creatinine clearance in the elderly. However, the Cockcroft- Gault equation can estimate a patient's creatinine clearance when prescribing a new medication or changing doses.

**Age-Associated Changes in Pharmacodynamics**

The molecular, biochemical, and physiologic effects of a drug are studied by pharmacodynamics; pharmacodynamics can change with aging, but the changes are specific to the drug studied and the effect measured; generalizations cannot be made.

**Deprescribing**

Deprescribing describes the discontinuation of medicines; the concern is that most deprescribing in clinical settings is reactive, for example, in response to an adverse drug reaction or therapeutic failure. The focus should be on clinicians being proactive in deprescribing when the clinician and patient decide to discontinue the medication after evaluating the risk-benefit analysis.

**Beers Criteria**

The American Geriatrics Society (AGS) updated Beers Criteria (2019) are especially helpful for Potentially Inappropriate Medication (PIM) usage in older adults and are widely used by clinicians, educators, researchers, and healthcare administrators in the United States.