- Actinic keratosis (pigmented)

- Basal cell carcinoma (pigmented)

- Condyloma accuminata

- Lentigo maligna

- Melanocytic nevus

- Melanoma

- Pigmented spindle cell (Spitz) nevus

- Seborrheic keratosis

- Solar lentigo

- Squamous cell carcinoma (pigmented)

- Verrucous carcinoma

- Verruca vulgaris

The morphologic features of a melanoacanthoma can mimic those of other skin lesions. Melanoacanthomas most commonly resemble other pigmented cutaneous lesions such as actinic keratosis, a basal cell carcinoma, a lentigo, a melanoma, a nevus, or a seborrheic keratosis. However, microscopic evaluation of the lesion enables the diagnosis of melanoacanthoma to be established.

The pathologic differential diagnosis is a pigmented seborrheic keratosis. However, in seborrheic keratosis, the pigment and melanocytes are predominantly present and restricted to the basal layer or lower layers of the epidermis. In contrast, in a melanoacanthoma, the pigment results from the dendritic melanocytes that are present throughout not only the lower layers but also the upper layers of the epidermis. The absence of cellular atypia and numerous mitoses excludes squamous cell carcinoma. The absence of koilocytes excludes the diagnosis of verrucae.

Actinic keratoses are premalignant skin lesions. They typically present as scaly red plaques on sun-exposed areas. However, pigmented actinic keratoses, usually in patients with darker skin color, can present as a flat dark brown or black hyperpigmented plaque that mimics other pigmented lesions such as melanoma or seborrheic keratosis. Although the diagnosis may be suspected clinically, it is often established after the lesion has been biopsied. Management is similar to non-pigmented actinic keratoses, including destructive modalities (such as liquid nitrogen cryotherapy or curettage or superficial chemical peels), topical treatments (with either 5-fluorouracil, imiquimod or ingenol mebutate) or photodynamic therapy.

Basal cell carcinoma is the most common skin cancer. It typically occurs on sun-exposed sites; however, the tumor can occur on areas that do not regularly get exposed to the sun, such as the areola of the breast, the axilla, the perianal region, and the umbilicus. The morphology of the cancer is variable. Superficial basal cell carcinomas present as flat red scaly plaques. Nodular basal cell carcinomas appear as flesh-colored to translucent papules or nodules with overlying and/or adjacent telangiectasias; some of the lesions may ulcerate. Sclerosing basal cell carcinomas mimic scars. However, an uncommon variant of basal cell carcinoma is pigmented and presents as a black or brown papule, plaque or nodule and may masquerade as either a melanoma. Microscopically, the pigment can be found in the basaloid tumor cells in macrophages in the dermis or both locations. Treatment of a pigmented basal cell carcinoma is similar to that of the non-pigmented tumor—often, the tumor is removed by either Mohs microscopically controlled surgery or simple excision.

Lentigo microscopically presents as hyperpigmentation of cells (including both the keratinocytes and melanocytes) in the basal layer of the epidermis; also, there may be a slight increase in the number of melanocytes. When this occurs in a sun-exposed location, the lesion is referred to as a solar lentigo; at other sites, the lesion is denoted as a lentigo simplex or just a lentigo. Clinically, the benign pigmented lesion is flat.

Melanoma is a malignant melanocytic neoplasm. The lesion may be flat (such as a lentigo maligna melanoma, which is typically found on sun-exposed sites such as the face and superficial spreading malignant melanoma) or a raised nodule (such as a nodular melanoma). Less frequently, melanomas are amelanotic and present as non-pigmented flesh-colored nodules. However, more commonly, melanomas are darkly pigmented; indeed, the individual tumors can be multicolored with black, brown, red, and even blue areas. Melanomas may spontaneously bleed or ulcerate or both.

A melanocytic nevus is a benign lesion. Common subtypes include junctional, intradermal, and compound. Whereas the intradermal nevus is flesh-colored and only contains nests of melanocytes in the dermis, the junctional nevus (which is a flat lesion with melanocyte nests restricted to the dermo-epidermal junction) and compound nevus (which is a raised lesion with melanocyte nests not only found along the dermo-epidermal junction but also in the dermis) are pigmented.

Seborrheic keratoses are benign pigmented plaques that are usually acquired in adulthood. Although an individual may have only one or a few lesions, many patients have numerous lesions. Their morphologic appearance is either flat (macular) or raised (plaque) with a ‘stuck on’ appearance. Rarely, they may be the cutaneous harbinger of an occult visceral malignancy when the new onset of multiple lesions suddenly appears; this has been referred to as the ‘sign of Leser-Trelat.’ Microscopically, seborrheic keratoses can share similar to melanoacanthoma; however, seborrheic keratoses only consist of keratinocytes, whereas melanoacanthomas are comprised of both keratinocytes and melanocytes throughout the entire lesion.

Squamous cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma in situ both typically present as red plaques or nodules. In contrast, pigmented squamous cell carcinoma and pigmented squamous cell carcinoma in situ present as brown tumors. They are often located in sun-exposed locations of the body. However, the pigmented lesions are often mistaken to be either benign or malignant melanocytic lesions.