**HIV-Associated Nephropathy**

The expression of HIV-1 genes in the kidney epithelial cells is required for the development of HIVAN. The mechanism by which HIV infects renal epithelial cells remains unclear. The classical receptors necessary for entry of the virus into T cells and macrophages are absent from renal cells. Various studies have shown that macrophages and lymphocytes appear to be vectors necessary for renal epithelial cell transmission of HIV. Among these are CD209 antigen (DC-SIGN), which mediates HIV infection of dendritic cells, and lymphocyte antigen 75 (DEC-205), which may directly contribute to infection of renal tubular epithelial cells. Polymorphisms in APOL1 result in an increased risk of HIVAN. However, the mechanism by which these variations cause HIVAN is yet to be elucidated. It appears likely that the infection of renal tubular epithelial cells by HIV is mediated via transfer from leukocytes. Phagocytosis of apoptotic CD4+ T cells has also been proposed as a possible mechanism by which HIV accesses renal cells. The HIV proteins Vpr and Tat circulate in plasma and through proteoglycans, and lipid rafts have access to podocytes.

**HIV-Associated Immune Complex Kidney Disease**

Many of the glomerular lesions associated with HIV-associated immune complex kidney disease (HIVICK) are routinely caused by co-infection with hepatitis B and C. Studies performed before the advent of combined antiretroviral therapy showed anti-HIV antibodies which may form immune complexes that could result in glomerulonephritis, but the mechanism and relevance in the post-antiretroviral era are unknown.

**HIV-Associated Thrombotic Microangiopathy**

Thrombotic microangiopathy is a well-known complication of late-stage HIV/AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) but its incidence has decreased dramatically since the arrival of combined antiretroviral treatments. While its pathogenesis remains to be elucidated, it is postulated that the source of endothelial injury is the exposure to circulating viral proteins combined with other factors such as medications, proinflammatory molecules, and antiphospholipid antibodies.