For the facial colliculus is composed of both CN VI and VII, its lesion may lead to multi-level symptoms. CN VI lesions may result in impaired horizontal eye movements, including lateral gaze palsy and one-and-a-half syndrome. One of the significant abnormalities from CN VII damage is Bell palsy.

**Lateral Gaze Palsy**

A lesion located in the abducens nucleus will lead to the paralysis of the ipsilateral lateral rectus. Although the function of the contralateral medial rectus muscle, which is innervated by CN III, will remain intact, interneurons projecting from the damaged CN VI nucleus will no longer be able to send proper signals through the contralateral MLF to the CN III nucleus. As a result, horizontal eye movements are unable to coordinate when both eyes attempt to gaze towards the side of the lesion. For example, if the right nucleus of CN VI is damaged, the right CN VI fibers projecting to the right lateral rectus muscle will be impaired. Since the left CN III nucleus and its nerves are not damaged, there will be no problem contracting the left medial rectus muscle when CN III is activated, and there is no involvement of CN VI. In this example, the lesion of the right nucleus of CN VI impairs the left MLF that projects to the left CN III nucleus, and thus the left CN III nerve cannot stimulate the contraction of the left medial rectus muscle. Ultimately, horizontal eye movements will become disrupted, and both eyes will look straight ahead when instructing the patient to turn their gaze to the right. The patient will have no problem gazing to the left.

**One-and-a-Half Syndrome**

If a lesion in the dorsal pontine tegmentum is more extensive than the size of the CN VI nucleus and damages both the ipsilateral abducens nucleus and MLF, then the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle and bilateral medial rectus muscles will be impaired. From the ipsilateral CN VI nucleus, CN VI fibers arise and travel to the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. In contrast, the interneuron fibers arising from the ipsilateral nucleus cross the midline and project through the contralateral MLF and synapse to the contralateral CN III nucleus. The ipsilateral MLF, to which the contralateral CN VI fibers project, is responsible for the synapse on the ipsilateral CN III nucleus, which innervates the ipsilateral medial rectus muscle. For example, when the lesion affects both the right CN VI nucleus and MLF fibers, the right lateral rectus and left medial rectus muscles associated with the right CN VI fibers will be impaired. The right medial rectus muscle, which is innervated by the right CN III that can no longer receive signals from the right damaged MLF, will also be impaired. As a result, when the examiner asks a patient to look to the right, the patient will seem to be looking straight ahead. When instructing a patient to look to the left, the patient’s left eye will look to the side, whereas the right eye cannot move to the left and look straight ahead.

**Bell Palsy**

Because the facial motor nerve fibers loop over CN VI in the dorsal aspect of the caudal pons, damage to the facial colliculus will result in the paralysis of the ipsilateral facial muscles, which is a classical representation of a condition called Bell’s palsy. A patient with Bell’s palsy may experience drooping of the corner of the mouth and upper eyelid. The patient may also have the inability to wrinkle his or her forehead and experience overall facial muscle weakness. Because the facial motor and intermediate nerve fibers do not meet until the geniculate ganglion, other responses such as taste, parasympathetic, and somatic sensation might still be intact.

**Hyperacusis**

Paralysis of the stapedius muscle due to the injured facial nerve may lead to uninhibited movements of the stapes and ultimately to an excessive acuteness to hearing.