**Exfoliative And Impression Cytology**

Exfoliative cytology is usually performed using a cytobrush as malignant cells tend to have a low cell to cell adherence and also desquamate when present on the mucosal surface. In contrast, impression cytology is done by using cellulose acetate paper (CAP) and is simple and inexpensive as exfoliative cytology.

**Diagnostic Vital Dyes**

The various dyes used to assist OSSN diagnosis are rose bengal, toluidine blue, and methylene blue.

Rose bengal helps to satin unhealthy and dead devitalized epithelial cells bright pink. It stains OSSN lesions and helps in distinguishing the abnormal epithelium. The other pathologies with abnormal epithelium also get stained. Hence this has high sensitivity and low specificity.

Due to high affinity, toluidine blue is a metachromatic acidophilic dye stain nuclear material (high density). The OSSN mass having high mitotic rare and less intercellular adhesions also stain well with toluidine blue. Gichuhi et al., in their analysis for OSSN, proved that 0.05% toluidine blue is safe, has no toxicity, and produces only little discomfort with topical application. They found a high sensitivity of 92% and a low specificity of 31% toluidine blue for OSSN diagnosis.

The third dye which aids in the diagnosis of OSSN is methylene blue which is an acidophilic dye. This dye can penetrate cell walls and easily binds to nucleic acid. This has a high affinity for OSSN cells with a rapid metabolic rate. Steffen et al., in their prospective analysis of 75 patients, found 97% sensitivity and 50% specificity of methylene blue for OSSN lesions.

These vital have a good negative predictive value and easily exclude the diagnosis of OSSN. Their main application is during surgery to localize a lesion and margins for excision.

**Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography (ASOCT)**

Although it is very well known that OSSN is sometimes difficult to diagnose clinically on routine slit-lamp examination, excision biopsy and histopathological examination are warranted to subclassify the tumor or when the diagnosis is in doubt. The introduction of ASOCT in OSSN diagnosis came as a boon for all ophthalmologists providing higher axial resolution and rapid scanning speed, thus improving the tumor diagnosis. It is a very vital tool for the cross-sectional evaluation of OSSN. Recently, newly built non-invasive, non-contact, spectral-domain, ultra-high-resolution ASOCT has been built up to map OSSN involving all the corneal layers easily. It reveals any epithelial thickening, epithelial activity, stromal invasion, delineate tumor margin, and normal from abnormal tissue. It also helps to locate the depth of the tumor.

**Confocal Microscopy**

Cytopathological evaluation of OSSN with the help of confocal microscopy is a relatively safe, simple, and non-invasive technique but has been underused due to limited availability and research in this area. Confocal microscopy can help in early diagnosis, follow-up, and estimating the recurrence of OSSN. It also helps to assess the treatment response of various topical chemotherapeutic agents in corneal and conjunctival OSSN. The newer generations confocal microscopes and high axial resolution of 4, but in contrast to ASOCT, they provide only a transverse view without delineating neighboring corneal layers.

In cases of SCC, high-frequency ultrasound helps assess the extent of invasion into the eye.