To differentiate between psychoses associated with a primary psychotic disorder and psychotic disorders associated with other medical or neurologic conditions, one can examine the following factors:

**Age of onset:**This is one of the most important factors when determining the etiology of a psychotic episode. The primary psychotic disorder will usually present in late teens to the early thirties. (Men typically present with the condition earlier than women). Psychosis associated with medical/neurological conditions will often present after the age of 40. The older the patient, the higher the risk for medical or neurological psychosis, especially in the hospital setting.

**The pattern of onset:**Primary psychotic disorder may present subtly, often with a prodromal phase that may be confused with another psychiatric disorder (e.g., schizophrenia can easily be confused with depression in its initial stages). Medical or neurological psychosis will usually present acutely.

**Genetics:**There is a significant association with the primary psychotic disorder and family history than psychosis associated with medical/neurologic conditions.

**Presentation:**Primary psychotic disorder commonly presents during significant life stressors (Moving, new job, end of a relationship), while psychosis associated with medical/neurologic conditions generally presents in healthcare settings.

**Hallucinations:**Primary psychotic disorder is generally synonymous with auditory hallucinations, whereas psychosis associated with medical/neurologic conditions is usually associated with all other types of hallucinations except auditory (e.g., visual, tactile, olfactory).

Specific primary psychotic disorders, with their subtypes, along with all other psychotic disorders, will be discussed in detail in other activities.