Patients with Fournier gangrene most often present with pain in the perineal or genital area. Since early signs may be minimal or subdued until symptoms become severe, clinicians should be suspicious of any infection or cellulitis in the perineal or scrotal areas, especially if the pain appears out of proportion to the apparent lesion.

Patients may also report being immunocompromised or having recently had trauma to the area as well as recent surgeries. They may report redness and swelling to the perineum, scrotum, and genitals, as well as systemic symptoms such as fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, urinary retention, and malaise.

The earliest signs of a possible Fournier gangrene include itching, localized tenderness, edema, and erythema involving the skin of the perineum, scrotum, or labia.

While classically considered a male disease, the incidence of Fournier gangrene in women is increasing.

Early diagnosis of Fournier gangrene can be very difficult as 40% of patients may present with no symptoms, and up to 75% of cases are initially misdiagnosed, contributing to its continuing high mortality rate.

**Severe Pain Out of Proportion to the Physical Findings is a Classic Finding of Fournier gangrene.**

As the infection progresses, additional features, such as crepitation on palpation, purpura, bulla, and patchy black tissue discoloration, are present.Clostridia) bacterial activity.

The area of involvement may spread far beyond the visible margins of the affected skin. Late signs include overt signs of sepsis, shock, hypotension, tachycardia, fever, tachypnea, and organ dysfunction.

While typically an acute, rapidly progressive process, sometimes Fournier gangrene can present much more slowly over days or even weeks. The typical case has been estimated to take about five days from the initial onset of the first symptom to hospital arrival.

The natural history and presentation of Fournier gangrene have been described as five stages:

- Prodromal symptoms include lethargy and fever. They may be present from 2 to 7 days.

- Genital tenderness and pain. The overlying skin is usually edematous.

- Genital pain and tenderness are now intense with increased erythema of the skin.

- Subcutaneous crepitation is now present, and the overlying skin appears dusky.

- Purulent drainage may be expressed, and there is obvious gangrene involving a portion of the affected area.

Extra attention to the physical examination of the genitalia and perineum is necessary for certain patient groups as these areas are likely to be checked only infrequently. Such patient groups would include:

- Dementia

- Frail and elderly

- Morbidly obese

- Non-verbal

- Obtunded

- Paraplegics

- Patients with quadriplegia