**Papillary and Follicular Thyroid Cancers**

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical resection remains the main treatment modality of both PTC and FTC, followed by radioiodine ablation (RAI ablation) when indicated and suppression therapy with thyroid hormone.

To minimize the risk of complications, specifically recurrent laryngeal nerve injury and hypoparathyroidism, surgery is recommended, performed by experienced, "high-volume" thyroid surgeons.

Pre-operative neck ultrasound is pivotal in deciding the appropriate surgical procedure. Surgical resection can be hemithyroidectomy or total thyroidectomy, with or without lymph node dissection. The choice of surgery depends on tumor size, presence of lymph node metastasis, extra-thyroidal extension, age of the patient, and the presence or absence of co-morbid conditions. In patients with locally advanced disease, additional imaging of the neck is advised.

A thyroid lobectomy is preferred for unilateral DTC < 1 cm, without any extra-thyroidal or lymph node invasion, unless there are clear indications for total thyroidectomy, such as childhood head and neck irradiation or a strong family history of thyroid cancer. Lately, there is also a trend for just active surveillance without immediate surgery, but more studies are needed to show the difference, if any, in the outcomes and prognosis.

For tumor sizes between 1 and 4 cm with no extrathyroidal or lymphatic invasion, the procedure of choice can either be a total thyroidectomy or lobectomy, depending on patient preferences and risk factors, as described above. This decision should be made with the patient aware that a completion thyroidectomy may be necessary depending on pathology results.

For tumors > 4 cm or tumors with extra-thyroidal or lymph node invasion, a total thyroidectomy is the preferred surgical procedure as there is a high risk of multifocal carcinoma in such cancers. It is also intended to facilitate RAI ablation and future surveillance with thyroglobulin as a tumor marker.

The decision for lymph node dissection should be made on a patient-by-patient basis, and there is still a lot of controversy about the proven survival benefit of prophylactic node dissection. Regardless, all patients with proven or suspected PTC should undergo a thorough examination of both the central and lateral neck for possible nodal metastasis. The lateral neck compartments are not routinely entered in thyroidectomy and should be assessed preoperatively with ultrasound and subsequent FNAB if there is a concern for lymphatic spread. If pathologic nodes are confirmed, an ipsilateral neck dissection should be carried out, with a formal clearance of defined lymph node compartments as opposed to isolated "berry-picking" of diseased nodes. The central neck lymph nodes are difficult to assess preoperatively due to their location. A careful inspection and palpation of the central neck should be performed at the time of surgery, with subsequent compartmental neck dissection if abnormal nodes are found.

**Postsurgical Risk Stratification**

Postsurgical risk stratification must be performed to determine the need for additional treatment, especially with RAI ablation. The TNM (Tumor, Node, Metastasis) risk stratification by the American Joint Commission on Cancer(AJCC) predicts disease-specific mortality, while the American Thyroid Association (ATA) risk stratification system, which is widely used, helps predict the persistence or recurrence of residual cancer.

The ATA system classifies patients as low, intermediate, or high risk based on clinicopathologic findings, including but not limited to tumor size, histologic type, vascular or lymph node involvement, local invasion, distant metastasis, the extent of tumor resection, post-operative thyroglobulin levels, and post-operative radioiodine uptake outside of the thyroid gland.

The  TNM-AJCC system accounts for factors such as the tumor size, the presence and extent of extra-thyroidal invasion, the number of nodal metastases, and whether there is the presence of distal metastasis. Age is a significant factor in predicting mortality in thyroid cancer patients, and its role is also significant in staging the disease. Patients under 55 years old at the time of diagnosis will receive a stage II diagnosis at the most.

**Radioiodine (RAI) Ablation Therapy**

RAI therapy after thyroidectomy is used for remnant ablation of normal residual thyroid tissue, as adjuvant therapy for subclinical micrometastases, or as treatment of apparent local or distant metastasis.

**Thyroid Hormone Suppression Therapy**

Thyroid hormone suppression therapy to suppress TSH and thereby potentially minimize its stimulation of thyroid cancer growth is recommended in most patients after surgery. For patients with ATA high-risk, the goal TSH should be no more than 0.1m IU/liter, and for patients in the intermediate-risk category, the goal TSH should be between 0.1 and 0.5 mIU/liter. For the ATA low-risk category, a goal TSH between 0.5 and 2.0 mIU/liter is acceptable.

**Persistent or Recurrent Disease**

For recurrent minimal iodine-avid disease, RAI ablation is the preferred therapy. For invasive neck disease, surgical resection is recommended. Percutaneous ethanol injection

**Systemic Chemotherapy**

Systemic chemotherapy is usually only considered in a group of carefully selected patients with a high metastatic disease burden or rapidly progressive metastatic disease despite the above treatment (Iodide-refractory). Because of the significant adverse effects associated with such therapy, it should be considered only when the associated benefits exceed the risks.

Systemic chemotherapy for DTC is preferably administered through a clinical trial. The common agents of choice are the kinase inhibitor class of drugs such as anti-angiogenic multi-targeted kinase inhibitors (aaMKI- lenvatinib, sorafenib), BRAF kinase inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib), MEK inhibitors (trametinib, cobimetinib), NTR kinase inhibitors (larotrectinib), and RET inhibitor (selpercatinib).

**Dynamic Risk Stratification**

After the initial postsurgical risk stratification and appropriate treatment as above, patients should be re-stratified during each follow-up visit depending on their response to therapy into one of the following clinical outcomes: 1. Excellent response, 2. Biochemical incomplete response, 3. Structural incomplete response, 4. Indeterminate response.

Monitoring in the first postsurgical year primarily involves a thyroid ultrasound scan every 6 to 12 months and TSH and thyroglobulin levels every 3 to 6 months, depending on risk. For higher-risk patients, additional imaging such as CT scan, MRI, FDG-PET, or whole-body radioiodine scanning is required.

After one year, the frequency of monitoring depends on the dynamic risk stratification.

**Medullary Thyroid Cancer**

Surgical therapy that includes total thyroidectomy with resection of local and regional metastases is the mainstay of treatment for MTC. In most patients with confirmed MTC and no evidence of pre-operative cervical lymph node metastasis on ultrasound, prophylactic central lymph node dissection should be performed at the time of the total thyroidectomy. Patients with confirmed lateral zone nodal metastases should receive lateral compartment dissection, central neck dissection, and total thyroidectomy. Serum calcitonin, carcinoembryonic antigen, and biochemical testing for coexisting hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma should be performed. Patients should be monitored long-term with serial calcitonin levels, neck ultrasound, and physical examination. Of note, as MTC is not of follicular origin, there is no role for radioiodine ablation or TSH suppression in its management.

**Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer**

In patients diagnosed with anaplastic thyroid cancer, BRAF V600E mutation testing and staging are performed. Resectable disease is surgically removed, followed by specific BRAF kinase inhibitors in patients with BRAF V600E mutations. Other patients received targeted radiation treatment and cytotoxic chemotherapy after surgery. However, distant metastases are common in patients even at initial diagnosis due to their rapidly progressive course, and local invasion into the trachea or vasculature may occur, making it unresectable. Mortality is near 100% for these cancers, and a conservative surgical approach for palliation can be considered in such high-risk patients.