The pelvic bones are an attachment for many different muscle groups involving the abdomen, pelvis, perineum, and lower extremities. The muscles limited to the pelvis include the muscles of the pelvic wall and the pelvic diaphragm.

Along the anterolateral wall of the true pelvis lies the obturator internus muscle. This muscle extends from the bony surfaces of the pelvis into the lesser sciatic foramen and inserts on the greater trochanter. The muscle receives innervation from the nerve to the obturator internus (L5-S2). It serves as an external rotator of the hip and strengthens the hip joint.

Along the posterolateral surface of the true pelvis lies the piriformis muscle. This muscle extends from the bony surfaces of the sacrum and pelvis into the greater sciatic foramen, with its insertion on the greater trochanter of the femur. The muscle receives innervation from the anterior rami of S1 and S2. It also serves as an external rotator of the hip and strengthens the hip joint.

The pelvic diaphragm consists of the coccygeus muscles and the levator ani muscles.

The coccygeus muscle is the most posterior and superior of the pelvic diaphragm muscles. It extends from the ischial spines to attach to the lateral surface of the coccyx and inferior sacral segment. Its innervation comes from branches of the S4 and S5 spinal nerves. It serves as the support for the pelvic viscera and flexes the coccyx.

The levator ani is subdivided into different muscle groups (pubococcygeus, puborectalis, and iliococcygeus), but the margins are ill-defined. These muscle groups extend from the anterior bony surfaces of the pelvis to attach to the perineal body, anococcygeal ligament, and walls of the viscera near the pelvic floor.