Brucellosis is a zoonotic disease that can be caused by four different Brucella species in humans: B. suis, B. melitensis, B. abortus, and B. canis. As few as 10 to 100 organisms can cause the disease in humans. All Brucella species are gram-negative, nonmotile, facultative intracellular coccobacilli. Brucella species do not form spores or toxins. The animal host of B. suis is swine; the hosts of B. melitensis are sheep and goats; the host of B. abortus is cattle, and the hosts of B. canis are dogs.

Among these, B. melitensis is the most virulent, followed by B. suis. B. melitensis causes the most severe cases of brucellosis and is the most prevalent worldwide. B melitensis is acquired by exposure to animals or animal products. Ingestion of unpasteurized goat milk and related dairy products is the main route by which B. melitensis is transmitted to humans. Slaughterhouse workers become inoculated with brucellae through aerosolization of fluids, splashing of mucous membranes, and contamination of skin abrasions. Veterinarians are usually infected by inadvertent inoculation of animal vaccines against B. abortus and B. melitensis. In laboratories, it can infect technicians from specimens of animals (including humans) whose tissues are operated upon or submitted for culture or pathologic analysis. B. abortus is more widely distributed, but it is less pathogenic for both animals and humans and rarely causes complications. It has been the most common cause of brucellosis in North America. B. suis has been the second most common cause of brucellosis in North America. It causes a prolonged course of illness associated with suppurative destructive lesions. B. canis infection causes a disease similar to that of B abortus.