Lab tests should be ordered; complete blood count to determine the patient's neutropenic level; blood, urinalysis, and throat cultures are needed to determine the source of infection. Two sets of blood cultures should be obtained from a peripheral vein and any venous catheters, as well as specimens for testing from any sites of infection, before the immediate administration of empirical broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy. Urinary tract infections should be suspected in asymptomatic patients with a history of such infections.

- Staphylococcus aureus

- Coagulase-negative Staphylococci

- Viridans group streptococci

- Enterococcus spp

- Streptococcus pneumoniae

- Streptococcus pyogenes

- Bacillus spp

- Stomatococcus spp

- Listeria monocytogenes

- Corynebacterium jeikeium

- Escherichia coli

- Acinetobacter spp

- Enterobacter spp

- Pseudomonas aeruginosa

- Klebsiella spp

- Stenotrophomonas maltophila

- Citrobacter spp

- Proteus spp

- Haemophilus spp

- Neisseria meningitidis

- Capnocytophaga canimorsus

- Haemophilus spp

- Moraxella spp

- Serratia spp

- Legionella spp

**Table 1. Bacteria cultured in febrile neutropenia**

Additional testing may be required in some instances:

- For example, Galactomannan may be performed on patient serum, or bronchoalveolar lavage samples may serve as a diagnostic biomarker of fungal infections.

- 1,3-beta-D-glucan (BDG) is a fungal-specific cell wall component and may serve as a diagnostic biomarker of fungal infections.

- Procalcitonin, though still under investigation, may have moderate diagnostic accuracy for the detection of bacteremia in patients with sepsis.

- Patients with unknown chest infiltrate on imaging may benefit from the culture of BAL fluid.

Two widely used assessment tools, The Multinational Association for Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC) and The Clinical Index of the Stable Febrile Neutropenia (CISNE), can be part of the patient interview. These tools can help risk-stratify patients into high-risk and low-risk neutropenic fever.

The MASCC was created the assess the risk of severe complications in patients with neutropenic fever. The MAASC index has a max score of 26. Patients with a score greater than 21 are considered low risk, and less than 21 are high risk.

**MASCC Scoring Index**

Characteristic/Score

- The burden of illness: no or mild symptoms: 5

- The burden of illness: none or mild: 5

- The burden of illness: moderate symptoms: 3

- The burden of illness: severe symptoms: 0

- No hypotension (systolic BP greater than 90 mmHg): 5

- No chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: 4

**Type of Cancer**

- Solid tumor: 4

- Lymphoma with previous fungal infection: 4

- Hematologic with previous fungal infection: 4

- No dehydration: 4

- Outpatient status (at the onset of fever): 3

- Age less than 60 years: 2

A more specific scale for low-risk patients classification is the CISNE which may be more useful in the emergency department setting. One of the components of the scale is the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status, which helps determines the patient's functional status as a surrogate for the patient's ability to undergo therapies for severe illnesses.

**The Clinical Index of Stable Febrile Neutropenia Score**

Characteristics/Score

- ECOG performance status (greater than 2): 2

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): 1

- Stree-induced hyperglycemia: 2

- Chronic cardiovascular disease: 1

- Monocytes less than 200 per mcL: 1

- Grade greater than or equal to 2 mucositis: 1

- Interpretation

CISNE/Recommendation

- 0-2: Consider outpatient management with oral antibiotics

- Greater than or equal to 3: Inpatient management