As the X-rays come out of the tube port, the size and shape of the X-ray field can be adjusted by collimators. The collimator housing attaches to the tube port. A light source is placed at a virtual focal spot location and is reflected by a mirror angled at 45 degrees. Two pairs of parallel opposed lead shutters define the X-ray field and, when the collimator light is on, define the X-ray and light fields.

As X-ray beams pass through materials, portions of the beam are attenuated, which results in a change in the shape of the produced spectrum. This is referred to as "filtration," and the change in spectra can be customized using different types and amounts of filter material. Inherent filtration occurs when X-ray attenuation is achieved by the anode material itself and the material placed over the exit window of the X-ray tube.

The final piece of equipment used to produce X-rays is the tube generator. The X-ray generator provides an electrical current at a high voltage to the X-ray tube, resulting in the X-ray beam production.

There are several X-ray generator designs. The most contemporary is the high-frequency inverter generator. It functions by converting the low-frequency, low-voltage input power to a high voltage output waveform with an inverter circuit. This allows for the application of a nearly constant voltage to the X-ray tube for efficient X-ray production.

Factors that affect X-ray emission include the anode material, the X-ray tube voltage, X-ray tube current, beam filtration, and generator waveform. The anode target material affects the efficiency of X-ray radiation production. The output is roughly proportional to the atomic number of the anode material. Besides, the energies of the X-rays produced also depend on the target material. The tube voltage (kV) dictates the maximum energy of the produced photons. An increase in the voltage results in increased X-ray production efficiency, quantity, and quality of the resulting X-ray beam. X-ray beam intensity (or the number of photons in the beam) is directly proportional to the tube current and exposure time.