There is no oral formulation of fosphenytoin. The most common route of administration is intravenous(IV). An intramuscular (IM) route formulation is also available for adults, not recommended for the neonatal or pediatric population. The benefit of fosphenytoin over phenytoin is its ability to administer with both saline and glucose.

**IV Administration**

- Intermittent infusion diluted with dextrose 5% or normal saline.

- The infusion should not exceed 150 mg PE (phenytoin equivalent)/minute as it increases the risk of serious cardiovascular events such as hypotension and arrhythmia.

- For at-risk patients, the elderly, and cardiac patients, the patient can receive an infusion rate as slow as 25 to 50 mg PE/minute.

- The recommended administration rate for pediatric patients is 1 to 2 mg PE/kg/minute with a maximum of 150 mg PE/minute.

**IM Administration**

- It is not the preferred route for status epilepticus or pediatric patients.

- Single daily dose administration using up to 4 injection sites. Patients can tolerate a maximum of 20 mL/site.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patient with Hepatic Impairment: T**he fraction of unbound phenytoin (the active metabolite of fosphenytoin sodium injection) is increased in patients with hepatic impairment and hypoalbuminemia. After IV fosphenytoin sodium administration to patients with hepatic impairment, fosphenytoin conversion to phenytoin may be increased without an equivalent increase in phenytoin clearance which has the potential to increase the severity of adverse events. Hence, monitor unbound phenytoin concentrations in these patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**The fraction of unbound phenytoin (the active metabolite of fosphenytoin sodium injection) is increased in patients with renal disease. After IV fosphenytoin sodium administration to patients with renal disease, fosphenytoin conversion to phenytoin may be increased without an equivalent increase in phenytoin clearance, which can potentially increase the severity of adverse events. Hence, monitor unbound phenytoin concentrations in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**In humans, exposure to phenytoin (the active metabolite of fosphenytoin sodium injection) can increase the risks of congenital malformations. Prenatal exposure increases the incidence of major malformations, including orofacial clefts and cardiac defects. Moreover, there is an increased risk of fetal hydantoin syndrome characterized by growth abnormalities (including microcephaly), dysmorphic skull and facial features, hypoplasia of digits and nails, and cognitive deficits. In addition, some malignancies, including neuroblastoma, have been reported in children whose mothers received phenytoin during pregnancy. In addition, a life-threatening bleeding disorder related to reduced levels of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors can occur in infants exposed to phenytoin in utero. This adverse event can be prevented with vitamin K administration to the mother before delivery and to the neonate after birth. In addition,  An increase in seizure frequency may occur during pregnancy due to altered phenytoin pharmacokinetics. Therefore, regular measurement of serum phenytoin concentrations may help manage pregnant women for proper dose adjustment.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**There is a lack of data regarding using fosphenytoin during breastfeeding. Fosphenytoin is metabolized in the body to phenytoin. Due to low levels of phenytoin in breast milk, the amount ingested by the infant is small, and no problems are seen in breastfed infants except for rare idiosyncratic reactions. Breastfeeding during phenytoin does not affect infant growth or development adversely. If the mother needs phenytoin, discontinuing breastfeeding is not required. However, combination treatment with other sedating anticonvulsants or psychotropics may result in sedation in infants or withdrawal reactions upon discontinuation.

**Pharmacogenetic Considerations:**Fosphenytoin can cause severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs). Reactions include Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), and Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS). Pharmacogenomic studies in patients of southeast Asian ancestry have also identified an increased risk of SCARs in carriers of the reduced function CYP2C9*3 variant, which has also been associated with reduced clearance of phenytoin. Therefore, avoid fosphenytoin as an option to carbamazepine in patients who are positive for HLA-B*1502 or CYP2C9*3 carriers. Clinicians should consider starting fosphenytoin at a low dose for CYP2C9*3 carriers. However, it must be noted that HLA-B*1502 or CYP2C9 genotyping has limitations and must never replace clinical care and management in emergency settings.