Milrinone is a medication indicated for cardiac support in patients with acute heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, or chronic heart failure. It improves cardiac contractility (inotropy) and cardiac relaxation (lusitropy) and induces vasodilation. It has the overall effect of increased cardiac output, improved left ventricle-arterial coupling, and enhanced cardiac mechanical efficiency. Its use is primarily in the perioperative and ICU settings, although it also has utility for outpatient therapy in special patient populations.

**FDA-approved Indication**

Milrinone is approved for short short-term IV therapy for patients with acute decompensated heart failure with reduced ejection fraction in need of inotropic support.

**Use in the Perioperative Setting**

Milrinone is often used during cardiac surgeries, including coronary artery bypass graft surgery, cardiac transplantation, and other cardiac surgeries requiring cardiac support. Likewise, it has utility in non-cardiac surgeries for patients with acute decompensated left ventricular heart failure, acute right ventricular heart failure, or pulmonary artery hypertension.

**Cardiac Units and the ICU**

Milrinone is used chiefly in the ICU and the cardiac unit for cardiac support in patients with acute heart failure, weaning patients with pre-existing left ventricular dysfunction from cardiopulmonary bypass, or as a temporizing agent for patients with plans to undergo cardiac surgery or transplantation.

**Outpatient Use of Milrinone**

Clinicians direct the use of milrinone in the outpatient setting to patients with severe symptoms of congestive heart failure (CHF) refractory to optimal medical therapy. Previously, an oral version was in use in the outpatient setting for symptomatic treatment of New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III/IV CHF; however, this fell out of favor due to increased patient mortality secondary to ventricular arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death.

In pediatric patients with congenital heart failure, outpatient milrinone infusion regimens are a means of bridging patients until they can undergo cardiac transplantation and initiate mechanical circulatory support, or it may work palliatively in those that are not eligible for transplant/mechanical intervention. This method of treatment is effective for improving patient symptoms and decreasing the number of hospitalizations.

**Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension**(PPHN)(Off-label use)

A recent study evaluated milrinone for persistent pulmonary hypertension in resource-limited settings where inhaled nitric oxide and ECMO are unavailable. The study concluded that milrinone is superior to sildenafil in improving oxygenation without lowering blood pressure parameters. However, additional extensive research is needed before routine use of milrinone in NICU for PPHN.