Medical management is mainly supportive.

The first step in managing these seriously ill patients is to stabilize them and assess fetal status with a nonstress test and ultrasound examination for a biophysical profile.

Intensivist, hepatologist, nephrologist, hematologist, surgical, gynecologist, and neonatologist consultations should be considered promptly to comanage them.

Patients with severe hypertension should be immediately started on intravenous labetalol, hydralazine, or nifedipine.

Patients with severe right upper quadrant or epigastric pain and elevated liver function tests should be evaluated promptly with a bedside ultrasound to rule out liver rupture, fulminant liver failure, or hepatic bleeding and may need to be confirmed with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging(MRI).

Management is mainly supportive in patients with DIC, pulmonary edema, acute respiratory failure, and acute kidney injury and should be stabilized according to the clinical guidelines.

Massive transfusions may be required. Consider patients for red cell transfusion if hemoglobin is <7gm/dl or if the patient has ecchymosis, severe hematuria, or suspected placental abruption. All actively bleeding patients with any degree of thrombocytopenia should be transfused with platelets. Patients with coexisting DIC may need fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate.

Patients with HELLP syndrome and coexisting TTP will benefit from therapeutic plasma exchange.

Patients should be referred immediately to a gynecologist to consider prompt delivery as it is the only effective treatment. Betamethasone administration is recommended for fetal lung maturity when the patient presents at <34 weeks of gestation. Magnesium sulfate should be initiated at the time of admission to prevent maternal seizures and neuroprotective effects on the fetus/neonate. In two large double-blind, randomized trials, there was no proven benefit to administering dexamethasone in patients with HELLP syndrome as it did not improve maternal or perinatal/infant outcomes.