No definitive diagnostic criteria have been validated and established for piriformis syndrome.  It remains a diagnosis of exclusion, but many of the following exam findings can aid the clinician in honing in on this diagnosis:

- Unilateral or bilateral buttock pain with fluctuating periods of pain throughout the day

- No lower back pain,

- No pain upon palpation of axial spine

- Negative results for straight leg raise

- Prolonged sitting triggering gluteal pain or sciatica

- Fluctuating sciatica through the course of the day

- Buttock pain near the projection of the piriformis reproduced by FAIR or Freiberg sign or Beatty sign, or palpitations

- The absence of perineal irradiation

- Sciatica reproduced by FAIR, Freiberg sign, or Beatty sign.

Standard radiographs of the pelvis and hip should be done to rule out underlying hip pathology. MRI of the lumbar spine is also recommended to evaluate for discogenic causes of lumbar radiculopathy and to rule out other sources of compression (e.g. soft tissue tumors or masses).  MRI can also evaluate for spinal stenosis, herniated disks, facet arthrosis, SI joint pathology, occult pelvic fractures, and any surrounding tendinopathies or bursitides.

EMG is often normal in patients with acute piriformis syndrome presentations, however, chronically, EMG/NCS can be useful in identifying neuropathic changes and abnormal results in muscles innervated by the sciatic nerve

Solution (injectable):

- Corticosteroids: 40-mg of Depo-Medrol or Kenalog

- Local anesthetics: 3-5-ml of local anesthetic such as lidocaine or bupivacaine

- It is also done with botulinum toxin for longer relief than steroids and local anesthetic.

Patient Position: Prone

Fluoroscopy starting position:

- An A-P view is adjusted so that the inferior part of the sacroiliac joint is in the middle of the screen.

**Piriformis Muscle Injection with Fluoroscopic Guidance**

- 18-gauge 1.5″ needle tip is placed on the cleaned skin over the inferior SI joint.

- Create a skin wheal and then anesthetize the deeper subcutaneous skin with 1% lidocaine and a 27-gauge 1.25-inch needle.

- A 22-gauge 3.5″ or 5″ Quincke needle is used to contact the very tip of the inferior sacroiliac joint. As the procedure is performed, note the approximate needle depth.

- After injection, the needle is withdrawn and redirected to a target site 1-cm inferior, 1-cm lateral, and 1-cm deeper than the SI joint.

Caution: Never inject if the patient feels a sharp pain shooting down their leg as the needle tip may be inside the sciatic nerve. The needle should be repositioned and then retry.