**HORMONAL MANAGEMENT OF ADRENOCORTICAL CARCINOMA**

The combination of cancer burden and hormonal excesses occur in almost 50% of adrenocortical carcinoma patients. Agents to treat Cushing syndrome such as ketoconazole, metyrapone, and mifepristone are often used, with the hope of reducing the morbidity of cortisol excess. Ketoconazole inhibits CYP17A1, CYP11A1, and to a lesser extent, CYP11B1.

Metyrapone is an inhibitor of steroidogenesis at the level of CYP11B1,

Spironolactone and eplerenone are mineral corticosteroid receptor antagonists that can be used to counteract edema and hypertension associated with cortisol or aldosterone overproduction. Spironolactone can be used to manage androgen effects in females patients with androgen-secreting tumors as well as mineralocorticoid effects in those patients with mineralocorticoid-secreting tumors. Dosing may need to be as high as 200 to 400 mg/day.

The success of hormonal control is contingent on a synchronized approach to reducing hormonal production, counteracting the effects of hormonal overproduction, and reducing disease burden via surgery or systemic chemotherapy.

**LOCALIZED DISEASE**

Localized ACC encompasses stages I and II disease and most patients with stage III disease. Stage I is relatively uncommon, representing only 3% of all ACC cases, whereas stages II and III make up 37 and 34%, respectively.

The drug of choice for adjuvant treatment is mitotane, which exerts hormonal effects by reducing adrenal steroids production by blocking steroidogenic enzymes, as the 11b-hydroxylase enzyme, (officially named cytochrome P450 11B1 -CYP11B1-)  and cholesterol side-chain cleavage by inhibiting CYP11A1 (which appears to be one of the covalently bound mitotane targets) in the adrenal cortex. In the periphery, it increases glucocorticoid clearance.

Mitotane has been shown to significantly improved recurrence-free survival (RFS) in some studies and not others.

Adjuvant treatment generally starts within three months of post-surgery based on animal studies.

**ADVANCED DISEASE**

More than half of ACC patients present with locally advanced or metastatic disease (Stage III or IV).

**Systemic therapy for metastatic disease**

In metastatic disease, different parameters merit consideration: the tumoral volume, the number of metastatic organs, and the progression rates. Debulking surgery only benefits in ACC patients with a limited number of tumoral organs (less than or equal to 2), resectable tumoral mass, with a light progression and when severe hormone excess that is not manageable medically. However, most patients require medical therapy.

Mitotane remains the only medication approved by the European Medicine Executive Agency (EMEA) and the U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of “metastatic ACC.” An overview of collecting different studies showed that the objective response rate is at best, 24%.

**Neoadjuvant Approach**

The use of neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy as a bridge to surgery correlated with a favorable outcome in one small study with borderline resectable adrenocortical carcinoma (BRACC), defined as having oligometastases, needing multiorgan or vascular resection, or having a poor performance status preventing surgery. Twelve patients (80%) received combination therapy with mitotane and etoposide/cisplatin-based chemotherapy, two patients (13%) received mitotane alone, and one patient (7%) received chemotherapy alone. Median DFS for resected BRACC patients was 28.0 months [95% confidence interval (CI), 2.9–not attained] vs 13 months (95% CI, 5.8–46.9) (p = 0.40) for initial surgery patients. Five-year OS rates were also similar: 65 % for resected BRACC vs 50 % for initial surgery (p = 0.72).

**Targeted Therapy Approach**

Targeted therapy may also be an option for the management of adrenocortical carcinoma. The first trials targeted epidermal growth factor receptor (EGRF) gefitinib and a combination of erlotinib and gemcitabine. Among vascular endothelial growth factor, sunitinib exhibited a modest anti-tumor effect in the phase 2 trial. VEGF can be administered in patients without mitotane treatment.

Recently, drugs targeting IGF-II seemed to be very promising, as IGF-II is the most-up regulated gene in ACC (80% as described before). Preclinical studies antagonizing this pathway with pharmacological agents resulted in inhibition of growth in vitro and in vivo. This inhibition was more potent than that observed with the use of mitotane alone in decreasing xenograft growth, and the combination of IGF inhibition with mitotane resulted in greater antiproliferative effects than those observed with the use of single-agent treatment. These data establish the role of targeted disruption of IGF-1R signaling to obtain a therapeutic advantage when used with mitotane therapy or possibly other chemotherapeutics in ACC patients.