Hydrops fetalis is mostly an incidental finding on routine prenatal workup. The underlying cause has a direct influence on the development of symptoms and its prognosis. Hydrops due to chromosomal abnormalities is usually detected during early pregnancy, whereas cardiac causes are detected in the second or third trimester. Hence, a detailed prenatal workup should be done in suspected cases. The following are the various diagnostic modalities for the evaluation of hydrops fetalis.

The first detailed ultrasound is done between 18 to 22 weeks of gestation. The most common findings detected during early pregnancy are ascites and skin edema (>5 mm thickness) in the fetal head, back of the neck, thorax, and abdomen. The cause of generalized skin edema is most probably due to aneuploidy or associated anatomical defects. Polyhydramnios and placental edema are most commonly seen before 20 weeks, whereas pleural effusion and pericardial effusion in the fetus is rarely seen before 15 weeks of gestation.

It is mandatory to look for the possibility of maternal toxoplasma, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes (TORCH), and parvovirus B19. Parvovirus B19 infection is most commonly associated with fetal anemia and ascites; however, cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis present with congenital malformations like ventriculomegaly, microcephaly, and hyperechogenic bowel. Hence, the antibody screen for TORCH infections should always be considered.

Fetal heart rate, umbilical artery pulsatility index, end-diastolic flow, and middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity (MCA-PSV) are also helpful in detecting the underlying causes of hydrops. The mean fetal heart rate is increased in trisomy 21. Increased resistance to blood flow in the umbilical artery is seen in trisomy 18 and triploidy.

Chorionic villous sampling (CVS) is most frequently done for karyotyping if hydrops fetalis is diagnosed before 15 weeks of gestation.

Anti-SS-A/SS-B antibodies in maternal Sjogren syndrome can cause bradyarrhythmias and complete heart block in fetuses, resulting in hydrops' development. However, congenital heart block is the first manifestation to be seen on ultrasound during the first trimester. The prognosis for this is relatively poor.

Elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) during pregnancy indicates the fetomaternal hemorrhage, which causes feal anemia and nonimmune hydrops. Hence, AFP levels are monitored closely.

Direct and indirect Coomb test is used for detecting immune hydrops fetalis, but they do not correlate the disease severity.

Echocardiogram, thyroid hormone levels, complete blood count, and metabolic panel also detect other causes of NIHF after birth.