The first step in the treatment of symptomatic gastroparesis is often lifestyle modifications. Optimal glycemic control in patients with diabetes will minimize the effects of hyperglycemia, causing delayed gastric emptying. Smaller, more frequent meals with minimizing carbonated beverages, increasing the liquid content, reducing fats and fiber content are common recommendations.

Antiemetics are often the first step in gastroparesis patients as they help with the common symptoms of nausea and vomiting. Serotonin (5-HT3) receptor antagonists like ondansetron, phenothiazines (dopamine receptor antagonists) like prochlorperazine and promethazine are commonly used. Side effects include sedation and extrapyramidal effects, and therefore, these are usually used on an as-needed basis.

The cornerstone of pharmacologic therapy in diabetic gastroparesis consists of prokinetic agents.

Metoclopramide, a 5-HT4 receptor activator and dopamine receptor antagonist in the stomach with weak 5-HT3 receptor antagonism in the nervous system, is a commonly used medication that increases the contraction amplitude of esophageal fundic and antral musculature. It is effective for treating gastroparesis for several weeks, but long-term dosing has shown inconsistent results.

Erythromycin binds to the motilin receptors responsible for the initiation of the MMC in the upper gut.

Domperidone is a dopamine (D2) agonist with effects similar to metoclopramide but is much less likely to cause extrapyramidal side effects as it does not cause the blood-brain barrier. Symptomatic patients with diabetes have reported improved domperidone therapy, but again, the effect could be lost in about six weeks.

Gastric electrical stimulation has been studied, but so far, there has not been a significant reduction in symptoms noted consistently across various small studies. It was granted humanitarian approval from the FDA to treat chronic refractory nausea, but it is not available widely and is not routinely reimbursed.

In refractory patients with severe symptoms, a gastrostomy tube for intermittent decompression by venting or suctioning may provide relief.

The last resort in refractory gastroparesis is surgery, including a partial gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy and gastric resection. There is not enough data on surgical treatment at this time, and the decision to subject a patient to this should ideally be made by a motility expert.