**Asthma**

Asthma is a common pathology in both children and adults, ranging from intermittent, mild persistent, moderate persistent, and severe persistent. An essential and unique aspect of asthma is a reversible inflammation of the airway caused by hyper-responsiveness. This response can become triggered by many different factors, including infections, exercise, allergens, smoke, and temperature.

The pathological response begins with the initial inhalation of an irritant. This irritation results in bronchospasms, airway inflammation, and increased mucus. These changes result in an increase in airway resistance, most noticeable during expiration. If left untreated, mucus can build up and block future medication doses from successfully working. Additionally, the inflammation can lead to local airway edema, further reducing gas exchange.

Asthma exacerbations are treatable if caught early. Common medications include beta-2 agonists (i.e., albuterol) and muscarinic receptor antagonists (ipratropium bromide). The medications help dilate the airway and halt further inflammation, allowing gas exchange and the patient to gain better quality breaths.

**COPD**

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a blanket term that encompasses the following disease: chronic bronchitis, emphysema, refractory asthma, and bronchiectasis. COPD, in general terms, describes diseases that result in air being trapped within the lungs, unable to be fully exhaled. This condition results in increased residual volume (RV), increased functional residual capacity (FRC), increased total lung capacity (TLC), resulting in a V/Q mismatch, and chronic hypoxia.

**Chronic Bronchitis**

Repeated exposures to irritants (most commonly cigarette smoke) cause high sensitivity, mucus production, and an increase in inflammatory markers. Alveolar epithelium initiates the inflammatory response; it is also the target. Thus, when exposed to an irritant, the alveolar epithelium responds by commencing the inflammatory response—this inflammation results in increased blood flow (and resulting edema) and mucus production. Due to a long history of exposure, this state becomes a baseline pulmonary state of increased mucus production and edematous vasculature. Acute exacerbations occur as a result of mucociliary dysfunction from long-term scarring. Without the cilia to clear debris, mucus plugs will block the airways. Therefore, the initial irritant causes an inflammatory response, increasing mucus production. The inhaled debris and mucus are then stuck due to dysfunctional mucocilia, further exacerbating the inflammation and trapping air in the process (hence the obstruction). The characteristic wet cough of chronic bronchitis comes from excess mucus production.

**Emphysema**

Emphysema can split into three pathological subdivisions: centrilobular, panacinar, and paraseptal. Centrilobular being the most common and has a particularly high association with smoking. Panacinar is less common and is the result of a deficiency of alpha one antitrypsin. Paraseptal may be seen on its own or in the presence of centrilobular or panacinar. When it is a single pathology, it commonly presents in young adults with spontaneous pneumothorax.

The disease process results from damage to the acinus, resulting in distal airway wall destruction leading to permanent dilation. When the distal walls are destroyed, there is a decrease in the overall number of alveoli, causing a decrease in capillary surface area. Therefore, with a decreased capillary surface area, there is a resulting decrease in gas exchange. The exact mechanism of wall breakdown determines the pathological subdivision. Centrilobular emphysema is the result of long-term exposure to a noxious irritant, typically smoke. Macrophages are recruited to the site of irritation and begin releasing chemical markers to attract neutrophils. Neutrophils and macrophages will release proteinases that destroy elastin and cause mucus secretion. Elastin destruction results in connective tissue loss in the lungs and the decreased surface area. Panacinar emphysema is the result of a mutation that leads to decreased alpha one antitrypsin (AAT). AAT normally inhibits the action of elastase in the lung, keeping elastin and the integrity of the lung intact. However, with decreased levels of AAT, elastase is no longer inhibited, and it begins breaking down the elastin, leading to progressively worsening emphysema. In all forms of emphysema, there is a loss of pulmonary connective tissue. Without elastin, the lungs cannot properly contract and push air back out of the lung, leading to air trapping.