# Definition/Introduction

Packaging of pharmaceutical medications may vary depending on the use and type of substance packaged: prescription drugs, non-prescription (over-the-counter) drugs, and herbals and dietary supplements. Variations of pharmaceutical packaging include blister packs, alternative tamper-evident packaging, bottles, vials, ampules, intravenous bags, and calendar packs.

Child-resistant packaging of oral prescription drugs began with the Poison Prevention Packaging Act in the 1970s.

Optimal drug packaging maximizes the physical and chemical stability of the medication, which may be affected by environmental factors such as light, temperature, and humidity. Blister package material may be chosen based on its barrier properties. Common materials include polyvinyl chloride, polyvinyl dichloride, polychlorotrifluoroethylene (Aclar), aluminum foil, and cyclin olefin copolymer. Though aluminum foil offers the least moisture penetrance, polyvinyl chloride is often the preferred blister material due to its low cost and ease of production; however, polyvinyl chloride has many disadvantages. Polyvinyl chloride is a minimal moisture barrier linked to environmental issues associated with its disposal. Aclar provides better moisture protection than polyvinyl chloride but does not offer as much protection as an aluminum foil.

A pharmacy insert is a written piece intended to inform the reader about various aspects of the medication. In the United States, there are three forms of written informational material associated with medicines: medication guides, patient package inserts, and consumer medication information packages. The Food and Drug Administration regulates medication guides and patient package inserts. On the other hand, consumer medication information packages are developed by commercial providers with the intent of distribution within pharmacies.

Medication packaging inserts provide unbiased prescribing and safety information for the health care provider. In June 2006, the FDA officially instated a new format of package inserts. The new format has three sections—the highlights of prescribing information, a table of contents for prescribing information, and the complete prescribing information.

Highlights of Prescribing: This section is a bulleted list style summary of pertinent clinical information and is able to be cross-referenced to the third section, the prescribing information. In this section of every medication package insert, there must be a universal disclaimer written verbatim except for the medication name. The section also contains the drug name bolded, followed by the year of approval in the United States. Other sub-sections of this first section includes the black box warning, recent significant changes, indications and usage, dosage forms and strengths, dosage and administration, drug interactions, contraindications, warnings, adverse drug reactions, and use in specific populations.

Full Prescribing Information Table of Contents: this section references all the sub-sections and sections in the full prescribing information.

Full Prescribing Information: The final section begins with pertinent dosing information and warnings. This section also details all risks associated with taking the drug. Additional sub-sections include drug abuse and dependence, toxicity, clinical pharmacology, nonclinical toxicology, clinical studies, patient counseling information, how the drug is supplied, stored, and handled, and references.

# Issues of Concern

Although intended to act as safeguards for the patient, pharmaceutical packaging may hinder medical adherence. With child-resistant and tamper-evident packaging, many individuals face difficulties in opening the prescription packaging, discouraging them from taking their medications. Difficulties opening pharmacy packaging may include individuals using sharp objects in an attempt to open the packaging, breaking tablets during efforts to push them out of blister packs, and simply being unable to open the drug container due to tamper-evident packaging.

Also, with some forms of packaging, it may be difficult for individuals to be able to ascertain if they have taken the previous dose. Whereas blister packs and pill organizers aim to mitigate this problem, some individuals have difficulty removing the pill from blister packs without breaking the drug itself. Individuals also must accurately separate medications into the pill organizer in order for it to be beneficial.

There are also concerns regarding differences in how drug information is conveyed to the general public versus the health care providers. While the Food and Drug Administration regulates both the medication guide insert and patient package inserts in the U.S., the patient targeted pharmacy brochures are not regulated. This lack of regulation on patient targeted brochures is of particular concern because unregulated pharmacy leaflets may address adverse drug reactions in a manner that may undermine their severity.

# Clinical Significance

Medication packaging mostly affects the shelf life of a drug, which is determined by the physical and chemical stabilities of the product. Chemical stability is determined by how long the drug will continue to have 100 ± 5 % of the label claim potency and contain sufficiently low amounts of any degradation products. This stability is often the basis of the drug expiration date. Physical stability is associated with the drug’s appearance and action (i.e., dissolution). Moisture is a significant destabilizer of drugs; thus, care must be taken in package design to minimize moisture exposure to extend the shelf life of the pharmaceutical product.

Pharmaceutical packaging comprised of polymers to preserve a drug may have unintended consequences should the polymers from the package leach into the medication.

Pharmacy packaging inserts yield further obstacles in delivering quality patient care and obtaining medical adherence. With low health literacy rates and confusing jargon often used in patient pharmaceutical packing, many individuals have difficulty comprehending the patient prescription inserts. This lack of comprehension subsequently increases the risk of adverse events associated with taking the medication incorrectly or forgoing treatment due to misunderstanding.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Pharmacy packaging interventions are now at the forefront of the attempt to decrease medical noncompliance. The FDA and EMA have guidelines for the design of medications to optimize medical adherence; however, there are no guidelines for the design of pharmacy packaging to optimize patient usability.

Additional studies examining the effects of calendar pill organizers have shown inconclusive results. Whereas an epilepsy study showed a significant improvement to medication adherence as measured by a reduction in seizure frequency, two studies on hypertensives and diabetics failed to show a significant decrease in medication adherence as measured by reductions in health care expenditure.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Calendar pillboxes offer a feasible, tangible way for the individual, his/her caretaker, or other health care professionals to monitor medication adherence. In Japan, there have been successful attempts to virtually monitor patient medication compliance using a programmed calendar pill organizer. With the use of specially designed pill organizers, physicians were able to determine when the organizer was opened and the number of drugs removed from the organizer.

A digital medicine program (DMP) analyzing the efficacy of digital medicine on Hepatitis C infected patients found higher rates of treatment adherence and sustained virologic response among those using the digital medicine program. This particular DMP was comprised of an oral drug encapsulated with an ingestible sensor, a patch to detect real-time medication consumption, a mobile app for patients to log their information and a health care provider portal for the team to coordinate patient management. If the software detected the patient was not wearing the patch, did not ingest the drug while wearing the patch, or did not consume the correct dose of the drug, the patient and the patient-care team was notified and the provider or a member of the research team reached out to the patient to discuss the noncompliance.

A post-engagement survey showed that many participants felt more involved in their healthcare through the DMP due to the personal mobile app tracking and the ability to connect with their patient-care team through the app.