The mature adult breast comprises skin, subcutaneous tissue, epithelial, and stromal components. The epithelial component is comprised of branching ducts that connect the structural and functional units of breasts, known as lobules to the nipple. The stromal component comprises the majority of the breast volume in a non-lactating breast and is composed of fibrous and adipose tissue. The breast tissue extends from the 2 and 6 ribs vertically and sternal edge to midaxillary line horizontally. A part of breast tissue projects into the axilla and is known as the axillary tail of Spence. The skin of the breast is thin and contains sebaceous glands, exocrine sweat glands, and hair follicles. The nipple is devoid of hair follicles and contains abundant sensory nerve endings and sebaceous and apocrine glands. The areola, which measures about 16 to 60 mm, is nearly circular and has higher pigmentation. There are elevations near the periphery of the areola, which form due to the opening of ducts of Montgomery glands, which are large sebaceous glands and are known as Morgagni tubercles. The Montgomery glands represent a stage between sweat and mammary glands. The breast is covered with the superficial pectoral fascia, which continues with the superficial abdominal fascia of Camper. The breast is covered from the underside with deep pectoral fascia, which covers the muscles pectoralis major and serratus anterior. The two fascial layers covering the breast tissue are connected by fibrous bands known as Cooper suspensory ligaments that provide natural support to the breasts. The majority of total breast blood supply comes from internal mammary vessels. Sensory innervations are mainly from anterolateral and anteromedial branches of thoracic intercostal nerves T3 to T5. It is also supplied by lower fibers from supraclavicular nerves of the cervical plexus.