**Anterior Triangle**

The infrahyoid, or strap, muscles are paired bilateral muscle pairs that occupy the area between the sternum and hyoid bone. The innervation of each of the strap muscles is from the ansa cervicalis. The sternothyroid and thyrohyoid are relatively shorter muscles and are deep to the longer omohyoid and sternohyoid muscles. The sternothyroid originates manubrium just lateral to the midline and inserts on the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage. Its function is to depress the thyroid cartilage. The thyrohyoid is the superior continuation of the sternothyroid. It originates from the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage and inserts on the greater horn and body of the hyoid bone. When the hyoid bone is fixed, it elevates the thyroid cartilage. When the thyroid cartilage is fixed, it depresses the hyoid. The sternohyoid is also just lateral to the midline and is superficial to both the sternothyroid and thyrohyoid. It originates from the sternoclavicular joint and neighboring manubrium and inserts on the body of the hyoid bone. It depresses the hyoid bone during swallowing. The omohyoid muscle is lateral to the sternohyoid and also superficial to the sternothyroid and thyrohyoid. It has two bellies joined by an intermediate tendon.  The superior stomach separates the muscular and carotid triangles. It originates from the intermediate tendon posterior to the sternocleidomastoid and inserts on the body of the hyoid bone lateral the sternohyoid. The posterior belly of the omohyoid is not contained within the anterior triangle, but passes through the posterior triangle of the neck and attaches to the superior aspect of the scapula. The omohyoid depresses the hyoid bone.

Additional muscles that are related to the anterior triangle of the neck include the digastric, stylohyoid, and mylohyoid. The digastric muscle has an anterior and posterior belly joined by a common tendon that attaches to the body of the hyoid bone. The anterior belly originates from the digastric fossa on the internal surface of the body of the mandible and is innervated by the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. The posterior belly originates from the medial surface of the mastoid process and is innervated by the facial nerve. The digastric muscle functions to elevate the hyoid bone and depress the mandible.

**Posterior Triangle**

The sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles contribute to the boundaries of the posterior triangle. These relatively large muscles are both wrapped in investing fascia and are innervated by the spinal accessory nerve. The sternocleidomastoid has an origin at both the manubrium and the medial end of the clavicle, and it inserts at the mastoid process and superior nuchal line of the occipital bone. Its functions in ipsilateral flexion of the neck and contralateral rotation of the head. The trapezius originates broadly from the superior nuchal line and the spinous processes of C2 through T2 vertebrae, and it inserts on the spine of the scapula, acromion process, and lateral end of the clavicle. It functions in numerous movements of the scapula, including elevation, lateral rotation, retraction, and depression.