Management of lagophthalmos involves both medical and surgical approaches with the aim of treating the underlying condition leading to exposure keratopathy and protection of the ocular surface.

**Medical**

Artificial tears without preservatives can be administered frequently in order to improve the patient's tear film. The ointment can be applied at night time or during the day if there is severe corneal exposure. Taping of the eyelids at night can offer additional ocular surface protection without resorting to surgery.

**Surgical**

A stepwise approach is recommended based on the severity and duration of the lagophthalmos. A close follow-up with the frequent examination is necessary.

**Tarsorrhaphy**

When there is corneal exposure and recovery is expected within a matter of weeks, a temporary tarsorrhaphy can be a good option. In the majority of cases, the cornea can be protected adequately by closing the lateral one-third of the eyelids. A small opening should remain so that the cornea can be continuously assessed and required topical medications can be administered. Loosening of the sutures can occur over time, resulting in inadequate ocular surface protection. Complications include trichiasis and poor cosmesis from scarring.

**Gold/Platinum Weight Implantation**

If there is no full lid closure, gold or platinum weight can be implanted into the upper eyelid in patients with paralytic lagophthalmos. This will result in a gravity-dependent enhancement of eyelid closure.

**Upper Eyelid Retraction and Levator Recession**

Patients with lagophthalmos secondary to upper eyelid retraction (i.e. from thyroid eye disease) can have recession surgery of the upper eyelid retractor muscles (levator palpebrae superioris and Müller’s muscles). Full-thickness skin grafts or advancement flaps can be options for patients with postsurgical lid shortening e.g. after upper lid blepharoplasty. In addition, scar band releases and tarsal-sharing procedures can be suitable for cicatricial lagophthalmos.

**Lower Eyelid Tightening and Elevation**

Lower eyelid laxity occurs in facial nerve paralysis and floppy eyelid syndrome. Lid tightening procedures such as lateral tarsal strip will lead to improved apposition of the lower eyelid to the globe and decrease scleral exposure and epiphora symptoms.

**Ancillary Surgical Procedures**

Severe lagophthalmos secondary to facial nerve paralysis may require midface elevation. This can be achieved with a variety of techniques, such as using autogenous fascia slings. Other approaches to reanimate the face include temporalis muscle transposition, nerve grafts, palpebral springs, suborbicularis oculi fat lifts, and soft tissue repositioning.