After completion of a skin biopsy, the tissue is generally processed and sectioned for analysis with light microscopy. Skin tissue processing methods vary among laboratories; however, the paraffin technique is the most common. The standard steps for this process are fixation, dehydration, clearing, and paraffin infiltration. Fresh tissue is generally stored and transferred in 10% neutral buffered formalin fixative, which helps maintain tissue architecture by cross-linking lysine residues. Specimens get embedded in wax before mounting on glass slides for viewing. However, wax is not soluble in water or alcohol; therefore the specimens must undergo dehydration first. Alcohol dehydration is used to remove water from the sample. Alcohol is then removed by xylene as they are miscible in a process referred to as "clearing." The tissue is placed in a warm paraffin wax which replaces the spaces which water previously occupied. After the blocks have cooled, they are cut into thin slices, rehydrated with water, and then stained with stains such as hematoxylin and eosin. The amount of time for this process is dependent on tissue size, temperature, and reagents used.

Other techniques to make sections for light microscopy are frozen sections and semithin sections. Frozen sections are achieved by freezing tissue with liquid nitrogen and cutting it with a cold knife. This technique is faster than the paraffin technique. Semithin sections are used to see fine detail and are achieved by embedding sections in epoxy, allowing for thinner slices to be cut.

Specimens that require immunofluorescence undergo preservation in Michel's or Zeus solution rather than formalin.