LDH catalyzes the synchronized inter-conversion of pyruvate to lactate and NADH to NAD+ and increases the speed of reaction by 14 times. The chemical reaction proceeds by transferring a hydride ion from NADH to pyruvate at its C2 carbon. The molecular mechanism involves the binding of NADH to the enzymes as a first step. Many residues at the active site are involved in this binding. Once NADH is bound, it facilitates the binding of lactate, through an interaction between the NADH ring and the LDH residues. Transfer of a hydride quickly occurs in both directions forming two tertiary complexes, namely,  LDH-NAD+-lactate and LDH-NADH-pyruvate.

**Enzyme regulation:**LDH activity is dependant on the metabolic switch to anaerobic respiration. LDH is modulated by three types of regulations, namely, allosteric modulation, substrate-level regulation, and transcriptional regulation. The relative availability and concentration of substrates regulate the activity of LDH. The enzyme becomes more active during extreme muscular activity when there is an increase in substrates. The demand for ATP compared to aerobic ATP supply causes the accumulation of ADP, AMP, and Pi. Glycolytic flux leads to the production of pyruvate that exceeds the metabolic capacity of pyruvate dehydrogenase and other shuttle enzymes that metabolize pyruvate. This process channelizes the flux of pyruvate and NAD+ through LDH, subsequently generating lactate and NADH.

In conditions of increased NADH/NAD+ ratio, as usually happens in individuals who drink alcoholic beverages, high concentrations of ethanol lead to the production of high concentrations of lactate and NADH, and thus the depletion of NAD+. This reaction subsequently leads to pyruvate conversion to lactate linked to the regeneration of NAD+. Thus, the high NADH/NAD+ ratio shifts the LDH equilibrium towards lactate.