The variability in causes of lymphadenopathy can often present diagnostic challenges to clinicians. To reduce confusion and to improve diagnostic accuracy, it is important to obtain a thorough history and physical, create a set of differentials, and organize them in accordance with their presentation.

Causes of lymphadenopathy include but are not limited to:

- **Malignant:**If the history and physical examination are consistent, lymphadenopathy may be concerning for diagnoses like metastatic breast cancer, Kaposi sarcoma, leukemias, lymphomas, metastatic disease (i.e., gastric cancer), malignant disorders of the skin.

- **Autoimmune:**Several conditions that are characterized by a highly active immune system may result in lymph node abnormalities, including dermatomyositis, Kawasaki disease, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, Sjogren syndrome, Still disease, systemic lupus erythematosus

- **Infectious:**Many different infections can contribute to benign changes in the lymph nodes. Health care providers may consider several different subcategories of infection, including bacterial, viral, and other:
- Bacterial: brucellosis, cat-scratch disease, bacterial pharyngitis, syphilis, tuberculosis, tularemia, typhoid fever
- Viral: cytomegalovirus, hepatitis, herpes simplex, HIV, mononucleosis, rubella, viral pharyngitis.
- Other: bubonic plague, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, toxoplasmosis

- **Medications:**Often, medical therapies may incite the benign growths of lymph nodes. These therapies include but are not limited to allopurinol, atenolol, captopril, carbamazepine, cephalosporins, gold, hydralazine, penicillin, phenytoin, primidone, pyrimethamine, quinidine, sulfonamides, and sulindac.

The aforementioned causes may be subdivided into a mnemonic “MAIM,” which may help as a useful memory tool for recall of the vast amount of differentials that may contribute to lymphadenopathy. These differentials lead to changes in lymph node size and/or consistency and require further investigation with history, physical examination, and diagnostic testing.