Alignment in a normal cervical spine should be 15 to 30 degrees of lordosis from C1 through C7.

While radiographs of the cervical spine were the standard for trauma patients and patients with suspected cervical spine injuries in the past, the popularity of computed tomogram (CT) scans has led to a change in practice. With its speed, high sensitivity and specificity, and availability, multiplanar CT scans are quickly becoming standard in patients with cervical spine injuries.

With high suspicion of an associated neural injury, ordering cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is becoming more commonplace as well. MRI is superior to CT scans for evaluating the spinal cord, nerve roots, disc, and ligamentous structures in the cervical spine.

Due to rising healthcare costs, there has been an effort to determine which patients need advanced imaging with an MRI and which do not. Risk factors of an MRI disclosing a treatment-altering injury missed on the CT scan include age over 60, polytrauma patients, cervical spondylosis, a neurologic deficit, and a patient that cannot undergo evaluation due to a low GCS or other altered mental status.

When evaluating the radiographic studies, the different fracture morphologies have different characteristics. Vertebral body compression fractures have visible height loss of the vertebral body with anterior wedging and a maintained posterior cortex. Burst fractures are also in the category of compression fractures.

Facet dislocations and fractures can be unilateral or bilateral. A subluxation of the facet can also occur; referred to as a perched facet. Distraction mechanisms, often with a rotational force, can lead to facet joint subluxations with associated disruption of the disc or capsule.

Special consideration in the evaluation of a patient with AS is that it can be challenging to identify fractures on plain films due to the fusion mass. The clinician should treat those presenting with acute neck pain or a change in postural position as though they have a fracture until proven otherwise.

Upon completing the history, physical exam, and imaging studies, the clinician must determine what the treatment plan for the patient will be. There are a couple of classification systems that have been devised to help guide the physician in this decision. The first is the Subaxial Injury Classification System (SLIC). This classification stratifies the type of fracture, the competency of the DLC, and the patient’s neurologic status with numerical values to determine the course of treatment. A score of three or less suggests conservative management; a score of five or more indicates operative management, whereas a score of four is a gray zone and left to physician judgment.