Due to the severe nature and the force required to sustain calcaneal fractures **concomitant injuries** must be considered.

- A thorough evaluation of the entire spine should be performed anytime a calcaneal fracture is identified especially when a fall is a mechanism. The force from impacting the ground translates through the lower extremity and upward sometimes causing **spinal compression fractures**.

- **Compartment syndrome** of the foot is a rare but severely debilitating complication of calcaneal fractures and can occur in up to 10% of the injuries. A high index of suspicion is needed in considering patients presenting with increased pain either after treatment or during the initial evaluation.

- **Osteomyelitis, postoperative wound infection, malunion,**and**subtalar arthritis**are all potential complications of calcaneal fractures and repair.

Infections and wound breakdown are the most common and devastating complications of the extensile lateral approach.  Wound complications and infections can be as high as 37% and 20% respectively with operative intervention.

Subtalar osteoarthritis may result from surgical or nonsurgical treatment with an increasing number of patients with non-operatively treated displaced intra-articular calcaneus fractures requiring late subtalar fusion as a result of subtalar arthritis.

Sural nerve injury may result in up to 15% of cases treated operatively (more often with the extensile lateral approach). The risk is reduced with a more inferiorly based L-incision.

Chronic pain is also a common complication, in many cases owing to post-traumatic subtalar arthritis, malalignment or stiffness resulting from the injury.

Peroneal tendon instability may result from displaced, intra-articular calcaneus fractures.