Many surgical procedures can lead to iatrogenic nerve injury, especially for anatomical variants involving early bifurcation, as this can lead to more nerve divisions of which to be mindful. Inguinal hernia repair is one such surgery where the variations in the anatomy of the LFCN can lead to iatrogenic injury. During laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair, the incidence of nerve injury is approximately 2%. This nerve is also at risk of injury during aesthetic abdominoplasties, and it is suggested to approach the 4 cm area surround ASIS with careful dissection to avoid iatrogenic injury of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. During bone graft harvesting, the LFCN is also at potential risk, as the size of the bone graft and incision can increase the likelihood of nerve injury and lead to the recommendation to keep incisions at least 3 cm away from ASIS.

Another procedure where the location of the LFCN is of particular interest is bone graft harvesting. Factors such as the size of the graft and size of the incision can greatly influence the risk of injury. The current suggestions are that the grafts should be less than 3 cm in size and that the incisions should be at least 3 cm or more away from the palpable point of the ASIS. The anterior approach in hip arthroplasty is superior to the posterior approach, as it lowers the risk of dislocation and provides less risk to the hip adductors; however, the risk to the LFCN is greater, with 81% of patients undergoing an anterior hip arthroplasty report new onset neurapraxia in the distribution of the LFCN. The current standard of practice to avoid LFCN damage suggests that incisions are made parallel to the LCFN.