Ionized calcium plays an important function in muscle contraction.  Skeletal muscle function is governed by an action potential that releases calcium stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This calcium then binds to tropomyosin and allows for the interaction of myosin and actin in the sarcomere, leading to muscle contraction. In smooth muscle, second messenger systems trigger the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Additionally, ligand-gated and voltage-gated calcium channels on the smooth muscle membrane allow for extracellular calcium to enter the cell. Calmodulin binds calcium ions and activates myosin light chain kinase to phosphorylase the myosin head, which then binds actin and causes smooth muscle contraction. Cardiac muscle is governed both by action potentials and extracellular calcium influx. The action potential triggers an inward flow of calcium that potentiates additional calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The contraction of one cardiac muscle cell is communicated to adjacent cells through intercalated disks, thus allowing for the synchronized contraction of cardiac muscle. It is through this mechanism that calcium is used to stabilize the cardiac cell membrane against depolarization in severe hyperkalemia.

Ionized calcium also serves many microbiological functions, including activating protein kinases, enzyme phosphorylation, and mediating cell response to hormones such as epinephrine, glucagon, vasopressin (ADH), secretin, and cholecystokinin.