Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (PDE inhibitors) are a class of agents acting on phosphodiesterase enzymes. They are FDA approved to manage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, erectile dysfunction, pulmonary arterial hypertension, acute decompensated heart failure, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, atopic dermatitis, and neonatal apnea. The management of patients administered PDE inhibitors requires decisive care and decision-making from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, as the management of each condition can lead to a better quality of life for patients. These healthcare professionals include a primary care provider, a specialist (cardiologist, pulmonologist, urologist, or rheumatologist), depending on the management of the disease, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care provider and specialist should be familiar with PDE inhibitors, their indications and use, adverse effects, and contraindications. In addition, patients should be fully educated on the side effects of therapy, such as headaches and decreased blood pressure that may cause dizziness and lightheadedness.

The patient should also be advised to seek medical attention immediately if more concerning effects such as visual disturbances, hearing loss, and priapism for long periods occur using PDE-5 inhibitors (sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, and avanafil). The elderly population prescribed therapy for erectile dysfunction should be thoroughly evaluated in case dosing modifications may be needed for renal and hepatic impairment in this patient population. The clinician should be aware of any other medications the patient may be taking short-term or long-term. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors can cross-react with other agents as they are metabolized by the cytochrome p450 system in the liver resulting in subtherapeutic or toxic serum concentrations.

Cardiac risk factors should be carefully assessed before treatment as this class of medications may cause a decrease in blood pressure and precipitate or further worsen an underlying cardiac disease. Patients taking antihypertensives should be advised about their concurrent use with phosphodiesterase inhibitors as it can cause symptomatic life-threatening hypotension. PDE-4 inhibitors may worsen or precipitate psychiatric symptoms such as suicidal thoughts and depression in susceptible individuals. The use of this medication class can be discussed with a psychiatrist before administration in select individuals.

Nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as theophylline and caffeine should be used cautiously as toxicity can result in seizures, arrhythmias, and mortality. If seizures or arrhythmias occur, patients should be treated promptly with benzodiazepines and beta-blockers as indicated and as needed until the patient is stabilized. The primary care clinician should periodically monitor patients as some phosphodiesterase inhibitors may cause elevations in liver enzymes, thrombocytopenia, and electrolyte disturbances. Joint decision-making and interprofessional interaction are essential components to decrease adverse effects and enhance patient-centered care to achieve the desired outcome.