Each implant company has a specific system with trays that come with the necessary tools and trial components. The basic equipment that will be used in all cases and will improve the efficiency and safety of the case include:

- Standard operating table

- De Mayo leg holder, paint roller, or other equivalent patient positioning instrumentation

- Tourniquet

- Overall use remains debated in the literature
- Use and duration is surgeon-specific

- Retractors

- Osteotomes

- Sagittal saw

- Mallet

- Lamina spreaders

- Cement-specific equipment

- Cement mixer system
- Pressurizing gun

- Pulse lavage irrigation

- Suction

- Bovie electrocautery

In revision cases, may also require other equipment, including:

- Curettes

- Reamers

- Cones

- Sleeves

- Stemmed options including offset adjusting capabilities

- Bone grafting options

**Implant Types**

Implant types have continued to evolve since the 1950s. Insall et al. initially described in the 1970s the different models of knee prostheses. He placed them into two categories; condylar replacements that spared ligaments and hinged-type components that sacrificed the ligaments. Four models were described, with increasing complexity in each model:

- Unicondylar

- Duocondylar

- Geometric

- Guepar

In modern arthroplasty, most implants are a derivative of these models that were initially described. They include unicompartmental, cruciate retaining, posterior stabilizing, constrained non-hinged, constrained hinged prosthetic components from least complex to the most complex.

**Cruciate Retaining (CR)**

The ACL is sacrificed; overall feasibility mandates a competent and functional PCL.

It can be used in those with mild varus/valgus deformity. It should be avoided in those with inflammatory arthritis due to increased risk for short-term or delayed rupture of PCL.

Benefits:

- Fewer patellar complications (theoretical)

- Increased quadriceps strength (controversial, depends in part on surgical exposure utilized)

- Improved stair climbing

- Preserved PCL proprioception (theoretical)

- Lower shear forces on the tibial component

- Improved femoral bone stock preservation

- Preserves near-normal knee kinematics

- Avoids cam-post jump complication that exists in posterior stabilized prosthetic components

Disadvantages:

- Risk of postoperative PCL degeneration or rupture that can lead to flexion instability

- Tight PCL can lead to increased wear on polyethylene and dysfunctional TKA kinematics.

**Posterior Stabilizing (PS)**

It can be used in those with absent PCL, inflammatory arthritis and may be beneficial in those with a previous patellectomy as it can add some anteroposterior stability that is absent due to the weak extensor mechanism. PS femoral prosthetic component contains a box in the femoral component with a post on the polyethylene liner that substitutes for the resected PCL.

Benefits:

- It can theoretically be easier to achieve ligamentous balance in the knee without having to worry about accounting for the physiologic effects of the intact PCL

- Greater deformity correction compared to cruciate-retaining implants

- Theoretically improved knee range of motion

- Decreased polyethylene wear due to congruent articular surfaces

Disadvantages:

- Cam-post jump of the post over the femoral box, typically due to mid-late flexion instability

- Polyethylene wear on the post can lead to osteolysis.

- Patellar clunk that may occur due to a soft tissue nodule and is present when going from flexion into extension

- The increased theoretical risk of technical error which can involve elevating the joint line

Overall, multiple studies have not demonstrated a significant difference in function, satisfaction, or implant survival between cruciate-retaining and posterior stabilizing implants.

**Constrained Non-Hinged**

Varus-valgus constrained design is used in cases where there is LCL or MCL deficiency, moderate bone loss, or flexion gap laxity. This implant has a large tibial post with a deep femoral box.

Benefits:

- Allows for coronal stability in severe coronal bone deformities

Disadvantages:

- Increased femoral bone loss and is a poor option in younger patients unless necessary.

- Increased risk of aseptic loosening due to increased constraint

- Increased polyethylene wear and increased risk of cam fracture

**Constrained Hinge**

Rotating hinge prostheses are used in complex revision arthroplasty cases with significant bone loss, ligamentous laxity, or oncologic cases. Femoral and tibial components link with an axle, and the tibial bearing can rotate around the tibial platform. This rotation allows for a lower constraint and, therefore, a decreased risk of aseptic loosening. Early implants were uniplanar without allowing rotation and had a high rate of aseptic loosening.

Advantages:

- Very versatile and has application for many salvage cases

Disadvantages:

- Significant bone resection needed for implant

- Although lower with a rotating hinge, still at risk for aseptic loosening due to increased constraint.