**Biochemistry**

Liver function tests including bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and albumin may be elevated on the initial evaluation. This may indicate the severity of the disease. Other abnormal laboratory findings noted in patients with decreased synthetic liver function or reserve include an elevated international normalized ratio (INR), prothrombin time (PT), thrombocytopenia, anemia, hyponatremia, or hypoglycemia. Patients with advanced HCC, chronic hepatitis, or cirrhosis-related HCC are likely to present with these findings. Patients with early non-cirrhotic-related HCC may present with normal LFTs on the initial encounter. Patients with paraneoplastic features of HCC could present with hypoglycemia, hypercalcemia, erythrocytosis.

Other laboratory investigations to evaluate the etiology of HCC include hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-HCV antibody, alpha antitrypsin level, copper levels, and iron saturation.

**Serum Alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP)**

Alpha-fetoprotein is a serum glycoprotein produced by the fetal yolk sac and fetal liver during gestation. Elevated serum levels of AFP are typical for advanced HCC. This does not correlate with tumor size or vascular invasion. About 40% of small HCC do not secrete AFP. Early non-cirrhotic HCC have normal serum AFP levels.

Other biomarkers include des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin (DCP) and lectin-bound alpha-fetoprotein, which may be elevated in HCC.

**Imaging**

HCC may be diagnosed with ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Ultrasound: Ultrasound (US) is a non-invasive, widely used screening test for HCC and surveillance. Sensitivity and specificity range from 51%-87% and 80-%100% respectively.

Contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) is used for the characterization of lesions detected on non-contrast ultrasound. CEUS has specificity greater than 97% and sensitivity and sensitivity of 90% in diagnosing lesions previously demonstrated on the non-contrast US as HCC.

Ultrasound with or without serum alpha-fetoprotein is recommended every six months for HCC surveillance in high-risk patients.

Computed Tomography (CT): Diagnostic imaging criteria for detecting HCC with triphasic CT scan include hyperenhancement in the arterial phase and rapid washout during the portal venous phase relative to the liver background.

MRI: T1-weighted images may be isointense to hyperintense depending on the degree of fibrosis, fat, and necrosis. Hyperintense images on T1 are mostly well-differentiated tumors and appear as isointense on T2 images. Poorly or moderately differentiated tumors appear as isointense on T1 images and hyperintense on T2 images. Contrast MRI has a sensitivity of 77%-90% and a specificity of 84-97%.

American radiology association (ARA) has developed a liver imaging reporting and data system (LI-RADS) for classifying hepatic nodules and has been adopted by several societies including the American association for the study of liver disease (AASLD) in 2018. The lesion should demonstrate a non-peripheral washout appearance in the portal venous or delayed phase, non-rim arterial phase hyperenhancement in relation to the background liver parenchyma, smooth enhancing capsule appearance, and growth of more than 50% increase in size in less than 6 months.

**Liver Biopsy**

Liver biopsy is not routinely done for HCC as the procedure is associated with the risk of tumor seeding and bleeding, and false negative on failure to obtain tissue from the appropriate site. Liver biopsy has a sensitivity of 66%-93% depending on the size of the tumor, positive predictive value, and specificity of 100%.

AASLD recommends biopsy in lesions not typical for HCC on contrast-enhanced imaging and categorized as LI-RADS-M or LI-RADS-4. Several biomarkers to increase the accuracy of the diagnosis of HCC from high-grade dysplastic nodules include heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), glypican-3 (GPC3), and glutamine synthetase (GS).