The radiopharmaceutical is prepared in cyclotrons and brought into the department in lead-lined containers early in the morning. The handling process requires exquisite care and diligence to avoid exposure to the staff and public. The radiotracer is injected through a tungsten syringe employed in a specialized carrier and is kept behind a lead screen.

The PET/CT system comprises stand-alone PET and CT scanners housed in a single gantry. The patient bed is shared between the two scanners and moves smoothly from the PET to the CT component during image acquisition.

A scintillator absorbs ionizing radiation and converts the fraction of absorbed energy into photons of visible or ultraviolet light which can then be converted into electric signals through photodetectors. The typical PET scanner consists of thousands of inorganic scintillation crystals organized in blocks to form detector modules arranged in a ring configuration. The bismuth germanate (BGO) detectors have been traditionally used as scintillation crystals but are now replaced by lutetium oxyorthosilicate (LSO) detectors.

These crystals absorb the energy from annihilation events in the body (511 Kev energy) and create tens of thousands of visible wavelength photons proportional to the amount of energy deposited by the annihilation photon. Random coincidence is when two detected photons have come from two separate annihilation events. Scatter coincidence is when both photons are from the same event, but one or both have scattered. True coincidence is the detection of both photons from the same annihilation event.

These light photons are channeled to the coupled photodetectors. The most common photodetectors in PET are photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), which consist of vacuum tubes with photocathodes.

The initially formed image is not perfect in any sense and is significantly affected by the attenuation of PET photons in the body, the variation in detector efficiency, and the recording of scattering and random events with true coincidences. Therefore, attenuation correction is carried by a CT scan performed simultaneously. The CT component also helps provide additional anatomical information lacking in nascent PET images.

The images are then represented quantitatively in terms of the radioactivity concentration, i.e., kBq/ml, which is then converted into a standardized uptake value (SUV) by normalizing to the patient weight and injected radioactivity.

- SUV (g/ml) = tracer uptake(kBq/ml) / (activity (MBq) / weight (kg))