Magnesium is a vital mineral for many bodily functions. However, unless patients are diagnosed with hypomagnesemia, this mineral should not be empirically recommended by the prescribing clinicians, including MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs. These days many people consume magnesium supplements because of a false understanding of correcting the condition. Excessive magnesium intake is not safe either, as it can lead to hypotension, hyporeflexia, and respiratory depression. With a magnesium concentration of above 6 mg/dL, ECG changes can include PR prolongation, widening of QRS, and peaked T waves. Cardiac arrest occurs whenever levels are above 15 mg/dL. When IV magnesium is administered, the nurse should constantly monitor the vital signs, especially blood pressure.

While magnesium is generally safe, given the potential for severe issues in specific cases, the entire interprofessional team needs to be aware of the patient's intake of supplemental magnesium and record such in the patient's health record. This way, the whole team can make medical decisions based on complete and accurate data. It is incumbent on each interprofessional team member to provide input based on their area of expertise and counsel the patient on the appropriate use of the drug. Pharmacists need to examine the possibility of drug-drug interactions and report to the prescriber as appropriate. An interprofessional approach involving clinicians, mid-level practitioners, pharmacists, and nursing staff, collaborating the activities, and openly sharing case information will provide the safest and most successful patient care. [Level 5]