The heart has an electrical system that allows it to contract in a rhythm. A vital aspect of this electrical system is depolarization and repolarization. The electrical activity is conducted through the sinoatrial (SA) node and atrioventricular (AV) node and into the ventricles. This electrical activity is clearly outlined on an electrocardiogram (ECG) with P waves, the QRS complex, and T waves. The P wave represents the electrical activity of the atrium. The QRS complex shows the depolarization of the ventricles. Lastly, the T wave shows the repolarization of the ventricles.

The focus of this article is on the QT interval. It is measured from the Q wave until the T wave, and the QT interval clinically represents the repolarization of the ventricles. When measured on an ECG, the QT interval lengthens when the heart is beating slower and shortens when the heart is beating faster. That is why an adjusted version of the QT interval is used: QTc. This allows for an accurate QT interval at lower and higher heart rates. There are different formulas used to obtain the QTc interval.

- Bazett

- Fridericia

- Framingham

Bazett's is the most commonly used formula and is done by dividing the QT interval by the square root of the R-R interval.

A normal QTc in a male is 440 ms or less, and in a female, it is 460 ms or less. Those with prolonged QT are at risk for one of the potentially deadly arrhythmias known as torsades de pointes. It is a form of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, an unstable cardiac rhythm. This rhythm may cease on its own and go into sinus rhythm or degenerate into ventricular fibrillation. It is important to distinguish torsades de pointes from other forms of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. For an arrhythmia to be classified as torsades de pointes, it must also occur in the setting of QT prolongation. Other forms of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia can occur with a normal QT interval and usually occur due to ischemia.

The most common symptom of Torsades de Pointes is syncope. If hemodynamically unstable, patients with torsades are administered a 2 to 4 g bolus of magnesium sulfate and must undergo cardioversion. Isoproterenol can also be used to increase the heart rate, thereby decreasing the absolute QT interval. However, this medication has limited availability in many settings. Other second-line options can include lidocaine. Amiodarone, while used for ventricular tachycardia, should generally not be used as it has some QT-prolonging properties. Phenytoin has also been identified as a potential third-line treatment option.

It is generally accepted that QT prolongation past 500 ms carries an increased risk of torsades de pointes. The degree of QT prolongation is correlated to the level of risk, with severe prolongations being associated with much higher risk. The most common etiology is acquired prolongation due to medication use, followed by electrolyte abnormalities. Less common are various conditions.

**Prolonged QT Etiologies**

- Pharmacological

- Long QT syndrome

- Jervell and Lange-Neilson syndromes

- Romano-Ward syndrome

- Hypocalcemia

- Hypokalemia

- Hypomagnesemia

- Hypothyroidism

- Hypothermia

Literature has shown that people with diabetes and those suffering from certain inflammatory diseases may suffer from mildly prolonged QT. This is also true in those with heart disease. No major evidence in the general population indicates changes in mortality are associated with mild QT prolongation. However, subsets of cardiac patients may have an increased mortality risk if they suffer from QT prolongation, especially when combined with other risk factors.

Pharmacological agents are the most common cause of QT prolongation, given the broad range of medications that may induce it. Treatment is primarily aimed at discontinuing the offending drug, as it usually leads to normalization of the QT interval.

**QT-Prolonging Medications**

**Antipsychotics:**Haloperidol, ziprasidone, quetiapine, thioridazine, olanzapine, risperidone, droperidol

**Antiarrhythmics:**Amiodarone, sotalol, dofetilide, procainamide, quinidine, flecainide

**Antibiotics:**Macrolides, fluoroquinolones

**Antidepressants:**Amitriptyline, imipramine, citalopram, amitriptyline

**Others:**Methadone, sumatriptan, ondansetron, cisapride

A vast number of medications prolong the QT interval. They are preferably classified based on the degree of QT prolongation they induce. This is specifically medication-dependent. Caution is advised when combining QT-prolonging medications or when using these medications in those with electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypokalemia. Clinically, patients at risk of electrolyte derangements must also be considered. Specifically, those experiencing extrarenal losses and/or those on diuretics are at risk for electrolyte abnormalities and hence may have unknown prolonged QTc.

Many commonly used medications, such as diphenhydramine and azithromycin, exhibit QT-prolonging effects. However, the degree of QT prolongation is not severe enough to warrant immediate caution in healthy patients. These medications bind to the human ether-related gene (hERG) channels and reduce electrical conduction through the potassium ion channels. This results in delayed repolarization of the heart.