The estimated U.S population, which is immunocompromised due to any cause (HIV/AIDS, chemotherapy, immunomodulatory drugs, etc.), is 2.7%, which is roughly 8 million people.  Among these, immunodeficiency is found to be highest in women, Whites, and people aged 55 to 59.

More than 5 million cases of community-acquired pneumonia occur every year in the U.S. and the incidence rates are highest among males and African-Americans.

More than 400,000 cases of Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) occur annually in patients with AIDS throughout the world. A majority of these are either patients who have an undiagnosed HIV infection or those receiving inadequate antiretroviral therapy. On the other hand, the global incidence of PCP in non-HIV infected individuals is more than 100,000 annually. In these non-HIV infected, yet immunocompromised individuals, the most common conditions and risk factors are:

- Hematological malignancies, with corticosteroids, monoclonal antibodies, and T-cell dysfunction being the main risk factors.

- Solid tumors, high dose chemotherapy, prolonged corticosteroid use, marrow transplantation are the biggest risk factors in this population.

- Solid-organ transplantation, with decreased CD4+ count being the main risk factor.

- Autoimmune diseases, especially in patients receiving anti-TNF alpha and other immunomodulatory drugs (the biggest risk factor for PCP in this population).

- Patients receiving glucocorticoids or other biological and immunomodulatory drugs for any other condition.

Opportunistic fungal infections such as Histoplasma capsulatum and Coccidioides immitis occur primarily in endemic regions, such as the Ohio and Mississipi river valleys and Southwestern U.S, respectively.