Patients with fractures of the talar neck typically present following a high-energy traumatic mechanism such as motor vehicle accident or fall from height with hindfoot pain, ecchymosis, and swelling. These patients are often victims of polytrauma and likely have other bony, vascular, or soft tissue injuries, so the basic “ABCs” (airway, breathing, and circulation) of acute trauma care are paramount. A complete neurovascular examination should is necessary with both the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial artery pulses palpated or evaluated with a doppler if necessary. The cutaneous sensory distribution of all five named nerves of the foot (superficial peroneal, deep peroneal, saphenous, sural, and tibial nerves) should be examined.

The motor exam consists of plantar and dorsiflexion of the great toe and ankle and inversion and eversion of the foot, documenting any neurovascular deficits. The skin should undergo close inspection for abrasion or laceration concerning for possible open fracture. If found to be an open fracture, thorough bedside irrigation and debridement are necessary, and intravenous antibiotics and tetanus vaccination are provided. Dislocations and bony deformity require reduction, and the extremity is placed into a temporizing splint for pain relief and to alleviate pressure from the soft tissues surrounding the talus. If an extruded talus is present, the bone should be thoroughly washed with sterile saline and placed back inside the soft tissue envelope if possible.