Patients who require a BDG have circulation with complete mixing of the systemic and pulmonary vascular beds in parallel. The BDG is undertaken to convert this circulation into a series circuit where pulmonary blood flow (PBF) is based upon systemic venous return. For optimal functioning of this circuit, blood flow through the pulmonary circulation cannot be inhibited by elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), AV valve dysfunction, or reduced ventricular compliance. In patients with HLHS, no obstruction to blood flow should exist at the atrial septum.

The BDG or superior cavopulmonary anastomosis (SCPA) is undertaken to enable ventricular volume unloading, associated with a reduction in ventricular end-diastolic volume and ventricular hypertrophy.

Norwood et al. suggested that a superior cavopulmonary anastomosis or Hemi-Fontan procedure should be performed as a primary step before conversion to complete Fontan physiology. This would reduce volume overload on the single ventricle and avoid acute ventricular volume associated with a Fontan. With a Fontan, although ventricular cavity size is reduced, ventricular hypertrophy would result due to the persistence of ventricular mass. In effect, reduced ventricular compliance would lead to Fontan circulation failure. With the BDG, ventricular remodeling, with the tandem reduction in ventricular mass and wall thickness, would occur slowly over time. The BDG was also postulated to improve systemic arterial oxygen saturation without an increase in ventricular workload or elevated PVR.