Joint pain is a complex problem facing medical practitioners that has its origin in a host of conditions, injuries, and diseases. Between 2013 and 2015 alone, an estimated 54.4 million United States (US) adults (22.7%) annually were told by a doctor that they had some form of arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, lupus, or fibromyalgia.

Physicians, researchers, and other medical providers have, for centuries, sought to understand the etiology and causes of joint pain in an effort to develop effective treatments to alleviate discomfort.

Joint pain and/or arthritis is one of the most prevalent and expensive conditions known to humankind. In 2013, the American national medical costs attributable to arthritis were $140 billion.

The human knee is perhaps the most common joint to suffer the effects of articular cartilage loss. In a population of patients greater than 45-years-old, the age-standardized prevalence of radiographic osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee was reported to be between 19.2% (Framingham Study) to 27.8% (Johnston County Osteoarthritis Project).

Thus, much attention has been turned to finding an effective method whereby the damaged or deficient articular hyaline cartilage can be restored to the knee.

One method of surgically restoring a viable articular surface to the knee joint whose hyaline cartilage surface has been injured is through osteochondral allograft transplantation. Osteochondral allograft transplantation is an effective treatment when the source of knee pain is a large chondral defect or in the cases of post-traumatic arthritis.