Deficiencies of vitamin B12 and folic acid are the leading causes of megaloblastic anemia.

Folic acid is present in food such as green vegetables, fruits, meat, and liver. Daily adult needs range from 50 to 100 mcg. The recommended dietary allowance is 400 mcg in adults and 600 mcg in pregnant women.

The primary dietary sources of cobalamin/vitamin B12 are meats, fish, eggs, and dairy products. Vegan diets are low in vitamin B12. However, not all patients following a vegan diet develop clinical evidence of deficiency. Vitamin B12 is first bound within the duodenum and jejunum to the intrinsic factor (IF) produced by gastric parietal cells and is then absorbed in the terminal ileum. The body stores 2 to 3 mg of vitamin B12 in the liver (sufficient for 2 to 4 years). The most frequent cause of vitamin B12 deficiency is pernicious anemia caused by autoimmune gastric atrophy, leading to decreased intrinsic factor production.

Clinical copper deficiency can cause microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic anemia and neutropenia. Copper deficiency also causes myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy. Bone marrow evaluation can reveal myelodysplasia and megaloblastic anemia. Treatment with copper replacement promptly reverses hematologic manifestations of the disease, although neurologic manifestation may take longer.

In rare cases, MA is due to inherited problems:

- Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome: An autosomal recessive disease characterized by megaloblastic anemia associated with diabetes mellitus and early-onset sensorineural hearing loss.

- Inherited deficiency of intrinsic factor or the receptor in the intestines: Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome or juvenile megaloblastic anemia is caused by biallelic mutations affecting the ileal receptor for the vitamin B12-IF complex. These patients also have proteinuria and abnormal vitamin D metabolism.

- Some infants have congenital folate malabsorption syndrome.

Drug-induced megaloblastic anemia can occur from a variety of different medications via various different mechanisms. Drugs known to cause megaloblastic changes in the bone marrow include:

- Allopurinol

- Azathioprine

- Capecitabine

- Cladribine

- Fludarabine

- Fluorouracil

- Gadolinium

- Gemcitabine

- Hydroxyurea

- Lamivudine

- Leflunomide

- Mercaptopurine

- Methotrexate

- Mycophenolate mofetil

- Trimethoprim

- Zidovudine

Drugs that reduce the intestinal absorption of folic acid or vitamin B12 and/or metabolism of these vitamins include:

- Aminosalicylic acid

- Antacids and proton pump inhibitors

- Penicillin antibiotics

- Chloramphenicol

- Erythromycin

- Oral contraceptives

- Metformin

- Phenytoin

- Tetracyclines

- Valproic acid