Minimally invasive surgery does not include a full sternotomy. Approaches include a partial sternal split (lower J shaped or less commonly upper hemi-sternotomy), limited right thoracotomy incision, and multiple smaller incisions for a robotic approach.

A minimally invasive approach using the right mini-thoracotomy is the most common.

The mini-thoracotomy incision is standardly made in the fourth intercostal space, and newer techniques with periareolar incision have been developed for select patients. Robotic instrumentation can be used for an endoscopic approach that refers to incisions no larger than 1.5 cm for endoscopic instrument placement. Complete procedural details are beyond the scope of this review and discussed elsewhere.

The percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair procedure provides a benefit over the surgical approach as the cardiopulmonary bypass is not necessary. The procedure uses transesophageal echocardiography guidance and is divided into a five-step process:

- Baseline imaging

- Trans-septal puncture

- The positioning of the clip in the left atria above the affected mitral leaflet

- Leaflet grasp and deployment of the device

- Post-deployment assessment. Multiple clips may be deployed to achieve a good result.

Transcatheter mitral valve replacement (TMVR) devices are undergoing clinical trials in the US for future use. The first-in-human study was conducted in Vancouver, Canada, between August 2017 and August 2018 and showed promise. The first TMVR device, Abbott Tendyne, was approved for use in Europe in January 2020 and is undergoing the Safety and Effectiveness of Using the Tendyne Mitral Valve System for the Treatment of Symptomatic Mitral Regurgitation (SUMMIT) clinical trial in the US for possible approval. Many techniques and the success of the TMVR devices are currently under investigation.