**Pectus Excavatum**

Complications related to any thoracic surgery such; bleeding, surgical site infections, seroma, pneumothorax, and other pulmonary issues are equally in open and MARPE surgery. In the NSQIP database, the Nuss procedure morbidity rate complications are of 3.8%. Pectus excavatum recurrence (2 to 37%) is higher due to open surgery resulting from perichondrium surgical disruption, highlighting acquired asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy development in patients under four years old. Underlying connective tissue disease and too early bar removal have been linked to pectus recurrence too. The highlight complication associated with MARPE is bar displacement (5.7 to 12%).

**Pectus Carinatum**

Complications are the same as the modified Ravitch procedure for pectus excavatum; however, it is important to highlight that the recurrence rates are reduced by making less costal cartilage resection with intact growth centers. Bracing treatment recurrence risk is 5 to 15%. Bracing complications highlight is the device's poor tolerance.

**Poland Syndrome**

Complications will depend on phenotype, associated anomalies, and surgical repair (case-by-case basis). Breast cancer risk in a female is a paramount highlight.

**Sternal Clefts**

Will depend more on the associated anomalies than sternal cleft; however, post-surgical complications are of special interest, bein post-surgical repair cardiac compression the most life-threatening complication.

**Ectopia Cordis**

Infection, cardiac failure, and hypoxemia have been reported as the most common causes of death.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

The main cause of death is respiratory failure. Terminal kidney disease can develop in 30% of cases. Associated anomalies highlights are; Liver, pancreatic, and retinal anomalies. The most frequently reported deaths are during the first year of life, while the older the child, the lower the risks.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

Respiratory complications, congestive heart failure, and pulmonary hypertension are the leading causes of death.