**Cerebral Blood Flow Regulation and Physiology**

Cerebral oxygen delivery is a function of brain blood flow and blood oxygen content, whereby cerebral blood flow (CBF) is dependent on cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) and inversely proportional to cerebrovascular resistance (CVR). Another way to conceptualize blood flow to the brain is via the pressure gradient between the supplying arteries (mean arterial pressure, MAP) and the cerebral venous system, the latter being approximately equivalent to intracranial pressure (ICP).

- CBF = CPP/CVR = (MAP – ICP)/CVR

Vascular resistance within the brain reflects the smooth muscle tone of the vessels, which is partially influenced by mean arterial pressure (MAP). If CPP increases or decreases, the myogenic reflex will result in vasoconstriction or vasodilation, respectively. This assertion is the classical view of pressure-flow autoregulation. If intracranial pressure is stable, CPP is replaceable by MAP. In this manner, changes in brain blood flow can be measured for a range of blood pressures to determine autoregulation.

As mentioned in the introductory remarks, four mechanisms regulate cerebral blood flow: myogenic, neurogenic, endothelial, and metabolic processes. Each component appears in the figure below.

**Myogenic Tone**

Myogenic tone is produced when arteriole and small artery smooth muscle cells contract in response to increased pressure. In contrast, myogenic tone relaxes in response to decreased pressure. Transmural pressure changes, in turn, activate mechanically sensitive ion channels and proteins in the vessel wall, triggering various downstream cascades. For instance, membrane depolarization opens voltage-gated calcium channels, leading to an influx of calcium cations into the smooth muscle cell.

The importance of smooth muscle cell myogenic regulation is apparent in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL). Patients with CADASIL show a degree of smooth muscle cell degeneration in small cerebral arteries. Studies have demonstrated impaired myogenic autoregulatory functioning in both animal models and individuals with the genetic condition.

Lacombe et al. provided evidence that transgenic mice expressing a mutant NOTCH3 in vascular smooth muscle cells exhibited impaired cerebral vasoreactivity, including reduced responses to vasodilatory challenges and a shift of the lower limit of autoregulation toward higher pressures.

**Neurogenic Response**

Neurogenic mediation of cerebral vasoreactivity involves the control of small- and medium-sized vessel diameters. Neurons and other cell types like astrocytes and microglia secrete a variety of neurotransmitters with vasoactive properties. For instance, acetylcholine and nitric oxide are relatively potent vasodilators, while serotonin and neuropeptide Y stimulate vasoconstriction.

On a larger scale, these changes in blood flow in response to neuronal activation are observable as the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal employed in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The BOLD response has been adapted in many fMRI studies investigating increased cerebral metabolic demand in cognitive tasks, spatial memory, visual processing, and across various disease states.

Regarding regional heterogeneity, the anterior circulatory system of the brain possesses denser sympathetic innervation than that of the posterior system. The anterior circulation is controlled mainly by adrenergic sympathetic relays from the superior cervical ganglion as they travel up the carotid arteries. The posterior vessels instead depend on the sympathetic chain via the vertebrobasilar arteries.

Autoregulation has also demonstrated greater effectiveness in the brainstem. For example, in severe hypertension in anesthetized cats, cerebral blood flow significantly increases in the anterior circulation, whereas the brainstem only requires modest increases in inflow.

This regional variability may play a key role in developing posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). This syndrome, which parenthetically is not always posterior or even reversible, is otherwise characterized radiologically by transient bilateral subcortical vasogenic edema in the posterior circulation.

**Metabolic Mechanism**

The metabolic mechanism subserving autoregulation occurs in smaller vessels subject to changes in the local environment. Most notably, carbon dioxide overtly alters vasomotor responses; every 1 mmHg increase in PaCO2 corresponds to a roughly 4% increase in cerebral blood flow.

There is a hypothesis that this vasomotor response is regulated by proton concentration in the smooth muscle of cerebral vessels. Proton gradients are regulated by carbonic anhydrase activity, the catalytic activity of which depends on the tight regulation of pH (normally hovering around 7.4 in the human body). Prolonged hypocapnia that generates tissue alkalosis may increase carbonic anhydrase activity.

**Endothelial Mechanism**

Lastly, endothelial tissue begets a gamut of signals that affect vascular tone. The endothelium secretes vasodilators like nitric oxide (NO) and vasoconstrictors like thromboxane A2 and endothelin-1 in a paracrine manner. Further, as an interesting bedside-to-bench endeavor, researchers have looked at the ability of statins to regulate autoregulation. In more detail, statins can upregulate nitric oxide synthase, causing cerebral artery dilation and increased cerebral blood flow.