The evaluation should include:

- Review radiotherapy and dental record

- Biopsy of wound

- Panographic Radiographs

- CT of mandible

- Stage the disease

Rule out recurrence/persistence of primary malignancy or new secondary malignancy by getting a biopsy of the wound.

Imaging studies aid in the diagnosis and quantify the extent of disease.

CT findings:

- Cortical bone disruption with mixed lysis and sclerosis can be seen. Pathologic fractures can also be seen.

Panographic radiograph findings:

- Plain radiographs are useful for screening but can underestimate the extent of lesions.

- Lytic areas with ill-defined, non-sclerotic borders can be seen.

Gather record of radiotherapy and review treatment method, radiation portal, and total dose.

Marx Staging of ORN is the most common staging system in use. It is based on response to hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO).

- Stage 1

- 
              
- Exposed alveolar bone without pathologic fracture, which responds to hyperbaric oxygen therapy and minor bony debridement

- Stage 2

- 
              
- The disease does not respond to 30 daily HBO treatments with minor bony debridement, or it requires major bony debridement initially. They are then considered Stage 2 and receive more radical surgical debridement plus ten postoperative HBO treatments.

- Stage 3

- 
              
- Failed treatment in stage 1 or 2 or initially present with signs below:
              
              
- 
                  
- Pathologic fracture
                  
                  
- Orocutaneous fistulae
                  
                  
- Evidence of lytic involvement of inferior mandibular border
                  
                

              
              
- Treatment involves mandibular segmental resection of all necrotic bone and 30 preoperative and ten postoperative HBO treatments.