**Bleeding Risk on Anticoagulation**

Several factors can increase the risk of bleeding in patients receiving anticoagulation therapy. The risks can be anticoagulant-related or patient-related. Providers need to consider other factors or errors that can increase the risk of bleeding in patients.

**Anticoagulant-Related Risks**

- Studies have shown that the risk of significant bleed is higher with warfarin than with direct oral anticoagulants.

- Dose of anticoagulant

- Concomitant use of other medications (e.g., antiplatelet agents) that independently increase the risk of bleeding

**Patient-Related Risks**

- Age

- Race (risk increased in Black/Brown population)

- Underlying medical conditions

- Recent surgery

- Coagulopathy

**Anticoagulation Reversal**

The initial step for any condition requiring urgent reversal of anticoagulation is always to discontinue the anticoagulant. Other standard measures that can be applied to most anticoagulants in certain significant and life-threatening bleeding situations include:

a) Use of activated charcoal with 2 hours of the last dose of anticoagulant

b) Hemodialysis

c) Red blood cell transfusion for anemia

d) Platelet transfusion if thrombocytopenic

e) Some cases may warrant surgical or endoscopic intervention

Different anticoagulants have specific reversal agents that act to counteract their effects.

- Unfractionated Heparin: Protamine sulfate counteracts the anti-10a activity of unfractionated heparin. Protamine sulfate has a short half-life and is usually administered intravenously. The ideal dose to achieve full resolution of anti-10a action can be calculated by 1 mg/100units of heparin remaining in the blood. The amount of heparin remaining in the blood can be estimated based on the previous dose of heparin, the interval since the last treatment, considering its half-life of one to two hours (doses of 50mg or 25mg via slow intravenous infusion).

- Low Molecular Weight (LMW) Heparin: Protamine sulfate is indicated for bleeding in patients on LMW heparin, although not as effective as with bleeding associated with unfractionated heparin. It is known to neutralize the larger molecules of the LMW heparin, which are the culprits in bleeding.

- Direct Oral Anticoagulants (Dabigatran): Idarucizumab is an anti-dabigatran monoclonal antibody fragment used in patients treated with dabigatran presenting with life-threatening bleeding. Its dose is 5 grams intravenously.

- Direct Oral Anticoagulants (Apixaban, Betrixaban, Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban): Andexanet alfa can be given as 800 mg bolus at 30 mg/minute followed by 960 mg infusion at 8 mg/minute or half of this dose depending on the dose of anticoagulation and last dose of direct oral anticoagulant received above 8 hours.

- Other Agents: Other nonspecific reversal agents that can be used if andexanet is not available are; 4-factor activated prothrombin complex concentrate (4-factor PCC), factor eight inhibitor bypassing activity (FEIBA), antifibrinolytic agents (tranexamic acid, epsilon-aminocaproic acid), or desmopressin (DDAVP).