The etiology of biliary atresia is unknown. Theories suggest a multitude of etiological and causative factors that are both genetic and acquired.

Since about 3% to 20% of children with biliary atresia have some associated syndrome or another congenital abnormality, and as biliary atresia is more common in certain geographic regions, it is likely that some genetic component is present in the pathogenesis of the disease although no single etiology has been found so far.

The extrahepatic bile ducts first become visible as an out-pouching of the foregut at 20 days of gestation, and the intrahepatic bile ducts become visible at 45 days, which form from the primitive hepatocytes. The porta-hepatis is the place of the interface between the extra and intrahepatic bile ducts, and the successful union is crucial for the development of the patent biliary system. The non-syndromic isolated type of biliary atresia might result from faulty remodeling in fetal life at the hepatic hilum. This is supported by the fact that there are similarities in the cytokeratin staining of the bile ducts in patients with biliary atresia and first-trimester fetal bile ducts strengthening the possibility that biliary atresia could occur due to the failure of the bile duct remodeling at the hepatic hilum with the persistence of fetal bile ducts.

Other theories favor a possible acquired, inflammatory, and infectious cause for the pathogenesis of the disease. Rotavirus and reovirus type 3 are specially mentioned as their perinatal animal models produced biliary atresia; however, these results have not been consistently seen in humans.

There have also been studies that show immune-related damage to the ductules of patients with biliary atresia due to an increase in the expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 in the bile ductules.

Other studies favor an acquired etiology with seasonal clustering of the cases especially in the winter months and also because 50% of the children with the disease have pigmented stools earlier in life which then later became clay-colored.

**Classifications**

Biliary atresia is not a single disease that results from a specific etiology, but rather it is a phenotype that results from different etiologies. It is broadly classified as syndromic and non-syndromic isolated varieties. Davenport et al. grouped specific entities of biliary atresia based on the similarities they share.

**Biliary Atresia Splenic Malformation Syndrome (BASM)**

Biliary atresia is associated with polysplenia, vascular anomalies including a pre-duodenal portal vein, interrupted vena cava, azygous continuation, cardiac malformation, malrotation, and situs inversus. In this type, the malformation occurs early in embryogenesis and accounts for the other anomalies. Maternal diabetes seems to play a role, and there is a female predominance.

**Cystic Biliary Atresia**

In this type, there is the obliteration of the biliary system with cystic dilatation. The incidence is reported to be around 10%, and it carries a better prognosis.

**Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgM Positive Biliary Atresia**

This type represents about 10% of the cases, and most of them are non-Whites. These children present with higher bilirubin and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels and more inflammatory infiltrates in the extrahepatic biliary apparatus on histology. This group has the worst prognosis.

**Isolated Biliary Atresia**

This represents the largest group, but the etiology is unknown.

**Morphological Classification**

Morphological classification is based on the level at which the biliary lumen is obliterated. The Japanese Association Of Pediatric Surgeons has classified it as:

- Type I: Obliteration of the common bile duct

- Type II a: Obliteration of the common hepatic duct

- Type II b: Obliteration of the common bile duct, hepatic duct, cystic duct with no abnormality of the gallbladder, and cystic dilatation at the porta hepatis

- Type III: Obliteration of the common bile duct, hepatic duct, and cystic duct with no anastomosable ducts at the porta hepatis; this is the most common variety.