Peripheral blood may reveal an increase in neutrophil and eosinophil count.

Pulmonary function tests show a restrictive defect, with impaired diffusion capacity unlike usual obstructive pattern in respiratory bronchiolitis.

Chest x-ray may show a reticulonodular infiltrate in lower lung zones but appears fairly subtle and nonspecific. They are reported to be normal in 3% to 22% of biopsy-proven cases.

High-resolution CT chest is the imaging modality of choice. It shows diffuse bilateral lower lobe predominant ground glass changes in a homogenous distribution, and without honeycombing- the last two features distinguishing it from usual interstitial pneumonia or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. In progressive disease, cysts and traction bronchiectasis may be seen, but it is not exclusively subpleural. Fibrosis is not as common as in NSIP or UIP.

However advanced DIP is reported to be indistinguishable from NSIP with a temporally uniform pattern of fibrosis beyond the initial accumulation of alveolar macrophages. Sugiyama et al reported that late-stage association at 30%.

Unlike other inhalational lung diseases, the ground glass infiltrates in DIP are more predominant in lower lung zones.

Interestingly in a study reported by Cartier et al., radiologists' diagnosis of DIP based on HRCT was histologically proven in only 59% of cases, emphasizing once again the need for a clinical, radiological, and histological consensus.

Transbronchial biopsy may not yield representative tissue section and have been reported to provide findings consistent with organizing pneumonia in early disease or fibrotic disease in later stages.

A surgical lung biopsy is the gold standard of diagnosis.

In recent years, transbronchial cryobiopsy is being explored as an alternative diagnostic approach with an increase in sample size by non-invasive means.

Studies have shown time and again that considerable overlap exists between RB-ILD and DIP and features of both may be present in differing sections of biopsy.