While opioid use disorder is on the rise across the world and has transformed into an epidemic in the U.S., it needs a better understanding from healthcare professionals and government intervention along with resources and a team-based approach to managing these patients. It requires an interprofessional approach where the cognitive and behavior therapies need to be supported by medical intervention to reduce the chances of withdrawal and relapse. Medications are available to use in pregnancy and have shown better neonatal outcomes, as well as improve morbidity and mortality in the adult population.

The primary care physician is responsible for coordinating the care, which includes the following:

- Consensus expert opinion suggests screening for all adult patients for opioid use disorder.

- The primary care provider diagnoses opioid use disorder. They are also responsible for coordinating care and management associated with opioid use.

- When assessing a patient on chronic opioids, the recommendation is to order a urine drug screen.

- For opioid intoxication, signs, and symptoms of respiratory depression, constipation, reduced consciousness, and cardiac arrhythmias require monitoring.

- Treatment of the underlying comorbid condition associated with opioid use disorder is necessary— for example, cognitive behavioral therapy and antidepressants for major depressive disorder.

- Discussion of the diagnosis of opioid use disorder with the patient and the long term and immediate effect of opioids on their morbidity and mortality

- Prescribed naltrexone for an emergency overdose of opioid analgesia for any patient on chronic opioids

- If the patient is using IV drugs, the clinician should order various labs to rule out potential HIV, hepatitis B, and C.

- Referral to an addiction medicine specialist or methadone clinic for the patient on high-dose opioids, if the primary care provider is uncomfortable managing opioid use disorder.

- Discuss a rehabilitation program for the patient who has the means for detoxification.

- A referral to a pain medicine specialist if the patient continues to require opioid analgesia or desires interventional procedures as an alternative to treat their pain.

Furthermore, the possibility of addiction, dependence and withdrawal symptoms must merit consideration when treating opioid use disorder. An interprofessional team working together can reduce the morbidity and mortality of chronic opioid use and overdose. Naloxone can be a life-saving treatment for a patient on chronic opioids. The long-term outcomes for detoxification and drug rehabilitation are promising.

Specialty trained nurses in addiction and pain medicine are involved in care. They monitor patients, provide education, and facilitate communication between team members. Pharmacists review opioid treatment, check for contraindications and interactions, as well as, providing education to patients and their families. They can often be the first to notice opioid misuse by the filling of prescriptions from multiple providers, early refill requests, etc., and should contact the prescriber(s0 in such instances. These interprofessional interventions can drive better outcomes for patients with this disorder. [Level V]