# Introduction

Cholinergic receptors function in signal transduction of the somatic and autonomic nervous systems. The receptors are named because they become activated by the ligand acetylcholine. These receptors subdivide into nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, which are named secondary to separate activating ligands that contributed to their study. Nicotinic receptors are responsive to the agonist nicotine, while muscarinic receptors are responsive to muscarine.

The two receptors differ in function as ionotropic ligand-gated and G-protein coupled receptors, respectively. Nicotinic receptors function within the central nervous system and at the neuromuscular junction. While muscarinic receptors function in both the peripheral and central nervous systems, mediating innervation to visceral organs. The difference in signal transduction of the two receptor types confers separate physiological functions upon receptor activation. Furthermore, differences in receptor subtypes create unique implications for pharmacologic targets and pathogenesis of the disease.

# Issues of Concern

Due to the diffuse presence of cholinergic receptors, dysfunction can yield various outcomes. Muscarinic receptors mediate autonomic function in all major organ systems; however, receptors are also present throughout the central nervous system. Abnormal muscarinic receptor function has shown correlations in diseases such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, schizophrenia, and epilepsy. Furthermore, research shows both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors play a role in the dopamine reward system pathway.

At the neuromuscular junction, nicotinic receptors function in signal transduction of voluntary movement. In myasthenia gravis, competitive receptor inhibition secondary to autoimmune dysfunction can lead to the life-threatening loss of function at the neuromuscular junction. This life-sustaining function works to the clinicians’ advantage during surgical cases where a patient requires paralysis with pharmacologic interference at the neuromuscular junction. However, great care must be taken in patients with disorders such as lower or upper motor neuron denervation, major trauma, severe infection, or burn injuries, as these may result in the upregulation of nicotinic receptors at the neuromuscular junction, which contributes to an overabundance of receptors.

# Cellular Level

Cholinergic receptors perform major roles in neural transmission within the somatic and autonomic nervous systems. The nicotinic receptor subdivides into two subtypes, N1 and N2. N1 may also be referred to as the peripheral or muscle receptor type, while N2 is known as the central or neuronal receptor subtype.

Muscarinic receptors are divided into five main subtypes M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5.

# Development

In the development process of the central nervous system, cholinergic receptors influence neuronal cell growth and survival, cell differentiation, and synapse formation. Nicotinic receptors compose some of the first receptor proteins observed in CNS development. Expression of various nicotinic receptor subtypes in the brain influences cell migration, neuronal outgrowth, and signaling pathways. The varied expression of receptor subtypes can confer different development pathways in the brain. Receptor subtypes may exhibit separate ionic permeability. Receptors that are permeable to Ca++ exhibit a regional variance in activating second messenger systems, stimulating the growth of neuronal progenitor cells or the activation of gene expression through indirect phosphorylation of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB).

The nicotinic receptors perform a wide range of functions due to small changes in the overall subunit structure. Furthermore, nicotinic receptors influence the release of multiple neurotransmitters such as dopamine, noradrenaline, acetylcholine, glutamate, and GABA. Similarly, muscarinic receptors display regional specificity within the brain, contributing to development. These receptors have also been shown to play a role in the growth of neuronal cells as well as astrocytes and oligodendrocytes; however, they also exhibit specialized function by mediating the development of spatial memory and long-term potentiation through contributions to neuronal plasticity. Cholinergic receptors play an early and essential role in brain development. The many functions of these receptors in development have long-term implications for dysfunction due to their presence in areas of high neuronal plasticity throughout adulthood, like the hippocampus.

# Function

The autonomic nervous system is responsible for maintaining the homeostatic environment of the body with adjustments affecting major organ systems such as neuronal, circulatory, respiratory, integumentary, digestive, and urinary. The autonomic nervous system divides into sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric divisions.

Muscarinic receptors mediate many functions of the parasympathetic nervous system. The muscarinic receptors are on various organs throughout the body. Receptors diffusely express on organs of the neuronal, cardiac, musculoskeletal, pulmonary, digestive, and urinary systems. As mentioned, different receptor subtypes exist on different organs, producing various effects. The overall function of the receptors aims to achieve the “rest and digest” function of the parasympathetic nervous system. While the sympathetic nervous system readies the body for “fight or flight,” the parasympathetic nervous system functions as the unconscious restorative and energy-conserving system. Therefore, many functions of muscarinic receptors may be referred to as opposing the action of the sympathetic nervous system. Receptors present on cardiac muscle cells receive innervation from the vagus nerve and act to slow the heart rate and decrease the force of contraction. Receptors function at the SA node, AV node, atria, and within the ventricles, resulting in a slowed heart rate, decreased conduction velocity, and a prolonged cardiac muscle refractory period.

Within the digestive system, receptor activation stimulates intestinal motility and digestive enzyme secretion. Receptor activation in the lungs leads to smooth muscle contraction, narrowing the airways, and increasing secretion production. Furthermore, muscarinic receptors are present throughout the central nervous system and have demonstrated important functions in both learning and memory. Animal models lacking the M1 receptor develop deficiencies in both cognition and long-term potentiation.

# Mechanism

While both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors become activated in response to the ligand-binding of acetylcholine, their mechanism of activation differs significantly. As mentioned, nicotinic receptors are ionotropic; this means activation of the receptor leads to the formation of an ion channel within the cell membrane, known as a ligand-gated ion channel.

The generation of calcium and protein kinase C is responsible for further activation of downstream events, which produce the overall effect of receptor activation. Alternatively, the M2 receptor is an inhibitory g-protein (Gi) GPCR, which upon ligand binding, leads to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase, resulting in a decrease in the second messenger molecule cAMP.

# Pathophysiology

Due to the diffuse presence of cholinergic receptors throughout the body, their dysfunction affects both the peripheral and central nervous systems. At the somatic neuromuscular junction, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are at the center of the pathophysiology of antibody-mediated myasthenia gravis and congenital myasthenic syndromes. Within the central nervous system, there is evidence of dysfunctional muscarinic and nicotinic receptors playing a role in the development of Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, schizophrenia, epilepsy, and addiction.

The neuromuscular junction works to convey the electrical signal of voluntary movement to mechanical action. The dysfunctional states of myasthenia gravis and congenital myasthenia syndromes disrupt transmission at the neuromuscular junction. Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease that generates antibodies against the nicotinic receptor at the neuromuscular junction. The binding of pathologic antibodies to the receptor results in its loss of function and recycling back within the cell.

Within the central nervous system, cholinergic receptors play a role in developing Alzheimer, Parkinson, schizophrenia, epilepsy, and addiction. Alzheimer disease is debilitating; progressive dementia mostly affecting individuals over the age of 65. Early disease research found a common disruption of M1 receptor signaling. Researchers have found this to play an important role in cognitive function in animal models, with M1 gene knockouts demonstrating memory decline and accumulation of the pathologic Alzheimer protein, amyloid-beta.

# Clinical Significance

The wide distribution of cholinergic receptors in the peripheral nervous system mediating the activity of visceral organs and skeletal muscle creates a unique pharmacologic niche. When activated, muscarinic receptors can produce bradycardia, bronchoconstriction, increased GI motility, emptying of the bladder, gland secretion, and pupillary constriction for near vision.

At the neuromuscular junction, nicotinic receptor agonists are used to induce a state of paralysis. Nicotinic agonists do this by binding to the receptor, occupying the acetylcholine binding domain. Two popular classes of drugs are succinylcholine and tubocurarine. Both of these drugs exhibit specificity for nicotinic receptors at the neuromuscular junction but differ in their mechanism for receptor inactivation. Succinylcholine binds and activates the nicotinic receptor but remains bound to the active site of the recept.