The pathophysiology of neurologic language impairment, including aphasia and agraphia, remains incompletely understood. Generally, aphasia is better studied than agraphia and serves as the most common model for neurologic language processing. However, several reports have observed a dissociation between written language and verbal language ability, which suggests locations in the brain dedicated to writing.

Classical localization methods based on vascular lesions originally identified two primary linguistic centers of the brain: these are Broca’s area in the dominant inferior frontal gyrus and Wernicke’s area in the dominant superior temporal gyrus. These areas are respectively supplied by the superior and inferior divisions of the middle cerebral artery. The left hemisphere is the dominant hemisphere in over 95% of right-handed and over 70% of left-handed individuals.

Lesions to the inferior division of the middle cerebral artery are commonly attributed to “fluent” language impairment, characterized by nonsensical speech and impaired comprehension. It was initially believed and remains commonly taught that Wernicke’s area involves word recognition and meaning. However, while more recent data reveals that Wernicke’s area is indeed involved with phonological language production, it may not be crucial for language recognition. Rather, the posterior cortical language area responsible for word recognition and meaning- for which lesions produce a nonfluent or Wernicke’s aphasia- is spread more diffusely across the temporal and parietal lobes.

Some areas of the brain are thought to be dedicated to handwriting. The dominant angular gyrus is believed to be involved in the abstract conversion of verbal representation of language to visual representation. While hypothesized by some authors to be involved in reading ability, other authors consider this area to be dedicated to written language production and instead implicate the nearby lateral occipital gyri in reading disorders.

Cases of lexical agraphia and phonological agraphia point to the existence of separate routes for lexical and phonological centers used for writing.

While classic localization models remain clinically useful and aid in identifying cortical areas that are crucial in the various aspects of language, data increasingly support a network-based model of language processing. Functional imaging studies have revealed that language functions are more diffuse than previously thought.

In contrast to central agraphia, peripheral agraphia is much more varied in its pathophysiology and often localizes to one or more locations in the central and/or peripheral nervous system. The localization of apraxic agraphia is not standardized and has been most commonly documented with lesions in the frontal and parietal lobes, although lesions leading to apraxic agraphia have also been observed in the thalamus and cerebellum.

Paretic motor agraphia can occur due to lesions anywhere in the corticospinal tract and associated muscles. Micrographia is associated with Parkinsonism, which itself is most commonly associated with lesions to the substantia nigra, but can also occur with lesions in the globus pallidus, striatum, or even the frontal lobe.

Reiterative agraphia may reflect phenomena of conditions such as catatonia or Tourette syndrome.