The mechanism for normal erectile function initially involves activation of cyclic GMP by nitric oxide. This causes relaxation of the cavernosal smooth muscle tissue resulting in increased blood flow into the corpora with a resulting erection. This process is limited by the action of the phosphodiesterase type 5 enzyme which converts cyclic GMP back to its inactive state.

Although the pathophysiology of stuttering priapism is not fully understood, it appears to result from dysregulated dynamics of the normal erection process leading to venous stasis, compartment syndrome, and diminished blood flow. This eventually leads to tissue damage and ultimately corporal fibrosis with permanent loss of erectile ability. The mechanism underlying stuttering priapism is thought to be similar to that of ischemic priapism.

The molecular mechanism thought to cause stuttering priapism involves reduced cavernosal nitric oxide in the endothelial cells, which downregulates phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5) and reduces RhoA/Rho-Kinase activity while increasing adenosine and opiorphin levels. Within the corporal, cavernosal tissue, nitric oxide - cyclic GMP - phosphodiesterase type 5 signaling is downregulated along with increased oxidative stress and disruptions in the usual vasoconstrictive mechanisms. All of these effects taken together cause a reduced cavernosal smooth muscle tone, leading to enhanced tissue relaxation and an exaggerated response to normal stimuli, resulting in prolonged erections.

The conventional method of explaining priapism related to SCD is based on the principles of increased blood viscosity and venous congestion. Normal erections reduce the oxygen saturation in the corpora cavernosa. In patients with SCD, this predisposes the red blood cells to sickle inside the corpora cavernosa creating a higher viscosity which induces venous stasis, leading to increased congestion and ultimately priapism. The priapism further reduces blood flow, causing acidosis, damage to the smooth muscle tissue, and an inflammatory reaction, eventually resulting in penile corporal fibrosis and permanent erectile dysfunction (ED).