Currently, the standard of care for a treatment-naïve patient with HIV-1 is a three-drug, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) regimen that is started as soon as possible after a patient tests positive for HIV. A foundation of HAART is the administration of drugs that inhibit HIV viral replication at several stages in the lifecycle through different mechanisms to prevent viral resistance to any single agent. However, the selection of these drugs and the life-long treatment of a patient with HIV can be complex. Management of a HAART regimen is a multifaceted process that should be administered by, or in consultation with, a provider with specific training as defined by the HIV-Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. This approach is crucial to optimize patient care as studies have demonstrated provider experience positively correlates with improved patient outcomes.

Healthcare professionals should work as an interprofessional team to ensure they have a comprehensive patient history before selecting a HAART combination. Additionally, a board-certified infectious disease pharmacist specializing in HIV and HAART is an invaluable consulting member of the interprofessional healthcare team. Nurses will help monitor therapy, note progress or lack thereof, and verify patient compliance with therapy, which is of paramount importance with HAART. As always, healthcare team coordination and patient education are critical components to maximize patient adherence, prevent further spread of disease, and provide continuity of care to the patients.