The management of PDS and PG is governed by various factors like stage of the disease, amount of pigment dispersion, IOP value, and presence or absence of glaucomatous optic neuropathy. The first stage of PDS is characterized by diffuse pigment dispersion in the early second to the third decade and is usually asymptomatic.

After some time, the pigments block the trabecular meshwork, resulting in raised IOP and OHT, which leads to the second stage of the disease and may result in optic nerve damage. In the third stage, the pigment accumulation reduces, and IOP is normalized and characterized by iris transillumination defects. In the third stage, the "pigment reversal sign" is seen in which a dark and dense pigment is seen in the upper quadrant and less dark in the lower quadrant. The patients with PDS should be followed up annually to rule out the development of OHT and optic nerve damage. In the case of advanced glaucoma, the patient should be followed up every 4 to 6 months, and these patients can have rapid vision loss associated with risk factors like myopia and PDS.

**Lifestyle Measures**

As vigorous physical activity and excessive exercise have been linked with PDS, the patients should be counseled regarding exercise behaviors if PDS or PG sets in.

**Medical Management**.

The medical management of PDS is on similar lines to POAG.

**Miotics**

Pilocarpine is considered helpful in limiting pigment dispersion. It reduces irido-zonular contact and improves aqueous outflow. Pilocarpine 2% three times a day is deemed safe in these patients. Long-term use can exacerbate side effects like myopia, ocular surface disease progression, and retinal detachment in these patients. Pilocarpine is also poorly tolerated by young patients.

**Selective Alpha-Adrenergic Antagonist**

Topical thymoxamine can induce pupillary constriction without affecting the accommodation. It has the side effect of excessive irritation.

**Other Antiglaucoma Medications**

Prostaglandin analogs, beta-adrenergic blockers, and alpha agonists are considered safe in PG. Mastropasqua, in their randomized trial, showed that latanoprost is more effective than timolol in controlling IOP in PG patients. But prostaglandins don't affect pigment liberation. A combination of medical management and a laser is beneficial in many cases. After prostaglandins, the following drugs are b-adrenergic antagonists, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, and alpha-adrenergic drugs.

**Laser Trabeculoplasty**

Laser trabeculoplasty is vital for treating the eye with heavy pigment dispersion. It is advisable to treat two quadrants simultaneously and with lower power settings to reduce the IOP spike.

**Laser Peripheral Iridotomy**

Laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) helps to reduce pigment release by reversing the iris concavity and decreasing the irido-zonular contact. It also helps reduce the IOP spikes but may not reduce the development of glaucoma. LPI maintains the pressure between the anterior and posterior chamber, thus minimizing the iris and zonular friction. It has been estimated that LPI reduces approximately 65% pigment release into the anterior chamber.

Previous studies have concluded that LPI  will reverse iris concavity and reduce trabecular meshwork pigmentation, but the evidence is lacking that it prevents progression of visual field defect or prevent the conversion of PDS to PG. Selective laser trabeculoplasty is useful for PG as it has good repeatability and safety and lowers IOP in comparable numbers with medical therapy. The mechanism proposed for SLT is the stimulation effect on the trabecular meshwork.

One study reported a 20% reduction in IOP for 85% of eyes at one year to follow up and later dropped to 1% at two years of follow up. The majority of cases require additional topical antiglaucoma medication for IOP control. The most common side effects of SLT are inflammation and IOP spikes. The factors responsible for IOP spike post SLT are intense TM pigmentation, multiple drug use, and previous application of argon laser trabeculoplasty. In high-risk cases, SLT may precipitate the need for filtration surgery. Post SLT application, 0.5% ketorolac or 1% prednisolone is given four times per day to reduce inflammation. The least energy, 0.4 mJ per spot, is preferred for SLT.

**Filtration Surgery**

The indication for filtration surgery is inadequate to control IOP despite maximum medical therapy and visual field progression. Trabeculectomy with mitomycin C is indicated in advanced glaucoma and non-resolving cases. The antifibrotic agents prevent bleb scarring, control shallowing of the anterior chamber, vitreous and retinal traction. Hypotony and suprachoroidal hemorrhage are essential complications of filtration surgery in young myopic patients.

**Glaucoma Drainage Devices**

Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (AGV) or Aurolab Aqueous Drainage Device (AADD) is indicated for failed filtration surgery cases.

**Minimal Invasive Glaucoma Surgery**

The advantage of minimally invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS) is that it doesn't require a bleb creation, and the aqueous is shunted from trabecular meshwork in the Schlemm canal.

**Trabectome**

Trabectome was the first MIGS approved in 2004. This is a type of ab interno trabeculectomy employing a handheld electrode. A study reported similar IOP reduction with trabectome and antiglaucoma medications in PG and POAG eyes. There was a 20% IOP reduction from baseline in 92 % PG eyes and 86% POAG eyes.

**Goniotomy**

This is performed with a Kahook dual blade by removing the trabecular meshwork. A multicentric study on PAOG eyes with goniotomy and phacoemulsification reported a mean IOP alleviation of 26.2% and 50% reduction in antiglaucoma medications. The most common side effects were pain, capsular opacification, and IOP spike.

**iStent**

This is another procedure to bypass the trabecular meshwork. This device is indicated for POAG management with cataract surgery. There are no current studies for iStent in PG. The second-generation iStent is available as a preloaded device that can be injected perpendicularly in the trabecular meshwork.

**Canaloplasty**

This is a surgical procedure to restore the normal aqueous drainage. In this technique, sodium hyaluronate is injected into the Schlemm's canal with the help of a microcatheter. A 10-0 prolene suture is inserted into the Schlemm's canal to ensure the 360-degree dilatation effect, which increases the aqueous outflow. This can be a potent treatment option for pigmentary glaucoma in young patients having mild to moderate visual field defects with a lower target IOP.