There are different potential paths of infection in the neck. Oral cavity/face/superficial neck infection can spread via the lymphatic system to the deep tissues of the neck. Lymphadenopathy may cause suppuration and then focal abscess formation. Direct communication between tissues in the neck may occur. Finally, penetrating trauma can introduce infection to the deep tissues.

After the spread of infection, either local inflammation or phlegmon may develop, or a fulminant abscess may form with a purulent collection of fluid. Signs of neck abscess in the deep tissues may result from either mass effect of inflamed tissue or abscess on the surrounding structures or from direct involvement of those structures with the infection. Examples of different types of spread include the following:

- A lateral pharyngeal space infection can spread to the carotid sheath, causing internal jugular vein thrombosis, which can lead to subacute bacterial endocarditis or other thromboembolic diseases

- Lateral pharyngeal space infection can lead to extensive edema causing respiratory compromise

- Tonsillitis may lead to a peritonsillar abscess, which may lead to a lateral/posterior pharyngeal infection that can then spread to the chest if untreated

This can lead to mediastinitis or empyema. Neck abscess can include peritonsillar infections, retropharyngeal infections, submandibular infections, buccal infections, parapharyngeal space infections, and canine space infections. The retropharyngeal, retroesophageal, and posterior mediastinum is all a continuous space for the spread of infection.

The organisms involved in deep neck infections include both aerobes and anaerobes, frequently with a predominance of oral flora. Organisms frequently cultured include Streptococcus, Bacteroides, Staphylococcus, Peptostreptococcis, Pseudomonas, E coli and H. influenzae.