# Continuing Education Activity

Hyperhomocysteinemia refers to the condition where there is greater than 15 micromol/L of homocysteine in the blood. This condition is present in a wide range of diseases, and in many cases, it is an independent risk factor for more serious medical conditions. However, the evaluation and management of this condition remain controversial. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of hyperhomocysteinemia and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the indications for obtaining a homocysteine level.
- Summarize who should receive treatment for hyperhomocysteinemia.
- Identify patients who would have elevated homocysteine levels.
- Explain the importance of the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients who have hyperhomocysteinemia.

# Introduction

Homocysteine is an amino acid not supplied by the diet that can be converted into cysteine or recycled into methionine, an essential amino acid, with the aid of specific B vitamins. Homocysteine levels vary between men and women, with a normal range typically between 5 to 15 micromol/L. Hyperhomocysteinemia is when levels exceed 15 micromol/L.

When homocysteine levels are greater than normal limits, it signifies a disruption in the metabolism of homocysteine.

Homocysteine levels are generally categorized into three groups: moderate (16 to 30 micromol/L), intermediate (31 to 100 micromol/L), and severe (over 100 micromol/L).

# Etiology

Homocysteine is converted to cysteine and methionine by a combination of B vitamins (B12, B6, and folate) and enzymes (Methylene Tetrahydrofolate Reductase: MTHFR). Specifically, homocysteine is converted to methionine by a process known as remethylation with the help of vitamin B12.  Methionine can subsequently be broken down to S-adenosyl-methionine to be regenerated to homocysteine. In a reaction called transsulfuration, homocysteine is converted to cysteine catalyzed by pyridoxal-5’-phosphate (PLP) and cystathionine B-synthase. Elevations in homocysteine suggest disruptions in one of the components of this reaction.

# Epidemiology

The estimated prevalence of mild hyperhomocysteinemia is 5 to 7% in the general population. Several studies have shown that it is an independent risk factor for thrombotic disorders (i.e., deep vein thrombosis).

# Pathophysiology

Elevated levels of homocysteine can increase the risk of atherosclerosis by causing endothelial layer injury, promoting inflammation, and increasing oxidative stress.

There are multiple pathways to which elevated homocysteine levels can lead to schizophrenia. Elevated total homocysteine levels in the third trimester of pregnancy may cause subtle damage to the vasculature of the placenta, which can limit oxygen to the fetus and may have a direct effect on the brain structure of the fetus and thus increase the risk of developing schizophrenia.

The pathogenesis of hip fracture and elevated homocysteine levels is speculated to be due to homocysteine interference in collagen cross-linking, which alters the bone matrix and increases the fragility of the bones.

# History and Physical

The presentation of hyperhomocysteinemia varies due to the underlying cause and, in some cases, is asymptomatic. Patients presenting with any cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disorders can have elevated homocysteine levels and can be asymptomatic.

# Evaluation

The initial evaluation of hyperhomocysteinemia includes a thorough history and physical exam to look for any signs and symptoms of homocystinuria, a rare but deadly disease.

In patients who do not have signs and symptoms of homocystinuria, the decision to measure homocysteine levels and pursue treatment remains controversial. According to the American Heart Association (AHA), homocysteine levels do not predict cardiovascular disease development. Lowering homocysteine levels does not improve clinical outcomes, nor does it prevent future cardiovascular and thromboembolic diseases with treatment.

On the other hand, some studies showed that lowering the homocysteine level was beneficial. One study was able to show that lowering hyperhomocysteinemia through folic acid supplementation would reduce carotid atherosclerosis progression.

# Treatment / Management

Several studies have tried to demonstrate the efficacy of vitamin supplementation to reduce cardiovascular and thromboembolic risk. The American Heart Association explained that folic acid supplementation (0.2 to 15 mg/d) could lower homocysteine levels. However, randomized control trials have been controversial in showing cardiovascular risk reduction with folic acid supplementation unless a patient has homocystinuria.

In patients with homocystinuria with severe hyperhomocysteinemia, homocysteine-lowering treatments with pyridoxine, folic acid, and hydroxocobalamin did reduce cardiovascular risk.

In patients who have hyperhomocysteinemia without homocystinuria, treatment remains controversial. Randomized control trials have not been able to show a reduction in cardiovascular risk for those who lower homocysteine levels using homocysteine-lowering therapies.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for hyperhomocysteinemia, especially in homocystinuria (i.e., these patients would have marfanoid habitus and ectopic lens), includes Marfan syndrome and sulfite oxidate deficiency syndrome. Differentiating among these conditions is crucial as studies have pointed out their similarities. Obtaining a homocysteine level will distinguish these diseases from homocystinuria.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of severe hyperhomocysteinemia in the setting of homocystinuria is poor if it is left untreated. For patients with hyperhomocysteinemia without homocystinuria, the prognosis is difficult to assess as there is not enough research. However, theoretically, there is an increased risk for osteoporosis, schizophrenia, and brain atrophy in specific populations that can increase the morbidity of these patients. Therefore, further research is needed to determine a patient's prognosis when diagnosed with elevated homocysteine.

# Complications

Potential complications of hyperhomocysteinemia in the setting of homocystinuria include retinal detachment, glaucoma, and vascular disease as children or young adults.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Especially for the primary care physician, we believe that it is reasonable to discuss the evaluation of hyperhomocysteinemia, including the controversial nature of the treatment. The first step would be to discuss the patient’s intake of foods with folic acid, vitamin B6, and B12 to see if the patient is meeting the recommended dietary amount for these vitamins. If they are not meeting these requirements, recommendations can be made to increase foods rich in these vitamins, such as fruits and vegetables, as a portion of the general population does not meet the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for these nutrients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

At this time, it is recommended that only those with signs and symptoms of homocystinuria and mild cognitive impairment are evaluated and treated for hyperhomocysteinemia.