Surgical hand antiseptic practices began in the late 1800s and remain vital to the prevention of infection today. Surgical hand antisepsis or hand hygiene for surgery requires a different set of skills than regular handwashing techniques

According to the CDC, "Hand Hygiene in the Healthcare Settings," hand hygiene for surgery follows specific vital steps using either an antimicrobial soap or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer before donning sterile gloves for surgical procedures. In contrast to hygienic handwashing, surgical hand preparation must remove the transient flora and reduce the presence of resident flora

**Surgical Hand Antisepsis Steps**

- Remove all jewelry such as rings, watches, and bracelets before beginning the surgical hand scrub.

- Inspect hands for cuts, cuticle damage, open lesions or abrasions.

- Apply surgical shoe covers, hats, caps, masks, and eye protection next.

- Turn on water using foot/knee controls to the desired warm temperature.

- Perform a pre-rinse ensuring soap gets to about two inches above the elbows remembering the hands must be kept above the elbows at all times during this process as well as during the rinse.

- Begin debris removal from underneath fingernails using a nail pick while the water is running.

- When performing surgical hand antisepsis using an antimicrobial agent, scrub hands, fingers, and forearms for 2 to 6 minutes typically, but follow manufacturer guidelines and facility-specific policies and procedures. Some institutions suggest a certain number of strokes when cleansing the nails, palms, hands, and forearms.

- Brush methods may be used and are facility-specific. Long scrub times (e.g., 10 minutes) are not a recommendation due to the potential to irritate hands and nonsupporting evidence of its benefit versus risk.

- Shorter scrub times with a two-stage surgical scrub technique may be standard in some institutions.

- Remember, when rinsing soap/agent off, allow water to run off at the elbows, ensuring the hands remain clean and free of microbes.

- Foot or knee controls are used to turn the water off.

- Hands stay elevated and away from the body at all times.

- Approach sterile field, grasp towel, avoid dripping excess water on your sterile field, and dry one hand.

- Obtain a new sterile towel or reverse the first towel and dry the other hand.

- Drop towel into a nearby linen hamper or carefully handoff to another member of the healthcare team.

- After application of the alcohol-based product or antiseptic hand rub as recommended, allow hands and forearms to dry thoroughly before donning sterile gloves.