There is no cure for Alzheimer's disease. Only symptomatic treatment is available.

Two categories of drugs are approved for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease: cholinesterase inhibitors and partial N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists.

**Cholinesterase Inhibitors**

Cholinesterase inhibitors act by increasing the level of acetylcholine; a chemical used by nerve cells to communicate with each other and is important for learning, memory and cognitive functions. Of this category, 3 drugs: donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine are FDA-approved for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Donepezil can be used in all stages of Alzheimer's disease. Galantamine and rivastigmine are approved for treatment in MCI and Dementia stage. Donepezil and galantamine are rapid, reversible inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase. Rivastigmine is a slow, reversible inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase. Donepezil is usually preferred of all because of once-daily dosing. Galantamine is available as a twice-daily tablet or as a once-daily extended-release capsule. It cannot be used in end-stage renal disease or severe liver dysfunction. Rivastigmine is available in an oral and transdermal formulation. The most common side effects of cholinesterase inhibitors are gastrointestinal-like nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Sleep disturbances are more common with donepezil. Due to increased vagal tone, bradycardia, cardiac conduction defects, and syncope can occur, and these medications are contraindicated in patients with severe cardiac conduction abnormalities.

**Partial N-Methyl D-Aspartate (NMDA)****Memantine**

Partial N-Methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist memantine blocks NMDA receptors and slows intracellular calcium accumulation. It is approved by the FDA for treating moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease. Dizziness, body aches, headache, and constipation are common side effects. It can be taken in combination with cholinesterase inhibitors.

It is also important to treat anxiety, depression, and psychosis, which is often found in the mid to late stages of Alzheimer's disease. Avoid tricyclic antidepressants, because of their anticholinergic activity. Antipsychotics are used for acute agitation, only if the patient or caregiver have been exhausted. However, their limited benefits should be weighed against the small risk of stroke and death.

Environmental and behavioral approaches are beneficial especially in managing behavioral problems. Simple approaches such as maintaining a familiar environment, monitoring personal comfort, providing security objects, redirecting attention, removing doorknobs and avoiding confrontation can be very helpful in managing behavioral issues.

To minimize caregiver burden, mild sleep disturbances can be reduced by providing exposure to sunlight and providing daytime exercise.

The expected benefits of the treatment are modest. Treatment should be stopped or modified if no significant benefits or if intolerable side effects.

Regular aerobic exercise has been shown to slow the progression of Alzheimer's disease.