Significant issues of concern focus on the regulatory authority that the FDCA grants the FDA. In numerous instances, the FDA has been accused of overregulation and/or under-regulation by a multitude of governmental and non-governmental organizations.

Concerns about overregulation primarily focus on the drug approval process and drug prices. Critics argue that FDCA components such as the 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendment, which requires drug manufacturers to submit evidence of drug efficacy in addition to safety, added considerable costs and delays to the drug approval process, resulting in fewer drugs being brought to market.

Moreover, critics argue that FDA-mandated clinical trials, estimated to have a median cost of $48 million, exacerbate high drug prices for consumers.

Concerns of under-regulation primarily focus on the approval of unsafe drugs and food additives. Critics argue that the FDA has a track record of overlooking safety and efficacy concerns when approving new drugs, necessitating recalls when deemed necessary during postmarket surveillance. Troglitazone, for example, was an FDA-approved medication for diabetes but was withdrawn due to hepatotoxicity and acute liver failure cases.

More recently, the FDA drug approval process has been scrutinized due to the FDA’s approval of aducanumab, a medication for Alzheimer disease, despite a lack of solid evidence for its efficacy.

Furthermore, the FDA has been criticized for allowing routine antibiotic use in domestic animals, which allegedly contributes to widespread antibiotic resistance.