Understanding the tools of the physiological functioning of opioid receptors is significant to develop new therapeutic drugs.

**Heteromerisation**

Heteromerisation of receptors is the interaction between different classes of receptors which on being co-stimulated invoke a functional response distinct from a response produced on their individual stimulation.

Interaction with other opioid receptors

Heteromers containing opioid receptors only are formed with different combinations including DOR-MOR, DOR-KOR, and MOR-KOR with DOR-MOR combination as the most well understood. Receptors can be stimulated independently or concurrently as heteromers depending on the binding agonist. Further research needs to be undertaken to tap this mechanism of heteromerization for therapeutic benefit.

**Interactions with Other GPCRs**

**CB1 Receptor**

Some recent studies have shown the interaction of MORs with Cannabinoid (CB1) receptors; this has been observed through increased potency of opioids like morphine when co-administered with CB1 receptor agonist 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Another point of evidence is the significant modulation of the ERK pathway on stimulation of MOR/CB1R heterodimer, compared to the modulation observed with individual receptor stimulation.

Studies have shown that interactions exist between MOR and alpha-2A adrenergic receptors altering the functional activity of these individual receptors. A significant interaction of MOR with the neurokinin-1 receptor (NK1) leads to changes in the internalization and resensitization processes.

**Allosteric Modulation**

Specific molecules that bind to sites on the receptors other than the ligand-binding sites, to potentially cause an alteration in the effects of the agonist receptor complex are referred to as allosteric molecules. These are either positive or negative allosteric modulators depending on the increase or decrease in the potentiation of effects of opioids agonists on binding opioid receptors, respectively. This modulation is a crucial aspect to unravel since, in addition to lowering of the required analgesic dose of the opioid, it reduces the likelihood of developing tolerance and dependence.

**Biased Signaling**

Recent advances in the comprehension of the signaling pathways have unraveled the phenomenon of biased signaling. Biased signaling can be understood using the example of signaling pathways activated after binding of an agonist to KOR. KOR stimulation recruits G protein-coupled signaling pathway and beta-arrestin pathway, which leads to analgesic and dysphoric effects, respectively. This phenomenon has also been observed with MOR stimulation with analgesia undergoing mediation by Gi protein-coupled signaling and adverse effects like respiratory depression by beta-arrestin recruitment.

**Interaction with Other Cellular Proteins**

Opioid receptors, particularly MOR, have been shown to interact with other cellular proteins like calmodulin (Ca2+ binding protein) and cytoskeletal trafficking proteins involved in the process of endocytosis.