Percutaneous transcatheter management of aortic valve disease requires a skilled interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a cardiac nurse, laboratory technologists, a pharmacist and some physicians in different specialties. Without proper pre-operative, intra-operative, and post-operative management life-threatening complications can and will occur. Therefore, it is imperative that the interprofessional team works as a unit with reliable communication to optimize patient-centered care. From the moment an aortic valve defect is identified, the discovering clinician has a responsibility to coordinate care including the following:

- Obtain an echocardiogram, electrocardiography, chest radiograph, and detailed physical exam including general labs

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory distress, cardiac arrhythmias, and cardiovascular collapse

- Consult with the interventional cardiologist and cardiothoracic surgeon to assess the need for catheter versus surgical intervention [level 1]

- Consult with the structuralist about imaging tests to ensure that they meet the requirements for surgical or catheter management

- Consult with the intensivist about ICU care and monitoring while in the hospital with the assistance of cardiac specialty nurses trained nurses assisting with coordination of care, family education, and reporting untoward changes in vital signs and arrhythmias.

- The cardiac pharmacist specialty should assist with checking for drug-drug interactions, appropriate dosing, and assisting the team with monitoring therapeutic effect.

The management of aortic valve disease is a dynamic, ever-changing field. New technology comes up every day. It is crucial for the team to be up-to-date with the new upcoming technology and guidelines.