Securing a safe airway is a crucial aspect of emergency management of patients with suspected or proved tracheobronchial tears. However, tracheobronchial injuries are often not detected or suspected before the decision to intubation is made. The practice of rapid sequence intubation often prompted by hemodynamic instability or respiratory distress should be avoided in patients with tracheobronchial injury since intubation in a torn or disrupted airway causes further damage to the air passage with a high likelihood of making a false passage. Spontaneous breathing is promoted in such a setting until a safe airway is established.

A 2014 newsletter by the American Society of Anesthesiologists outlines an algorithm for disrupted airway, which underscores the need to maintain spontaneous breathing in such settings until a safe airway is ensured. Fiberoptic bronchoscopic intubation is the ideal measure in such settings since it can visualize the airway clearly and can suction out clots and secretions, helping in the safe placement of the tube. Moreover, fiberoptic bronchoscopy does not require neck extension, which makes it ideal in any suspected or confirmed cervical spine injury settings. The fiberoptic bronchoscopic placement re ensures that the cuff is distal to the injured airway. If the injury is at the level of carina or one of the main bronchi, the endoscope could guide the positioning of the tube into the uninjured bronchus and help in initiating single lung ventilation. However, fiberoptic bronchoscopy will not be able to visualize the airway clearly whenever there is active bleeding, or there is a distal collapse of the airway. A restless, unstable, or uncooperative trauma patient with hemodynamic compromise makes the procedure extremely challenging under normal sedation. Rigid bronchoscope under inhalational anesthesia at the operation theatre would be ideal in such a condition since it can also remove clots and secretions much more effectively. Moreover, an endoscopic intervention could help in patching the airway defect (if any) at least temporarily. However, rigid bronchoscopy needs an extension of the neck and is contraindicated even in a suspected cervical spine injury.

In cases of severe tracheal injury where larynx and proximal trachea are completely transected, and transoral intubation is challenging to achieve, the airway should be grasped via the cervical wound and tracheostomy tube needs to be introduced therein. Emergency bedside open tracheostomy may have to be performed by a surgeon with the tracheostomy tube passed through the injured trachea to preserve the tracheal length when reconstruction procedure is to be undertaken in the future. Since the trachea has anatomical proximity to numerous vital structures in the cervicothoracic region, it is imperative that the injuries to these nearby structures need to be ruled out soon after a safe airway is established. Severe concomitant injuries to these vital structures determine the overall survival. Hence injuries to the vocal cords, esophagus, vertebral body and spinal cord, lungs, ribs, sternum and clavicle, carotid arteries, jugular veins, and great vessels need to be specifically looked for.

If the tear is extending to the carina, single-lung ventilation has to be considered with the endoscopic placement of the endotracheal tube to the uninjured bronchus. The high airway pressures and positive end-expiratory pressures should be avoided during ventilation in the airway injured patients. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) needs to be considered for patients unable to ventilate as a bridge to recovery or a definitive repair either surgically or bronchoscopically.

The vast majority of patients with tracheobronchial injuries are best managed with surgical intervention. Conservative management to allow spontaneous healing often results in stenosis at a later stage. If the stenosis is detected bronchoscopically, an initial dilation will open up the airway and drain the secretions for a short period. However, the definitive surgery is delayed until four to six months in such cases until the scar tissue gets matured. A bronchial sleeve resection with a pedicled tissue flap is often required in the management of late stenosis. Laryngeal & vocal cord injuries have to be thoroughly assessed with appropriate measures before attempting the repair of injured cervical trachea. However, there appears to be a recent paradigm shift towards minimally invasive modalities (e.g., stent placement), especially in iatrogenic injuries or in high-risk patients for surgical repair.

The decision regarding surgical repair for acute tracheobronchial tear, in general, is based on the risk for airway obstruction, massive air leak, and mediastinal infections.

Few experts advocate conservative management in self-ventilating patients or the ones on minimal mechanical ventilatory support without evidence of mediastinal or esophageal injury. This approach is probably more applicable to iatrogenic tracheobronchial injuries, which are often single, unlike the tracheobronchial injuries in blunt or penetrating trauma, which are much more severe and are associated with multiple life-threatening concomitant injuries. Surgical management is indicated in such iatrogenic injuries after a failed trial of conservative management in the form of worsening pneumomediastinum, subcutaneous emphysema or pneumothorax with persistent air leak, or unexpanded lung even after intercostal tube placement.

The select group of patients, especially the one with posterior wall laceration/tear after iatrogenic injuries (e.g., endotracheal intubation, percutaneous tracheostomy), are managed successfully with conservative management.

Surgical principles in the management of tracheobronchial tear include obtaining optimal exposure, conservative debridement ensuring the preservation of adequate airway length for future reconstruction, preservation of laterally oriented tracheal blood supply, buttressing the repair, and consideration for a tracheostomy, especially in polytrauma patients. Basic principles of cervical tracheal injury include a collar incision followed by anterior mobilization of the trachea up to the level of carina with taking precautions as not to injure the laterally placed blood supply. Knots are placed outside the trachea to prevent the formation of granulomas.

A post-operative tracheostomy is often required due to the high incidence of unilateral or bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve injury incomplete tracheal transactions, which occur below the level of the cricoid cartilage. But an anastomosis with minimal tension is often possible in such circumstances. In associated esophageal injury, the esophagus is repaired first with flap placement, and the tracheal repair is performed only at the end of the procedure. A thoracotomy will be required in intrathoracic tracheal repair. The right fourth intercostal approach is used to access the lower trachea, carina, and right main bronchus where a left fourth intercostal thoracotomy is done to access left main bronchus. A transsternal approach (median sternotomy) is made in patients who have lower tracheal and carinal injuries along with spinal injuries, with the latter precluding thoracotomy positioning. All the above repairs should be visualized by bronchoscopy before leaving the surgical suite. It is imperative to ensure that the cuff of the endotracheal tube is not placed near the area of repair in intubated patients.

Cardilo et al. proposed a morphologic classification for tracheal wall injuries during endotracheal intubation to guide non-surgical management.

Broad-spectrum antibiotics are administered in such conservatively managed patients for a week though clinical data to support this measure is lacking at this stage. Routine antibiotic protocols are applied to surgically managed patients. Schaefer-Fuhrman classification also has been applied to laryngotracheal trauma to identify those patients who could be managed non-operatively. Though most experts believe that primary surgical repair is the treatment of choice in tracheal injuries, there is another group of experts who find no difference between primary surgical versus conservative management in the management of select types of iatrogenic tracheobronchial injuries**.**

In patients who are at high risk for surgical intervention due to multiple comorbidities, including a moderate to severe underlying cardiopulmonary disability could be managed with self-expandable metallic stents (SEMS), which could mechanically cover the defect, and incite local inflammatory response to cover the area by granulation tissues. These stents could be removed after 4 to 6 weeks after an endoscopic reevaluation of the injury. The benefits of this intervention far outweigh the possible stent-related complications. In certain patients, surgery also could be considered at a later stage after this bridging intervention. Madden BP et al. used endobronchial glue injection with stenting in tracheal lacerations less than 5 mm.