Alfentanil is a synthetic opioid analgesic and a derivative of fentanyl. It is widely used for analgesia to supplement general anesthesia for various surgical procedures or as a primary anesthetic agent in very high doses during cardiac surgery.

Compared to similar anesthetics, including fentanyl and sufentanil, alfentanil is the least potent, has the fastest onset of action, and has the shortest duration of action.

Barker M. et al. conducted a retrospective observational study to determine any significant differences in patient outcomes when using alfentanil or fentanyl for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation sedation. The researcher’s institution was switching from alfentanil to fentanyl use. Ninety-five patients on fentanyl and 69 patients on alfentanil were studied. Barker M. et al. found no differences in patient outcomes when comparing sedation with alfentanil or fentanyl for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. However, the researchers noted that higher doses of the adjuvant sedatives quetiapine and midazolam were used with alfentanil-treated patients.

Eberl S. et al. conducted a randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of alfentanil vs. esketamine as adjunct medications for propofol-mediated deep sedation for endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Propofol was administered as a target-controlled infusion (TCI). One hundred and sixty-two patients (N = 162) were enrolled in the study. The researchers observed that less propofol was needed in the esketamine treated patients (N = 83) vs. the alfentanil-treated patients (N = 79).