Patients on erythropoietin therapy may develop absolute (decreased ferritin levels with low transferrin saturation) or functional iron deficiency (normal ferritin levels with low transferrin saturation). This deficiency results from an inability to move enough amount of iron rapidly from storage to support the enhanced erythropoiesis.

It increases the risk of serious cardiovascular events, vascular access thrombosis, stroke, myocardial infarction, venous thromboembolism in clinical studies when target Hb levels reach more than 11 g/dL or a rapid rise in hemoglobin over 1 g/dL over two weeks (U.S. Boxed Warning).****Although epoetin alfa does not affect blood pressure directly, it may raise blood pressure in the early phase after administration when the hematocrit is increasing acutely. Therefore, clinicians should exercise care when using it in patients with uncontrolled hypertension. Additionally, patients may require dosage adjustments of antihypertensive therapy after initiating this medication.

Pure red cell aplasia may occur in patients treated with specific epoetin alfa formulations. In chronic renal failure patients, chances of hypertensive encephalopathy and seizures have increased, particularly those with a previous history of seizures. Headache, nausea, shortness of breath, edema,  vomiting, tachycardia, diarrhea have also been noted. Injection site erythema and flu-like symptoms (like arthralgias and myalgias) can occur, which last for 2 to 4 hours.

Due to a sudden increase in hematocrit, blood viscosity, and peripheral vascular resistance, particularly dialysis patients, may require to adjust anticoagulation. Serious thromboembolic events like increased clot formation in atrioventricular (AV) shunts, migratory thrombophlebitis, microvascular thrombosis, thrombosis of major vessels like retinal, temporal, pulmonary, and renal vessels increases. The risk of thrombotic events is even higher in adults with ischemic heart disease or congestive heart failure. So, lower target hematocrit should be preferable in these patients. Some dosage forms may contain benzyl alcohol, which is associated with fatal toxicity “gasping syndrome” in neonates.