A suspected hemarthrosis can be evaluated by plain radiographs, computed tomography (CT) scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The preferred initial imaging modality is plain film radiology of the involved joint and surrounding bones. If a fracture is not seen but strongly suspected, further evaluation with a CT scan is warranted. MRI may be able to diagnose ligamentous or other soft tissue injuries as the cause of hemarthrosis. Ultrasound (US) in the right clinical setting can help identify and characterize intra-articular fluid collections.

Arthrocentesis and joint aspirate fluid analysis may be required for definitive diagnosis. The synovial fluid from a hemarthrosis may appear red, pink, or brown depending on the cause of bleeding. Aspiration of the joint and subsequent analysis can differentiate simple effusion, hemarthrosis, lipohemarthrosis, and septic arthritis. Arthrocentesis can also provide significant relief of pain for the patient. The presence of lipid globules in the aspirate represents a lipohemarthrosis. If the initial synovial fluid aspirate is non-bloody but bright red blood soon appears after withdrawing fluid, then this is indicative of a traumatic hemarthrosis. A true hemarthrosis typically does not clot due to fibrinolysis compared to a bloody aspirate from traumatic aspiration that does coagulate. Centrifugation of the synovial fluid aspirate and examination of the supernatant may also be helpful to discern the difference between true hemarthrosis and traumatic aspiration; a true hemarthrosis will display a serous appearance of the synovial fluid supernatant with xanthochromia.

Lipohemarthrosis can be detected by arthrocentesis, plain radiographs, CT scan, MRI, and in a minority of patients by US. The presence of a linear interface between 2 different densities with an effusion suggests lipohemarthrosis. This feature results from the entry of marrow fat into the joint cavity and is highly suggestive of an intra-articular fracture. One series demonstrated that 65% of patients with intra-articular fracture did not have fat-fluid levels on plain radiographs; however, all patients with lipohemarthrosis visible on plain radiographs were found to have intra-articular fractures. On plain radiographs the finding of a single fluid-fluid level (layering of fat and blood) on a cross-table view is suggestive of a lipohemarthrosis; however, it can occur without the presence of fat globules. The finding of a double fluid-fluid level (layering fat, blood, and serum) is specific for lipohemarthrosis and can be seen on either US or CT or MRI scans. The sonographic finding of lipohemarthrosis may be used as a sensitive surrogate marker for intra-articular fracture. When used alone for evaluation of acute knee trauma, plain radiographs can miss up to 21% of fractures. If a lipohemarthrosis is identified on either plain film or US, there should be a high suspicion for an occult fracture which should prompt further evaluation with CT scan.

See Figure 1, a horizontal, cross-table lateral view plain radiograph of the knee with a fat fluid level in the supra-patellar recess compatible with a lipohemarthrosis.