**Function:**

The radius permits the forearm and hand to pronate and supinate, flex and extend at the elbow, and adduct, abduct, extend, flex, and circumduct the wrist. Pronation and supination occur through complex articulation with the cylindrical shaped radial head, which is stabilized to the ulnar notch by the annular ligament. This arrangement allows the radial head to rotate proximally, causing anteromedial movement of the distal radius. The distal radius crosses over the distal ulna and inverts to allow the wrist and hand to pronate. A reversal of this movement allows for supination.

In addition to pronation and supination, three articulations allow for extension and flexion at the elbow joint. The elbow joint is a pivot joint (radiocapitellar articulation), a hinge joint (humeroulnar articulation), and a second pivot joint (proximal radioulnar joint). The radius also articulates with the capitulum of the humerus. The olecranon of the ulna articulates with the trochlea of the humerus allowing for the antebrachium to flex and extend with the brachium. While the proximal radioulnar joint's primary function is to enable pronation and supination, the annular ligament maintains proximity between the two bones as the biceps and brachialis contract, causing flexion and allowing the two bones to move as one unit.

Distally, the ulnar notch of the radius and the ulnar head articulate at another pivot joint allowing for supination and pronation. The radius articulates with the wrist via the scaphoid and lunate bones. This articulation is a condyloid or "ellipsoidal" joint which allows the wrist to move in two planes. The radiocarpal joint allows the wrist to adduct, abduct, flex, extend, and circumduct.

**Joints and Ligaments:**

The lateral ligaments of the elbow are collectively named the lateral collateral ligament complex, which is composed of four ligaments that are difficult to separate. First, the lateral collateral ligament (a.k.a. "radial collateral ligament") attaches from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus to the annular ligament. The lateral collateral ligament joins the radius to the humerus and protects the antebrachium against varus stress. The annular ligament attaches from anterior to the posterior radial notch of the ulna encircling the radial head allowing pronation and supination. The lateral ulnar collateral ligament attaches from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus to the ulnar supinator crest. The lateral ulnar collateral ligament helps protect the antebrachium against valgus stress. Finally, the accessory lateral collateral ligament attaches from the supinator crest to the inferior margin of the annular ligament, providing further stability to the joint.

Between the medial border of the radius and the lateral border of the ulna resides the interosseous membrane which divides the anterior and posterior compartments of the antebrachium. The interosseus membrane serves as an attachment site for muscle while allowing for force distribution across the forearm. When the forearm supinates, the interosseous membrane fibers become taught, stabilizing distal and proximal joints.

The distal radioulnar articulation is composed of the palmar radioulnar ligament (volar radioulnar ligament) that attaches the anterior radius to the anterior ulna, the dorsal radioulnar ligament (posterior radioulnar ligament) which attaches the posterior radius to the posterior ulna, and the articular disc which lies between the distal ulna and radius. These structures allow for load distribution and allow the second pivot during pronation and supination of the forearm.

The distal radius is attached to the lunate bone via two ligaments, the long and short radiolunate ligaments. These ligaments prevent hyperextension of the lunate bone during wrist extension. The distal radius is attached to the scaphoid via the radial collateral ligament of the wrist, and the radioscaphocapitate ligament attaches the volar aspect of the radius to the scaphoid and capitate carpal bones. Lastly, the dorsal radiotriquetral ligament is a wide ligament, which connects the dorsal radius to the dorsal scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum.

**Borders and Surfaces:**

The radius has three borders (volar, dorsal, and internal) and three surfaces (volar, dorsal, and lateral). The volar border separates the lateral and volar surfaces, the dorsal border separates the lateral and posterior surfaces, and the internal (interosseous border) separates the volar and dorsal surfaces.

The volar surface (anterior surface) provides the site of origin to the flexor pollicis longus and flexor digitorum superficialis muscles, and site of insertion to the pronator quadratus, supinator, and biceps brachii muscles. It also provides the surface for the anterior radiocarpal ligament attachment. The dorsal surface provides the origin site to the abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis muscles as well as the insertion for the rest of the supinator muscle. The lateral surface provides the insertion sites for the brachioradialis and pronator teres muscles. These are generalizations of where each muscle attaches, and in addition to anatomical variation, many of the muscles attach to more than one radial surface.