Endocervical adenocarcinoma is usually seen in relatively young females. The symptoms are usually non-specific, like spotting, pain during intercourse, and persistent pelvic pain. This is usually seen in women with a history of multiple sexual partners, especially HPV associated types. Most of the cases are diagnosed on routine cervical screening.

Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is the most common symptom seen in post-menopausal women, especially in endometrial carcinoma. Weight loss, anemia, vaginal discharge are the other non-specific symptoms of endometrial carcinoma. Radiologic evaluation in patients with AUB might reveal the increased thickness of endometrium in patients with endometrial carcinoma on Ultrasound examination. Usually, the endometrial thickness of >10mm is thought to be worrisome for endometrial carcinoma; however, endometrial carcinoma cannot be ruled out for endometrial thickness <10mm. An endometrial stripe, polyp, or any other irregularity on ultrasound should raise concern for endometrial carcinoma.

**Management**

Atypical glandular cells (AGC) diagnosis should be immediately followed up with a clinician. There is risk of premalignant lesions in patients diagnosed with AGC is as high as 11%, the risk of endometrial cancer is 3%, and the risk of cervical cancer is 1%. AGC is found in <1% of cervical cytology specimens. About 50% of the patients diagnosed with AGC will be found negative on colposcopy and endometrial sampling. Management is mainly based on the type of AGC diagnosis.  Squamous lesions are most commonly found in patients with AGC diagnosis. When there is a malignancy of glandular cells, it is most commonly from the endocervix or endometrium. However, in rare cases, malignancy from the ovary, breast, fallopian tubes, pancreas, and colon have also been reported. The management differs according to the diagnosis and also pregnancy status.

The ASCCP (American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology) issued the 2019 consensus guidelines.

Initial management of all categories except atypical endometrial cells is colposcopy with endocervical sampling. Women 35 years or older who are at risk for endometrial carcinoma should also undergo endometrial sampling. Women <35 years should undergo endometrial sampling if they are at higher risk for endometrial carcinoma (abnormal uterine bleeding, obesity, or conditions suggesting chronic anovulation).

- AGC, NOS: after a negative colposcopy and endocervical sampling, these patients should be followed-up with cytology at 12 and 24 months along with high-risk HPV testing. Suppose negative should be co-tested every 3 years**.**If any abnormality is detected, colposcopy should be done.

- AGC favor neoplasia: initial colposcopy and endometrial sampling, if negative, should be followed by cone biopsy.  A negative colposcopy and endometrial biopsy do not exclude the diagnosis in these patients.

- In patients with Atypical endocervical cells, "intact specimen with interpretable margins should be provided, concurrent endocervical sampling above the excision bed is preferred.

- Those with atypical endometrial cells should undergo endometrial as well as endocervical sampling. Colposcopy may be delayed if endometrial pathology is identified in these patients.

-  For pregnant patients with AGC diagnosis endocervical canal can be gently brushed with a cytobrush. Biopsies and curetting should be avoided as there is a risk of causing harm to the pregnancy. Non-pregnant patients with AGC, endometrial, and endocervical sampling should be done, with or without colposcopy. If the sampling is negative for any pathology, then a colposcopy should be considered.

-  Failure to find a lesion (based on strong clinical suspicion) should be followed by further studies like transvaginal ultrasound, CA-125 levels, and CA19-9, as sometimes the diagnosis of AGC is associated with an occult primary in other organs.

Subsequent management depends on the results of initial sampling and cytologic interpretation. Repeat cytology is not an option, as AGC is a high-risk category, and these patients may harbor indolent preinvasive or invasive carcinomas. Excisional sampling is recommended if the initial management fails to provide a diagnosis. In women diagnosed with Atypical glandular cells, NOS, if the initial workup reveals no evidence of carcinoma >CIN2+, Adenocarcinoma in situ, or carcinoma, co-testing at 12 and 24 months is recommended. If the co-testing at 12 and 24 months is negative, these patients can be managed with repeat co-testing every 3 years. If any abnormality is noted, colposcopy is recommended.