Allergic conjunctivitis frequently accompanies seasonal allergy symptoms, specifically known allergy exposures or a history of atopy. As such, recurrent episodes are commonly seen. Practitioners should elicit a personal history of allergies and atopy and a history of similar episodes in the past. Practitioners should ask about specific symptoms from the current and any past episodes. Itchiness and diffuse bulbar and tarsal conjunctival injection are the most commonly reported symptoms and present in allergic conjunctivitis subtypes. Other histories and physical exam findings vary with the specific subtype of allergic conjunctivitis.

**Simple Allergic Conjunctivitis:**Clear, watery discharge is the most commonly seen discharge and is usually bilateral with minimal crusting in the mornings. Pain and decreased visual acuity are not commonly reported in simple allergic conjunctivitis and should prompt the provider to consider another diagnosis. Eyelid edema and chemosis are not uncommon and can be quite marked.

**Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis:**Symptoms are usually most severe in the spring and include thick mucus discharge, pain, photophobia, and blurred vision. Patients will also often complain of foreign body sensation. On examination, corneal ulcers and conjunctival infiltrates can sometimes be found. Giant papillae on the tarsal conjunctiva are universally seen on examination.

**Atopic Keratoconjunctivitis:**Symptoms are usually perennial and include pain, blurry vision, photophobia, and foreign body sensation. Examination reveals findings similar to simple allergic conjunctivitis. The addition of chronic inflammatory changes to the ocular surface (corneal scarring and neovascularization) and varied changes to the eyelids (lower lid more commonly) and peri-orbital skin range from mild atopy to lichenification.

**Giant Papillary Conjunctivitis:**Symptoms consistent with simple allergic conjunctivitis often give way to worsening itch and discharge that becomes thick mucus instead of clear and watery. Patients usually report worsening pain and blurry vision with the increased sense of foreign body (contact lenses, sutures). The examination reveals findings consistent with simple allergic conjunctivitis as well as giant papillae covering the tarsal conjunctiva.