The management of SJS is interprofessional. A number of specialists are usually involved in the care of these patients, including a dermatologist, intensivist, ophthalmologist, pulmonologist, nephrologist, plastic surgeon, and gastroenterologist, functioning as an interprofessional team. The acute care of these patients is provided by wound care. The pharmacist must also closely assess the medications that the patient is receiving to prevent exacerbation of the disorder or determine if any of the patient's medications could be the trigger for the condition. Even after treatment, these patients may have severe cosmetic deficits and may require mental health counseling. If the lesions occur across joints, the patient may benefit from physical therapy to restore function and muscle strength. The patient has to be educated on the use of ocular lubricants because of the sicca-like syndrome. Many patients do lose weight after suffering a severe reaction and should be referred to a dietitian. Following discharge, the patients need long-term follow-up to ensure that there are no functional deficits, including vision loss. Once a patient has suffered an SJS, it is highly recommended that the patient wear a warning bracelet indicating the toxic agent or allergen.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes of patients with SJS depend on the extent and severity of skin involvement. For those with a mild eruption, the lesions usually heal in 12 to 16 weeks. Mild scarring may occur, but there is usually no functional loss unless the eyes and other mucous membranes are involved. When the involved skin area is more than 20%, mortality rates of 1 to 27% have been reported. The presence of concomitant bacterial infection can increase mortality rates. Factors that adversely affect the outcome include advanced age, leucopenia, presence of a malignancy, renal dysfunction, hyperglycemia, and more than 10% BSA involvement. Survivors of SJS may develop inverted eyelids, sicca-like syndrome, visual loss, and corneal neovascularization, but n interprofessional approach will lead to better outcomes.