Several imaging modalities are available for establishing the diagnosis of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. They include:

- Plain radiographs

- Computed tomography (CT)

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

**Radiographic Findings**

Telangiectatic osteosarcoma is typically a purely lytic lesion with a permeative destructive growth pattern. This rapidly growing tumor often expands the contour of bone and shows features of cortical disruption with minimal or no periosteal new bone formation. The massive expansile growth pattern of telangiectatic osteosarcoma can superficially simulate an aneurysmal bone cyst. Telangiectatic osteosarcoma can have a deceptively innocent radiographic appearance with sharply demarcated margins, simulating a benign bone cyst. Aneurysmal bone cysts generally have type 1A or 1B patterns of geographic bone destruction.

T1-weighted MRI shows heterogeneous low signal intensity, and T2-weighted images show high signal intensity with several cystic foci, fluid levels, and an extra-skeletal extension of the tumor, similar to an aneurysmal cyst, but with irregular walls, septae, and nodular and solid components.

The criteria for diagnosing telangiectatic osteosarcoma include the following:

- Radiographically, a destructive, osteolytic tumor with little or no matrix mineralization or periosteal new bone formation

- Cystic/cavitary gross specimen with little solid tumor tissue and no areas of a dense bone

- Histologically, a tumor with single or multiple cystic cavities containing blood or necrotic tissue, with thickened septa composed of anaplastic tumor cells

The high alkaline phosphatase level frequently seen in osteosarcoma is not a feature of telangiectatic osteosarcoma. On the other hand, the evaluation of platelet count, white cell count, lactate dehydrogenase, and alkaline phosphatase have been described for differentiating telangiectatic osteosarcoma from aneurysmal bone cysts. The sarcomas had a higher value of platelet count, white cell count, alkaline phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase than the aneurysmal bone cysts.