All interprofessional healthcare team members should know the potential complications with amphetamine-like agents. This team includes clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists. These agents should not be prescribed liberally, and even when prescribed, the patient must have close monitoring to ensure that there is no misuse of the medication.

A careful history, physical exam, and cardiovascular evaluation should take place before initiating stimulant medication because serious cardiac problems can increase the risk of sudden death. Evaluate and monitor the risk of abuse and dependence before prescribing amphetamines and during therapy. Physicians should avoid prescribing the immediate-release (short-acting) type if there is a suspicion of potential for misuse in the patient or the parents. The prescribing physician should advise the patient to report symptoms of tachycardia, hypertension, angina, peripheral vasculopathy, or Raynaud phenomenon. Also, patients should receive education regarding the most common adverse effect of the medication. Most amphetamine-related toxicity is safely manageable with supportive care, including monitoring airway, breathing, and circulation and controlling agitation with benzodiazepines.

With interprofessional care coordination and open communication among the interprofessional team members, patients are more likely to experience therapeutic benefits and avoid adverse events and toxicity when prescribed amphetamine-like agents. [Level 5]