The antiarrhythmic medications have typically been categorized according to the Vaughan-Williams (VW) classification system. The system classifies the medications according to the main mechanism of action (although several agents retain properties from multiple classes). The VW classification breaks down into four main categories, with some references adding a fifth.

**Class I**

- **Class Ia:**Causes moderate degree blockage of fast sodium channels. Drugs include quinidine, procainamide, and disopyramide. These are the most pro-arrhythmic of the sodium channel blockers due to prolonged QTc interval; use is limited due to pro-arrhythmic potential. Quinidine is used in selected patients with Brugada syndrome as an alternative to the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator placement (ICD). Treatment with quinidine can be useful in patients with short QT syndrome and recurrent ventricular arrhythmias (VA). Therapy with quinidine may reduce the number of shocks in patients with short QT syndrome who have undergone ICD placement. Disopyramide is still used occasionally with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), particularly as a combination with beta-blocker or verapamil to treat symptoms such as angina or dyspnea in patients with HOCM not responding to beta-blockers or verapamil alone. Procainamide can be a valuable agent to help unmask and diagnose Brugada syndrome in patients suspected of having Brugada syndrome but without a definitive diagnosis. Procainamide is a recommended agent to restore sinus rhythm in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) in whom atrial fibrillation (AF) occurs without hemodynamic instability in association with a wide QRS complex or with a rapid pre-excited ventricular response. It also can be useful in an attempt to terminate ventricular tachycardia and arrhythmia.

- **Class Ib:**Causes mild degree blockage of sodium channels. Drugs include lidocaine and mexiletine. These drugs shorten the QTc interval, are used for VA only, especially post-myocardial infarction VA, and are not useful for atrial arrhythmias. In long QT syndrome, mexiletine shortens the QTc interval and has been used to reduce recurrent and ICD arrhythmias.

- **Class Ic:**Causes marked degree of sodium blockage and no effect on QT interval. Drugs include flecainide or propafenone. These drugs are reasonable for ongoing management in patients without structural heart disease or ischemic heart disease who have symptomatic supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) and are not candidates for or prefer not to undergo catheter ablation. These agents are also useful for pharmacological cardioversion of AF. Some patients may use the "pill in pocket" strategy. The pill in the pocket refers to a treatment strategy where the patient with paroxysmal AF does not take a regularly scheduled maintenance dose of the medication but instead carries a loading dose of the agent. Suppose the patient senses an episode of AF has started. In that case, they take a loading dose of the respective treatment medication as a one-time dose and attempt chemical cardioversion back to a more regular rhythm. Flecainide and propafenone - should not be used for patients with any "structural heart disease." The Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trials (CAST I and II) showed increased mortality in patients who had a previous myocardial infarction treated with class Ic agents (flecainide, encainide, moricizine) versus placebo when trying to reduce the frequency of premature ventricular contractions (PVCs). The implications of this trial are that class Ic agents are not routinely prescribed to patients with left ventricular dysfunction. This data essentially rules out the majority of ventricular arrhythmias for treatment with class Ic agents.

**Class II**

Beta-blockers (BB) are indicated for rate control in patients with paroxysmal, persistent, or permanent AF and atrial flutter. Oral beta-blockers are useful for ongoing management in symptomatic supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) patients. Beta-blockers are often first-line antiarrhythmic therapy because of their excellent safety profile and effectiveness in treating ventricular arrhythmias. Therapy with beta-blockers reduces adverse cardiac events for long QT syndrome and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. In patients with symptomatic  (PVCs) in an otherwise normal heart, treatment with a beta-blocker is useful to reduce recurrent arrhythmias and improve symptoms.

**Class III**

Potassium channel blockers decrease potassium efflux out of the cell and prolong the QTc interval.

- Amiodarone exerts sympatholytic, sodium, and calcium antagonistic properties that decrease AV and sinus node conduction. This drug is recommended in patients with AF to maintain sinus rhythm, especially in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction. It is also a reasonable option in pharmacological cardioversion. This agent can be used in critically ill patients without pre-excitation to attain ventricular rate control, although it is less effective than non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. Amiodarone is the most common antiarrhythmic medication used for the suppression of VA. In patients with hemodynamically unstable persistent VA after defibrillation, intravenous amiodarone should be administered to achieve a stable rhythm. And it has shown effectiveness in VA suppression in patients with ischemic heart disease with ongoing beta-blockers treatment.

- Dronedarone reduces the hospitalization rate for AF in sinus rhythm patients with a non-permanent AF history. However, the clinician should not prescribe dronedarone in patients with AF that cannot be converted into normal sinus rhythm (permanent AF). According to the FDA review, it doubles the rate of cardiovascular death, stroke, and heart failure in such patients.

- Dofetilide is used for atrial arrhythmias only. Oral dofetilide is useful for acute pharmacological cardioversion in atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter patients.

- Sotalol shares the effects of class II and class II, non-cardioselective beta-blocker, and potassium channel blockers. Therefore, clinicians can use it to treat both ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias. It is not effective for converting AF to sinus rhythm but may be used to prevent recurrent AF. Sotalol also showed its efficacy in suppressing VA.

- Ibutilide is indicated for AF or atrial flutter only.

**Class IV**

Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil) decrease conduction velocity and slow conduction through the AV node. They are useful for ventricular rate control in acute and chronic AF and atrial flutter. Diltiazem and verapamil are options in the acute treatment of hemodynamically stable patients with SVT,  focal, and multifocal atrial tachycardias.

**Other Antiarrhythmic Drugs**

- Adenosine is useful for diagnosing and terminating SVT due to either atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) or orthodromic atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT). This drug may also be utilized diagnostically; adenosine helps unmask atrial flutter or atrial tachycardia (AT). Adenosine is also useful in terminating focal AT of a triggered mechanism and differentiating focal AT from AVNRT and AVRT.

- Digoxin - Although digoxin is not usually first-line therapy for ventricular rate control in patients with AF, a combination of digoxin and beta-blocker/or non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers is a reasonable rate control option in patients with AF and heart failure.

In revised classification, original Vaughan Williams Classes I through IV are maintained but subcategorized these classifications due to recent developments, including the presence of Na+ current components (for Class I), advancements in autonomic (G protein-mediated) signaling (for Class II), K+ channel subclassification (for Class III), and new molecular targets related to Ca2+ homeostasis (for Class IV). Also, Class V to VII has been described.

**Updated Vaughan Williams Classification**

**Class 0: HCN Channel Blockers**

Ivabradine: Stable angina and chronic heart failure with heart rate ≥70 bpm

**Class I: Voltage-gated Na+ Channel Blockers**

**Ia:**Quinidine, disopyramide, procainamide- Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, recurrent atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, Brugada syndrome, short Q-T syndrome(SQTS)

**Ib:**Lidocaine, mexiletine- Ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, especially after myocardial infarction

**Ic:**Encainide, flecainide, propafenone- Supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias resistant to standard treatments in the absence of structural heart disease, and premature ventricular contractions, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia

**Id:**Ranolazine- Potential treatment option for tachyarrhythmias and ventricular tachycardia

**Class II: Autonomic Inhibitors/Activators**

**IIa:**Inhibitors: Pindolol, carvedilol, timolol, nadolol (non-selective βB); bisoprolol, atenolol, metoprolol, esmolol (selective β1 blocker)- Rate control of atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and ventricular tachyarrhythmias

**IIb:**Activators: Isoproterenol- Ventricular escape rhythm (complete AV block prior to pacemaker implantation)

**IIc:**Inhibitors: Atropine- Symptomatic sinus bradycardia, conduction block.

**IId:**Activators: Carbacholine, methacholine, digoxin- supraventricular tachyarrhythmias

**IIe:**Activators: Adenosine- Termination of PSVT

**Class III: K+ Channel Blockers/Openers**

**IIIa:**Voltage-dependent K+ channels

K+ channels (non-selective) blockers: Amiodarone, dronedarone- Atrial fibrillation, hemodynamically unstable ventricular tachycardia, life-threatening recurrent ventricular fibrillation

Kv11.1 (rapid K+ current) blockers: Dofetilide, almokalant, ibutilide, sematilide, sotalol- Ventricular tachycardia in patients in patients without a history of myocardial infarction or structural heart disease, WPW syndrome associated with atrial fibrillation.

Kv1.5 (ultra-rapid K+ current) blockers: Vernakalant- pharmacological cardioversion of recent atrial fibrillation (in patients without structural heart disease /ischemic heart disease)

**IIIb:**Metabolically dependent K+ channels blockers: Nicorandil, pinacidil- treatment of stable angina (second line), decrease in actional potential recovery time, shortens QT intervals.

**Class IV: Ca2+ handling modulators**

**IVa:**Surface membrane non-selective Ca2+ channels blockers: Bepridil, falipamil- Potential management of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias

Surface membrane L-type Ca2+ channels blockers: Verapamil, diltiazem- Supraventricular arrhythmias, Rate control of atrial fibrillation.

**IVb:**Intracellular Ca2+ channel blockers: Propafenone, flecainide- Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia(CPVT)

**Class V Mechanosensitive channel blockers**

Inhibitors: N-(p-amylcinnamoyl) anthranilic acid (under research- not FDA approved)

**Class VI: Gap junction channel blockers**

Inhibitors: carbenoxolone (under investigation- not FDA approved)

**Class VII: Upstream target modulators**

Omega-3 fatty acids: eicosapentaenoic acid, docosahexaenoic acid - Post–myocardial reduction of risk of cardiac death

Statins- Potential for use in atrial fibrillation

ACE inhibitors: captopril, enalapril, ramipril, lisinopril; ARBs: losartan, telmisartan- Potential application in atrial fibrillation due to heart failure