The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is a United States Department of Labor branch that oversees overall workplace safety and sets safety standards for specific working conditions. Many of the guidelines OSHA puts in place transcend many fields. However, some are more specific to the healthcare setting, such as working with blood and bloodborne pathogens, laboratory chemicals, infectious disease, and personal protective equipment standards.

One OSHA workplace safety topic that applies to almost all fields is electrical safety, ranging from standard electrical outlets or extension cords to specific workplace hazards like power lines or massive generators in places like factories or dams. Harnessing electricity is one of the most important modern inventions utilized in nearly all aspects of life, but the unique physical properties of electrical energy that allow it to power our world also make it extremely dangerous.

In the workplace, electricity is defined as the flow or propagation of charged particles through a substance, commonly a conductive material that allows these charged particles to move with minimal resistance, including metals like copper. Though electrical energy propagates easily through metals, the human body is another low-resistance vessel that electricity can flow through easily. The nervous system and its role in carrying out bodily functions like movement and secretion show that endogenous electrical energy flows easily through the body via nerves. However, these nerve impulses are tiny compared to exogenous electrical energy like that from an electrical outlet.

The combination of high electrical energy and relatively low resistance poses significant risks for any person who comes in contact with electrical energy. Therefore, electrical safety is given utmost respect because of the catastrophic effects a breach in safety can have on an individual. Regulated under electrical-specific standards 29 CFR 1910.300-399, personal protective equipment standard 29 CFR 1910.137, and special industry-standard 29 CFR 1910.269, electrical safety is monitored and enforced by OSHA to reduce work-related electrical injury and deaths.