The main target of treatment is a reduction in the level of unconjugated bilirubin using phototherapy and plasmapheresis. Most patients have survival rates beyond puberty without significant brain damage but, eventually, develop kernicterus later in life. The only curative option available presently for Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome is liver transplantation.

Phototherapy: The mainstay of treatment for Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome is intensive phototherapy. Phototherapy is often part of the treatment of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.

Plasmapheresis: Plasmapheresis is the most effective process to remove the excess unconjugated bilirubin from the blood during severe hyperbilirubinemia crisis. Plasmapheresis is a process for removing any unwanted substance from the blood. During plasmapheresis, blood is removed from the affected patient, and blood cells are separated from plasma. The plasma is then replaced with the donor plasma, and the blood transfused back into the affected patient. As bilirubin is tightly bound to albumin, removal of albumin during this process leads to a reduction of bilirubin in the blood.

Orlistat: It is a lipase inhibitor that works more efficiently in combination with calcium phosphate. It is hypothesized to capture the unconjugated intestinal bilirubin and helps in its excretion in proportion to the amount of fat excreted in stools.

Calcium phosphate supplementation: Patients who have undergone phototherapy in Crigler-Najjar type I and supplemented with calcium phosphate demonstrated a reduction of serum bilirubin level by 18%, suggesting that calcium phosphate traps photoproducts of bilirubin excreted in the bile. This hypothesis also has support from animal studies involving rats, that noted decreased serum bilirubin concentration after oral calcium phosphate supplementation, likely from trapping unconjugated bilirubin in the gut.

Liver transplantation: It is the only therapeutic and definitive treatment method in Crigler-Najjar type I. Transplanted liver has a healthy UGT1A1 enzyme for bilirubin conjugation, which rapidly reduces serum bilirubin level. Prophylactic liver transplantation is advisable to prevent kernicterus, as once it occurs, it may not be fully reversible.

Hepatocyte transplantation: Hepatocyte transplantation is an encouraging alternative to liver transplantation. In this process, normal hepatocytes are infused into the portal vein or peritoneal space. It is the temporary method of serum bilirubin reduction with published reports of a 50% reduction in bilirubin level.

Gene therapy: Introduction of a normal UGT1A1 gene can potentially cure the genetic defect. It is achievable through ex vivo gene transduction (genes are transduced in cultured hepatocytes) and vector-mediated gene delivery. Adenovirus is the most effectively used vector for gene transfer to liver cells.

Inhibition of bilirubin production: A single dose of heme oxygenase inhibitors such as tin-protoporphyrin or tin-mesoporphyrin in neonates demonstrated a 76 percent decrease in the bilirubin levels and removed the need for phototherapy.

Phenobarbitol: Patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome usually do not require treatment with phenobarbital. However, the patients with jaundice affecting their quality of life receive therapy with phenobarbital, which works by induction of remaining UGT activity. Hence, phenobarbitol has no role in Crigler-Najjar type I. It reduces the serum bilirubin level by 25% in type II patients.