Treatment of a patient with suspected bowel perforation involves establishing intravenous (IV) access and initial hemodynamic management, especially if the patient presents with any signs or symptoms concerning sepsis or shock. Initiation of broad-spectrum antibiotics aimed at gram-negative and anaerobic organisms is essential and should be initiated early. For suspected distal perforation of the intestinal tract, nasogastric decompression should be performed, and the patient made NPO (nothing by mouth). Perforated appendix or appendicular abscess is categorized in the low-risk community-acquired intra-abdominal infections group. However, risk factors for antibiotic resistance or treatment failure should be excluded. Such risk factors include recent travel history to the high rates of antibiotic-resistant organisms’ sites, known colonization with antibiotic-resistant organisms, advanced age, immunocompromised patients.

If the patient is hemodynamically stable and there is no concern for peritonitis, such as in the case of a spontaneously contained perforation, the option for non-surgical management with antibiotics and observation may be pursued in consultation with the surgical team.

Localized abscess formation may be amenable to drainage by interventional radiology.

Most cases will progress to require direct investigation via laparoscopic or open (laparotomy) exploration. This allows for primary repair as well as infection control measures. Minimally invasive exploration and repair are often successfully performed. However, it should be noted that exploratory laparotomy is the surgical intervention of choice for any signs of clinical deterioration or hemodynamic instability.