**Vestibulocochlear Nerve**

The vestibulocochlear nerves carry vestibular information from the semicircular canals, utricle, and saccule and pass through the internal acoustic meatus together with the facial nerve. The vestibular portion enters the brainstem at the pontomedullary junction and travels through the inferior cerebellar peduncle to reach the vestibular nuclei or the flocculonodular lobes of the cerebellum. Benign tumors of the Schwann cells may arise from the vestibular portion of CN VIII and result in vestibular symptoms.**Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abducens Nerves**

CN III, IV, and VI nerves innervate the six extraocular muscles that control eye movements in response to head movements. When the head turns to the left, vestibular information initiates its journey from the left semicircular canal via vestibular nerve fibers and proceeds to the ipsilateral medial and superior vestibular nuclei. Then, excited neurons in the left superior and medial vestibular nuclei send signals to the right CN VI nucleus. The right CN VI innervates the right lateral rectus muscle to contract and direct the gaze to the right. Another nerve fiber projects from the CN VI nucleus and ascends via the MLF toward the left CN III nucleus. When stimulated, the oculomotor nerve results in the medial rectus muscle contraction and allows the left eye to gaze to the right. Inhibitory nerve fibers also proceed from the medial vestibular nucleus to the left CN VI nucleus, rendering the left lateral rectus and right medial rectus muscles to relax. The result of these combined counteracting effects is a smooth, coordinated eye movement toward the opposite direction, and thus a steady visual field with head-turning. The trochlear nerves innervate the contralateral superior oblique muscle and stimulate the muscle to contract and make eye movements via lateral rotation, intorsion, and depression.