Ocular investigations include:

**Fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA)**- FFA features may vary.

**Optical coherence tomography (OCT)**- OCT in the acute phase reveals inner retinal hyperreflectivity at the Purtscher flecken and cotton wool spots. Intraretinal and subretinal fluid and retinal thickening may be associated. Paracentral acute middle maculopathy (PAMM), characterized by hyperreflectivity of the inner nuclear layer due to ischemia of intermediate and deep retinal capillary plexus, might be a feature in the acute phase. Features in the late phase include retinal thinning and photoreceptor loss.

**OCT angiography**may show ischemia at both retinal capillary plexus which may recover, leading to visual improvement.

**Multifocal electroretinogram (mfERG)**revealed dysfunction of both the inner and outer retina in a case.

The **visual field**may reveal central or paracentral, or arcuate scotoma, usually with preservation of the peripheral visual field.

Evident history of severe trauma is present in Purtscher retinopathy. In cases of Purtscher-like retinopathy, investigations may include

- Amylase and lipase levels to rule out pancreatitis,

- Imaging for injury as required,

- Antinuclear antibody- Lupus retinopathy appears very similar to Purtscher-like retinopathy and should be ruled out when no apparent history of trauma is present.

- Complement component C5 is usually elevated in Purtscher-like retinopathy and plays an essential role in leukoembolization.

- Abdominal imaging to rule out pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer,

- Evaluation of connective tissue disorders, including:

- Anti-double-stranded DNA,
- Antiphospholipid antibody,
- Rheumatoid factor, and
- Markers of muscle breakdown in dermatomyositis like serum creatine phosphokinase and serum/urine myoglobin.