An endotracheal tube placed even for a short period causes superficial mucosal damage, whereas chronic placement might cause pressure necrosis of deeper layers involving submucosa, perichondrium, and even the cartilage. The laryngeal, as well as tracheal mucosa, are affected similarly. The sites of contact in the larynx usually involve the medial aspect of arytenoid cartilages, vocal cords, cricoarytenoid joints, posterior part of the glottis, and sub-glottis. While the area at the level of vocal cord commonly forms the area of contact in the larynx, the mucosal area in contact with the inflated cuff is involved in the trachea. If the edema involves only the arytenoids and the false cords, it does not cause luminal obstruction. Whenever the edema, ulceration, granulation, or vocal cord dysfunction causes laryngeal luminal narrowing, the resultant increase in airflow velocity manifests as stridor, which is a sign of clinically significant airway obstruction.

There is an association between laryngeal edema with resultant decreased vocal cord mobility, with the latter predisposing to adducted positioning of the cords, thereby increasing the work of breathing. The risk of aspiration is also high in patients with reduced vocal cord mobility, which increases the risk of respiratory failure. It should also be noted that the above-mentioned factors (edema, ulceration, granulation, or vocal cord dysfunction) causing luminal narrowing will be present as single or in varying combinations in a given patient. It is assumed that stridor and respiratory distress occur when more than half of the luminal area is obstructed.