**Visual Acuity and Refraction**

Snellen’s visual acuity documentation of uncorrected and best-corrected visual, near vision, and pinhole vision is very important in these cases. The corrected distant visual acuity is an indirect indicator of the size and density of PPC.

**Undilated and Dilated Fundus Evaluation**

To rule out any incidental fundal pathologies and this also helps in deciding the prognosis of the case. Postoperatively, cases resulting in posterior capsular rent must undergo a retinal evaluation to rule out nucleus or cortex drop or signs of retinal detachment.

**A-Scan Ultrasonography**

To calculate the axial length, keratometry readings, and intraocular lens power for implantation.

**B Scan Ultrasonography**

In the case of dense opacities where media is hazy and the fundus is not visible, a B scan must be done to rule out retinal pathologies. In case of any retinal or optic disc pathology on B scan, the patient should be counseled in detail regarding visual prognosis. This also helps in planning future treatment of the patient with the help of a retina specialist. Guo et al. utilized 25 MHz B scan USG for delineating the posterior capsular status in PPC and proposed that this can be a valuable tool in guiding the management of these cases.

**Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography (ASOCT)**

ASOCT is a beneficial tool to assess the status of the posterior capsule preoperatively. All PPC patients must undergo preoperative ASOCT evaluation to rule out pre-existing PC dehiscence; this helps the ophthalmic surgeon plan case management and be prepared for any possible intraoperative mishap. ASOCT is a valuable tool for counseling the patients regarding visual prognosis and the outcome of the surgery.

**Intraoperative Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography**

The diagnosis and management of ASOCT have taken a leap forward, with intraoperative OCT guiding the surgical steps of PPC. Titiyal et al. described the posterior polar cortical disc defect (PPCDD) sign in PPC cases while performing phacoemulsification. They proposed that the presence of this sign is an indicator of an intact posterior capsule and the risk of PCR is comparatively lower in these patients compared to patients without PPCCD signs.

**Modified Posterior Optical Coherence Tomography**

Pujari et al. defined conical sign with +20 dioptre and modified posterior optical coherence tomography (m-OCT). They showed that the presence of a conical defect is an indicator of pre-existing posterior capsular dehiscence and guides the intraoperative and postoperative management of these cases.

**Other Tests**

Complete blood count, kidney function test, pulmonary function testing by a specialist, electrocardiogram, and physician evaluation are necessary when indicated before surgery. The patient should be systemically stable to undergo the surgical intervention.