The true prevalence and incidence of all-cause strangulation injuries and mortality is unknown. Because of the diversity of etiologies that lead to the common injury pathway, epidemiological studies, and case series within the literature tend to be etiology and population specific.

Hanging injuries are the second most common cause of suicide in the United States; whereas, gunshot wounds are the leading cause. Males are more likely to commit suicide in both of these manners.

In a retrospective case series published by Berke et al (2019), 98 near-hanging patients were identified over an 11-year period. All patients underwent trauma evaluation, and 254 CT and MRI scans were performed, which discovered only 8 traumatic injuries. Two patients demonstrated injuries to the cervical vasculature, three patients showed signs of thyroid cartilage and hyoid bone fractures, and three patients had vertebral injuries. A total of 35.7% of patients had clinically diagnosed anoxic brain injury, which was deemed present in all 19 patients who expired (19.5%). Injuries were more common in patients with a low Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) compared with those exhibiting a normal GCS.

Pediatric patients less than 1 year of age unintentional strangulation injuries ranks fourth among all causes of unintentional injury. Motor vehicle accidents, drownings, and burns are all more common. Of over 200,000 playground injuries recorded in 1999, only 0.07% were fatal, and of these 50% were determined to be caused by asphyxia from strangulation injuries. Eighty percent of victims were found to be under 10 years of age.