**Lumbar Puncture and CSF Analysis**

Lumbar puncture is a sterile procedure, done to obtain CSF samples for diagnostic purposes. It involves passing a needle into the subarachnoid space at the levels between L2 and L5 vertebrae. However, most commonly lumbar puncture is performed between L4 and L5. Biochemical, microbiologic, and cytologic studies are carried out, some possible pathognomic pictures in comparison to physiologic CSF parameters are as follows:

Normal CSF

- Color: clear or colorless

- CSF Pressure: 8 mmHg to 15 mmHg

- Glucose: 50 mg/dl to 80 mg/dl or two-thirds of blood glucose level

- Protein: 15 mg/dl to 45 mg/dl

- Mononuclear cells: 0 to 5/mm3

- **Bacterial Meningitis:**Grossly cloudy or purulent, elevated CSF protein, low CSF glucose, elevated CSF lactate, and markedly elevated neutrophils

- **Viral Meningitis**Grossly clear CSF, Normal or slightly low glucose, moderately elevated protein, and markedly elevated lymphocyte levels

- **Tuberculous Meningitis:**Grossly yellowish and viscous CSF, low glucose, markedly elevated protein, normal or slightly elevated neutrophils, moderately elevated lymphocytes

- **Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**Lumbar puncture may be used to diagnose a subarachnoid hemorrhage about 12 hours after onset of a debilitating occipital headache usually when brain CT scan returns negative. The CSF studies showing a red cell count of more than 100/mm3 and grossly yellowish CSF termed "xanthochromia" due to CSF bilirubin, which may be confirmed via CSF spectrophotometry is strongly suggestive of subarachnoid hemorrhage.

**Subarachnoid Block**

Also called a spinal block, is a method of regional anesthesia. It involves the injection of a local anesthetic agent into the subarachnoid space through a needle at the level between L2 and L5 vertebrae.

**Intrathecal Administration**

Specially formulated drugs were administered intrathecally into the CSF to assess the blood-brain barrier. Cancer chemotherapeutic agents like methotrexate are available in intrathecal formulations as well as intrathecal opioids using an intrathecal pump or catheter.