Initial treatment should be based on presentation and should focus on possible respiratory or cardiac failure. Providers must be prepared to protect the airway when needed, using noninvasive or invasive techniques. Beta-agonists may be used for wheezing but may not be beneficial. If severe pulmonary toxicity is found, move toward intubation as patients may decompensate quickly. High positive end-expiratory pressure is generally indicated to maintain alveoli. Antibiotics may be warranted if a concomitant infection is suspected. Those presenting with cardiovascular symptoms will need aggressive, intravenous fluid hydration in cases of hypotension. Ventricular dysrhythmias should be treated with beta-blockers to prevent catecholamine surges. Catecholamines like epinephrine should be avoided given the increased sensitivity of the conducting system associated with hydrocarbons.

Patients presenting with skin exposure will need to have their clothes removed and be decontaminated with soap and warm water. Contact precautions should be used for the safety of staff and providers. Patients are presenting agitated, or seizing should be given benzodiazepines. The patients may need to be restrained for their own protection of the safety of the staff or providers. GI symptoms generally do not need treatment or decontamination. Local poison control should be consulted before starting GI decontamination. The pneumonic CHAMP is helpful in determining serious/life-threatening ingestions.

- C - Camphor

- H - Halogenated hydrocarbons

- A - Aromatic hydrocarbons

- M - Metals

- P - Pesticides

Halogenated hydrocarbons may cause dysrhythmias and hepatotoxicity, where aromatic hydrocarbons may cause bone marrow suppression and cancer.

Initial orders should include a chest radiograph to aid in determining the extent of lung injury. Laboratory studies are generally not helpful when assessing acute exposure, but may determine the effect on other organ systems. Useful laboratory tests may include complete blood count, oxygen saturation, serum electrolytes, liver function tests, creatinine, glucose, and urinalysis. An electrocardiograph also may be useful. Prolonged QT, ST-segment elevation, bradycardia, SVT, AV blocks, atrial fibrillation, premature ventricular contractions, and ventricular fibrillation are all possible ECG findings with exposure to hydrocarbons. The patient should be placed on a cardiac monitor for possible arrhythmias and pulse oximetry for hypoxia. Replace electrolytes as needed as hypokalemia is common in hydrocarbon exposure. The mainstay treatment for hydrocarbon toxicity is supportive care, and the majority of symptoms resolve within a short observational time. If after an observation period of 4 to 6 hours there are no signs of pulmonary or systemic toxicity, including a clear chest radiograph, the patient may be discharged home with outpatient follow up and strict return precautions. If after observation, systemic or pulmonary symptoms persist, admission and prolonged observation may be necessary. N-acetylcysteine may be considered in cases of liver toxicity associated with specific toxins such as carbon tetrachloride. Other considerations include treating toxicity of additives that may coexist with hydrocarbons.