Management or treatment of the different MPNs are as follows:

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML): Philadelphia chromosome is the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene which results in dysregulated tyrosine kinase activity. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) targets tyrosine kinase activity of the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene. CML is divided into three phases: chronic phase accelerated phase and blast phase. Patients with chronic phase are managed initially with TKIs such as imatinib (first-generation TKIs) or nilotinib and dasatinib (second-generation TKIs). Based on ENESTND and DASISION, Nilotionib and Dasatinib respectively were superior to Imatinib in terms of achieving cytogenetic and molecular remission.  Patients in accelerated phase are treated with second-generation TKI and depending upon response may need hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HCT). However blast phase CML patients undergo treatment with TKI and are evaluated for stem cell transplant.

Polycythemia vera (PV): Patients are divided into high risk and low risk based on age and thrombotic events which also guide the management approach. Patient with age less than or equal to 60 years old with no history of a thrombotic event are classified as low-risk PV, however, patients with greater than 60 years or those who have a history of thrombotic events are considered high-risk patients. Low-risk PV is usually managed with low dose aspirin and therapeutic phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit less than 45%. High-risk PV is managed with therapeutic phlebotomy, low dose aspirin and the use of first-line cytoreductive agents such as hydroxyurea, busulfan, or interferon alfa. For those patients who do not respond to the first-line cytoreductive agents, ruxolitinib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor) as second-line therapy may be beneficial. Patients who develop acquired von Willebrand disease should avoid aspirin due to the increased risk of bleeding. Symptoms such as pruritus and erythromelalgia are generally well controlled with low dose aspirin, but recalcitrant cases may benefit from cytoreductive agents or ruxolitinib.

Essential thrombocythemia (ET): The management of patients with ET is based on vasomotor symptoms, and it also involves the prevention of complications such as hemorrhage and thrombotic events. Vasomotor symptoms are usually controlled with low dose aspirin. Patients with high risk (age greater than 60 or thrombotic event at any age with positive JAK2 V617F mutation) or intermediate risk (age greater than 60, negative JAK2 mutation, and no thrombotic event) are treated with a cytoreductive agent (hydroxyurea) and low dose aspirin. Very low or low risk includes patients 60 years or younger, with or without JAK2 mutation and no thrombotic event; these patients are managed based on the symptoms with either low-dose aspirin or clinical monitoring alone.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF): Patients with Intermediate and high-risk disease with Myelofibrosis benefit from Ruxolitinib. Based on the COMFORT trials Ruxolitinib was helpful in reducing spleen volume and improving symptoms related to Myelofibrosis. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation is recommended in patients with the high-risk disease with the potential to cure. Asymptomatic, low-risk patients are managed with observation only.

Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL): Because of the rarity of the disease, there is no specific treatment. Most patients are managed with a cytoreductive agent (hydroxyurea).