The exact cause of congenital aniridia is unknown. However, the paired box gene (PAX6) gene at chromosome 11p13 is a crucial factor in pathogenesis. This gene is involved in the development of essential organs, including the eye, pancreas, brain, and spinal cord during embryonic development.

The various hypothesis regarding the etiopathogenesis of aniridia include:

- Aniridia may be a subtype of iris coloboma.

- Neuroectodermal theory - Aniridia develops from an anomaly of neuroectodermal development - this theory has support from the association of aniridia with neuroectodermal defects like the absence of iris muscles and foveal hypoplasia.

- Mesodermal theory suggests that there is an abnormality of the development of mesodermal tissues like optic nerve head hypoplasia; this does not explain foveal hypoplasia which commonly accompanies aniridia.

**Classification of congenital aniridia:**

**Autosomal dominant congenital aniridia**- It consists of at least two-thirds cases of congenital aniridia and may be present in up to 85% cases with aniridia. This variant is autosomal dominant and the most common form of aniridia; it has complete penetrance but variable expressivity. Thus family members may have different severity of aniridia, ocular involvement, and visual acuity. Some cases may have subtle iris hypoplasia or iris coloboma.

**Sporadic congenital aniridia**- There is a de novo mutation of the PAX6 gene and may consist of 13% to 33% of cases with aniridia. An important fact is that this variant of aniridia correlates with nephroblastoma (Wilms tumor) as a part of WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation), also known as Miller syndrome. The genitourinary anomalies include undescended testes in males and streak gonads (nonfunctional ovaries) and/or bicornuate uterus in females. Intellectual disability includes difficulty in learning and processing information. There might be other manifestations, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, and anxiety. There may be craniofacial dysmorphism.

WAGR syndrome occurs as the chromosomal location of the PAX6 gene at 11p13 is very close to WT1 (Wilms tumor) gene. There is a partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 11 involving both PAX6 and WT1 in this syndrome. Patients with WAGR syndrome have around 45 to 60% chance of developing nephroblastoma. Approximately 25% to 33% of patients with sporadic congenital aniridia may develop nephroblastoma before 3 years of age.

**Autosomal recessive congenital aniridia-**It consists of 1% to 3% of all congenital aniridia cases and is the least common variant of congenital aniridia. It has associations with cerebellar ataxia and mental retardation (Gillespie syndrome).