Considering the cosmopolitan character of gram-negative microorganisms and their ability to cause infections in humans, it is important to state that the biggest problem facing healthcare workers is bacterial groups that cause multiresistant infections. Multiresistant gram-negative infections (MDRs) are today one of the most significant health challenges in the world due to the inadequate response of these pathogens to antimicrobials, which have practically pulverized by the production of ESBL and carbapenemases. A little over twenty years ago, the first KPC carbapenemase was reported in the United States, and since then, such infections have spread globally. However, since the 1980s, there have been reports of gram-negative strains of ESBL, especially in the hospital environment.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), multiresistant gram-negative bacteria are rampant in the United States except in Maine and Idaho.

The extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (CTX-M, TEM, SHV, PER, VEB, TLA) are enzymes that hydrolyze extended-spectrum cephalosporins. From this family of enzymes, the most prevalent are CTX-M and its variations. Studies show that 12% of E. coli isolates in the USA produce ESBL, while in Latin America and Asia, this percentage may reach 27% and 38%, respectively. At the beginning of the ESBL outbreaks, they had links to the hospital environment; however, today, they are found in patients originating in the community.

Carbapenemases (KPC, NDM-1, IMP, VIM, OXA-48) are characteristically enzymes that hydrolyze carbapenem and most other beta-lactams. In the United States, the most commonly detected are KPC, NDM, and OXA-48; in Europe, the most prevalent are OXA-48, KPC, and VIM, and the NDM are less incident. Further, an aggravation of these enzymes is their transfer by plasmids, which often carry additional resistance genes, making these gram-negative bacteria pan-resistant.

Finally, another vector of the global spread of these genes is the extensive capacity of interspecies transmission. Also, it is postulated that there is a risk of contracting a multidrug-resistant infection in patients with comorbidities, hospitalizations in ICUs, prior use of antibiotics, and prolonged use of a central venous catheter.