**Meninges and Spaces**

- Epidural space - fatty space between the bony framework of the spinal vertebral column and the thick dura mater surrounding the spinal cord. It contains adipose tissue and blood vessels.

- Dura mater - Thick outermost covering (meninges) of the spinal cord, extending down to the level of the S2 vertebra.

- Arachnoid mater - The middle covering of the spinal cord

- Subarachnoid space - Space between the arachnoid mater and the innermost covering of the spinal cord. It contains Cerebrospinal fluid.

- Pia mater - The innermost covering of the spinal cord, intimately adhering to its surface, stabilizes the spinal cord through lateral extensions of the pia called the denticulate ligaments, extending between the ventral and dorsal roots unto the dura mater.

**Spinal cord**

- The length is about 45 cm in men and 43 cm in women

- The anatomic course originates in the brainstem before coursing through the foramen magnum.  The spinal cord continues distally through the cervical and thoracic regions of the spinal column before terminating as a tapered structure known as the conus medullaris

- The spinal cord proper terminates at the L1-L2 vertebral level and is anchored distally via the filum terminale, representing an extension of the pia mater with fibrous attachments to the coccyx

- The spinal cord comprises 5 segments, cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal

- Long, cylindrical structure with varying levels of thickness/width depending on the corresponding vertebral levels

- 31 total nerve root segments

- 8 cervical 
- 12 thoracic
- 5 lumbar
- 5 sacral
- 1 coccygeal

- Cord width ranges from 0.64 to 0.83 cm in the thoracic region to 1.27 to 1.33 cm in the cervical and lumbar regions.

- A 2016 systematic review of the literature demonstrated that, on average, the largest transverse diameter corresponded to the C5 neuronal segment (1.33 +/- 0.22 cm), and the smallest transverse diameter, on average, corresponding to the T8 segment (0.83 +/- 0.21 cm)
- Enlarged regions of gray matter correspond to nerve root distribution to the upper and lower extremities.

- A cross-sectional view of the spinal cord shows its organization into the gray and white matter. The anterior aspect of the cord is identifiable with the presence of an anterior median fissure. The gray matter is organized into an H- shaped body of cell bodies. The anterior horn comprises motor nuclei, while the posterior horn comprises sensory nuclei. The surrounding white matter is organized into anterior, posterior, and lateral columns (funiculi), from neuronal axons organized into tracts that convey neural messages back and forth to the CNS (the ascending and descending tracts). The anterolateral columns carry temperature and pain information, while the dorsal column communicates the sense of touch, proprioception, and vibration. The cervical and thoracic spinal segments present an intermediolateral gray horn which gives off preganglionic sympathetic fibers onto the sympathetic trunk on both sides of the spinal cord.

- The spinal cord's central canal is an extension of the 4th ventricle. It contains CSF; surrounding it is the gray commissure and the anterior white commissure. Decussation of the tracts of the white columns occurs at the anterior white commissure.