The clinician should perform a thorough medical and dental history emphasizing the location, onset, and characteristics of pain, aggravating and relieving factors, past treatments, and history of other pain disorders.

**Recommended Systematic and Psychological Assessment**

Temporomandibular disorder symptoms include pain, TMJ clicking and crepitation, and different levels of mandibular limitation. The pain is typically provoked by function; spontaneous pain in the TMJ area suggests a different etiology.

Patients with TMD also report headaches and otological symptoms – otalgia, tinnitus, vertigo, aural fullness, and subjective hearing impairment.

The physical examination should also search for signs of tooth wear, bruxism, abnormal mandibular movements, tenderness of muscles of mastication, neck, and shoulder, pain with dynamic loading, and postural asymmetry. A neurological examination rules out cranial nerve abnormalities. Careful palpation of masticatory muscles and surrounding neck muscles helps identify trigger points, myospasm, and referred pain syndrome.

**Pain**

Pain from the TMJ and muscles of mastication is a common symptom. It can be a constant or periodic dull ache over the joint, the ear, and the temporal fossa. It is more commonly observed during mandibular movement or palpating the affected regions. The pain can be myogenic, caused by mechanical trauma and muscle fatigue. Articular pain arises from overloading, trauma, or degenerative changes of articular and periarticular tissues.

**Joint Sound**

The two common joint sounds are clicking and crepitations. Clicking is a sound of an uncoordinated movement of the condylar head and the articular disc. Crepitations are compound sounds caused by the roughened, irregular articular surfaces during mandibular movement.

**Limitation of Mandibular Movement**

Movement limitation can occur in opening, closure, protrusion, and lateral excursion of the mandible. It can be due to muscular or ligamentous restriction or disc displacement.

**Dislocation**

It is the condyle displacement from the fossa, and the patient may be unable to close the mouth. The patient can reduce the dislocation himself or report to the clinician for reduction.

**Otologic Symptoms**

TMJ pain in the auricular regions is more noticeable posteriorly. Tinnitus, itching in the ear, and vertigo are other symptoms associated with articular pain.

**Recurrent Headaches**

Patients perceive the pain and tenderness of masticatory muscles along the temporal region as headaches. It can correlate with other headaches, such as migraine pain.