**Prepping and Draping**

The entire penis, including the base, is prepped with an antimicrobial solution. At this time, a sterile field is created using towels or drapes.

**Procedure**

Local anesthesia can be used or foregone entirely. A dorsal penile block is performed using plain lidocaine. A ring block can be performed and/or even superficial skin injection at the projected site of needle insertion. Once the block has completely anesthetized the patient, a large-bore butterfly needle is placed into the corpora cavernosus at a perpendicular angle to the penis at the 2 to 3 o'clock or the 9 to 10 o'clock position near the penile base. Care should be taken not to violate the urethra, the dorsal penile neurovascular bundle, or puncture through to the contralateral corpora cavernosus.

Only one side requires injection and aspiration because the corpora are connected with fenestrations. Limiting the number of punctures to the corpora decreases the risk of penile hematoma. Once the needle has been placed, aspiration can be attempted using a 20 mL to 30 mL syringe. Often aspiration is unsuccessful because the blood has become thick, requiring irrigation with normal saline. This is performed using saline flushes. After saline injection, aspiration is attempted again. This technique can be performed multiple times. If no progress has been made, phenylephrine injection is performed in approximately 200 microgram increments. Vital signs should be checked prior to and after the injection of phenylephrine, along with continual reassessment for symptoms of hypertension. 1000 micrograms is typically the maximum dose of phenylephrine.

After detumescence has occurred, patients should be monitored for the return of the erection and symptoms caused by the phenylephrine injection.

**Post-procedure**

Gauze and a self-adherent wrap can be placed on the puncture site to help prevent penile hematoma. Patients should be instructed to return if the erection returns.