# Continuing Education Activity

Cheiralgia paresthetica is a compression neuropathy of the superficial radial nerve. It manifests as sensory disturbances, such as paresthesias, to the dorsal and radial aspect of the wrist and hand. Treatment of this condition is straightforward for most patients with conservative measures directed at removing the offending agent. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of cheiralgia paresthetica and reviews the interprofessional team's role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of cheiralgia paresthetica. 
- Summarize the presentation and physical exam findings of a patient with cheiralgia paresthetica.
- Review the treatment and management options for cheiralgia paresthetica.
- Describe the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by cheiralgia paresthetica.

# Introduction

The radial nerve is susceptible to compression at many different locations throughout its course. Cheiralgia paresthetic is compression of the superficial branch of the radial nerve in the forearm. This condition was first described by Dr. Wartenberg in 1932 when he introduced the term cheiralgia paresthetica and reported five clinical cases.

The radial nerve derives from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus and consists of fibers from the nerve roots at C5, C6, C7, C8, and sometimes T1. It descends between the long head of the triceps and axillary artery and enters the posterior compartment of the arm via the triangular interval. It continues to descend along the medial proximal upper arm between the long and medial head of the triceps until it reaches the spiral groove. The nerve passes distally and laterally around the posterior humerus, where it penetrates the lateral intermuscular septum and gains access to the anterior compartment of the brachium. The nerve enters the anterior compartment distal to the deltoid insertion at approximately 11 cm proximal to the elbow. It continues anteriorly to the lateral epicondyle between the brachialis and brachioradialis at the elbow to enter the forearm.

Roughly 3 to 5 cm proximal to the supinator, the radial nerve separates into the posterior interosseous nerve and the superficial branch of the radial nerve. The posterior interosseous nerve proceeds deep to the supinator. The superficial branch of the radial nerve continues superficially to the supinator and deep to the ulnar margin of the brachioradialis in the anterolateral aspect of the forearm to where it briefly runs alongside the radial artery. At roughly 9 cm proximal to the radial styloid process, it then pierces the deep fascia between the middle and distal third of the forearm, to emerge between the brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus to eventually become subcutaneous. The superficial branch of the radial nerve then ramifies again at approximately 4.9 cm proximal to the styloid process into dorsomedial and dorsolateral branches. These branches travel alongside the cephalic vein and proceed across the first dorsal compartment of the wrist and its tendons, the abductor pollicis longus and the extensor pollicis brevis. The dorsolateral branch supplies the dorsolateral thumb proximal to the interphalangeal joint. The dorsomedial branch supplies the dorsomedial thumb proximal to the interphalangeal joint, dorsoradial half of the hand and dorsal aspect of the index, long, and radial half of ring fingers proximal to the distal interphalangeal joint.

# Etiology

The radial nerve can be compressed anywhere along its length. Due to the superficial location of the terminal branches, the nerve is at risk for local trauma.

The nerve is more vulnerable where it passes from deep to superficial.

# Epidemiology

Cheiralgia paresthetica is a relatively rare condition when compared to other nerve compression syndromes. Carpal tunnel syndrome has an annual incidence rate between 0.1 and 0.35%; while, ulnar nerve compression syndromes have a rate of 0.02%. Radial nerve compression syndromes have a rate of 0.003%.

# Pathophysiology

This syndrome results from compression of the superficial branch of the radial nerve. The symptom and degree of injury are related to the amount of force on the nerve and the duration of compression of the nerve.

# History and Physical

The patient presents with pain, tingling, paresthesias over the dorsolateral aspect of the hand, wrist, and fingers.

**Physical Exam**

**Visual**

- Masses, scars, signs of external compression

- Skin changes

**Sensation**

- The first dorsal web space is specific to the superficial branch of the radial nerve

**Light Touch**

- May be abnormal

- Up to 100% of patients

**2-point Discrimination**

- May be abnormal

- 4 to 5 mm greater than the contralateral side or more than 15mm 

- Up to 80% of patients

**Vibration (256 Hz)**

- May be abnormal 

- Up to 100% of patients

**Muscle Strength**

- No motor weakness or signs of atrophy

- May see a decrease in pinch and grip strength due to pain with these activities 

- Up to 80% of patients

**Tinel Test**

- Most common finding

- Must test course of the superficial branch of the radial nerve and lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve

- Identify the nerve segment with maximal Tinel response

**Hoffman Test**

- Evaluate for upper motor neuron pathology

**Finkelstein Test**

- May yield a false positive in up to 96% of patients

- Neuropathy may coexist with de Quervain tenosynovitis

**Dellon Test**

- Active, forceful hyperpronation of the forearm and ulnar deviation and flexion of the wrist with the elbow extended by the side

**Wartenburg's Neuritis Compression Test**

- Direct pressure at the insertion of the brachioradialis

**Superficial Branch of the Radial Nerve Compression Test**

- Direct pressure at junction of brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus causes symptoms

**Optional Examination with Nerve Block**

Superficial branch of the radial nerve block with a local anesthetic

- Inject local anesthetic subcutaneously near the area of maximal Tinel Test

- Ultrasound guidance preferred to avoid nerve injury

- Finkelstein Test should become negative

- Measured pinch and grip strength should improve

# Evaluation

Multiple diagnostic modalities can be used to evaluate for cheiralgia paresthetica. They include the following

**Electromyography/Nerve Conduction Study**

- Able to identify slowing nerve conduction velocities as compared to accepted normal values

- Commonly there is no slowing present

- Very helpful if present. May be able to identify the location and nature of nerve injury precisely

**Ultrasound**

- Can help distinguish between the different causes of wrist pain including cheiralgia paresthetica, de Quervain tenosynovitis, and thumb carpometacarpal joint arthritis

- Able to identify areas of nerve entrapment or compression

**Plain Radiographs**

- Able to identify any bony prominences or orthopedic hardware present

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

- T1-weighted images can identify the nerve anatomy including any narrowing or enlargement that may be caused by its entrapment

- Water sensitive sequences including fat-suppressed T2-weighted, fat-suppressed proton density-weighted, and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images can identify changes in the nerve itself including edema and enhancement

# Treatment / Management

Management of cheiralgia paresthetica is mainly nonoperative therapy. Attention should first focus on removing sources of external compression that could be leading to the neuropathy. The patient should be encouraged to rest, avoid any provocative maneuvers, and alter any work activities that may exacerbate the symptoms. Also, NSAIDs and nerve medications can be used to augment therapy.

Surgery is only for failure of nonoperative treatment. Treatment should be attempted for 6 months before one proceeds with surgical intervention. Clinicians require caution when treating patients with painless paresthesias as surgical complications may create painful neurologic symptoms.

Surgical decompression: To approach the superficial branch of the radial nerve, palpate the radial styloid process and follow the border of the brachioradialis proximal 10 cm. Draw a line connecting the two. Identify the area with the most pronounced Tinel response, tenderness, and allodynia. Then center your incision over this. Carefully elevate skin flaps to identify the brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus tendons. The superficial branch of the radial nerve generally appears between the two tendons with brachioradialis located above and extensor carpi radialis longus located below.

Postoperative care should consist of early range of motion at directed by physical therapy with all restrictions lifted by 2 weeks after surgery. Occupational therapy should reinforce this early range of motion protocol and incorporate nerve gliding techniques to minimize adhesion formation, desensitization, and scar massage. Patients generally receive 4 to 6 weeks of therapy and achieve maximum medical improvement at 60 to 90 days after surgery.

# Differential Diagnosis

**De Quervain's Tenosynovitis**

- Stenosing tenosynovitis in the first dorsal extensor compartment

- Pain, tenderness, and swelling over the lateral wrist

- No sensory disturbance

- Cheiralgia paresthetica itself gives a false positive Finkelstein test. Although, it may be associated with de Quervain tenosynovitis. Up to 50% of patients with cheiralgia paresthetica also get a diagnosis of de Quervain tenosynovitis

**Lateral Antebrachial Cutaneous Nerve Neuritis**

- A lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve provides sensation to the lateral forearm

- Positive Tinel test over the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve may be mistaken for positive Tinel test over the superficial branch of the radial nerve

- The superficial branch of the radial nerve and lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve neuritis may coexist

- The sensory overlap between the superficial branch of the radial nerve and lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve in the dorsoradial hand occurs in 21% to 75% of patients. Cadaveric dissections demonstrated the connection comes from the lateral branch of the superficial branch of the radial nerve.

- Check Tinel's test just distal to antecubital fossa just medial to the brachioradialis where the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve exits deep fascia

- Tinel test may be positive in the course of the superficial branch of the radial nerve when there is a more proximal issue

- Must perform nerve block to lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve before the superficial branch of the radial nerve to rule out a false-positive superficial branch of the radial nerve block if overlap exists

**Thumb Carpometacarpal Joint Arthritis**

- Pain at the in the radial aspect of the wrist

- Pain and weakness with motion, grip, and pinch

- Crepitus with motion

- Positive Grind Test: pain with a circular motion of thumb while applying axial compression

- Possible adduction deformity of the thumb carpometacarpal joint alone or in combination with a hyperextension deformity of the thumb metacarpophalangeal joint (Z-type deformity)

- No sensory deficit

**Proximal Nerve Lesion**

- Spinal cords lesions, nerve root compressions, brachial plexus injuries encompassing the posterior cords, radial nerve palsies, posterior interosseous nerve syndrome, and radial tunnel syndrome.

- Sensory disturbances will likely be associated with strength deficits.

**Intersection Syndrome**

- Pain in the dorsoradial aspect of the forearm

- Crepitus over the intersection of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis with extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis

- No sensory deficit

# Prognosis

The outcomes for the treatment of cheiralgia paresthetica are promising. It is very common for patients to have spontaneous resolution of their symptoms. There are reports of up to 71% of patients treated nonoperatively have good to excellent outcomes.

# Complications

Complications include but are not limited to unsuccessful surgical decompression, persistent symptoms, worsening of symptoms, iatrogenic nerve injury or injury to surrounding structures, and wound problems.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Cheiralgia paresthetica can be treated well with straightforward nonoperative interventions. The key to treatment is an accurate diagnosis and identification of the cause of the compression. Once the cause is determined, patients should be educated on techniques to remove the compression and to avoid activities that will aggravate the symptoms. These conservative measures will lead to symptom resolution in the majority of patients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cheiralgia paresthetica is a relatively common disorder that is underdiagnosed. The diagnosis is often confused with other wrist disorders. Successful management of cheiralgia paresthetica encompasses an interprofessional team approach. Clinicians, including the primary care provider and nurse practitioner who first see the patient, must be familiar with this disease and its presentation to diagnose it correctly. Having a high index of suspicion will lead to prompt diagnosis and initiation of treatment. Radiologists and neurologists can further verify the disease and identify the location of compression through imaging and electrodiagnostic tests.

Treatment initially consists of multifactoral conservative management with the removal of compression and avoidance of provocative activities. Brace therapy may be an initial approach with input from orthotists. NSAIDs and other nerve medications may also be options; the pharmacist should verify appropriate agent selection, dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and counsel the patient regarding optimal use of NSAID to avoid complications such as gastric upset, reporting any issues to the nurse or physician. If patients fail to improve with conservative management, a surgeon can remove anatomic nerve compression through a variety of techniques.  Postoperatively, the patient will benefit from physical therapy and occupational therapy focusing on early range of motion, nerve gliding exercises, and avoiding activities that exacerbate the condition. Specialty-trained nurses can monitor progress and provide patient education at follow-up visits and also watch for adverse medication effects, and let the treating physician know if there are any concerns. Open discussion and communication with the patient and between all of the health care providers on the interprofessional healthcare team is key to the successful treatment of this disease. [Level V]