Ultrasound-guided blockade of the suprascapular nerve is an effective method for treating acute and chronic shoulder pain. This nerve provides sensory innervation to both the acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joints. Two approaches to blocking the suprascapular nerve have been described, and their difference is clinically significant due to the proximity of the phrenic nerve to the brachial plexus. The posterior approach at the suprascapular canal has no risk of a phrenic blockade. The anterior approach is lateral to the brachial plexus, but the phrenic nerve can be affected depending on the volume of the block solution.

In a cadaver study investigating the phrenic sparing volume for the anterior suprascapular nerve block, a maximum volume of 4.2 mL was identified to dye the suprascapular nerve but spared the phrenic nerve 90% of the time (MEV90).

The anterior blockade of the suprascapular nerve block may provide equivalent analgesia compared to the “gold standard” of the interscalene peripheral nerve block. A recent randomized prospective, a double-blinded study by Auyong et al. compared the analgesic benefit, opioid usage, and pulmonary compromise of three commonly used nerve blocks for shoulder surgery; the interscalene, supraclavicular, and suprascapular nerve block.

The results suggested clinically comparable analgesia with dramatically different effects on lung function. The suprascapular and interscalene peripheral were essentially equivalent for analgesia (displaying clinically significant non-inferiority) and slightly outperformed the supraclavicular nerve block in pain scores. No clinically meaningful differences in opioid usage existed between the three groups. Interestingly, the patient’s pulmonary function was well preserved following the suprascapular nerve block, resulting in a vital capacity of 90% of the patient’s baseline, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 87% of baseline, and reduced diaphragmatic excursion of 1.7 cm.

At the same time, the interscalene nerve block demonstrated a reduction of vital capacity to 67% of baseline, FEV1 of 68% of baseline, and diaphragmatic excursion reduction of 5.9 cm.  This study strongly suggests that an anterior suprascapular nerve block provides analgesic equivalence to the interscalene block, with much improved pulmonary mechanics.

Another recent prospective randomized double-blinded non-inferiority trial compared anterior suprascapular nerve block to interscalene block