# Continuing Education Activity

Thrombin is a topical hemostatic agent used to control and minimize blood loss during surgical procedures, is utilized in conjunction or as an alternative to standard surgical techniques. The Federal Drug Administration has approved three thrombin-based products: recombinant thrombin, human thrombin, and bovine thrombin. This activity provides a highlight and discusses critical elements about this drug and how this information can be useful for the medical team involved in the peri- and post-operative care of the patient.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for thrombin use.
- Summarize the risks associated with initiating thrombin.
- Review the common complications of thrombin use. 
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients receiving thrombin.

# Indications

Thrombin is a serine endopeptidase. The enzyme has been extensively studied and researched throughout the years for biotherapeutic purposes.

# Mechanism of Action

Thrombin is a serine endopeptidase naturally produced in humans, and it has a crucial role in the coagulation cascade and the complex process of hemostasis. The liver produces it as an inactivated zymogen, prothrombin, and when the coagulation cascade is activated, this protein is split by other proteases, eventually forming thrombin.

# Administration

All three thrombin products, bovine thrombin, human thrombin, and recombinant thrombin, have been approved by the FDA for topical use only and have been currently label as such by the manufactures. Thrombin products can be applied topically as a solution, as a glue in combination with fibrinogen, or sprayed into a mist.

# Adverse Effects

**Bovine Thrombin Adverse Effects**

Bovine thrombin can be extremely immunogenic, fostering the creation of antibodies against bovine thrombin.

**Human Thrombin**

Human thrombin, analogous to any other human blood product, is not utterly devoid of the potential risk of transmitting bloodborne diseases. Even when donors are screened and tested for such diseases and individual units of plasma are extensively examined and purified, there still a risk of possible infection, including, in theory, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

**Recombinant Thrombin**

Recombinant thrombin is a sequence of amino acids relative identical to human thrombin, this sequence of amino acid residues is obtainable from modified Chinese hamsters ovary cell line.

# Contraindications

Thrombin products must not be injected intravascularly or utilized within an open vessel due to a high risk of disseminated intravascular coagulation heart failure, cardiac arrest, and thromboembolism.

# Monitoring

Patients require monitoring for any signs of bleeding, abnormal platelet counts, coagulation parameters, and fibrinogen levels. Patients receiving thrombin-containing products must be monitored for signs of hypersensitive reactions, blood pressure, changes in heart rate, and decrease end-tidal carbon dioxide. Additionally, patients require monitoring for any signs of thromboembolism during and after thrombin has been administered.

# Toxicity

There have not been any reported cases of thrombin products, causing an overdose. There are no antidotes available.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

All three thrombin products, bovine thrombin, human thrombin and, recombinant thrombin, have been widely used across surgical specialties to achieve hemostasis and overcome bleeding during surgical procedures. Consequently, it is essential for the medical team involved in the peri- and post-operative care of the patient to be aware of any adverse reactions to any of the thrombin products.

Proper monitoring and surveillance of partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time, the international normalized ratio is crucial due to the risk of coagulopathies related to these products. It is of equal importance for the interprofessional healthcare team to avoid re-exposure in patients with a previous adverse reaction to thrombin and the avoidance of human thrombin in patients with a history of harmful reactions to human blood products. With interprofessional coordination and communication between clinicians, mid-level practitioners, surgeons, nurses, and pharmacists, appropriately managed thrombin use will result in improved patient outcomes while minimizing adverse events.

In conclusion, thrombin is a great drug that has been used over the decades to accomplish hemostasis. However, it is not absent from adverse effects. Newer bovine thrombin formulations and, in recent years, the development of alternate thrombin products, like human thrombin and recombinant thrombin, provides the patient with a safer drug that enhances clinical outcomes and reduces morbidity and mortality.