**Pectus Excavatum**

This condition is diagnosable at birth but commonly remains unrecognized until early childhood or adolescence. The clinical picture is usually a tall, thin, healthy patient with only a visible pectus defect. Highlighting; type of morphology defect, spine alteration coexistence, pain along the sternal border, and lower ribs margin detection. Psychological distress from body image issues is of paramount importance.

**Pectus Carinatum**

Pectus carinatum assessment is similar to patients with pectus excavatum.

**Poland Syndrome**

Poland syndrome has a wide clinical findings constellation and can be detected during pregnancy or along from birth to adolescence. Physical examination highlights include limbs and torso symmetry and functionality evaluation, and sternal notch to the acromion, olecranon to ulnar styloid, and phalanges lengths measurements. The breast disease spectrum is of paramount importance.

**Sternal Clefts**

Sternal clefts detection can be made with prenatal sonography or at birth. Physical findings would vary depending on the type of cleft. Highlights are; the presence of a bulging skin in a partial cleft, and direct precordial pulse in a total cleft. Identify cardiopulmonary physiologic impairment and other associated anomalies are of paramount importance.

**Ectopia Cordis**

Prenatal evaluation is the recommended approach of ectopia cordis detection. Physical findings at pregnancy and birth highlights are an ectopic heart and associated anomalies coexistence.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

Detection is possible with a prenatal ultrasound examination. Lung area and CT / AC ratio (thoracic circumference / abdominal circumference) measurements are the most specific prenatal evaluation findings. Classic physical findings at birth are narrow chest with short limbs, brachydactyly, micromelia, elevated and fixed clavicles, and small pelvis with hypoplastic iliac bones.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

Detection is possible with a prenatal ultrasound examination. Vertebral anomalies and spine Bifida are the suspicious prenatal evaluation findings (anecdotical). Physical findings highlights are short trunk dwarfism with vertebral and ribs deformities.