An individual that has experienced an electrical injury may present with a variety of complaints or issues, and these may include cardiac arrhythmia or arrest, respiratory arrest, coma, blunt trauma, or an assortment of burns. Some patients may complain of occasional unpleasant sensations without any obvious physical damage, while others may present with a large amount of pain and overt tissue damage. Regardless of the patient’s presentation, it is critical to determine details about the source of electrical injury (e.g., high versus low voltage, AC versus DC), the length of contact, and any resultant trauma that may have occurred.

Patients that have experienced a low-voltage AC injury may present with only superficial burns, or contrastingly, many devastating injuries if there is prolonged contact or muscle tetany. Low-voltage AC injuries may potentially result in cardiac or respiratory arrest, arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular fibrillation), or seizures that are unwitnessed. For this reason, electrocution should be considered as a differential for any patient that presents with or has experienced a recent arrest. Additionally, it is important to obtain as much information as possible regarding the electrical injury, from any witnesses or emergency medical service personnel, to guide treatment appropriately.

High-voltage AC injuries are more likely to result in highly destructive thermal burns. It is very rare for a patient that has experienced a high-voltage AC injury to have associated loss of consciousness or arrest. Under such circumstances the provider should, again, try to obtain as much information as possible regarding the injury from witnesses or associated medical personnel.

Regardless of the presenting complaints or extent of the electrical injury, all patients should receive a thorough physical examination to assess the full extent of the damage. In general, morbidity tends to be higher with low-voltage injuries than with high-voltage injuries.

Ventricular fibrillation, for example, may occur with exposure to voltage as low as 50 mA to 120 mA (i.e., lower than the highest accessible current in most households). In addition to arrhythmias and other electrical abnormalities, electrical injuries may also directly damage cardiac myocytes. Therefore, patients may experience delayed arrhythmias as a result of this damage as well (e.g., sinus tachycardia or premature ventricular contractions). Electrical injuries resulting in long-term cardiac sequelae, however, are rare.

If the pathway of electrical current through the body crosses the thorax, there is a risk of chest wall muscle paralysis and concomitant respiratory arrest. Unlike cardiac myocytes, however, lung tissue is a poor electrical conductor, and therefore rarely experiences a direct electrical injury.

Skin damage secondary to electrical injury is often the most devastating of associated injuries (secondary only to cardiac complications). Burns may appear minor despite substantial internal injuries (e.g., as with high voltage electrothermal burns) that may necessitate interventional surgery (e.g., amputation or fasciotomy). Burns are generally most severe at the source contact point (entry) and ground (exit), with the severity of any remaining injury depending heavily on the intensity and duration of source contact.

An electric arc is a form of electrical discharge that occurs between two electrodes as electrical current ionizes gases present in the air. This type of current, also known as plasma, is a current that passes through a medium that is normally nonconductive, has the highest current density, and is often luminous. Though in nature, electric arcs occur in the form of lightning, this is also a type of electrical current that may be harnessed and used industrially (e.g., welding, plasma cutting, fluorescent lighting). Undesired arcs may also occur as a result of poorly installed circuit breakers, switches, or electrical contact points. If an individual experiences an electrical arc burn there will likely be skin lesions at the point of source and ground contact points. These lesions characteristically have a dry parchment paper-like center surrounded by a rim of congestion. Based on the location of these wounds, one can determine the likely path of the arc through the body. Arcs may also cause electrothermal, flash, or flame burns in addition to electrical burns; therefore, a variety of wounds may be observed in affected individuals.

Flash burns occur when an individual is in proximity to the heat produced by an electrical arc, and this heat may reach more than 50,000 degrees Celcius.

Flash burns may pass through the body like an arc burn or, depending on the path of the arc; the flash may only pass over the surface of the skin, thereby causing diffuse superficial or partial-thickness burns without any internal injury.

Pediatric patients may present with oral burns as a result of biting or sucking on an electrical wire or appliance. An electric arc often forms between one side of the mouth to the other, whereby there may be involvement of the orbicularis oris muscle, or potential deformation of the lip if the burn crosses the oral commissure which are the corners of the mouth. There may be a significant amount of associated edema, as well as eschar formation within two to three days. If the eschar involves the labial artery, there may be severe bleeding when the eschar falls off after two to three weeks. These patients should, therefore, be monitored closely and receive adequate follow-up with burn specialists and oral or plastic surgeons.

Secondary blunt trauma as a result of an electrical injury may result in musculoskeletal or head injuries including tympanic membrane, cervical spine, or facial injury and potential subsequent neurological damage. Patients should be thoroughly examined for any signs of impending compartment syndrome (e.g., circumferential burns, vascular abnormalities, and any neurologic or motor dysfunction). Surgical consultation should be obtained as early as possible to avoid any further complications (e.g., severe compartment syndrome necessitating amputation).