**Solubility**

Le Chatelier’s principle:

If stressors like pressure and heat are applied to the equilibrium, the system will respond by adjusting to minimize the effects of the stress.

For example, if pressure is applied to a system, the dissolution reaction will respond to minimize this stress by reducing the pressure in the system.

Heat of solution

Solids and liquids form as a result of individual particles being held together by inter-particulate bonds. To form a solution, energy is required to break the bonds between the particles within the solid or liquid. Heat energy is also required to break the bonds in a solvent to insert one of the molecules into the solution. Both of these processes are endothermic. Heat energy is released when the solute molecules form bonds with the solvent molecules i.e. this process is exothermic.

Depending on whether more energy is used to break the bonds within the solute and solvent or is released when new bonds are formed between the solute and solvent, the reaction overall can be exothermic or endothermic.

- If more energy is required to break the bonds within the solute and solvent than is released when new bonds are formed between the solute and solvent, the reaction is considered endothermic.

- If more energy is released when new bonds are formed between the solute and solvent than is required to break the bonds within the solute and solvent, the reaction is considered exothermic.

The total amount of heat energy released from or absorbed by the system = sum of heat energy absorbed when bonds are broken – the sum of heat energy released when bonds are formed

- If the total amount of heat energy released/absorbed from the system is greater than zero, the reaction is endothermic.

- If the total amount of heat energy released/absorbed from the system is less than zero, the reaction is exothermic.