**Topical Ophthalmic Drop**

**Ocular Hypertension and Open-Angle Glaucoma**

- The topical ophthalmic form of timolol comes as a gel or solution. One drop is administered daily to the affected eye when using the gel form. Available doses are 0.25% and 0.5%. When using the solution, one drop of the 0.25% solution is applied to the affected eye twice daily. If the response is inadequate, the concentration is increased to 0.5% twice daily in the affected eye. Once the intraocular pressure is under control, the patient may decrease the dose to one drop daily.

**Infantile Hemangiomas**

- One drop of 0.5% timolol gel is applied to the affected area 2 to 3 times a day. Treatment continues until improvement is stable.

**Systemic**

**Hypertension**

- For the treatment of hypertension, dosing is 10 to 20 mg of oral timolol twice daily. If the patient’s response is inadequate, the dose can be increased incrementally to a maximum of 60 mg per day.

**Myocardial Infarction**

- For the secondary treatment of myocardial infarction, the dose is 5 mg of oral timolol twice daily. Dosing can be increased to 10 mg twice daily.

**Migraine Prophylaxis**

- For the prophylactic treatment of migraines, the patient may take 10 mg of oral timolol twice daily. If the response is inadequate, the dose can be increased to 30 mg per day.

**Atrial Fibrillation**

- Clinicians can use timolol to treat atrial fibrillation with an initial dose of 10 mg twice daily. It can then be increased incrementally to a maximum of 30 mg twice daily.

**Angina (off-label indication)**

- For off-label treatment of angina, the dose is 10 to 60 mg orally each day divided two or three times daily.