As previously discussed, bladder injuries may be the result of blunt (e.g., MVCs, and traffic-related accidents) and penetrating (e.g., gunshot and stab wounds) traumas, with the opportunity for injury prevention to deter bladder injuries from occurring. Though scarce, there is research to support injury prevention programs.

Penetrating injuries accounted for a small percentage of trauma patients (8.34%) seen at trauma centers based on 2015 data from the American College of Surgeons national trauma data bank annual report. However, researchers found 3.5% of penetrating trauma patients experienced reinjuries; interestingly, 30% of these patients presented to different hospitals.

MVCs are a large source of blunt abdominopelvic injuries seen at trauma centers, which can have a variety of causes. Teens have been identified as a high-risk group for distracted driving. Teens who completed a distracted driving program provided positive feedback; 93% of teens reported the program was comprehensive, 89% reported it was relevant to teen driving issues, and 81% of teens reported texting while driving as the most common injury cause for teens compared to other driving risk factors.

Alcohol use has been a focus of trauma centers since the 2006 mandate from the American College of Surgeons Committee on trauma for all level I trauma centers to screen for alcohol upon trauma patient admission. There is evidence to support numerous high-risk behaviors of trauma patients who acutely or chronically use alcohol 77% reported high-risk driving, 40% reported violent behaviors, and 19% disclosed suicidal ideation within the past 12-months.