Plain films can be utilized to rule out the possibility of acute fracture, which data shows only to be present in about 15% of all acute ankle sprains. Radiographic film series should include weight-bearing views of A/P, mortise, and lateral. Talar stress views and external rotation stress views can also be diagnostically helpful; however, it may be unnecessary for the diagnosis of a lateral ankle sprain.

The Ottawa Ankle Rules should help guide efforts to limit radiation exposure to patients. Thus, radiographs are indicated based on the criteria below, involving the ability to bear weight immediately post-injury, as well as specific points of tenderness.

- Pain in the malleolar zone with the inability to bear weight for four steps immediately and/or in the emergency department

- Pain in the malleolar zone with tenderness to palpation local to the posterior half (distal 6 cm) of the fibula or tip of the lateral malleolus

- Pain in the malleolar zone with tenderness to palpation local to the posterior half (distal 6 cm) of the tibia or tip of the medial malleolus

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is particularly advantageous for assessing soft tissue injury in the ankle region and is typically reserved for the planning of primary ligamentous surgical repair. Diagnosis criteria of acute ligamentous injury include morphologic and signal intensity changes within and around the suspected ligament. Healthy ligaments of the ankle complex are seen as thin, linear, low-signal intensity structures when uninjured. With an acute injury, intrasubstance edema can be seen on fat-suppressed or T2-weighted imaging as increased signal intensity within the ligament. In contrast, chronic injury to the ligament will show as thickening, elongation, and irregular contouring of the suspected ligament with no significant soft-tissue edema, marrow changes, or hemorrhaging noted by increased signal intensity. The ATFL, CFL, and PTFL are best viewed on coronal and axial views with the foot placed in dorsiflexion, and sectional thickness of 3 mm or less is recommended for the reliability of visualization.