Uric acid, a heterocyclic compound, is produced as a byproduct of purine metabolism. It can be generated from endogenous as well as exogenous sources. The human body makes about 300 - 400 mg of uric acid per day, with most of it being produced in the liver. Purines degenerate into inosine and hypoxanthine. Hypoxanthine is further metabolized into xanthine and uric acid in the presence of xanthine oxidase enzyme. In most mammals, uric acid is transformed to allantoin by enzymatic activity of uricase. Allantoin, being a very soluble chemical, does not create any pathology. However, in humans, this enzyme is nonfunctional, so the end product of purine metabolism is uric acid, a weak acid that is relatively insoluble. Thus, high levels of uric acid in the urine and serum can lead to its deposition in joints and kidneys, leading to gout and nephrolithiasis. Exogenous sources include meat, fish, alcohol, sweet drinks, sweetbreads, and organ meats which are particularly high in purines.

The organs responsible for the elimination and excretion of uric acid are the kidneys and intestines. In the intestinal tract, uric acid is transformed into ammonia and carbon dioxide. Bacteria utilize the intestinal ammonia for metabolism. In the kidneys, almost 100% of uric acid is filtered by glomerulus. Uric acid is further reabsorbed, secreted, and reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), ultimately resulting in only 10% fractional elimination in the urine.

Uric acid was first isolated by a Swedish pharmacist Scheele in 1776. Fourcroy examined about 600 stones from 1736 to 1802 and also suggested the term uric acid.