Psoas syndrome and the associated pain that occurs require prompt treatment ranging from conservative management to surgery. The cause of psoas syndrome may be due to various diagnoses, including osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, idiopathic, injury, overuse, and postoperatively following hip replacement. The history and physical exam may reveal that the patient has psoas syndrome. The cause is typically known without imaging studies but may require musculoskeletal ultrasound or MRI to aid in diagnosis.

It is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that may include a primary care physician, primary care sports medicine, orthopedic surgeon, and orthopedic nurse. Physical therapists are also vital members of the interprofessional group during the healing process both for conservative management of psoas syndrome and postoperative recovery after iliopsoas tendon release. In cases where evidence is not definitive, expert opinion from the specialist may assist in recommending the type of imaging or treatment. Nurses provide patient education, monitor response to treatment, and report status changes to the team. [Level 5]

A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Before an ultrasound-guided psoas tendon injection or iliopsoas tendon release, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluated by the primary care physician

- Be consulted by the primary cares sports medicine physician for refractory cases not responsive to conservative management.

- The patient will see the orthopedic surgeon if the diagnosis is unclear, and the patient may require tendon release surgery.

The outcomes of psoas syndrome are often excellent. However, to improve outcomes, prompt identification of the underlying injury and consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists for refractory cases are recommended. [Level 5]

Collaboration, shared decision-making, and open communication among interprofessional team members are critical elements for a good outcome. The earlier the team identifies the signs and symptoms of a complication, the better is the prognosis and outcome. [Level 3]