Supportive care is the mainstay of treatment since there are no approved antiviral medications for poliomyelitis. In patients affected by paralytic polio, most do not regain full strength. The more severe the acute disease is, the greater the likelihood of residual deficits and the development of PPS in the future.

Polio immunity is likely accomplished with the administration of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) or live-attenuated oral polio vaccine (OPV, Sabin). In developing countries, the OPV is still used primarily because of cost. However, due to the increased possibility of Vaccine-Associated Paralytic Poliovirus (VAPP) with its use, IPV is preferred in most vaccination schedules. The OPV formulation is changing to remove type 2 to reduce the chance of strain mutations, as type 2 is the most common strain of VAPP. Type 2 is being phased out because its wild type has been eradicated as of 1999, yet it continues to cause outbreaks in countries previously completely free of polio.

The release of joint contractures is also an important management step. Many surgical interventions can be taken into account to reestablish balance in the muscles around the joint to prevent deformities. Surgical management aims to get the patient walking and correct factors that will lead to deformity with age.

In the acute stage, treatment involves general supportive measures for fever and irritation, preventing respiratory tract infections, and managing any respiratory paralysis. The paralyzed legs are supported by splints to relieve pain and spasm. It also plays an imperative role in the prevention of the development of deformities.

In the convalescent stage, the goal should be to achieve an acceptable physical status for the patients to be integrated into their communities. Nonfatiguing exercise programs are the most appropriate to deal with muscle overuse weakness.

Orthoses are helpful in the conservative and definitive treatment of many deformities, and they are available for all parts of the body.