Vertigo, particularly in diving, should be taken seriously as the differential ranges from benign to highly morbid. Briefly, causes of vertigo in settings of changing pressure can be delineated according to the persistence of symptoms:

**Transient**

Vertigo that lasts less than one minute and typically benign.

- Alternobaric vertigo - caused by differences in pressures between the middle ear spaces

- Caloric - vertigo experienced by a difference in temperature between the left and right ears

**Persistent**

Vertigo that lasts more than one minute and is concerning for more serious conditions.

- Inner ear barotrauma: This can occur if there is a significant failure of equalization of the middle ear chambers. Increased pressure within the middle ear chamber causes actual damage to the inner ear.

- Vestibular decompression sickness: This results from the formation of air bubbles in circulation and tissue as the air that became dissolved at depth reconstitutes from solution as small air bubbles. If this is the cause of vertigo, the presentation may be accompanied by other neurologic deficits that do not necessarily follow a classic distribution pattern. This is an emergency and requires immediate administration of oxygen with transfer to the nearest hyperbaric facility.

- Arterial gas embolism: Similar to decompression sickness, this is the result of an air bubble forming in circulation, preventing blood flow and essentially causing a stroke. This can be due to the reconstitution of dissolved air or secondary to another process such as lung barotrauma. This is also an emergency requiring hyperbaric treatment.