There are three primary microscopy modalities of clinical relevance light microscopy (LM), immunofluorescence (IF), and electron microscopy (EM).

- Light microscopy: It is the essential modality used on all tissue samples and provides descriptive information regarding existing lesions in different renal parenchyma segments—this aids clinicians in determining differential diagnoses, particularly in pathologies affecting renal glomeruli. Histologic description of glomerular pathologies includes terms such as “proliferative” when there is an increase in the number of cells, “sclerosing” when there is scarring, and “necrotizing” when there are areas of cellular death. Lesions are further described as diffuse or focal if more or less than 50% of all glomeruli are involved, respectively. In an individual glomerulus, the process is considered global or segmental if more or less than 50% of the glomerular tuft is involved. LM can be further characterized based on the stains used; below is a brief description of various LM stains.

- Haematoxylin-eosin staining for general evaluation.

- Periodic Acid-Schiff stain (PAS) is widely used to evaluate glycogen storage disorders after kidney transplants to display tissue rejection.

- Masson’s trichrome stain for the determination of renal fibrosis.

- Methenamine-silver stain (Jones) for better visualization of glomerular basement membranes.

- Fluorescence microscopy (IF): As fluorescent dye-associated antibodies developed IF has revolutionized clinical nephrology and is particularly useful in determining the primary physiopathological mechanism generating a given renal lesion. This modality has helped guide the diagnosis of immune-mediated pathologies, as mentioned in other sections.