Fibrosarcomas are a spindle cell type of soft tissue sarcoma, characterized by its fusiform oval nuclei, lance-shaped tapered cells, and unipolar or bipolar cytoplasm. Adult fibrosarcomas show a mild to moderate degree of pleomorphism. Neoplastic cells are arranged in long sweeping fascicles that form a classic "herringbone" pattern. Note that a high degree of pleomorphism should classify any tumor as an undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. Fibrosarcomas display varying degrees of mitotic activity and have darkly staining nuclei with prominent nucleoli and scant cytoplasm. There is a variable amount of stromal collagen present within fibrosarcomas and may mimic fibromatosis in some tumors.

While histopathology is not sufficient to distinguish fibrosarcomas from other spindle-cell sarcomas, appropriate immunohistochemistry can greatly assist in diagnosis by identifying characteristic tumor markers. Furthermore, measurement of these markers on the cell surface or within the tumor environment is often critical in monitoring for treatment efficacy and tumor recurrence.

Vimentin is a marker that is indicative of a mesenchymal cell origin and is often the only positively stained marker in the diagnosis of fibrosarcomas. One might also find alpha smooth muscle actin, muscle-specific actin, and desmin to be common myogenic markers, which often serve to represent myofibroblastic differentiation.

In contrast, a positive S-100 protein marker would be indicative of a nerve sheath tumor, while CD31, CD34, and Factor VIII non-von Willebrand factor would suggest a vascular tumor rather than a true fibrosarcoma.