- Synovial sarcoma is a high-grade sarcoma with an aggressive course and a high potential to metastasize early.

- Synovial sarcoma is the most well-defined 'translocation-associated sarcoma,' identified by the presence of translocation involving the SS18 gene on chromosome 18 and one of the several synovial sarcoma X genes on chromosome X.

- The word synovial is a misnomer, as SS not only arises from the articular surface but can occur in any part of the body.

- SS is a biphasic tumor with both epithelial and spindle cell components. However, it exhibits morphologic and immunohistochemical heterogeneity.

- Patients diagnosed with SS must be treated at centers that experience a high volume of such patients.

- All patients diagnosed with SS must be discussed in a multi-disciplinary tumor board, including surgical oncologists/orthopedic oncologists, radiation oncologists, pathologists trained in diagnosing sarcoma, medical oncologists, and musculoskeletal radiologists.

- Surgical resection with a negative margin translates into the best outcomes in terms of overall survival and is the goal of surgical resection.

- Perioperative RT reduces the local recurrence rate and increases local disease-free survival. However, this has not translated into a better distant relapse-free survival or overall survival.

- Preoperative RT is associated with fewer complications than postoperative RT, although wound complications are higher with preoperative RT. A 4 to 5 weeks gap between surgery and RT seems to reduce wound complications with preoperative RT.

- Neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy affords better survival in children (based on non-randomized retrospective data) but remains controversial in adults. Hence, neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy is offered more commonly in the pediatric age group.

- Anthracycline-based regimens are the first choice in treating patients with SS in the neoadjuvant, adjuvant, or metastatic setting.