Cannabinoids and their anti-emetic potential are still under research, and many of the intricacies behind their mechanisms are still unknown or lack universal consensus.  Cannabinoids exert their anti-emetic properties through interactions with the centrally located CB1 receptors and 5-HT3 receptors in the dorsal vagal complex (DVC), which mediates emesis. A significant contributor to emesis appears to be via activation of 5-HT3 receptors in the DVC, specifically in the area postrema. Studies in animal models have shown that anandamide, an endogenous cannabinoid, THC, and several synthetic cannabinoids have demonstrated allosteric inhibitor effects on the 5-HT3 receptors in the DVC, providing a mechanism through which emesis control occurs.  Animal models have also shown that cannabinoids may work on pre-synaptic CB1to decrease the release of serotonin into the synapse, thus inhibiting the nausea/emetic response.

Animal models have also indicated CBD to have an allosteric inhibitory effect on the 5-HT3 receptor. However, this effect may be mainly through its activation of the 5-HT1A receptor. The activation of the 5-HT1A receptor ultimately reduces the amount of serotonin released, and thus a lower potential to trigger emesis. CBD is also thought to activate the CB1 receptors in the gastrointestinal tract through their G-protein-coupled receptor inhibitory effect, leading to decreased gastrointestinal motility. THC and CBD were once credited with inhibiting fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), leading to an increased concentration of anandamide that could exert its anti-emetic properties at a higher intensity, but recent studies into this mechanism have been equivocal.