The FAST exam evaluates the pericardium and three potential spaces within the peritoneal cavity for pathologic fluid. The right upper quadrant (RUQ) visualizes the hepatorenal recess, also known as Morrison’s pouch, the right paracolic gutter, the hepato-diaphragmatic area, and the caudal edge of the left liver lobe. Position the probe in the sagittal orientation along the patient’s flank at the level of the 8 to 11 rib spaces. Start with your hand against the bed to ensure visualization of the retroperitoneal kidney. The RUQ view is the most likely to detect free fluid with an overall sensitivity of 66%

Next, obtain subxiphoid (or subcostal) views to evaluate the pericardial space. Ultrasound detects as little as 20 cc of pericardial fluid

Following the subxiphoid view, image the left upper quadrant (LUQ) to inspect the splenorenal recess, the subphrenic space, and the left paracolic gutter, as well as the left lower hemithorax when performing an Extended FAST exam (eFAST). Obtain similar views of the right hemithorax when scanning the RUQ. For each hemithorax view, simply slide the probe cranially above the diaphragm. The presence of the hyperechoic vertebral bodies, or “spine sign,” aids in identifying pleural fluid.  Sensitivities and specificities of ultrasound for the detection of hemothorax are 92% to 100%

In addition to the anatomy described above, the eFAST incorporates views of the right and left anterior hemithoraces to detect the presence of a pneumothorax. Typically, a small amount of pleural fluid lines the interface between the parietal and visceral pleurae, allowing for synchronized lung and chest wall expansion and contraction during inhalation and exhalation, respectively. The sonographic appearance is described as pleural lung sliding or the “ants marching” sign.