The heart has four chambers (right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle) and four valves (tricuspid, pulmonary, mitral, and aortic valves). Valves between the atriums and ventricles (tricuspid and mitral) are called “atrioventricular” valve and valves between arteries and ventricles (aortic and pulmonary) are called “arterioventricular” valves. The aortic and pulmonary valves are also called semilunar valves because of their half-moon-like shape. Atrioventricular valves are considered to be the active structures because their attachment to the heart muscle through papillary muscles and fibrous cords makes them respond to myocardial contractions. Semilunar valves historically were considered functioning passively in response to blood flow since they do not have a direct attachment of the mobile part of the leaflet to the myocardium.

Although it is partly true, it now is known that valve’s sophisticated design and complex cellular components play an essential role in maintaining normal valve function.

The aortic valve, like other valves, permits the blood flow in one direction, from the left ventricle to aorta. It is reported to open and closes over 100,000 times a day and 3.7 billion times in a lifespan. Aortic valve has three leaflets (movable parts) and three sinuses, which are cavities behind the leaflets. Two of these sinuses have apertures of right and left coronary arteries, hence are called right coronary sinus and left coronary sinus. The third sinus is a blind sac and is called non-coronary or posterior sinus.