Pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE) is partially a radiologic diagnosis. On imaging, PIE shows the lung parenchyma filled with a mix of spherical cystic, linear, and oval air containing lucencies. Early changes appear to be linear but slowly progresses to the more cystic formation in the interstitium. Linear radiolucencies are about 3-8 mm long and less than 2 mm in width. Cystic-like radiolucencies measure 1-4 mm in diameter. During inspiration, the lung volumes may increase, but premature lungs have decreased lung compliance resulting in hyperdistended lungs on imaging.

Air leaks can also be seen on imaging. With air leaks, the air in the interstitium is full of large volumes of air, which reduces the gas exchange between the vascular bed and airspaces due to the increased distance.

Sometimes early bronchopulmonary dysplasia can be seen in the setting of partial bronchia obstructions. Histopathological findings in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia can show PIE, even if not seen on imaging.

PIE can sometimes be seen on the anteroposterior supine chest X-ray, but it requires sequential studies to see the disease progression. There may be some difficulty differentiating lucent bronchiole overdistention from PIE, but airways that are distended are also round and uniform. PIE tends to be more elliptical of various sizes in the bronchovascular bundles. The radiolucencies are not consistent with the normal bronchial tree. PIE can sometimes be misinterpreted as pulmonary edema or aspiration syndrome if the normally aerated lung seems surrounded by exudate. Air bronchograms are signs of respiratory distress syndrome, not PIE. It can also be mistaken if an infant is on a mechanical ventilator, the airways and alveoli can appear similarly distended as in PIE. If a chest X-ray is unable to differentiate, then a CT scan would be the next step for diagnostic imaging.