Planning is vital for a ureteroscopy to avoid unnecessary complications and minimize operating time. Imaging (such as a non-contrast CT and/or an abdominal x-ray (KUB) for urolithiasis) should be reviewed prior to the operation. Pre-operative urinalysis and urine cultures are critical so as to ensure there is no evidence of urinary tract infection (UTI). After obtaining informed consent, the patient should be anesthetized then properly prepped and draped, typically in the dorsal lithotomy position utilizing stirrups, with accurate side marking and prophylactic antibiotics according to AUA guidelines.

Advise patients preoperatively that a two-stage procedure may be necessary if ureteral narrowing, excessive bleeding, or other technical problems are encountered and a double J stent had to be placed. This way, they are not suddenly surprised to find out after surgery that another procedure will be required.  Such procedures are optimally scheduled about two weeks later.

The 2019 AUA guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis recommend tailoring the prophylactic agent towards the individual patient (based on prior urine culture results, the hospital’s antibiogram, and any additional risk factors the patient may have). The choice of antimicrobial would preferably be a single dose of a first or second-generation cephalosporin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX).

If a parenteral antibiotic is chosen, it must be administered within one hour prior to the introduction of the cystoscope so that an appropriate peri-operative tissue concentration is established. If an oral agent is chosen (such as TMP-SMX or amoxicillin/clavulanate), certain factors must be taken into account such as the variable amount of time to reach adequate tissue levels and that patients may be under a “nothing by mouth” dietary restriction prior to the procedure. For these reasons, an intravenous agent may be preferred.  A single dose of gentamicin used preoperatively, in addition to the standard prophylactic antibiotics, may be useful in controlling postoperative infections when performing procedures on infected systems or in patients deemed highly susceptible to infection.

Although general anesthesia is recommended, combined spinal-epidural anesthesia has been shown to be an adequate alternative

If a dedicated cystoscopy fluoroscopy table and suite is not available, try to position the ureteroscopic video tower on the side of the patient's stone and the C-arm (x-ray) on the opposite (contralateral) side.  We have found that often the optimal arrangement is to have the C-arm monitor more cephalad (closer to the patient's head) but on the same side as the C-arm. Viewing of the C-arm monitor is then achieved by looking through the vacant, open center arc of the C-arm.