Improving outcomes for ocular trauma, including corneal lacerations, requires a team approach. Although the ophthalmologist performs the repair, many others help throughout the process. The initial step in the process is identifying a corneal laceration. Prompt recognition of an ocular injury by a bystander at the scene of the injury, paramedic, emergency room nurse, physician, or optometrist expedites the repair. After identifying the corneal laceration, cover the eye with a rigid eye shield to prevent further damage, and transfer the patient to an ophthalmologist. Occasionally, a patient is incorrectly diagnosed with a corneal abrasion which can delay the repair. In the ocular blast injuries from the Boston Marathon bombing and the West Texas fertilizer explosion, only 28% of the patients had ophthalmology consulted from the emergency room.

The patient and family members almost always want to know if the patient’s vision will return to normal. Based on the United States Eye Registry, over 27% of the injuries involved permanent vision impairment. The Ocular Trauma Score is a tool for predicting the final vision of the injured eye and can be used by the team to educate the patient or their family.

Nurses are vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient’s vital signs, especially the pain level, pre-operatively and post-operatively. The radiologist has a role in identifying foreign bodies on facial computed tomography and can often confirm an open globe injury.

The surgeon, surgical technician, operating nurse, and anesthesia provider all have roles in the outcome of the surgery. A well-organized surgical timeout that all members participate in improves patient safety. In the surgical repair, the surgical technician passes instruments to the surgeon, prevents needle stick injuries, and ensures correct needle counts. The anesthesia provider is vital to prevent the patient from moving during the surgical repair. Abrupt movements from the patient can lead to tissue protrusion and worsen the injury.

All team members educate the patient and family about postoperative care to include compliance with medications, signs of complications, activity limitations, and expected symptoms throughout the recovery process. Setting realistic expectations is important because many cases result in poor outcomes.

A corneal laceration will change the refractive error of the patient. The patient may need a special contact lens fitting by an optometrist or an update in their prescription glasses to improve the visual outcome. The technological advances in contact lenses have improved patient visual outcomes after ocular trauma. A study of 214 patients with an open globe injury demonstrated a visual acuity improvement in 97% of the patients with a contact lens.