The TPF flap provides a wide range of utility in reconstruction within the head and neck. It was first described in 1898 for the reconstruction of an ear (following a horse bite) and reconstruction of the lower eyelid. The advantages provided by the flap are its size and flexibility. Up to 14 cm TPF can be harvested safely, and the flap can act as a fascial, fasciocutaneous, or osseofascial flap. Uses for the TPF are diverse and include forehead/brow, auricular, and lip reconstruction. Additionally, TPF plication can decrease lateral canthal rhytids and elevate the lateral brow during rhytidectomy. Plication also provides deep tissue support and can aid in preventing alopecia and visible scar formation.

When operating in this area, care is necessary to avoid injury to branches of the facial nerve. Dissection in the temporal region is safe above the superficial layer of the deep temporal fascia below the innominate fascia. This approach will ensure that the frontotemporal branch of the facial nerve is superficial to the plane of dissection. Additionally, dissection within the correct plane is necessary for the safe execution of zygomatic arch fracture reduction utilizing the Gilles approach. During this procedure, a 2.5 cm temporal incision is made superior and anterior to the helix within the hairline. Care is necessary to avoid the superficial temporal artery. Dissection continues down to the deep layer of the deep temporal fascia. The fascia is incised, and the temporalis muscle is exposed. An instrument then bluntly dissects between the deep temporalis fascia and the temporalis muscle using a sweeping motion. Once to the level of the depressed zygomatic arch fracture, a Rowe zygomatic elevator is then used to apply an outward force on the fracture.

Additionally, the temporalis fascia has been used routinely in a tympanoplasty for the reconstruction of the tympanic membrane. Given the ease of grafting, this autologous donor site has uses for both medial and lateral tympanoplasty. Temporalis fascia is useful for both subtotal and total repair of tympanic membrane perforations.