Understanding the fundamental physiological mechanisms of renin requires understanding the cells of the juxtaglomerular apparatus, which includes juxtaglomerular (JG) cells, macula densa cells, and the extra-mesangial cells. JG cells are responsible for the exocytosis of renin and have similar structures to smooth muscle; this reflects in their location within the tunica media of glomerular afferent arterioles. Renin is stored in the form of prorenin, and the cleavage of prorenin facilitates its conversion to renin by intracellular microsomes. JG cells are specialized cells characterized by a large nucleus with an increased number of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and Golgi apparatus, which can be explained by its increased physiological requirement to produce renin. They also have distinct features of gene expression in comparison to other cells of the JGA, allowing it to play an endocrinological and contractile role. Macula densa cells are located in the distal ascending loop of Henle and distal convoluted tubule and detect sodium concentration in the tubular fluid using sodium-potassium-chloride symporters. They are essential in controlling the release of renin, and its mechanism is outlined below. In contrast, the role of extra-mesangial cells is relatively unknown; however, researchers postulate that they play a role in the secretion of erythropoietin.

There are three fundamental mechanisms to which triggers the release of renin

- Baroreceptor detection of a decrease in renal perfusion pressure.

- Macula densa detection of a decrease in sodium in the renal tubule triggering the release of vasodilatory compounds such as prostaglandin and nitric oxide to increase glomerular blood flow and trigger renin release, respectively.

- Beta-1 adrenergic receptor activation via an increase in the activity of the sympathetic system.

Following its release into the bloodstream, renin acts on angiotensinogen, a glycopeptide continuously produced by the liver, forming angiotensin I. In humans, due to angiotensinogen's continuous production, there is an excess of angiotensinogen present in blood plasma, meaning that the conversion to angiotensin I is the rate-limiting step in the sequence of the RAAS. This is explainable by the relationship between the number of substrate molecules and enzyme active sites. As there is a constant abundance of substrates (angiotensinogen) that are available to bind to the active sites of released renin, the rate of reaction, which is mediated by the formation of enzyme-substrate complexes, will be determined by the number of active sites (amount of renin).

Angiotensin I is further cleaved into angiotensin II by the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), located in the endothelium of the lungs and kidneys. Angiotensin II then acts on the nephron to increase the reabsorption of sodium and water through the constriction of afferent glomerular arterioles and increase in activity of the sodium-proton symporter in the proximal convoluted tubule of the kidney. Angiotensin II also triggers the release of aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex as well as antidiuretic hormone (ADH) from the posterior pituitary gland, which both act to increase serum sodium levels and total fluid volume.