There are many other pathologic processes which may be confused for bursitis, or even occur concomitantly in the same location. The differential for joint pain is wide and encompasses many different disorders, and many forms of bursitis can mimic osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, or other inflammatory conditions. Additionally, the differential is heavily influenced by the location of the presumed bursitis. In a patient with shoulder pain, the differential includes rotator cuff or labral tears and shoulder impingement.

Often these pathologies occur together, and one may, in fact, have precipitated bursitis. Gout can mimic bursitis as well, especially at the olecranon, prepatellar, and infrapatellar bursa, as these joints are common locations for the formation of gouty tophi or pain from pseudogout. Ischial bursitis may be confused for sciatica, as the bursa itself is near the sciatic nerve, and patients may even complain of lancinating pain. However, the pain will be more pronounced on sitting, which helps distinguish ischial bursitis from sciatica.

Ischial bursitis can also be mistaken for ankylosing spondylitis, an inflammatory enthesopathy, or other conditions causing sacroiliitis. Trochanteric bursitis must be differentiated from iliotibial band syndrome; however, tenderness in IT band syndrome will be more distal compared to the more proximal location of the trochanteric bursa. Iliopsoas bursitis may present similarly to arthritis, overuse injuries from running, synovitis, labral tears, or avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Medial collateral ligament bursitis and pes anserine bursitis may appear similar to MCL strains or tears, meniscal injuries, or even tibial plateau fractures.

Bursitis of the knee does not usually produce an effusion, so this can help the clinician differentiate bursitis from the above pathologies. Retrocalcaneal bursitis upon initial evaluation may appear like Achilles tendinitis, an enthesopathy, pain from bone spurs, or even plantar fasciitis. Like many other forms of bursitis, these maladies may coexist or could have precipitated one another in the first place. Lastly, a septic bursa can be confused with a septic joint or even simple cellulitis of the skin overlying the bursa. It is important that the clinician distinguishes between these infectious processes, as their management may drastically differ, and a failure to recognize an infected joint may result in significant morbidity and mortality for the patient.