Von Willebrand disease is one of the most frequently encountered inherited bleeding disorders, with a prevalence of 1 in 1000. The clinical management of vWD is complex, and there are no clear, standardized guidelines for biological therapies and treatment protocols that are followed universally. Desmopressin remains the treatment of choice for patients with type 1 vWD; however, in patients with type 3 and severe forms of type 1 and 2 vWD, desmopressin is ineffective, and replacement therapy with plasma concentrates containing FVIII and vWF are the mainstay of treatment. Clinicians also prefer replacement therapy in certain high-risk populations.

Replacement therapy with vWF has evolved from crude plasma protein preparations to plasma-derived concentrates containing mixtures of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII (FVIII).

The management of patients with vWD aims to correct the dual defect of hemostasis - abnormal coagulation reflected by low levels of FVIII and abnormal platelet adhesion as expressed by the prolonged bleeding time. Therefore adequate restoration of hemostasis requires correction of deficient or dysfunctional vWF and correcting low FVIII levels.

Although the treatment of vWD has evolved tremendously, it still poses a challenge, particularly in terms of management strategies. There is a dire need for treatment options that are effective, individualized, and standardized to prevent dangerous acute bleeding episodes and improve the quality of life in patients with vWD.