The underlying pathophysiology of TBI is the excessive deformation of the brain parenchyma and its vascular structures relative to the skull and its normal attachment sites. Specific mechanisms of TBI are diverse and may include penetrating injuries, blast injuries, contact injuries, and acceleration-deceleration inertial injuries, with many patients presenting with a combination of different mechanisms. The skull may become fractured along the calvarium or skull base. Leptomeningeal cysts (growing skull fractures) and "ping-pong" fractures may also be seen in the pediatric population.

Hemorrhage may occur in multiple compartments within and outside of the brain, including subarachnoid hemorrhage, subdural hematoma, epidural hematoma, contusions within the brain parenchyma itself, and cephalohematoma (birth-related injury) where there is a hematoma in the compartment between the periosteum and underlying calvarium. Diffuse axonal injury (DAI) is thought to be present to some degree in the majority of patients with moderate-to-severe TBI. DAI is typically caused by a rapid rotational or deceleration force that causes stretching and tearing of neurons, leading to focal areas of hemorrhage that are not always detected on the initial (computed tomography) CT scan but later identified on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). DAI is a subtype of TBI which can present with intractable coma without elevated ICP.

TBI can be conceptualized as a primary injury occurring at the moment of impact, followed by a secondary injury resulting from disrupted normal cellular function. Secondary injury can result from a combination of inflammation, ischemia, apoptosis, and vasospasm. At the cellular level, the biomechanical force of TBI results in unregulated ionic flux (potassium efflux, sodium, and calcium influx), which leads to unrestricted glutamate release.

During this impaired metabolic state, the brain is vulnerable to repeat injury, as well as impairments in behavior and spatial learning, often presenting as post-concussive symptoms.