In the emergency department, the priority is clinical stabilization. If there is any evidence of respiratory distress and pulmonary edema, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (such as BiPAP) or mechanical ventilation should be started. Furthermore, if there are signs of symptoms of eclampsia (late stage of pre-eclampsia), including seizures, one should initiate appropriate management, including benzodiazepines and magnesium sulfate administration. If the patient has signs of pre-eclampsia, urgent blood pressure control is necessary with medications such as hydralazine and labetalol. If there are signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, practitioners should initiate proper treatment, including beta-blockers, and monitor for thyroid storm. If severe anemia is present, the clinician should consider a blood transfusion. As discussed earlier, if a patient is Rh(D) negative, the physician should administer the anti-D immunoglobulin.

Once the patient is stabilized, an emergent obstetrics consultation is necessary for the likely need for dilation and curettage (D and C). In patients with advanced maternal age typically greater than 40 years old and those who have completed childbearing, hysterectomy is often performed instead of a D and C. Hysterectomy, however, does not completely eliminate the risk of metastatic disease. After the evacuation of the molar pregnancy, the hCG levels should be monitored; if remain elevated, there is evidence of persistent or invasive disease requiring at times chemotherapy. A gynecological oncologist consultation is usually necessary in these cases to guide therapy.