The anatomical snuffbox is a broadly triangular superficial depression in the skin that emerges when the thumb is held in abduction and the wrist in ulnar deviation. The triangle's base lies parallel to the lateral border of the radial head, while the apex point to the first metacarpophalangeal joint.

When viewing the dorsum of the hand from above, the medial (ulnar) edge of the anatomical snuffbox is formed by the tendon of the extensor pollicus longus muscle, while the lateral (radial) edge is formed by the tendons of extensor pollicus brevis and abductor pollicus longus which run closely in parallel.

The extensor pollicus longus originates from approximately halfway up the ulna and inserts into the base of the distal phalanx of the thumb, allowing it to be the key extensor of the terminal phalanx. It is innervated by the posterior interosseous nerve.

The base of the anatomical snuffbox contains various bony landmarks. From proximal to distal, these are the radial styloid, the scaphoid bone, the trapezium, and the base of the thumb metacarpal, all of which are palpable on examination with the hand in ulnar deviation with the thumb extended.

The anatomical snuffbox is merely a surface anatomy characteristic and functions in context with other anatomical structures. However, y knowing the boundaries and contents of the anatomical snuff box, a healthcare provider can generate a differential diagnosis when a patient complains of pain in the area. For example, tenderness to palpation in the anatomical snuffbox after a fall on an outstretched hand indicates a scaphoid fracture and would require further testing, including radiologic X-rays, to accurately make the definitive diagnosis. Knowledge of the contents of the anatomical snuffbox will also aid the healthcare provider in those patients with difficult vascular access because both the radial artery and the cephalic vein lie within this area.