The most common congenital craniofacial malformation is facial clefting, accounting for 13% of all congenital anomalies.****Failure of any of the facial prominences to fuse can result in facial clefting. These include a cleft lip (failure of the maxillary process and the medial nasal prominence to fuse)****and an oblique facial cleft (failure of maxillary and lateral nasal prominences to fuse).

A cleft lip can be associated with a cleft palate. This is due to an abnormality in the development of the hard palate or roof of the mouth. Bilateral outgrowths from the maxillary prominences are called palatine shelves. These grow inferiorly from the primary palate until the end of the sixth week, when they elevate and fuse along the midline to form the complete secondary palate (hard palate). Failure in this process gives rise to a cleft palate. This is commonly diagnosed in newborn screening or following feeding difficulties and poor weight gain in early infancy. However, a cleft palate can sometimes be diagnosed later in life, for example, through nasal speech.

Thyroglossal duct cysts and sinuses are the most common congenital head and neck lesions found in children. These result from failed obliteration of the thyroglossal duct following the descent of the thyroid gland during embryological development. Classically they are in the midline and move upwards on tongue protrusion.

Branchial cleft anomalies are the second most common cause of congenital head and neck lesions, with second pharyngeal cleft lesions making up 90 to 95% of these. Branchial anomalies arise from incomplete obliteration of pharyngeal pouches or clefts during embryogenesis****and include fistulae, cysts, cartilaginous remnants, and sinus tracts.****a painless solitary lump anterior to the sternocleidomastoid. It does not move with swallowing or tongue protrusion.

There are various clinical syndromes associated with abnormalities of the pharyngeal pouches/arches/clefts.

For the neurocranium, the ability for displacement growth at suture lines is important for cranial growth. Early fusion of these suture lines is known as craniosynostosis. One condition where this occurs is Apert Syndrome. This syndrome is also characterized by midfacial hypoplasia with exorbitism, symphalangism, and syndactyly ****Alpert****syndrome, is primarily due to coronal suture premature fusion and leads to abnormal skull appearance and can also cause hydrocephalus and learning difficulties.