Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are class medications used in the management and treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD), erectile dysfunction(ED), pulmonary arterial hypertension(PAH), benign prostatic hyperplasia(BPH), acute decompensated heart failure, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis(PA), atopic dermatitis(AD), and neonatal apnea. In the class of medications that prevent cAMP and/or cGMP degradation, it exhibits smooth muscle relaxation, vasodilatory, and bronchodilatory effects. This activity outline and describes the indications, action, and contraindications for phosphodiesterase inhibitors as a valuable agent in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD), erectile dysfunction(ED), pulmonary arterial hypertension(PAH), acute decompensated heart failure, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis(PA), and other disorders when applicable. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the management and care of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD), erectile dysfunction(ED), pulmonary arterial hypertension(PAH), and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of various phosphodiesterase inhibitors.
- Identify the different classes of phosphodiesterase inhibitors.
- Outline the proper monitoring for the various classes of phosphodiesterase inhibitors.
- Summarize the interprofessional team approach for enhancing care coordination and communication to improve phosphodiesterase inhibitors therapy and optimize outcomes.