**Primary Congenital Glaucoma**

There is a failure of posterior movement of the ciliary body to expose the trabecular meshwork.

Previously, Barkan membrane was considered an important cause; however, it could not be demonstrated.

Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is an autosomal recessive condition with three loci: the genetic locus (GLC) 3A, 3B, and 3C. GLC3A and 3B have been mapped to the short arm of chromosomes 2 and 1, respectively.

**Iris Hypoplasia/Iridogoniodysgenesis**

The primary etiology is considered to be goniodysgenesis; however, clinically, the angle looks normal without any signs of anterior iris insertion.

**Axenfeld and Rieger Anomaly**

Defective migration, differentiation, and arrested development of neural crest cells manifest as anterior chamber anomaly.

**Peters Anomaly**

The defective neural crest cell migration results in an abnormal first wave causing the posterior corneal defect, corneal opacity, and iridocorneal/ kerato-lenticular adhesions.

**Aniridia**

There are multiple gene mutations responsible for aniridia. Mutations in PAX6, ELP4, and TRIM44 genes are responsible for Aniridia 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

**CHED**

The SLC4A11 gene codes for bicarbonate transporter-related protein-1 (BTR-1), responsible for the deturgence of the corneal stroma. A dysfunctional BTR-1 due to mutation in SLC4A11 is responsible for edematous corneal stroma in CHED.

In the IC3D classification, the autosomal dominant type of CHED was considered to be similar to a type of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD).

**Sclerocornea**

It is due to an abnormal second wave of neural crest cell migration.

**Congenital Iris Ectropion**

This entity is considered to be due to developmental arrest rather than disorders of neural crest cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation.