Rapid sequence intubation involves sequential steps that lead to successful endotracheal intubation. These steps allow for adequate assessment of the choice, dose, timing, and sequence of administration of sedatives, analgesics, and paralytics while ensuring that all equipment is ready and the patient’s clinical status is optimized. Rapid sequence intubation using NMBAs is the standard of care and is associated with a reduction in complications compared to using sedatives alone. The following steps make up rapid sequence intubation; preparation, pre-oxygenation, pretreatment, paralysis and induction, positioning, placement and confirmation, and following these, post-intubation management. These are commonly called the “7Ps” of rapid sequence intubation and are described below.

Preparation includes assessing the degree of difficulty of a patient’s airway and establishing adequate intravenous access and continuous monitoring (telemetry, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry). As mentioned prior, ETTs of multiple sizes should be available and all tested for cuff leaks. Laryngoscopes, both curved and straight and in multiple sizes, should be available. All laryngoscopes should be checked for a functioning light source. Bedside suction devices should be easily accessible. Of note, even if airway assessment does not reveal any obvious evidence of difficulty, a backup plan should be readily available. Adequate nursing staff and respiratory therapists must be present to assist with intubation, monitoring, administering drugs, and preparing the ventilator.

Pre-oxygenation involves providing the highest possible oxygen concentration at high flows for 3 to 5 minutes. This allows the patient to tolerate longer periods of apnea without causing hypoxia during rapid sequence intubation. The upper airway patency needs to be maintained with chin lift or jaw thrust maneuvers that facilitate oxygen entry into the airways. For patients in whom achieving high oxygen saturation is not possible, pre-oxygenation can be performed with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation masks or positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valves that can be added to the bag-valve-mask.

Pre-treatment is an additional step involving administering medications that may optimize the clinical setting where intubation is being done. For example, intravenous fluids, anxiolysis with benzodiazepines, or opioid medications may be used before administrating sedatives and NMBAs. Typically a short-acting opioid such as intravenous fentanyl is administered for pre-treatment. In patients with reactive airway disease, a short-acting beta-agonist (albuterol) may be administered during this step to minimize airway resistance. Rarely, in patients with shock, pretreatment with alpha-adrenergic inotropic agents may circumvent further reduction in mean arterial pressure following intubation due to loss of sympathetic tone from the use of specific induction agents.

Paralysis with induction involves the simultaneous administration of the medications for sedation and paralysis that have been decided earlier in the preparation phase based on clinical status, allergies, and potential contraindications. During rapid sequence intubation, the dose of these drugs should be pre-calculated and administered intravenously as a bolus and never titrated. The onset and duration of action should all be taken into consideration. Etomidate should be given in a dose of 0.15 mg/kg to 0.3 mg/kg intravenously, depending on the stability of the patient. Ketamine is to be given in a dose of 2 mg/kg intravenously. Propofol is given in doses of 0.5 mg/kg to 2 mg/kg intravenously, depending on hemodynamic stability. Immediately after the induction agent, the paralytic agent of choice is administered intravenously. Succinylcholine is given in a 1.5 mg/kg dose, whereas rocuronium is given in a 1 mg/kg dose.

The protection and positioning phase is vital, as the patient is now paralyzed, and the airway must be protected from aspiration. Minimal bag-mask ventilation should be used to keep oxygen saturations adequate; this will be possible only if pre-oxygenation was adequate. One can perform the Sellick maneuver, in other words, apply pressure over cricoid cartilage to occlude the esophagus if necessary.

Placement should occur once adequate sedation and paralysis have been obtained. Direct laryngoscopy should be performed, and once glottis is visualized definitively, an appropriately sized endotracheal tube with stylet should be placed through the vocal cords under direct visualization. After that, the endotracheal tube cuff is inflated with 10 ml of air and the stylet removed. Placement should be confirmed by end-tidal carbon dioxide detection, quantitative or colorimetric methods. Auscultation over both lung fields and the epigastric region should also be performed to ensure equal breath sounds on both sides in the chest and absent in the epigastric region. A chest radiograph should be performed to determine the depth of airway intubation. The endotracheal tube tip should be located more than 2 cm but less than 5 cm from the carina on chest radiography.

Post-intubation management involves securing the endotracheal tube, connecting the endotracheal tube to a mechanical ventilator, and evaluating and managing potential post-intubation complications. Appropriate sedation agents should be initiated, as discussed earlier. Most induction agents have short half-lives.