The etiology of chylothorax can be classified into three broad categories, spontaneous (non-traumatic), traumatic, and idiopathic.  Historically, non-traumatic chylothorax was the more common cause for chylothorax, accounting for two-thirds of all cases. Recently,  traumatic chylothorax, particularly postoperative chylothorax, accounts for more than 50% of all cases described in the literature.

Non-traumatic chylothorax can be due to the following:

- Congenital chylothorax can be seen as an isolated condition or in association with other lymphatic abnormalities like lymphangiectasis, lymphangiomatosis, tuberous sclerosis, congenital heart disease, or chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 21 or Turner syndrome.

- Neoplastic chylothorax is the most common cause of non-traumatic chylothorax. Various cancers like lymphoma, chronic lymphoid leukemia, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, or metastatic carcinoma have been implicated in chylothorax. Interestingly, there is a relative decrease in the incidence of chylothorax in patients with lymphoma in recent times. This is likely due to early diagnosis and treatment of lymphoma, avoiding the late complication of chylothorax.

- Infectious chylothorax is mostly seen in developing countries as a complication of tuberculous lymphadenitis. Other infections are known to cause chylothorax are aortitis, histoplasmosis, and filariasis.

- Rare causes of chylothorax reported in the literature are due to cattleman disease, sarcoidosis, Kaposi sarcoma, yellow nail syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Down syndrome, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, macroglobulinemia, amyloidosis, venous thrombosis, thoracic radiation, goiter. All these reported diseases will lead to obstruction or destruction of the thoracic duct, causing chylothorax. Even parental nutrition therapy is implicated in chylothorax. Rapid infusion of total parenteral nutrition containing a high concentration of triglycerides can overwhelm the draining capacity of the thoracic duct leading to leakage of chyle to this surrounding pleural space and cause chylothorax.

Traumatic chylothorax occurs due to disruption of the thoracic duct anywhere in its course in the mediastinum. They can occur as a complication of the surgical procedure or can follow blunt or penetrating trauma to the chest.

- Postoperative chylothorax constitutes the most common cause of chylothorax in modern medicine. The risk of postoperative chylothorax depends on the type of surgery done. Esophagostomy carries the highest risk of 5% to 10% postoperative chylothorax, followed by lung resection with mediastinal lymph node dissection with 3% to 7% risk. Other surgeries like mediastinal tumor resection, thoracic aneurysm repair, sympathectomy, any surgeries in the lower neck and mediastinum carry a risk of chylothorax. Ingestion of milk before the surgery can lead to better visualization of the thoracic duct in the surgical field by causing whitish discoloration of the thoracic duct. It is proposed on of the preoperative steps to prevent postoperative chylothorax, although this has not been formally studied. Nonsurgical posttraumatic chylothorax is also described after central line placement, pacemaker implantation, embolization of the pulmonary arteriovenous malformation.

- Blunt trauma to the chest or thoracic spine can disrupt the thoracic duct without any obvious injury to the surrounding structure leading to chylothorax.  Chylothorax is also described after blasting injuries. Chylothorax is also described following a trivial injury like coughing and sneezing.

- Penetrating injuries of the chest like gunshot injury and stab injury can directly damage the thoracic duct leading to chylothorax.

Idiopathic causes account for nearly 10% of all cases of chylothorax.  Chylothorax is considered to be idiopathic after extensive investigation does not reveal any known cause for it. Most of these idiopathic cases are related to undiagnosed malignancy.