The treatment strategies for primary CNS vasculitis are primarily derived from case reports and cohort studies. In most patients use of glucocorticoids alone or in combination with cyclophosphamide was shown to improve symptoms. The response rates for both monotherapy and combination therapy were found to be similar, around 80%. The general recommendation is to start oral prednisone therapy promptly at the time of diagnosis at an initial dose of 1 mg/kg per day. In nonresponsive cases, cyclophosphamide should be started promptly. The sufficient duration of therapy is 12 to 18 months in most patients. In patients with more severe presentations, 1 gm methylprednisone per day for three days along with cyclophosphamide can be used. However, the evidence of intravenous (IV) steroids being superior to oral regimen has not been noted. Pulses of IV methylprednisone can be given as required for disease flares.

In cases of PACNS resistant to both glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants, tumor necrosis factor-alpha blockers (infliximab, etanercept) and mycophenolate mofetil can be used to treat the disease. These should be used as adjunctive therapy along with the standard therapy. Prophylactic therapy against Pneumocystis jirovecii and osteoporosis should be given to all patients along with the standard therapy.

Serial MRI and MRA every 4 to 6 weeks after initiation of the treatment and then every 3 to 4 months during the first year along with thorough neurological examinations are indicated for monitoring the course of the illness.