Before proceeding with osteopathic manual treatment, the clinician must evaluate the districts that make up the five diaphragms. The evaluation is divided into two steps. The first is general, while the second is very thorough.

**General Listening**

The patient is supine, while the operator is seated at the head of the table, starting to palpate the tentorium cerebelli. The little fingers are placed in contact with the inion or external occipital protuberance. In contrast, the other fingers form a semicircle, reflecting the tentorium's internal position until the index finger is placed on the asterion. This small bony depression is the union between the 'occipital, parietal and temporal bone. The tissue, the presence of pain, the temperature, and any tissue abnormalities or entrainments are assessed. In theory, one should "listen" to the movement of the tentorium with their fingers as an expansion and a return from the expansion. The movement does not match the heartbeat's rhythm or the breath; it is a slower movement.

The clinician places the fingers of one hand under the buccal floor to assess any abnormal tensions of the lingual complex and listen to the small movements present; It is also possible to evaluate the tongue with one hand that takes the great horns of the hyoid bone, while the other is always placed under the buccal floor.

Always with the clinician sitting in the same position, the thoracic outlet is evaluated. The index finger is positioned above the clavicle, while the middle finger is placed under the same bone; the thumb should be placed near the transverse process of C7. The other two fingers rest on the chest. The tissue, the presence of pain, the tissue's temperature, and any tissue abnormalities or entrainments are assessed. The movement to be perceived through palpation is an opening and closing of the thoracic outlet. The movement does not correspond to the rhythm of the heartbeat or the breath; it is a slower movement.

To evaluate the diaphragm muscle in a general way, the clinician stands up and stands beside the patient. The hands are positioned posterolaterally, as the diaphragmatic displacement occurs to a greater extent precisely with the postero-lateral portion; the anterior portion displaces a few millimeters with calm breathing. The tissue, the presence of pain, the temperature, and any tissue abnormalities or entrainments are assessed. Any alterations in the perceived movement of the diaphragm should also be evaluated; we must remember that the diaphragm has a minor displacement with its right area due to the presence of the liver.

The last step of this general assessment is towards the pelvic floor, with the clinician standing. The palms of the hands are placed on the iliac wings, giving small oscillations towards the bed as if to want to "open" the pelvis. In this way, it is possible to identify movement or pain restrictions of the various components that make up the pelvic floor, muscles and joints, and any limits of visceral adaptation.

With this first approach, it is possible to highlight areas with difficulty in movement or symptoms such as pain or discomfort. To identify a more problematic area that requires osteopathic treatment, it will be necessary to carry out simple inhibitory tests. To give an example, the clinician finds dysfunctions in the respiratory diaphragm and the lingual complex. It places one hand on the diaphragmatic rib area, while the other hand is placed under the buccal floor; with the first-hand listening, he creates a pressure tension with the fingers of the second hand. In this way, the afferents of the lingual area are masked, highlighting any dysfunctions of the diaphragmatic area. The opposite action is performed, that is, the hand on the rib area presses against the ribs, while the cranial hand via palpation "listens" to what happens to the buccal floor. The anatomical area where the previously felt dysfunction does not change will most likely be the area that needs treatment.

**Manual Specific Evaluation**

Tentorium cerebelli:

- The tone of the sub-occipital muscles

- The range of motion of the first cervical vertebrae, up to C4, and the dorsal nerve exits of the cervical plexus up to C3 (you can feel the presence of small buds under the finger)

- The presence of movement of the temporal bones and all sutures involving the temporal: occipitomastoid; sphenosquamosal; petrojugular; petroccipital; sphenopetrosal; temporozygomatic; parietomastoid; temporomandibular

- The tension of the tentorium of the cerebellum can be assessed by pulling the ear lobe in an anterior, oblique, and slightly caudal direction; the tension generated reaches the tentorium and the ear that responds to traction with greater brake, corresponds to the tentorial area in dysfunction.

- In evaluating the tentorium, it is necessary to listen via palpation to the other membranes and discern if the tentorial tension that appears is the cause or an effect from other membranous portions. Many texts deal with how to work and listen to membranes; it is not the technique that counts, but the palpatory quality.

Lingual complex:

- Visually observe the tongue and how the mouth is opened by the patient (if there are mandibular deviations and/or joint noises of the temporomandibular joint)

- Evaluate the behavior of the cervical spine when the mouth opens and the tongue is protruded/retruded.

- Observe the typology of the dental class to understand how the tongue interacts

- Evaluate how the tongue actively moves with the mouth open: forward or protruded; bringing the tip of the tongue up or in dorsiflexion; below or in ventroflexion; the whole tongue cranially or in elevation; inferiorly or in depression; lateral movements, right and left; backward or in retrusion.

- With a gloved finger, test the tongue's strength, with the movements just mentioned actively, but placing the finger in the opposite direction to the movement requested, creating minimal resistance.

- The tongue's movement is tested by asking the patient to rotate his head to the right and to protrude it, and the left side; the same protrusion is observed but with the cervical tract flexed and then extended. This observation is also important for the fascial and embryological correlations of the tongue and neck.

- The patient is subjected to a test to verify balance (Fukuda), with closed eyes and the tip of the tongue at the spot of the upper incisors, as we know that lingual afferents are important for postural management. The test is repeated with the tongue in the resting position. If the posture improves with the tongue in the spot, its afferents are correctly integrated into the body system; if, on the other hand, the result is indifferent or gets worse with the lingual spot, we could assume a tongue problem.

- With the tongue in dorsiflexion, the strength of the thigh is tested; the patient is asked to extend the knee, while the operator places his hand on the leg to create resistance. It is repeated with the other limb. If the strength increases, the lingual integration is preserved, while if it does not change or worsens with the tongue at the palatine spot, it could be a non-physiological lingual response. There is a parallelism between limb strength and lingual strength; a loss of limb strength corresponds to a decline in lingual contractility.

- The patient is asked to smile or pursue his lips, evaluating how the musculature behaves. In speech functions, the tongue has a neuromotor collaboration with the lip muscles, and any weakness of these muscles could detect a loss of strength and lingual coordination.

- Evaluate with the gloved hand, the tone of the chewing muscles

- Palpate the hyoid bone in different phases while the patient swallows, breathes, and opens the mouth and with a protrusion/retrusion movement of the tongue

It is possible to perform a non-instrumental test to get a preliminary indication on the function of the tongue, through the Performance Tongue Test (PTT).

Thoracic outlet:

- Sternum

- Sternum-clavicle, sternum, and first rib joints; clavicle-scapula, C7-D1-D2, ribs-D1 and D2

- Observe how the scapula moves actively and passively

- Observe how the first rib moves

- Assess the scalene muscles, pectoral muscles (major and minor), subclavian muscle, trapezius muscle

- Shoulder mobility

- Pleural dome

- Fascial system of the pleural dome

Some tests can be carried out to understand if there is a neurological dysfunction:

- EAST (Elevated Arm Stress Test - Surrender)

- ULTT - (Upper Limb Tension Test of Elvey)

No test manual can assess the presence of vascular dysfunctions.

Diaphragm muscle:

- The patient is always supine. Put your hands sideways to the ribs in the diaphragmatic area; listen to how the ribs move actively and passively (giving small oscillations).

- Evaluate the xiphoid process (if it is painful); evaluate how the ribs and the xiphoid process behave.

- To evaluate the diaphragmatic domes, right and left, with the hand resting on the anterolateral ribs, the clinician applies a slight cranial thrust to evaluate the elasticity of the tissue. The forearm is parallel to the patient's abdomen.

- With the same position, but with the forearm positioned at 45 degrees with respect to the patient's abdomen, the clinician's hand carries out stresses towards the bed to assess the posterolateral muscle mass.

- Evaluate the medial and intermediate pillars, stimulating the movement of the vertebrae from D11 to L4 and the last rib.

- Evaluate the phrenic nerve in the passage of the thoracic outlet, near the anterior scalene muscle and laterally to the sternocleidomastoid muscle (the portion of the clavicle head); check if it is a painful area.

It is possible to use the manual evaluation of the diaphragm (MED Scale) and a test to understand if the diaphragm is correctly integrated into the body context from a neurological point of view. The patient performs a Fukuda test with a deep inhalation and repeats, but with normal breathing; if the diaphragm is not dysfunctional, the balance improves. If the test performed reveals a latent imbalance, the diaphragm may have dysfunction. Additional verification of the previous result is to evaluate the strength of the thigh during a flexion with the patient standing, placing a resistance (with the clinician's hand) over the thigh during the active movement, with a deep inhalation. If the strength improves, the diaphragm is properly integrated; if the strength does not improve or gets worse, the diaphragm may have functional dysfunction. The name of the test is the Bordoni diaphragmatic test (BDT)

Pelvic Floor:

The patient is in a supine position.

- Symphysis pubis

- Suprapubic area for trigger points

- Ilioinguinal ligament

- Obturator nerve

- Adductor muscle strength

- Rotator muscles strength of the hip

- Pelvic floor muscles

- Pudendal nerve

- Sacral base-L5

- Sacroiliac joint

- External evaluation: bladder; uterus

The patient is in lateral decubitus.

- Pelvic floor muscles

- Iliolumbar ligament

- Iliac bone

- Coccyx

The patient is in the prone position.

- Spring test sacrum

- Trigger points thoracolumbar fascia

- Gluteal muscle

- Piriformis muscle

- Long dorsal sacroiliac ligament

- Pelvic floor muscles

- External evaluation: rectum

If the patient cannot position himself in certain positions, the osteopath will have to adapt to the patient and find different evaluation methods.