DON is a controversial disease entity whose diagnostic criteria are yet to be established. Color vision and contrast sensitivity tests may help detect an early onset DON. Characteristic visual defects include a central or a paracentral scotoma. Other patterns consist of an enlarged blind spot, arcuate or altitudinal scotomas, inferior defects being more common than superior.

Electrophysiological assessment to test the integrity of the optic nerve using pattern Visual Evoked Potential (pVEP) signals must be considered by the clinician, which may reveal a decreased amplitude and increased latency of the P-wave.

Several measurements, such as Barrett’s Muscle Index (MI), Extra-ocular Muscle Volume/ Orbital Volume (MV/OV), Crowding index (CI), have been implicated as reliable indicators of the disease in the literature. MV/OV > 20% has potentially come up as a more predictable index of acuity as well as field loss as compared to MI (MI > 60% is indicative of DON).

Color Doppler ultrasonography has detected orbital blood flow changes such as reduced resistivity index and flow velocities of Central Retinal Artery (CRA) in early-onset DON.

If none could be found in the presence of supporting radiological evidence of compression, DON is “likely” to be present. If no radiological evidence is present or if an alternative cause is found but with radiological compression, DON is still “possible.” In the presence of a different etiology of visual impairment without any compressive features on imaging, DON is again “unlikely.” The key message from the hypothesized flowchart is that DON can never be completely ruled out, and a high index of suspicion must always be maintained, especially in cases with subclinical stage, euthyroid presentation, and bilaterally symmetric DON where most of the ancillary tests may give confusing results.