Treatment should be directed at treating the underlying etiology of the UVFP (if applicable), preventing aspiration and improving dysphonia.  Multiple factors must be taken into account regarding the specific treatment provided and decisions must be tailored to each clinical scenario.

Idiopathic unilateral vocal fold paralysis and its prognosis are topics that deserve special mention. Although not well defined in the literature, idiopathic vocal fold paralysis is often believed to be secondary to a post-viral or post-infectious insult. Just as idiopathic facial nerve paralysis can occur affecting cranial nerve seven or idiopathic sudden sensor-neural hearing loss can occur affecting cranial nerve eight, the vagus nerve is also susceptible to such insult manifesting as idiopathic vocal fold paralysis. In 2008, Sulica reviewed twenty reports in the literature in an effort to delineate the prognosis and likelihood of recovery in patients affected by idiopathic vocal fold paralysis.

In this study, a total of 717 cases of idiopathic unilateral vocal fold paralysis were reviewed. In total, complete return of mobility occurred in 36% +/- 22% of patients, while some motion returned in 39% +/- 20% of patients. In 52% +/- 17% of patients, complete recovery of voice was obtained. This discrepancy in improvement in voice and mobility emphasize that resolution of dysphonia can occur without full recovery of vocal fold mobility, and thus highlights the importance of vocal therapy. In this review, most cases recovered within well under a year after initial onset. However, rare cases were noted to improve and recover well after this one-year mark. This information may prove helpful in deciding whether or not a period of observation may be reasonable before proceeding with surgical treatment in cases of idiopathic UVFP.

If no aspiration is evident and no ominous pathology is discovered on work-up, observation for a 6-12 month period in hopes of regaining vocal fold motion may be a reasonable option (as discussed previously). Referral to speech therapy for vocal and swallow therapy may also be recommended, especially prior to surgery if being considered. If the main complaint is dysphonia, vocal therapy can be an extremely affective strategy and can oftentimes negate the need for surgical intervention.

However, surgical interventions including temporary or permanent augmentation are also viable options that must be considered. Vocal fold augmentation is utilized to “augment” and medialize the paralyzed vocal fold into a more midline position to allow the contralateral true vocal fold to make improved contact during deglutination and phonation, ultimately helping to prevent aspiration and improve dysphonia. If aspiration is present, a more aggressive approach such as immediate injection augmentation may be indicated given the need to protect the airway.

Multiple considerations must be taken into account before proceeding with injection augmentation. There are a number of different materials that can be used for augmentation, all which have varying lengths of effects. If immediate or temporary injection augmentation is desired, it might be reasonable to choose a material with a known shorter half-life. This way, if there is the possibility of regaining vocal fold motion, only a temporary augmentation will persist. However, if an observational period has passed and there is a limited change of recovery, a more permanent augmentation may be useful, and a longer-acting material should be used.

Injection augmentation with Teflon was a material that was used popularly in the past, but is rarely used today given the risk and morbidity of the development of a Teflon granuloma. Gel-foam has been historically used, but is very short acting (~4-6 weeks), and given this extremely limited effect, is rarely used today. AlloDerm is a commonly employed material, and is known to have an effect that lasts approximately 2-4 months. Sodium carboxymethylcellulose is another material that is often used, and can be expected to have an effect ranging approximately 2-3 months. A longer lasting option, which can be expected to last approximately 18 months, is calcium hydroxlapatite Regardless of the material chosen, proper placement of injection should be deep to the superficial lamina propia, at the medial aspect of the thyroarytenoid muscle.

Injection augmentation can be performed under general anesthesia in the operating room under direct visualization with micro-suspension laryngoscopy, or alternatively, the procedure can be done percutaneously with direct visualization via nasolaryngoscopy in the office setting, with the patient awake. If a patient has multiple co-morbidities and there is a concern with general anesthesia, an office-based injection may serve as the better candidate. This yields the benefit of immediate feedback regarding improvement in dysphonia. However, the injection might not be as accurately placed or as easy as compared to performing augmentation under micro-suspension laryngoscopy in the operating room.

A more permanent surgical option is laryngeal framework surgery (medialization laryngoplasty), which is commonly used in cases of long-standing unilateral vocal fold paralysis. Surgical detail of this procedure is beyond the scope of this article, but in brief, a window is made in the thyroid cartilage, and an implant is placed to medialize the true vocal fold. A variety of materials have been used, but Gore-Tex strips and Silastic implants remain to be the favored materials commonly used today.

Another surgical procedure that deserves mention is arytenoid adduction. A suture is suspended from the muscular process of the arytenoid anteriorly to the thyroid cartilage, which mimics the action of the lateral cricoarytenoid muscle, causing vocal fold adduction. This procedure, although rarely used alone, may serve as a useful adjunct in the treatment of UVFP.