Surgical markings to design the flap should be undertaken as a first step. For the Limberg flap, this involves designing the defect as a rhombus with opposing 120-degree and 60-degree angles, ensuring adequate resection margins according to the relevant guidelines. The short axis of the defect exists between the 2 opposing 120-degree angles, with the first limb of the flap incision being a continuation of the short axis with an equal length to the sides of the defect. The second limb is then drawn parallel to the sides of the defect, at a 60-degree angle from the first limb.

The orientation should be determined by ensuring that the short axis of the flap is parallel to the LMEs and perpendicular to the RSLTs to facilitate transposition through inherent skin laxity. (Figure 5) The RSLTs or Langer lines may be identified by existing skin creases or wrinkles, although a pinch test may be performed if there is uncertainty. For the short axis of the flap, to be parallel to the LMEs, two clinical flap options exist. This is as opposed to the four geometrically possible that can be designed. (Figure 5) The final option also depends on proximity to neighboring landmarks and the aesthetic subunits. This should be drawn out with a surgical marker.

Local anesthetic infiltration should be undertaken to encompass the surgical field. Following this, the surgical field should be cleaned and draped before commencing the procedure.

If the defect is assumed to be excised with confirmed clearance, the defect should be extended to form a rhombus shape defect through additional excision of tissue. The flap should then be elevated in the same plane as the defect, typically the subcutaneous plane, with sufficient depth to include the subdermal plexus. Firstly, the two limbs of the flap are incised, and then the flap is raised by dissection of the tissue plane using dissecting scissors or a scalpel blade. This process may be aided by an assistant providing traction using skin hooks. Following flap harvest, thorough hemostasis with diathermy is advised to ensure a dry wound bed and thus reduce the risk of hematoma formation.

After elevation of the flap, it may be transposed into the defect. The donor site should be closed first with a robust suture technique such as two-layer deep dermal and interrupted sutures. This closure involves the most tension, with the maximum point being at the apex. Some undermining of the adjacent tissue may be required, although this should be minimized to prevent disruption of blood supply.