# Continuing Education Activity

Otoplasty is a cosmetic procedure used to change the position, shape, or size of the ear using permanent sutures. The primary indication for otoplasty is to correct prominauris, or protruding ears. This review focuses on the primary indication for otoplasty, prominauris. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, and techniques involved in performing otoplasty and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the pre-operative and post-operative care of patients undergoing this procedure.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the common indications for otoplasty.
- Describe the techniques commonly utilized in otoplasty.
- Review the common complications of otoplasty.
- Explain a structured, interprofessional team approach to provide effective care to and appropriate surveillance of patients undergoing otoplasty.

# Introduction

Furnas described otoplasty in 1959 with the technique of using permanent sutures on the conchomastoid to correct the deformity of prominauris.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Before surgical correction of the ear, a fundamental understanding of the embryology and anatomy is necessary.  Development of the ear begins with the otic placode which presents during the 3rd week of gestation. Cartilage formation is present in week 7.  The hillocks of His fuse by week 12 and the antihelix then furls between weeks 12 to 16. Finally, the helix furls at 6 months. The hillocks of His are numbered one to six, and they include tragus, helical crus, helix, antihelix, antitragus, and lobule.

# Indications

To understand the indications for performing otoplasty, one must appreciate facial analysis.  The pinna is ideally positioned approximately 15 to 20 mm from the helical rim to the scalp. Prominauris, which is the main indication for performing otoplasty, is seen when the auriculocephalic angle is greater than 30 degrees.  The ideal auriculocephalic angle ranges from 20 to 30 degrees. Additionally, the vertical height of the ear should be approximately six centimeters.

Innervation of the external ear is elaborate and involves multiple cranial nerves which include: auriculotemporal nerve from the trigeminal nerve, facial nerve, glossopharyngeal nerve, Arnold’s nerve from the vagus nerve, and nerves from the second and third cervical plexus.

# Technique or Treatment

The Mustarde technique treats the underdeveloped antihelical fold.  When examining the ear the surgeon should apply gentle pressure to form the planned antihelical fold.  Then mattress suture points should be marked 8 mm on each side of the new antihelical fold. Hydrodissection with local anesthetic is critical to promote anesthesia and hemostasis; 1% local lidocaine with epinephrine 1 to 100,000 is typically an acceptable local anesthetic. Cartilage tattoo can be performed with methylene blue to mark the cartilage site of suturing.  A postauricular incision is made to provide access for the sutures. There is an option to score the cartilage which can help weaken it to ensure that the cartilage loses its elasticity. The horizontal mattress sutures should include three separate sutures from superior to inferior about 10 mm apart.

# Complications

Complications largely divide into early and late complications.  Early complications involve hematoma, bleeding, postoperative infections including perichondritis, dehiscence, and necrosis of the skin.  The most worrisome postoperative complication is a hematoma. Hematoma formation can lead to cartilage and skin necrosis. If not addressed immediately, the hematoma can progress to infection which could worsen cartilage necrosis and lead to cauliflower deformity. Cartilage necrosis can also result from over tightening of the sutures and sometimes excessive pressure from the dressing. Postoperative hematomas are usually seen between one to three days after surgery. Pain is one of the main symptoms and should prompt a timely examination.

Other late complications include excessive scarring suture extrusion, hypersensitivity, and most importantly poor aesthetic outcomes. Unsatisfactory aesthetic outcomes are the most common complication of otoplasty.

# Clinical Significance

A proper understanding of the diagnosis, indications, and surgical techniques will lead to positive outcomes in otoplasty.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The correction of prominauris has traditionally been under the specialties of plastic surgery and otolaryngology. Although otoplasty is typically an outpatient procedure, it still requires a team approach. The child’s pediatrician most often refers these patients to the surgeon, which requires an understanding of the diagnosis and direct communication with the surgical practice, as well as knowledge of the appropriate timing of referral and repair. If a wound infection and subsequent perichondritis were to develop, consulting with an infectious disease pharmacist may also be warranted to help guide antibiotic selection. The earlier a complication is recognized, the better the prognosis and subsequent cosmetic outcome (Level V).