The progressive changes in the gastric mucosa can lead to the development of the intestinal type of gastric adenocarcinomas. The histological changes from superficial gastritis to malignant mucosal transformation are described below:

- Helicobacter pylori gastritis

- Non-atrophic gastritis (NAG)

- Duodenal ulcer or multi-focal atrophic gastritis (MAG) without metaplasia

- MAG with metaplasia (small intestinal type) or intestinal metaplasia of the incomplete colonic type

- Low-grade dysplasia

- High-grade dysplasia

- Intraepithelial mucosal carcinoma

- Invasive intestinal adenocarcinoma

**Staging of Chronic Atrophic Gastritis/Intestinal Metaplasia**

It was the success of hepatitis severity staging that encouraged a group of pathologists and gastroenterologists 'The Operative Link on Gastritis Assessment (OLGA)' to organize a similar reporting system. This is based on cancer risk from lowest (Stage 0) to highest (Stage IV) based on the severity of atrophy and the extent of the spread of the atrophy in the stomach.

The abnormal mucosal areas identified using a visual analog scale are compared with standardized biopsy samples of at least five different topographic areas. The staging is based on the combined scoring of the severity of atrophy and the location and extent of CAG in the stomach. The extent of mucosal atrophy is calculated on histological specimens as the percentage proportion of atrophic/metaplastic mucosa compared to normal mucosa in the antrum and corpus. Separate 'mean' atrophy severity scores are calculated of the antrum and corpus and then compared with the topographic areas involved resulting in stages 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the OLGA classification.

**Atrophy Severity (antrum and corpus)**

- No atrophy 0% - score 0

- Mild 0-30% - score 1

- Moderate 30-60% - score 2

- Severe >60% - score 3

**Location**

**Antral Atrophy Score**

- A1 (lesser curve of antrum)

- A2 (greater curve of the antrum)

- A3 (incisura angularis)

**Corpus Atrophy Score**

- C1 (lesser curve of the corpus)

- C2 (greater curve of the corpus)

The mean antral score will be calculated as A1+A2+A3 and the mean corpus score C1+ C2. The overall OLGA score is classified between stages 1 to 4 based on a combination of the severity of atrophy and the location of spread in the antrum and/or corpus. Stages 0, 1, and 2 are considered low risk and stage 3 and 4, high risk. In summary, advanced stage 3 and 4 have more extensive mucosal atrophy and more widespread topographic involvement of the stomach mucosa of the antrum and corpus and warrant definitive surveillance. It is of note that an individual can have stage 3 gastritis with severe atrophy scoring 3 that only involves the antrum but will be stage 2 if it only involves the corpus.

GA and GIM have higher risks for progression to gastric cancer when involving corpus, antrum, and incisura (pan gastritis stage 3 or 4).

The Operative Link on Gastric Intestinal Metaplasia uses the same configuration of biopsies at five regions in individuals with intestinal metaplasia and classifies low-risk OLGIM stage 0, 1, 2, and high-risk OLGIM stage 3, 4 based on the severity and extent of spread of IM in the stomach. This system is recommended by the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA), whereas European and British centers follow the OLGA classification for mapping and surveillance. The severity of metaplasia is graded as mild, moderate, and severe intestinal metaplasia in the antrum and the corpus. More advanced stages (3/4) have a progressive spread of moderate to severe intestinal metaplasia in the corpus and the antrum.

The OLGA system of histological classification evaluates all chronic atrophic changes, including intestinal metaplasia, whereas, in OLGIM, only intestinal metaplasia is considered. The proponents of OLGIM suggest a higher likelihood of progression to gastric cancer in high stage OLGIM vs. high stage OLGA cases.

A recent meta-analysis of studies comprising more than 2700 subjects showed a strong association between OLGA/OLGIM stages 3/4 and gastric adenocarcinoma vs. stage 1/2. It is essential that individuals with OLGA/OLGIM stages 3/4 have more intensive surveillance to reduce the risk of GC.

Gastric dysplasia is the turning point in the progression of gastric carcinogenesis. Dysplasia should, without a doubt, be treated as a malignant lesion with endoscopic or surgical resection.

The staging of gastric adenocarcinoma is based on the Lauren classification into diffuse and intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma.