The diagnosis of hyperlipidemia can be a difficult one, often in the sense that there are no presenting symptoms. To establish a diagnosis, the primary care physician or attending physician ordering lab work must have a high suspicion for the disease or be completing routine screening labs. Typically the physician needs collaboration with nurses (obtain vital signs, asking history, etc.) who are also critical in the overall process of good patient care. Once the diagnosis is made, interprofessional communication and teamwork are vital to ensure the patient receives proper treatment based on the most up to date treatment guidelines.

Following diagnosis, the primary care physician typically will manage the disorder with diet, exercise, and/or medications. This diagnosis and treatment plan must be communicated to the patient's other physicians for optimal care. It also involves communication with the patient about medication side effects from the prescribing doctor and also from the pharmacist if needed. The pharmacist is also able to re-explain any potential adverse effects or interactions from the medications prescribed by the physician.

If diet education is needed, often, the patient can consult with a nutritionist or dietitian.

Proper interprofessional communication between these specialties and subspecialties and with the patient will ensure correct treatment and medication adherence, keeping the patient safe, and ideally preventing the progression of the disease. The patient should be monitored yearly or more often at the discretion of his or her primary care physician to keep close tabs on the progression of the disease.