As per recent analysis in the United States, digoxin toxicity presents in 10-18% of nursing home individuals.

The pump functions to maintain a low concentration of sodium inside the myocyte normally. This blocking results in an increased concentration of sodium inside the myocyte cell. This increment of sodium hampers the ion exchange mechanism of other transporters located in the myocyte cell membrane. One such transporter, the sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX), helps maintain low intracellular calcium levels in exchange for pumping sodium inside. However, when administering digoxin, the elevated sodium concentration inside the myocyte decreases this exchange resulting in elevated calcium levels within the myocyte. The extra available calcium is actively reabsorbed and stored by the sarcoplasmic endoplasmic reticulum ATPase (SERCA). The resultant increase in overall calcium availability for cross-bridge formation between actin and myosin filaments ultimately leads to increased cardiac contractility (positive inotropic effect). Digoxin is also known to increase vagal tone in SA and AV nodes.

Digoxin immune fab (DIF) are mixed anti-digoxin immunoglobulin fragments obtained from healthy sheep immunized with digoxin dicarboxymethoxylamine (DDMA). DDMA contains a cyclo-penta-per-hydro-phenanthrene: lactone ring coupled to keyhole hemocyanin. This ring is an essential component of the final product. After isolation of immunoglobulins from the ovine serum, these isolates undergo digestion by papain and a process of affinity chromatography, yielding digoxin-specific IgG Fab fragments.

DIF has an affinity for digoxin that ranges from 10^9 to 10^10 M-1. Its affinity is higher than the affinity of digoxin for the sodium pump receptor. This receptor is presumed responsible for its therapeutic and toxic effects. When administered to the intoxicated patient, DIF binds to digoxin molecules and reduces free digoxin levels. The reduction results in an equilibrium shift away from receptor binding and thereby decreases cardio-toxic effects. The kidney and the reticuloendothelial system eventually clear fab-digoxin complexes.

Clinical studies have also indicated the clinical utility of digoxin immune fab in pre-eclampsia. Pre-eclampsia is an exaggerated inflammatory condition compounded by altered endothelial function.