# Continuing Education Activity

When the hymen, a thin membrane of stratified squamous epithelium circumscribing the vaginal introitus, does not spontaneously rupture during neonatal development, it is referred to as an imperforate hymen. An imperforate hymen can present with obstructive symptoms of the female genital and urinary tract during the perinatal, pediatric, or adolescent years and is a rare cause of primary amenorrhea. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of imperforate hymen and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of the imperforate hymen in the setting of female urogenital development.
- Outline the presentation of a patient with an imperforate hymen.
- Summarize the various methods and alternatives to imperforate hymen treatment.
- Discuss the importance of collaboration among the interprofessional team with the parents and patient to promote timely treatment of an imperforate hymen and maintain post-surgical follow-up to monitor for potential complications and fertility morbidity.

# Introduction

The hymen is a thin membrane of stratified squamous epithelium circumscribing the vaginal introitus. When the hymen does not spontaneously rupture during neonatal development, it is referred to as an imperforate hymen. An imperforate hymen can present with obstructive symptoms of the female genital and urinary tract during the perinatal, pediatric, or adolescent years and is a rare cause of primary amenorrhea. Infants with an imperforate hymen may develop a mucocele from endogenous maternal estrogen stimulation.

Many patients remain asymptomatic until menarche when they present with cyclic abdominal pain and amenorrhea. Hematocolpos or hematometra, the accumulation of menstrual blood in the vaginal or uterine cavities, can create a pelvic mass identified on physical exam as a blue, bulging perineal mass. This mass may cause mechanical obstruction of the urinary tract, leading to urinary retention, hydronephrosis, or acute renal injury. Corrective hymenectomy may be delayed until puberty unless the child suffers from urgent complications of the pelvic mass, prompting emergent surgery to preserve renal function, treat an infection, or minimize infertility.

# Etiology

During urogenital development, the cloaca is divided by the urorectal septum to separate the ventral urogenital sinus from the dorsal anal canal. The Wolffian ducts (mesonephric ducts) and Mullerian ducts (paramesonephric ducts) are the two main ductal systems that give rise to specific structures in the male and female genital and urinary tracts. The Wolffian duct develops from the paired urogenital ridges and grows caudally to induce the formation of the mesonephric tubules. Additionally, the Wolffian duct induces the development of the Mullerian ducts from the coelomic epithelium of the paired urogenital ridges. The Mullerian ducts grow caudally using the Wolffian ducts as guides. The close association of the Mullerian ducts and Wolffian ducts during development explains the high incidence of urinary tract anomalies in women who also have Mullerian anomalies. The fusion of the Mullerian ducts forms the uterovaginal canal that gives rise to the uterus, cervix, and upper two-thirds of the vagina. The distal point of contact of the Mullerian ducts with the urogenital sinus is the site of the proliferation of the urogenital sinus epithelium, thereby forming the sinovaginal bulb. The sinovaginal bulb develops into the vaginal plate.

The embryological origin of the lower third of the vagina is the urogenital sinus. The precise embryological origin of the imperforate hymen is controversial. It is thought that the hymen normally perforates during the perinatal period at approximately 22 weeks. The most popular theory is that the hymen may fail to canalize with the rest of the vagina during development when the sinovaginal bulbs canalize at the site where the uterovaginal canal meets the urogenital sinus.

Redundancy of the newborn hymenal tissue leading to an inverted appearance is a common finding at birth, and over half of the newborn females will have reduced tissue redundancy by one year of age.

Microperforate hymen is thought to result when epithelial cells in the center of the developing hymen do not normally degenerate.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of imperforate hymen is estimated to be 1 in 1000 female births.

# Histopathology

The hymen is minimally innervated and predominantly consists of fibrous connective tissue with some elastic fibers and glycogen granules on the vaginal and vulvar surfaces. Both of its surfaces are surrounded by stratified squamous epithelium without glands.

# History and Physical

The presentation of an imperforate hymen is variable, depending on the patient’s age at presentation, the severity of the obstruction, and the clinical course. Additionally, the evaluation of the prepubescent child differs from the evaluation of the adolescent female. Abnormalities of the female genitalia may be difficult to discern on the newborn physical exam due to the excess hymenal tissue.

Hydronephrosis and pelvic masses can be detected as early as the 20-week prenatal ultrasound.

Infants with imperforate hymen may not even demonstrate a perineal bulge on a physical exam. The imperforate hymen may also be subtle, even if ultrasound demonstrates bilateral hydronephrosis with a bladder distended to the umbilicus.

During the interview of the mature adolescent, clarifying the menstrual and coital history is important, since patients may report regular menses with a microperforate hymen. Cyclic monthly pain is often reported due to the menstrual blood that expands the vaginal canal and uterus with resultant hematometra. Expansion can cause numerous pelvic symptoms, including pelvic and back pain, constipation, back pain, radiated pain secondary to sacral plexus irritation, and urinary retention.

The female genital exam starts with the identification of external structures to avoid overlooking anomalies prior to attempting a speculum exam. The physical examination of the adolescent may demonstrate a blue, bulging perineal mass that enlarges with the Credé maneuver. The Credé maneuver, application of manual pressure on the lower abdomen, exposes the imperforate hymen as a vaginal bulge.

# Evaluation

Routine prenatal ultrasound at 20 weeks of gestation is a cost-effective method for evaluating the fetus’s urinary tract for renal abnormalities, duplex kidney, or hydronephrosis of various etiologies, including physiologic hydronephrosis or obstruction, urinary retention, or vesicoureteral reflux.

# Treatment / Management

Spontaneous rupture of the asymptomatic imperforate hymen has previously been reported in 1 day and 1-month-old infants.

Other genital anomalies may be discovered at the presentation. Identification of an imperforate hymen prior to an acute presentation may assist with planned hymenectomy. Ideally, surgery should be deferred until puberty when the vaginal tissue is adequately estrogenized, which promotes wound healing after surgical incision of the hymenal tissue. Treatment options for an imperforate hymen include:

- Hymenectomy using cruciate or annular incisions

- Hymenectomy using electrocautery

- Placement of a 16Fr Foley catheter with 10ml balloon insufflation to preserve hymenal tissue

- Carbon dioxide laser treatment

Purulent vaginal fluid on needle aspiration may be found prior to drainage, which suggests that the hydrometrocolpos may become infected even before surgical intervention.

The traditional method of hymenectomy entails making a cruciate incision (cross-shaped) over the hymenal tissue with excision of the quadrants and approximation of the hymen edges to the vestibule with absorbable sutures. Other methods reported in the literature include hymen-sparing techniques. Annular hymenotomy using electrocautery to perform a circumferential annular (ring-shaped) hymenotomy reported no postoperative hymenal closure or scarred tissue beyond the hymenal contour in 14 patients aged 14.2 +/- 2.2 years at the time of surgery.

The traditional treatment for microperforate hymen includes cruciate hymenectomy.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for a perineal mass in a newborn girl includes periurethral cyst, ectopic ureterocele prolapse, and vaginal botryoid sarcoma. Imperforate hymen is distinguished from a periurethral cyst by identification of the urethral meatus. Ectopic ureteroceles may prolapse from the urethra and have a congested appearance. Vaginal botryoid sarcoma usually has a multilobulated appearance.

Other vaginal anomalies that result from developmental aberrancies of the urogenital sinus and Mullerian ducts must be distinguished from imperforate hymen and can also rarely occur in association with an imperforate hymen. Failure to diagnose these anomalies burdens the patient with further morbidity because the treatments are different. The main abnormalities include a transverse vaginal septum, vaginal atresia, and vaginal agenesis.

Failure of canalization at the point of contact between the urogenital sinus and the Mullerian duct results in a transverse vaginal septum. Transverse vaginal septa can be located at different levels within the vaginal (upper, middle lower). The septa may be associated with small perforations.

Vaginal atresia results from an aberrancy in the urogenital sinus, possibly recanalization, such that there is a septum or stenosis. While patients with vaginal agenesis may not be able to conceive due to hypoplasia or absence of the fallopian tubes and uterus, pregnancy is possible for women with vaginal atresia after surgical correction. On physical exam, a rectal exam can help define the extent of the genital tract in children and whether there are vaginal septa or anomalies.

Imperforate hymen can present as part of a syndrome, such as McKusick-Kaufman syndrome, characterized by polydactyly, congenital heart disease, and hydrometrocolpos in females.

# Prognosis

Successful drainage of an imperforate hymen satisfactorily resolves symptoms. Rarely, the imperforate hymen has been associated with neonatal death due to respiratory failure from the abdominal distension.

In another study, 86% of women conceived after hymenectomy without dyspareunia.

Vaginal adenocarcinoma is rare and was reported in a patient who had vaginal adenosis and a prior history of imperforate hymen.  Vaginal adenosis, the persistence of columnar epithelium in the vagina, was reported on colposcopic biopsies two years after hymenectomy in a 13-year-old patient who did not have estrogen exposure in utero. Another 20-year-old female who underwent hymenectomy and found to have granulated vaginal walls had colposcopy with biopsies positive for vaginal adenosis, which can be a precursor to vaginal adenocarcinoma. Another 14-year-old female presented for vaginal discharge and was found to have a red granulated vaginal wall with biopsies demonstrating adenosis. The authors hypothesized that vaginal adenosis associated with imperforate hymen may be related to undifferentiated paramesonephric tissue during development.

# Complications

The iatrogenic pelvic inflammatory disease has been documented after a patient underwent an office hymenotomy under sterile conditions. The surgical site had spontaneously sealed within one day when the patient was evaluated by an adolescent gynecologist who scheduled a hymenectomy in the operating room two days later. However, on postoperative day 7, the patient had a high-grade fever and had lower abdominal pain with MRI demonstrating right pyosalpinx requiring CT-guided drainage. This account illustrates that even small incisions into an imperforate hymen for symptomatic relief or confirmation of diagnosis should not be undertaken due to the risk of iatrogenic infection from the inoculation of bacteria into the hematocolpos.

Hymen re-closure is a risk, thought to be increased in prepubertal patients due to a lack of estrogenization of genital tissue.

Another case report of a 16-year-old girl who required four hymen surgeries due to re-closure had a Foley catheter placed for 3 to 4 days after the first three surgeries and, on her fourth presentation, underwent hymenectomy with continuous locked sutures and catheter placement for 14 days. No estrogen cream use was documented.

Postoperative infection risk is not globally studied, but individual case reports and series report their own outcomes. The decision to administer pre-operative antibiotics is surgeon-specific and depends on patient factors, such as concern for possible pyosalpinx.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although some clinicians distinguish imperforate hymen from the other Mullerian anomalies due to its unique embryologic origin, urinary tract abnormalities may still be associated with imperforate hymen on presentation due to the effect of the pelvic mass that causes a mechanical obstruction of the urinary tract, leading to urinary retention, hydronephrosis, or acute kidney injury. Ultrasound is a low-cost modality for the detection of urinary tract obstruction and pelvic masses. During the newborn period, caretakers may be advised to notice perineal bulges during hygienic care and to review with a pediatrician or specialist, as appropriate.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A team of pediatricians, gynecologists, and pediatric urologists are needed for the evaluation and treatment of imperforate hymen. In the case of an imperforate hymen, early diagnosis will prevent both short-term and long-term complications that may otherwise have a delayed, advanced presentation that may include acute kidney injury and even peritonitis.

Prompt diagnosis and treatment optimize both short-term symptom management and long-term reproductive potential while minimizing urologic complications. The positive impact on the patient from earlier diagnosis and treatment includes relief of suffering from pelvic pain, decreased morbidity related to infertility complications, and resolution of urinary tract obstruction. The successful surgical treatment promotes patency of the vaginal canal and prevents post-operative infection to reduce the risk of hospitalization or further procedures that bear morbidity to the pediatric patient.