**Lumbar Puncture**

An important clinical test that clinicians use to monitor CSF is the lumbar puncture (spinal tap). In this procedure, a long, hollow needle is typically inserted into the subarachnoid space of the lumbar spine just below where the spinal cord ends. The conus medullaris in most individuals ends at around the L2 level, while the thecal sac ends at around the S2 level. The needle can then be uncapped, and samples of CSF can be obtained. The first thing to note when doing a lumbar puncture is the opening CSF pressure. A high opening pressure can suggest various conditions, including hydrocephalus, intracranial mass, and idiopathic intracranial hypertension. When there is an elevated CSF pressure, there is a risk of damage to the brain by reducing the pressure too quickly.

For this reason, care is necessary to rule out intracranial space-occupying lesions and significantly associated mass-effect prior to performing this procedure. Intracranial space-occupying masses can be excluded on computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. A low CSF pressure can also be clinically significant. This situation can occur in conditions that allow for CSF to leak into surrounding tissues. CSF can leak due to physical trauma, previous lumbar punctures, or without an obvious physical cause (spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak).

Several analyses are possible on the contents of CSF obtained from a lumbar puncture. Since CSF should be transparent, the color is worth noting. A cloudy appearance can suggest an infectious cause, and red or xanthochromic color can suggest the presence of blood. Cultures can be taken from this fluid to look for different infectious agents that can cause meningitis. Additionally, molecular analyses can help to look for protein abnormalities. These tests can help to diagnose a wide variety of diseases affecting the central nervous system.

**Hydrocephalus**

Hydrocephalus is one important clinical disorder of cerebrospinal fluid. In this disorder, there is an abnormal accumulation of CSF within the ventricles. This typically results in elevated intracranial pressure. In the case of normal pressure hydrocephalus, there may be dilated ventricles in the absence of elevated intracranial pressure. Hydrocephalus is rarely due to CSF over-production and, in the majority of cases, is due to subnormal CSF reabsorption, which may occur in the case of choroid plexus papillomas or choroid plexus carcinomas. The two main functional subdivisions of hydrocephalus from subnormal CSF reabsorption are due to obstructive (non-communicating) hydrocephalus and non-obstructive (communicating) hydrocephalus.

Non-communicating hydrocephalus is due to an obstruction in CSF flow that is proximal to the arachnoid granulations. If there is a block in the cerebral aqueduct, for example, this may appear as enlargement of the lateral and third ventricle out of proportion to the fourth ventricle, commonly referred to as "triventricular hydrocephalus." Non-communicating hydrocephalus may also be due to intracranial space-occupying lesions. Communicating hydrocephalus is due to a defect in CSF reabsorption at the level of the arachnoid granulations.

Etiologies of hydrocephalus can be divided into congenital and acquired etiologies. Congenital etiologies include Chiari malformation, which may occur due to fourth ventricle outlet obstruction in Chiari I malformation and is commonly associated with myelomeningocele in Chiari type II. Other congenital etiologies for hydrocephalus include X-linked disorders, primary aqueductal stenosis, or Dandy-Walker malformation. Acquired etiologies of hydrocephalus include infectious, which is the most common cause of communicating hydrocephalus. Other acquired etiologies of hydrocephalus include post-hemorrhagic (following subarachnoid hemorrhage or intraventricular hemorrhage), neurosarcoidosis, post-operatively in pediatric patients who have undergone intracranial surgery or due to space-occupying intracranial lesions resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus. Some common locations of intracranial space-occupying lesions that may lead to obstructive hydrocephalus include a posterior fossa mass near the cerebral aqueduct, a sizeable suprasellar mass that may exert mass effect on the third ventricle, and a colloid cyst which can obstruct CSF flow at the foramen of Monro.

The treatment of hydrocephalus involves removing whatever obstructs CSF flow. In cases where there is recurrence or difficulty in ensuring a non-obstructed flow of CSF, a shunt can help drain excess fluid from the intracranial cavity. These shunts most often drain the CSF into the peritoneal cavity, but they can also be placed in other locations, such as the pleural cavity, gallbladder, and the right atrium of the heart.

Aquaporin-4 is the principal water channel in the brain and is expressed in ependymal cells lining the ventricular system and perivascular astrocytes that are a part of the blood-brain barrier.

**Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension**

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is characterized by an increased intracranial pressure (usually detected through lumbar puncture) with no discernable cause. In other words, it is unclear what is causing the increased CSF pressures. Patients often experience headaches, vision changes, pulsatile tinnitus, weakness, nausea, vomiting, etc. The diagnosis is generally made based on the history and physical exam. However, neuroimaging investigations and lumbar punctures are often necessary to rule out other potential causes.

**Chiari Malformations**

Chiari malformation is the name given to a group of deformities of the hindbrain (cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata).

- **Chiari Type I Malformation (Hans Chiari)**
- Occurs in 1 in 1,000 births; more common than type II malformations
- Genetic syndromes or, more commonly, idiopathic reduced volume of the posterior fossa lead to a displacement of the cerebellar tonsils into the spinal canal.

- **Chiari Type II Malformation (Arnold-Chiari)**
- Invariably results in the setting of myelomeningocele. Leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to the myelomeningocele follows herniation of the hindbrain into the spinal canal, disturbing the cerebrospinal fluid's normal flow and potentially causing subarachnoid adhesions.