**Medial (midline) and Paramedian Approaches**

In the medial approach, the site of the insertion of the needle is between the spaces created by the vertebral spinous processes. Upon locating the desired spot, lidocaine 1% must be injected into the skin and underlying tissues to decrease the discomfort with the advancement of the epidural needle. Once achieving local anesthesia, the epidural needle must be advanced with its stylet in place and with its bevel point cephalad; this will ultimately contribute to the proper location of the epidural catheter. The epidural needle must be advanced through the skin, subcutaneous tissue, supraspinous, and interspinous ligaments. Once there, the stylet must be removed, and the Loss of Resistance syringe (filled up with saline, air, or both) must be attached to the needle. The needle must be advanced while applying pressure to the plunger. Once the ligamentum flavum is pierced, a loss in resistance will be noted; this is the epidural space, and 5 to 10 cc of saline may be injected to expand the epidural space; this may decrease the risk of vascular injury.

In the paramedian approach, the insertion site of the needle is 1 cm lateral to the vertebral interspace. Local anesthetic must be administered as described for the medial approach. The epidural needle must then be advanced through the paraspinal tissues. Given this location, the needle will not transverse the supraspinous or interspinous ligaments. The advancement of the needle must stop upon feeling the engagement in the ligamentum flavum. The loss of resistance syringe must be then attached, and the epidural space must be located as described for the median approach.

Once either the midline or paramedian approach locates the epidural space, the epidural catheter must be advanced inside the needle after removing the loss of resistance syringe. The epidural catheter must be advanced to the 20 cm mark. The epidural needle is then removed, paying attention to the depth of the epidural space as indicated by the marks in the epidural needle. The epidural catheter is then withdrawn, aiming to leave its tip 5 to 6 cm into the epidural space; achieved by adding 5 to 6 to the depth of the epidural space. The resulting number is the mark at which the epidural catheter must be withdrawn.

Once the catheter is in its final position, a 3 cm syringe may be used to gently aspirate and rule out CSF leakage. If CSF is detected, the epidural catheter may be in the intrathecal space and must be relocated.

A test dose to rule out the intravascular position of the catheter is then performed, done by injecting 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine with epinephrine (1 to 200000). An increase in HR of 20 to 30 bpm or 15 to 20 mmHg in systolic blood pressure may indicate intravascular injection.

**Caudal Anesthesia**

Caudal anesthesia is a variation of epidural anesthesia widely used in childhood. It is useful for interventions under the umbilicus line (circumcision, herniotomy, orchiopexy). The indications and contraindications match the ones described above.

The patient positioning is in lateral decubitus, fetal position, the area sterile prepped, and the hiatus sacralis located at the vertex of the sacrum, between the cornua sacra. The sacrococcygeal membrane must be pierced with a 22 to 25 G venous catheter at a 45-degree angle relative to the body's longitudinal axis. The catheter must be advanced until the loss of resistance is felt. No additional advance must be attempted since the distance between the sacrococcygeal membrane and the caudal end of the dural sac may be less than 10 mm. If CSF or blood is noted, the catheter must be repositioned. Once properly located, a test dose with Epinephrine 0.5 mcg/kg may be performed to rule out an intravascular injection.