There are few complications associated with TA before surgical intervention. If a patient has DiGeorge syndrome, then one must monitor for complications associated with hypocalcemia. In the older, unrepaired infant who has received little or no cardiac care, a higher risk of infections is present if 22q11 deletions are present. Most complications occur post-operatively and usually in the first 48 hours postoperatively. Specific postoperative complications include pulmonary hypertensive crisis and low cardiac output syndrome. Decreased manipulation and mobilization of patients may achieve a decreased rate of pulmonary hypertensive crisis during the immediate post-operative phase. Right bundle branch block and arrhythmias such as supraventricular tachycardia were also noted. Complications requiring surgical re-intervention in the immediate post-operative period include mediastinal bleeding, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade. Problems common to any surgery included seizures and other nervous system injuries, prolonged bleeding times, and renal failure.

As patients outgrow their RV-PA conduit or truncal valve insufficiency worsens, re-interventions are inevitable. By the 10-year, postoperative period, approximately 75% of patients required re-intervention, with the number one cause being RVOT reconstruction, followed by valve repair/replacement, and relief of aortic obstruction.

Without the recommended single-stage repair, patients often die before two months of age. The 1-year survival rate for unrepaired patients is less than 20%. By age 4, pulmonary vascular obstructive disease becomes so severe that surgery is futile and patients die before the second decade due to cardiac failure. After the primary repair, patients have a 20-year survival rate over 80%, but the rate of reoperation remains high. Therefore, long-term follow-up is recommended.