The clinical presentation of both primary and secondary hyperoxaluria can be seen in several age groups and are preferably reviewed as renal and systemic manifestations. Secondary hyperoxaluria patients have a lower propensity for systemic manifestations.

**Renal:**The renal manifestations can be seen mainly due to the increased urinary oxalate excretion and its combination with calcium, leading to calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis. A typical patient will present to the emergency department with symptoms of renal colic, including severe, acute abdominal, or flank pain radiating to the groin, often associated with nausea and vomiting. Urinary difficulties and hematuria commonly accompany this presentation. Unlike those with an acute abdomen, kidney stone patients are constantly moving, trying to find a more comfortable position, helping to make the initial diagnosis relatively easy.

The crystallization and deposition of calcium oxalate within the renal parenchymal tissues is known as nephrocalcinosis. Together, these two processes of nephrocalcinosis and calcium oxalate stone formation will cause inflammation and progressive renal injury that eventually can lead to a decline in renal function and ultimately possible end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

Primary hyperoxaluria type 2 is milder than type 1, mainly due to lower urinary oxalate excretion, whereas recurrent renal stones are characteristic of primary hyperoxaluria type 3.

**Systemic:**The secondary deposition of calcium oxalate, more commonly associated with primary hyperoxaluria or severe enteric hyperoxaluria, gives rise to various systemic manifestations. Based on the organ affected, these include:

- Heart: Conduction defects, heart blocks, and cardiomyopathy.
- Hematology: Anemia due to oxalate deposition in the bone marrow that is unresponsive to erythropoietin-stimulating agents (ESA).
- Nervous system: Peripheral neuropathy, retinopathy, and cerebral infarcts.
- Skeletal: Bone pain, pathological fractures, the involvement of the joints like synovitis and chondrocalcinosis.
- Vaginal: Vaginal pain and dyspareunia from submucosal calcium oxalate crystal deposits.
- Vascular: Non-healing ulcers and gangrene due to ischemia of blood vessels. There have also been reports of refractory hypotension.