**AVAPS in Chronic Respiratory Failure**

- Stable hypercapnic chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) - AVAPS has been proven safe and reliable in the management of stable hypercapnic COPD patients. Besides, it is a more favorable treatment strategy compared to the non-invasive fixed inspiratory pressure support as the patients perceive a better sleep efficiency and quality of life.

- Obesity hypoventilation syndrome - Not only is AVAPS as competent as the BPV S/T modality of non-invasive ventilation, in improving oxygenation, sleep quality, and health-related quality of life (HRQOL), but it also has the added advantage of decreasing PtcCO2 more efficiently.

- Kyphoscoliosis - AVAPS has been associated with a significant improvement in arterial blood gases and forced vital capacity of patients with kyphoscoliosis-related chronic respiratory failure. It was well accepted by the patients resulting in good patient-compliance to the treatment and is thus an effective treatment option.

- Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome - Different case studies have found the AVAPS to be beneficial in the management of pediatric patients with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. The evidence has reported successful management of infants with this syndrome through AVAPS. Furthermore, the successful transition from invasive ventilation to non-invasive ventilation, via AVAPS, was demonstrated in children, and teenagers as well, with this syndrome.

**AVAPS in Acute Respiratory Failure**

- AVAPS has been successful in the treatment of COPD-associated acute hypercapnic respiratory failure. Significant improvement was seen in arterial blood gases, pH, respiratory rate, and the Glasgow Coma Scale. Nonetheless, it is important to note that the patients with a higher APACHE II score, calculated during ICU admission, had a higher risk of treatment failure.

- Although both AVAPS and BiPAP are reliable in the treatment of acute hypercapnic respiratory failure, AVAPS is associated with a speedy improvement of the patient clinically. The patients have also experienced greater comfort and satisfaction comparatively, and therefore, improved treatment-compliance.

- In patients suffering from acute exacerbation of COPD compounded with hypercapnic encephalopathy(GCS<10), treatment with BiPAP S/T + AVAPS was more superior compared to the treatment with BiPAP S/T alone as evidenced by a more rapid improvement in the arterial blood gases and Glasgow Coma Score. Remember that both the therapies are effectual, and there was no difference in the duration of hospital stay or the time-period that the patient was on non-invasive ventilation.

- AVAPS can be considered as the preferred treatment in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD as well as obstructive sleep apnea in comparison to the regular non-invasive ventilation.

- AVAPS has been documented to facilitate successful extubation in Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), thus demonstrating its potential in saving ventilators and setting them aside for the sicker patients at times of need.