SCH can be divided into acute and chronic manifestations. Acute sickle cell hepatic crisis, hepatic sequestration, intrahepatic cholestasis, and overt liver failure are common entities of acute SCH. More chronically, SCH includes viral hepatitis, transfusion overload, gallstone disease, and sickle cell cholangiopathy.

- One of the presentations of vaso-occlusive crisis is acute sickle cell hepatic crisis, which happens in 10% of patients with SCD.

- Acute hepatic sequestration, which can be precipitated in the setting of infection or hepatoxic drugs, results in erythrocytes accumulating in the spleen, lungs, and less frequently in the liver. This can present as acute right upper quadrant pain, rapidly increasing liver size, and rapidly worsening anemia. These erythrocytes are phagocytosed by Kupffer cells, resulting in sinusoidal dilation and consequently biliary tree compression, which can eventually lead to more acute symptomatic anemia if a significant amount of erythrocytes are sequestered in the reticuloendothelial system, which can cause the patient to go into hypovolemic shock.

- While rare, acute intrahepatic cholestasis manifestation of SCH can be the most fatal, presenting with right upper quadrant pain, fever, leukocytosis, jaundice. It can rapidly progress to renal and liver failure. There is widespread sinusoidal sickling, with resulting hypoxia causing the hepatocytes to balloon out, creating cholestasis in the bile canaliculi, with more severe hypoxia causing necrosis.

- Overt liver failure can also occur in SCD, which has very high mortality without a liver transplant. Liver biopsy results have shown centrilobular necrosis and very rarely cholestasis.

- Under chronic manifestations, patients with SCD who have multiple transfusions are at a higher risk for viral hepatitis B or C, depending on transfusion protocols in their location and vaccination status.

- Recurrent blood transfusions, chronic hemolysis, and increased iron absorption in the gut due to increased erythropoiesis can all cause iron to be deposited in the liver.

- Gallstone disease is common in patients with SCD due to excessive breakdown of heme, causing increased unconjugated bilirubin, precipitating pigment gallstones.[3] Fifty percent of these gallstones are made of calcium bilirubinate, which are radio-opaque and can be seen on a plain film X-ray. By age 65, 58% of patients with SCD have cholelithiasis. Unlike most patients with gallstones, those with SCD and cholelithiasis are at a higher risk for complications such as cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis, ascending cholangitis, and pancreatitis.[3] It is also essential to differentiate an acute hepatic crisis from acute cholecystitis.

- Sickle cell cholangiopathy results from recurrent episodes of sickle cell crisis generating ischemic damage of the biliary tree secondary to end arterial injury. The initial insult causes dilated ducts. Repeated injury results in necrosis of the epithelium, followed by strictures of the biliary ducts. Histologically, this can show up as ischemic bile duct necrosis and biliary fibrosis. This manifestation can be complicated by ascending cholangitis, bilomas, and biliary abscess formation.