Surgery in hypertelorism is mainly for cosmetic purposes. It requires a major surgery that has to approach through intracranial as well as extracranial route. The pioneer in surgery for hypertelorism was Paul Tessier. It was he who demonstrated that orbits could be moved from there position without affecting vision. The aim of the surgery is to bring the two orbits together medially and correct any dystopia, correcting the nasal dorsal portion and removing excess of skin.

The timing of surgery is usually between 5 and 7 years. Before five years, the bone growth of the maxillary arch may be affected by inferior excision, which may affect dental formation. Moreover, the bones may not be stout enough to hold the osteotomies together. However, surgery has better predictability in adults; the psychological consequences of cosmetic blemish warrant early surgery. If there is associated craniosynostosis, it has to be corrected before one year of age independently.

Surgical options available are box osteotomy, facial bipartition, and U shaped osteotomy.

Approaches depend upon the preoperative evaluation. The choice of procedure is determined by the presence of associated abnormalities, the morphology of the maxillary arch, the axis of the orbit, and the degree of hypertelorism.

Box osteotomy: Normal maxillary arch and dental occlusion, orbital axis are normal, mild to moderate hypertelorism.

Facial bipartition: narrow maxillary arch with incisors being higher than molars, the axis of the orbit is oblique, the nasal fossa is narrow, severe hypertelorism.