Whipple disease is characterized by myriad findings related to the infectious involvement of several organ systems. The typical presentation includes gastrointestinal symptoms that resemble other malabsorption syndromes. The prominent symptoms are weight loss, diarrhea, arthralgias, fever, and abdominal pain. Diarrhea has the usual features of steatorrhea but may be watery. Occult gastrointestinal bleeding is common (up to 80% of patients). Gross bleeding can also be present sometimes.

Peripheral edema reflects hypoproteinemia from protein-losing enteropathy and poor nutrition. Arthralgias are migratory, nondestructive, and involve large joints. They often precede intestinal manifestation. The articular attacks are usually acute in onset and last for hours to days. Sacroiliitis is common (20% to 30%), but ankylosing spondylitis is rare. Fever is also present in 30% to 50% of patients.

At some point, at least one-third of patients will have involvement of the heart. Pericarditis and endocarditis are common (50% to 75%) but rarely produce significant symptoms. Apical systolic murmurs are detected in 25% of patients. Friction rubs and congestive heart failure develop in up to 10% of patients. Patients who develop central nervous system (CNS) involvement may have signs of frontal release, ataxia, or clonus. Supranuclear ophthalmoplegia has also been reported in the medical literature.

Other neurological features described in these patients include confusion, seizures, delirium, cognitive impairment, abnormal body movements, hypersomnia, and extrapyramidal symptoms. Post-mortem examination reveals that the central nervous system is affected in 90% of patients, but clinical involvement becomes evident in only 10% to 40% of patients. Physical examination of patients will reveal peripheral lymphadenopathy in about 50% of the cases. Hyperpigmentation around the malar and orbital areas, hyperkeratosis, purpura, abdominal distension, glossitis, cheilitis, gingivitis, Chovstek or Trousseau sign can also be seen.