The overall prognosis for patients who sustain rectal trauma is again multifactorial, including but not limited to patient’s age, comorbidities, hemodynamics, concomitant injuries, and, as discussed, the location of injury (intraperitoneal compared to extraperitoneal). Despite advances in trauma guidelines, mortality rates en total remain between 3 and 10% with additional morbidity of 18 to 21%.

Brown et al. performed a retrospective review from 2004 to 2015, of all patients sustaining a traumatic rectal injury at 22 participating level 1 trauma centers. They demonstrated patients with intraperitoneal rectal injuries that underwent proximal diversion sustained more abdominal complications thereafter than those that did not (22% vs. 10% p=0.003). Further independent risk factors for intra-abdominal complications in patients with intraperitoneal injury included a high-grade injury (defined as AAST grade greater than II) or if the mechanism of injury was of penetrating in nature. Regardless of proximal diversion, there was no difference in overall mortality (3% vs. 2% p=0.66), excluding patients that died within 48 hours of hospital arrival.

Prognosis is similar concerning extraperitoneal injury. The same study showed no difference in mortality in the extraperitoneal rectal injury population, with proximal diversion, found to be (2% vs. 1% p=0.55), again excluding those that died within 48 hours of arrival. After multivariate analysis, independent risk factors for complications with extraperitoneal injuries were those that received distal rectal washout (OR 3.4 p=0.008) and presacral drain placement (OR 2.6 p=0.02).

Although only selectively indicated for destructive extraperitoneal rectal injuries, proximal diversion and creation of an ostomy are important to note for prognosis, as this holds 25 to 55% complications incidence in and of itself.