**“The great mimicker”**

Gastrointestinal tuberculosis is known as the great mimicker. It has been reported to mimic esophageal cancer, esophageal ulcers and tumors, gastric ulcers, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer, and sarcomas.

It has also been known to appear clinically similar to acute infections, such as appendicitis, colitis, acute cholecystitis, and necrotizing fasciitis.

**Differentiation from Crohn Disease**

Intestinal TB has very commonly been mistaken for Crohn disease.

There have been several strategies aimed at distinguishing the two:

1.Clinical features:

One meta-analysis found that patients with TB were more commonly found to have a fever, night sweats, lung involvement, and ascites. Diarrhea, hematochezia, perianal disease, and the presence of extraintestinal manifestations were seen more in Crohn disease.

2. Endoscopic features:

TB ulcers tend to be circumferential/transverse and surrounded by inflamed mucosa, with caseating granulomas. TB is also likely to produce a patulous ileocecal valve with heaped-up folds or a destroyed valve with a “fish-mouth” opening.

Crohn disease is associated with longitudinal ulcers, aphthous ulcers, a cobblestone appearance, luminal stricture, mucosal bridge, skip lesions, and recto-sigmoid involvement.

3. Diagnostic tests:

Patients with GI TB have lower hemoglobin levels, lower serum albumin, and high C-reactive protein (CRP) levels; these may help differentiate it from Crohn disease.

PCR testing for M. tuberculosis in tissue samples is highly specific for intestinal TB and may help in differentiating from Crohn disease.

Anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies have been shown to be unreliable in the differentiation of the two diseases.

4. Use of prediction models:

Several multi-parameter prediction models have been developed to differentiate the two diseases. However, these models have several distinct disadvantages, such as complex formulae, small sample size, heterogeneity of parameters, and lack of validation in different populations.

5. Use of therapeutic trial:

Some researchers and groups have recommended a therapeutic trial of ATT to differentiate the two diseases.

**Intestinal Sarcoidosis**

Intestinal TB may also be mistaken for intestinal sarcoidosis, and differentiation between the two conditions may be difficult, even with biopsy.

- Crohn disease

- Colorectal cancer

- Esophageal cancer

- Esophageal ulcers and tumors

- Gastric cancer

- Gastric ulcers

- Sarcomas

- Sarcoidosis