Abnormal levels of hCG are associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes such as molar pregnancies and fetal growth restrictions. The intrauterine environment must be maintained with certain conditions to support fetal development and growth properly. The intrauterine conditions are dependent upon placental function as the placenta is the main source of fetal nourishment. Suboptimal conditions due to an atrophic placenta may contribute to the risk of low birth weight. Several studies support the correlation between low birth weight and the risk of developing chronic conditions such as diabetes and hypertension later in life.

A molar pregnancy, or hydatidiform mole, is a tumor arising from the trophoblast, which surrounds a blastocyst and subsequently develops into the chorion and amnion.

The development of molar pregnancy correlates with fluxes in the levels of free beta-subunit of hCG. In a complete molar pregnancy, it is not uncommon to see large theca-lutein cysts as a result of increased stimulation of the ovaries by excess free beta-subunit hCG.

Patients with a history of prior molar pregnancy are at a 10-fold greater risk of a second hydatidiform pregnancy compared to the general population. The recommendation is that these women have their hCG levels monitored throughout pregnancy, as well as undergo evaluation by early ultrasonography.

Several clinical studies support the association of hCG concentration abnormalities with adverse fetal outcomes. This association varies with gestational age as hCG levels fluctuate throughout the pregnancy.

In the first trimester, low levels of hCG have correlated with spontaneous abortion and preeclampsia. Some studies have shown an association between low hCG concentrations (especially of the free beta-subunit of hCG) during the latter half of the first trimester and low birth weight due to attenuated fetal growth. Interestingly, some studies show that higher maternal hCG concentrations at the end of the first trimester are associated with fetal growth acceleration only in female-sex fetuses.

In the second trimester, high levels of hCG have associations with gestational hypertension, spontaneous abortion, preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction (low birth weight), and pre-term delivery; this is in contrast to the association of low levels of hCG and low birth weight observed in the first trimester of pregnancy.