The blood supply to the pelvis and pelvic joints originates from the descending aorta. The aorta bifurcates into the common iliac arteries at approximately the level of the umbilicus. The common iliac arteries bifurcate at the pelvic brim into the internal and external iliac arteries. The external iliac exits the pelvis through the inguinal ligament, which becomes the femoral artery supplying the lower extremity. The internal iliac artery splits into two major divisions, the anterior and posterior divisions of the internal iliac artery, which supply the pelvic organs, perineum, gluteal muscles, and nearby structures.

The anterior division further divides into several branches that vary significantly, partly due to differences in male and female reproductive anatomy. Anterior division arteries often include the umbilical, uterine (in females), superior vesicular, vaginal (in females), inferior vesicular (in males, variable in females), obturator, middle rectal, inferior gluteal, and internal pudendal arteries. These arteries supply pelvic organs, such as the bladder, prostate, uterus, vaginal canal, and seminal glands, as well as the pelvic floor, femoral head, and ilium. The posterior division of the internal iliac artery includes fewer branches, including the iliolumbar, lateral sacral, and superior gluteal arteries. The median sacral artery is an additional nearby vessel that arises from the bifurcation of the abdominal aorta.

The pelvic joints are served by the nearby arteries with considerable anatomic variation in this region. The bony portion of the lumbosacral joint is supplied by the iliolumbar, lateral sacral, and median sacral arteries. The lumbosacral intervertebral disc is avascular and served by diffusion from the adjacent vertebrae. Given its large territory, the sacroiliac joint is supplied by several vessels, including the iliolumbar, superior gluteal, and lateral sacral arteries. The sacrococcygeal joint receives its blood supply from lateral and median sacral arteries. The pubic symphysis is primarily supplied by the inferior epigastric, obturator, and deep external pudendal arteries.

The pelvis contains several groups of lymph nodes, including the internal, external, and common iliac lymph nodes. Additionally, they include the sacral, pararectal, lumbar, and inguinal nodes. There is an extensive network between the groups of lymph nodes; however, the nodes trace the venous system back to the common iliac veins and superiorly drain towards the cisterna chyli before traversing the thoracic duct. Extensive communication through rich lymphatic channels exacerbates the spread of cancer between the abdominal and pelvic organs.