A complete blood count is necessary, including hemoglobin, hematocrit, and MCV to determine anemia type.

For microcytic anemia, the presentation will determine the types of studies. If a patient is a menstruating woman with an MCV under 80, a Von Willebrand Factor and/or thyroid panel may be obtained to determine the underlying cause of menorrhagia as well as full menstrual history. On the contrary, a patient with microcytic anemia over the age of 50, is required to obtain a colonoscopy to determine if the iron deficiency originates from a polyp or neoplasm within the colon. Other investigations include urea breath test and an upper endoscopy to test for Helicobacter pylori infection if the patient complains of gastritis type pain. Anemia of chronic disease requires myriad tests if the underlying cause is unknown. Many of these tests include rheumatoid factor, Anti-double stranded DNA antibodies, Anti-neutrophil cytoplastic antibodies**,**anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies, a urine spot test to determine the renal function with GFR, creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen, HLA-B27 screening, and many more rheumatologic antibodies. Also, screening for malignancies with a CT scan or chest X-ray might be a consideration for the anemia of chronic disease. If lead poisoning is a possibility, a blood lead level is the gold-standard test. However, if other causes of sideroblastic anemia are suspected, a bone marrow biopsy is required. Medical history is very important to uncover the underlying etiology. In this case, the patient may be able to avoid a bone marrow biopsy. If beta-thalassemia is suspected based on history and physical examination, hemoglobin electrophoresis will help determine the amount of AA vs. A2 hemoglobin is present.  Genetic analysis is superior tests for alpha-thalassemia.

PBS and urine analysis would be beneficial to determine whether the hemolysis is intravascular or extravascular for normocytic anemia. If schistocytes are present and there is hemoglobin in the urine, it is indicative of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. If there are no schistocytes on PBS and no hemoglobin in the urine analysis but hemolysis is still suspected, the PBS can also give some insight. If there are spherocytes present, a Direct Coombs test is performed to determine whether autoimmune hemolytic anemia or splenic recruitment from hereditary spherocytosis and help determine the diagnosis.

For macrocytic anemia, history and physical examination is very important to determine whether the patient is a chronic alcoholic, is predisposed to liver failure, malabsorptive disease, or has a vegan diet lacking proper vitamin supplementation. Both vitamin B12 and folate levels are necessary, especially since folate can easily mask vitamin B12 deficiency. If orotic aciduria is suspected, urine analysis for orotic acid and ammonia is essential. The ammonia test can differentiate a deficiency in ornithine transcarbamylase versus orotic aciduria. Due to the rarity of Diamond-Blackfan anemia, the history and physical examination with CBC are efficient. However, a follow-up CT scan may be performed to screen for malignancies due to predisposition.