For most tumors, there is no purely medical treatment. The major exception is the systemic treatment of lymphoid hyperplasia, as discussed below. Most tumors require either biopsy or excision as initial management. Depending on the identity of the tumor, some patients will then need extended treatment even after the initial surgery. Rarely, a small, stable, or slow-growing lesion may be monitored without surgical intervention if there are no concerns of possible malignancy or if surgery is unable to be performed.

Pleomorphic adenoma is treated with complete surgical excision, including the surrounding pseudocapsule. This may be accomplished through an anterior orbitotomy or a lateral orbitotomy approach. The lateral orbital wall may need to be removed to provide full access to the tumor and allow for easy delivery of the tumor from the orbit without the risk of capsule rupture.

Most well-circumscribed and supposed benign lesions are treated similarly to pleomorphic adenoma and excised completely. It has been suggested that incisional biopsies can be considered in unclear or equivocal cases. Even for pleomorphic adenoma, recurrence and transformation risks are negligible if the surgical tract is also excised at the time of bulk tumor removal.

Dacryops can be monitored but may become symptomatic with growth causing diplopia, infection of the cyst contents, or be aesthetically displeasing to the patient. In these cases, the cyst can be removed by excision or marsupialization. The most common approach is transconjunctival through the superotemporal fornix, given direct access to the lacrimal gland. Still, care needs to be taken to preserve the lacrimal gland ducts, especially for palpebral lobe lesions.

Lymphoid hyperplasia is usually treated without surgery. Commonly, the initial treatment is high-dose systemic steroids, with or without concurrent radiation therapy. In some cases, rituximab has been used to control lymphoproliferative lesions. Rarely, lesions can be removed or debulked surgically.