Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction is an uncommon cause of bowel obstruction and is generally considered a diagnosis of exclusion. A thorough assessment, including contrast imaging, is necessary before the diagnosis of ACPO can be definitively made. Furthermore, the evaluation must assess for potentially reversible causes of ACPO and attempt to determine if any complications, such as ischemia or perforation, are present or imminent.

Laboratory tests, although non-specific to the diagnosis, complete a thorough evaluation. If not associated with underlying disease, leukocytosis, elevated CRP, or lactate are concerning for bowel ischemia. Liver function tests, lipase, and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) should be obtained to help rule out other causes of acute abdominal pain. Electrolyte abnormalities, including magnesium and calcium, are common and have been reported present in up to two-thirds of post-operative patients. Thyroid function should be evaluated if a recent test is not available. Patients with diarrhea should be evaluated for Clostridium difficile toxin. Consider blood cultures in patients who appear septic.

Appropriate imaging is essential to the diagnosis and management of ACPO. Plain radiography, consisting of upright and supine abdominal films, is commonly performed but is limited in its utility. Expected findings include varying degrees of colonic dilatation, normal haustral markings, and lack of signs of mechanical obstruction such as volvulus. Free air on acute abdominal series increases concern for perforation but does not rule perforation out. Perhaps the most important use of plain radiography is to measure the degree of initial colonic dilatation and for serial imaging during observation after diagnosis is made. CT scan with oral and intravenous (IV) contrast is the preferred modality for diagnosis. Rectal contrast is helpful but has been associated with iatrogenic perforation. Gastrografin or other water-soluble enteral contrast should be used. CT will rule out anatomic or mechanical bowel obstruction as well as evaluate for more obscure causes of dilatation, such as retroperitoneal hematoma or abdominal abscess. CT scans can also show signs of ischemia, such as mucosal wall thickening, submucosal edema, or gas. Classically, ACPO on CT scan will show isolated dilatation of the cecum and ascending colon with a gradual transition zone or "cut off" at the splenic flexure. If a CT scan is not available, and peritonitis is not appreciated during the examination, a contrast enema study can be performed, which has a reported sensitivity of up to 96% in making a diagnosis of ACPO. Lastly, diagnostic colonoscopy should be avoided in all patients with suspected ACPO, as gas insufflation is associated with an increased risk of perforation.