In healthy individuals, levels of glucose in the circulation are strictly regulated. The exit and entry of glucose are predominantly regulated by insulin and glucagon respectively. During an overnight fast of 10 to 14 hours, glucose is produced primarily in the liver by glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. This is known as endogenous glucose production (EGP) and is directly related to both fat-free mass and fasting plasma glucose (FPG) concentration

IFG and IGT are insulin resistance conditions with associated beta cell dysfunction. Initially, there is a compensatory increase in insulin secretion which maintains glucose levels in normal range. As the condition progresses, beta cells change, and the insulin secretion is unable to maintain glucose homeostasis, producing glucose intolerance. Under normal physiological conditions, postprandial insulin release is not in steady state but pulsatile. This pattern of pulsatile secretion  is blunted in individuals with glucose intolerance, reflecting the lost ability of beta cells to sense and respond to changes in plasma glucose levels.

Due to insulin resistance, the FPG concentrations are higher in GI than in those with NGT. In overweight or obese individuals, increased liver fat oxidation is also seen.

The two subsets of glucose intolerance, IFG and IGT differ in the site of insulin resistance as well as the pattern of insulin secretion. IFG is characterized predominantly by hepatic insulin resistance and normal muscle insulin sensitivity. People with IFG show a defect in early phase insulin secretory response to glucose. IGT is mainly associated with muscle insulin resistance. In addition to the defective early-phase insulin-secretory response, IGT also shows a severe deficit in late-phase insulin secretion. Evolving data suggest a role for impaired lipolysis, abnormal incretin biology, glucagon dysregulation and inflammation in both IGT and IFG Nathan DM 2007