Diagnosis should be clinically made, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy started with pending organism identification.

**Microbiological Diagnosis**

- Public health control

- Antibiotic sensitivity

- To exclude other organisms

**Gram Stain**

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in meningitis shows gram-negative intracellular and extracellular diplococci.

- Skin lesions in meningococcemia: Needle aspiration and scrapings are Gram-stained

- Buffy coat of blood Gram stain

**Culture**

- CSF is inoculated onto chocolate agar and incubated in 3% to 5% CO2

- Specimens from mucosa are inoculated into selective medium- Thayer-Martin chocolate agar to which vancomycin, colistin, and nystatin are added to inhibit commensals.

- Blood culture: 40% to 75% positive before starting treatment. CSF cultures are positive in 90% of untreated patients with meningitis

- Combining the results of blood and CSF cultures with CSF Gram stain identifies 94% of meningitis antigen.

**Antigen Detection**

- The meningococcal antigen in CSF (serum and urine have cross-reactions): Latex agglutination; Poor sensitivity and specificity for capsular B type

- PCR assays can detect meningococcal DNA in CSF, plasma, and serum. Sensitivity and specificity are above 90%. It is more sensitive than blood culture. Diagnosis can be made in 4 to 8 hours. PCR assays are less affected by previous antibiotic therapy.

**Imaging**

- If the patient is in a coma, computed tomography (CT) brain imaging is helpful to exclude intracranial hemorrhage.

**Hematologic and Metabolic Abnormalities**

In meningococcal meningitis, CSF, WBC count, peripheral blood leukocyte count and C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and ESR are elevated. CSF has raised protein, low glucose, and gram-negative Diplococcus.

- In meningococcal septicemia, metabolic derangements like hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia, and metabolic acidosis are seen in severe cases. Anemia, coagulopathy, decreased protein C, fibrinogen, prothrombin, and coagulation factors (V, VII, and X) are also seen.