# Continuing Education Activity

Adverse events (AE) frequently occur in our medical system, and at least one in ten patients are affected. An AE is a harmful and negative outcome that happens when a patient has been provided with medical care. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of an adverse event and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to evaluate and manage the adverse event.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the importance of monitoring patients for an adverse event. 
- Identify the common causes of an adverse event.
- Review the management of an adverse event.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by an adverse event.

# Introduction

Adverse events (AE) frequently occur in any medical system, and at least one in ten patients are affected.

# Etiology

Adverse events are caused by medical treatment, which injures a patient.

Poor communication and improper orders or documentation may also contribute to medical errors.

# Epidemiology

In the United States, over 250,000 patients who receive medical care each year will experience an adverse event.

A systemic analysis review found an annual incidence of adverse events of around 10%, among which 50% were found to be preventable.

- Relating to surgical specialties

- Medications and fluid-related

- Healthcare-associated infections

# History and Physical

Any patient who has any untoward effect or outcome experienced with medical treatment is experiencing an adverse event. This can include a wide range of symptoms that fall between the parameters of temporary harm to death.

# Evaluation

When a severe adverse event occurs, it must be evaluated. Evaluation of adverse events should include a patient assessment and related causes. A patient who is receiving treatment should be educated about any potential side effects, and the health care provider should be monitoring the patient for such effects. Symptoms reported by the patient should be assessed. Severe adverse events, such as patient injury or death, are reported and evaluated as sentinel events. The agency will assess the event and discuss the outcome and potential alternative treatments that may have been necessary.

As information technology continues to evolve, there are many systems developed to record or even prevent these events.

In the United States, many of our healthcare facilities include electronic event reporting systems to collect the voluntary report of an adverse event, but the rates vary widely among facilities.

The study pertaining to the incidence of adverse events in the hospital can be analyzed by the usage of the Global trigger tool and the Harvard method.

There are various strategies in improving the patient's safety and upraising the quality of the relevant tools of quality assurance, such as Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) and the Root Cause Analysis (RCA).

# Treatment / Management

Adverse events should be treated at the patient level and ultimately managed at the systemic level. When a patient experiences an adverse event, the healthcare provider should provide timely and appropriate treatment. For example, a patient who experiences nausea can be given an antiemetic medication. Adverse events that occur within the medical system must be reported.

Databases of reported adverse events can provide valuable information that can be used to make the necessary changes in care that can decrease or eliminate adverse events.

# Differential Diagnosis

An adverse event is associated with medical treatment. Therefore a medical treatment occurred before or during the occurrence of the adverse event.

# Prognosis

A patient who experiences an adverse event from medical care can become harmed or deceased.

# Complications

The ultimate complication from an adverse event is multispectral patterns of patient harm.

The mortality following the adverse events in the hospital is reported at a median of around 8%, and the annual secondary cost factor procured in managing them is estimated at around 17 billion dollars.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients can deter the incidence of adverse events by becoming involved and knowledgeable in their care.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Adverse events frequently occur in healthcare. Healthcare providers must ensure that proper care is given and that patients are monitored for any adverse events. The fragmentation of our current healthcare system poses additional strains on the prevention of adverse events.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Every member of the healthcare team can play a part in decreasing the incidence of adverse events. Proper prevention, reporting, follow-up, and analysis can all contribute to better care and the lowered incidence of adverse events. Healthcare team outcomes can be improved through the analysis of adverse events and the development of safer or alternative treatments.

The list of reportable adverse events include:

- Surgical events - wrong patient, wrong site, wrong procedure, retained foreign body

- Product/device related - contaminated products, air embolism

- Patient protection events - patient elopement, suicide

- Care management issues - medication errors, mismatched blood transfusion

- Environmental factors - burn, electric shock, wrong gas

- Criminal events - sexual assault, impersonation, physical assault

There is a pivotal need for developing a 'safety first' culture to prioritize our accountability in safeguarding the health of our patients. The implementation of WHO's surgical safety checklist can be the yardstick in minimizing the occurrence of adverse events in surgical specialties.