The American Academy of Otolaryngology has issued clinical practice guidelines for tinnitus. These include:

- Stress Reduction: This includes using biofeedback, measured breathing, etc. Although stress itself is not a cause of tinnitus, as in any condition, stress and anxiety can make the condition worse.

- Cognitive Therapy: The more the patient understands what tinnitus is and is not the less negative effect. Once the patient fully cognizes - understands that tinnitus is similar to itching, the symptoms are reduced.

- Masking: When the body hears the same sound from the cell phone or sound device, this reduces the symptoms.  There are various forms of masking. Essentially these masking sounds take the attention away from the internal tinnitus sound and replace it with relaxing sounds.

- Introduction of the same sound

- Introduction of an altered sound

- Music with the tinnitus sound removed

- White noise or pleasant sounds

- Sleep improvement: Tinnitus can affect normal sleep and therapy should be directed to better sleep hygiene.

The official guidelines stress that no medication cures tinnitus. However various combinations of magnesium, alpha-lipoic acid, N-acetyl cysteine, and others have been tested for protection of hearing from noise. When these are effective, it is difficult to differentiate from the placebo effect or from the impact of having a program where the patient feels they are in charge of bringing the brain into the healing process.

Recently beneficial results have been reported using deep brain stimulation. In theory, this alters unwanted neural circuits.

Primary to management is that tinnitus patients must never be told to live with it. Emphasis should be on reducing stress and given a program to follow. Tinnitus Retraining Therapy and Neuronomics are common programs used in therapy by individuals trained in their application. In Tinnitus Retraining the patient adapts to hearing the tinnitus; in Neuronomics the patient learns to ignore the tinnitus.

A hearing aid is always of benefit when tinnitus is associated with hearing loss. Some aids come with built-in soothing or masking sounds. Success is variable.

Medication such as alprazolam can reduce symptoms, but can have adverse effects including habituation.

Anti-depressants may be indicated for patients who do not respond to protocol therapy.