Systemic autoimmune disorders affect 3-5% of the general population, and ANAs are one of the few specific disease markers in their diagnosis.

**Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)**

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disorder that affects nearly every system in the body. Individuals have variations in disease presentation, where one system often deteriorates significantly more than the others. Clinical manifestations may include fatigue, arthritis, vasculitis, nephritis, pleuritis, and myocarditis. Clinical manifestations and immunologic criteria are required to establish a definitive diagnosis of SLE. Immunologic criteria include abnormal ANA titers in the absence of drugs and the presence of anti-dsDNA or anti-Sm antibodies.

**Scleroderma**

Scleroderma, or systemic sclerosis, involves progressive fibrosis of the skin and organs. Scleroderma presents either as a limited form or a diffuse cutaneous form. The diagnostic basis is a combination of clinical symptoms and increased ANA titers. Scl-70 is highly correlated with scleroderma, while anti-centromere antibodies are moderately correlated.

**Myositis**

Polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) are a group of inflammatory disorders that primarily affect the proximal muscles and cause inflammation. The primary clinical manifestation of PM is the gradual weakening of the proximal muscles. Likewise, DM presents with gradually increasing proximal weakness. Still, cutaneous symptoms such as facial erythema, poikiloderma in sun-exposed areas, and Gottron's papules on the extensor surfaces of the hands are also present. General ANA testing is used to diagnose PM and DM, while anti-Jo1 antibodies are associated with 30% of patients with PM/DM.

**Sjogren's**

Sjogren's syndrome is a chronic autoimmune pathology that destroys the exocrine glands, including the lacrimal and salivary glands. Diagnosis centers on clinical manifestations and serologic testing. Clinical manifestations of Sjogren's syndrome include chronic dry eye, dry mouth, Raynaud's phenomenon, arthritis, and bronchitis. When there is a suspicion of Sjogren's syndrome, testing for anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB titers is the protocol.

**Psoriatic Arthritis**

Psoriatic arthritis is a subtype of inflammatory arthritis seen in association with associated with psoriasis (a member of the spondyloarthritis family). This condition can present a diagnostic challenge for clinicians as the clinical presentation can be relatively subtle. There are several case reports regarding the potential long-term consequences and conditions associated with psoriatic arthritis, and these associations can ultimately compromise the patient's outcome.