Human immunodeficiency virus is transmitted sexually, via blood transfusions, sharing intravenous needles, and from the mother to a child during the birth process and breastfeeding. Human immunodeficiency virus has distinct phases: viral transmission, acute seroconversion, acute retroviral syndrome, recovery and seroconversion, asymptomatic chronic infection, and symptomatic human immunodeficiency virus infection or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. This activity focuses on acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and the sequelae of chronic human immunodeficiency virus infection and reviews the etiology, epidemiology, evaluation, and management options for these conditions. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing this complex, lifelong disorder.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the role of CD4 count and viral load in evaluating the type of acquired immune deficiency syndrome related illnesses that a patient may be experiencing.

- Identify some of the main organ systems involved in acquired immune deficiency syndrome related illnesses.
- Explain why patients should be advised to start trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole at CD4 counts less than 200 cells/L, and azithromycin at CD4 counts less than 50 cells/µL.

- Summarize collaboration among primary care providers and specialty-trained providers as an interprofessional team when caring for patients with complications of long-term human immunodeficiency virus infection, antiretroviral medication side effects, and complications of immunosuppression.