Risk factors for coronary artery disease classify into modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors.

A 2019 article indicated that age, sex, and race captured 63% to 80% of prognostic performance, while modifiable risk factors contributed only modestly. Yet, control of modifiable risk factors led to substantial reductions in CAD events.

- Age: CAD prevalence increases after 35 years of age in both men and women. The lifetime risk of developing CAD in men and women after 40 years of age is 49% and 32%, respectively.

- Gender: Men are at increased risk compared to women.

- Ethnicity: Blacks, Hispanics, Latinos, and Southeast Asians, are ethnic groups with an increased risk of CAD morbidity and mortality.

- Family history: Family history is also a significant risk factor. Patients with a family history of premature cardiac disease younger than 50 years of age have an increased CAD mortality risk.

Modifiable risk factors have a smaller but still significant role.

- Hypertension: 

- About 1 out of every three patients have hypertension. Hypertension and smoking were responsible for the largest number of deaths in a 2009 review comparing twelve modifiable risk factors.
- Hypertension has long been a major risk factor for heart disease through both oxidative and mechanical stress it places on the arterial wall.
- A 1996 article reported that in the Framingham cohort, a systolic of 20 mmHg and diastolic of 10 mmHg increase was observed from age 30 years to 65 years.

- Hyperlipidemia:

- Hyperlipidemia is considered the second most common risk factor for ischemic heart disease.
- According to the World Health Organization, raised cholesterol caused an estimated 2.6 million deaths.
- A recent cross-sectional study utilizing the coronary calcium score indicated a 55%, 41%, and 20% higher prevalence of hypercholesterolemia, combined hyperlipidemia, and low HDL-c, respectively.
- Elevated triglycerides have also been implicated in coronary artery disease; however, the relationship is more complicated as the association becomes attenuated when adjusted for other risk factors such as central adiposity, insulin resistance, and poor diet. Thus, it is challenging to determine an isolated effect of triglycerides on coronary artery disease.

- Diabetes mellitus:  

- The Center for Disease Control (CDC) reports that more than one out of every three adult patients in the United States have prediabetes, which puts one at risk of developing type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. 
- The heart disease rate is 2.5 times higher in men and 2.4 times higher in women in adult patients with diabetes compared to those without diabetes.
- A 2017 meta-analysis indicated that patients with diabetes with an A1C > 7.0 had an 85% higher likelihood (hazard ratio 1.85, 95% CI 1.14-2.55) of cardiovascular mortality, compared to those with an A1C < 7.0%.  It also revealed that non-diabetic patients with an A1C > 6.0% had a 50% higher likelihood (hazard ratio, 1.50, 95% CI 1.01-2.21) of cardiovascular mortality compared to those with an A1C of < 5.0%. Researchers also reported a significant study heterogeneity.
- Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with diabetes.

- Obesity:   

- 69% of adults in the United States are overweight or obese. 35% of adults are obese.
- Obesity is an independent risk factor for CAD and also increases the risk of developing other CAD risk factors, including hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus.
- One recent study indicated that obese patients were twice as likely to have coronary heart disease (hazard ratio 2.00, 95% CI 1.67-2.40) after adjustment for demographics, smoking, physical activity, and alcohol intake.
- A 1998 research study and 2016 review article conferred that obesity is associated with more complex, raised, and hi-grade atherosclerotic coronary artery lesions.
- The "obesity paradox" has also been reported. Despite evidence pointing to obesity as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity, some authors have described better outcomes in overweight and obese patients. There is an ongoing debate in light of this conflicting data.

- Smoking:

- The Food & Drug Administration (FDA) estimates that cardiovascular disease causes 800,000 deaths and 400,000 premature deaths per year. About one-fifth and one-third of these result from smoking, respectively. 
- A 2015 meta-analysis revealed that smoking resulted in a 51% increased risk (21 studies, RR 1.51, 95% CI 1.41.1-62) of coronary heart disease in patients with diabetes.
- A separate 2015 meta-analysis revealed that smoking resulted in twice the risk of cardiovascular disease for current smokers and a 37% increase in risk with former smokers, among patients > 60 years old.
- Nonsmokers regularly exposed to second-hand smoke also have a 25% to 30% increased risk of coronary heart disease compared to those not exposed.

- Poor diet: 

- The association between saturated fat and coronary heart disease has been a journey. Initially, thought to be a significant causative factor in the development of coronary heart disease, more recent reviews have cast more doubt on this association, placing more of an emphasis on the re-emergence of refined sugars as the main risk factor.
- Research has more clearly shown that trans fat increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, through adverse effects on lipids, endothelial function, insulin resistance, and inflammation.
- A 2016 systemic review revealed that soft drinks and sweetened beverages were associated with a 22% higher risk of myocardial infarction.
- A 2014 prospective cohort study revealed a 30% and 175% higher chance of cardiovascular disease mortality in the groups who consumed 10% to 24.9% (adjusted hazard ratio 1.30, 95% CI 1.09-1.55) and 25% (adjusted hazard ratio 2.75, 95% CI 1.40-5.42) more calories from added sugar compared with those who consumed less than 10% calories from added sugar.
- More recent studies and systematic review articles have focused on red and processed meat consumption. These articles have revealed a consistently higher risk of coronary heart disease and cardiovascular events ranging from 15% to 29% higher risk with red meat and 23% to 42% higher risk with processed meat consumption. Most studies included approximately 50 to 100 grams per day of consumption.

- Sedentary lifestyle: 

- Exercise is a protective factor in preventing the development of CAD. A 2004 case-control study performed in 52 countries, representing all continents, and involving 15,152 cases and 14,820 controls revealed a population attributable risk of 12.2% that physical inactivity has on myocardial infarction.
- Several observational studies have shown that individuals who self-select for exercise have lower morbidity and mortality. Mechanisms for this include enhanced production of endothelial nitrous oxide, more effective deactivation of reactive oxygen species, and improved vasculogenesis.

In addition to these traditional cardiovascular risk factors, novel risk factors have also been subject to research. These include:

- Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD):

- NAFLD has links to cardiovascular disease. It is also the most common chronic liver disease in developed countries.
- A 2017 meta-analysis revealed a 77% higher risk (RR 1.77, 95% CI 1.26-2.48) of cardiovascular events and over double the risk (RR 2.26, 95% CI 1.04-4.92) for coronary artery disease in patients with NAFLD.
- A more recent prospective study revealed that patients with NAFLD had greater than double the risk of cardiovascular events. Patients with liver fibrosis had a four-fold increase.

- Chronic kidney disease (CKD):

- CKD has been reported as an independent risk factor for coronary artery disease. Pro-inflammatory mediators, oxidative stress, and decreased nitric oxide production leading to endothelial dysfunction have been reported as possible mechanisms. Silent myocardial infarctions occur more commonly, likely due to the higher incidence of diabetic and uremic neuropathy in patients with CKD.
- CKD, with a GFR of 15-59, is noted as a risk-enhancing factor in the American Heart Association Guideline for the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease.

- Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): 

- The most common cause of mortality in SLE is cardiovascular disease. There is also a higher prevalence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in these patients. The mechanism is likely a pro-inflammatory effect on coronary microcirculation.
- Pericarditis is a common manifestation of SLE.

- Rheumatoid arthritis (RA):

- Estimates are that patients with RA have a 1.5 to 2.0 fold increased risk of coronary artery disease. Traditional risk factors such as body mass and lipoprotein levels also showed more unpredictable patterns in their predictive accuracy. The mechanism behind this associated risk is likely through a pro-inflammatory effect.
- Rheumatoid arthritis is also listed among the risk-enhancing factors in the American Heart Association Guideline for the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease.

- Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD):

- A 2017 meta-analysis noted that IBD is associated with a higher risk of coronary artery disease. However, the results were interpreted with caution due to the heterogeneity of the studies. The mechanism of the risk was uncertain, but again, it was thought to be due to a chronic inflammatory state.

- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV):

- HIV is understood to come with a higher risk of cardiovascular disease and its associated sequelae.
- A 2018 expert analysis from the American College of Cardiology noted that patients with HIV showed a 1.5 to 2-fold increased risk of coronary artery disease. The mechanism, again, was based on a pro-inflammatory state.

- Thyroid disease:

- The thyroid gland intricately links to cardiovascular function. Proposed mechanisms include the effect of thyroid hormone on dyslipidemia, cardiac function, atherosclerosis, vascular compliance, and cardiac arrhythmias; this is an area still under study.

- Testosterone:

- In 2014, the FDA released a required labeling change for low testosterone products for the use of low testosterone due to aging, due to a possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke. Subsequent studies and reviews have not been consistent in this correlation. Some reviews have even indicated a potential beneficial cardiovascular effect when treating low testosterone with testosterone supplementation. Further study is needed to provide more clarity on this specific topic.

- Vitamin D

- Vitamin D has been increasingly studied and debated over the past decade. Vitamin D deficiency has a link with an increased risk of coronary artery disease.

**Socioeconomic Status**

- Socioeconomic status is a significant risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Upstream determinants include financial strain, lack of affordable and nutritious food, exposure to domestic violence, and inadequate housing; this is an important consideration to consider given existing cardiovascular disease risk equations do not capture this.

**Women and Coronary Artery Disease**

- Although men are at higher risk than women of coronary artery disease, it is still the leading cause of death among women. Among women, only 54% were aware of this in 2009. Cardiovascular disease caused approximately 1 in 3 female deaths.

- Lack of awareness and understanding of coronary artery disease in women has also led to a disparity in health outcomes. There has been more focus on obstructive CAD and men compared to women.