1. Benign acral nevi are more likely to have pigment found in the furrows of the dermatoglyphic lines, as opposed to acral melanomas, which are more likely to have pigment accentuated in the elevated ridges. There is an adage saying "furrows are fine, ridges are risky," referring to the pigment accentuation viewed with magnification or dermoscopy.

2. Dirt on the soles (terra firma-forme dermatosis) can resemble acral nevi, but usually will rub off with an alcohol prep.

3. Tinea nigra, a pigmented fungus found in warm climates, has been mistaken for melanoma, and unnecessary surgeries have been performed on these lesions. A simple KOH-preparation will reveal the hyphae.

4. Talon noir (French for black heel) can resemble acral melanoma. This is simply blood in the stratum corneum from trauma, common from running or other activity. Examination with dermoscopy can often eliminate the need for biopsy.

5. Small incomplete biopsies can be misinterpreted as benign by the pathologist. It is best to sample the entire lesion, when possible. If the lesion is large, then alert the pathologist of the total lesion size on the requisition, to increase suspicion.

6. Shave biopsies are difficult to perform on thick acral skin and often result in samples that are too superficial. Usually, a punch biopsy or excisional biopsy is better.

7. Benign acral nevi can have pagetoid melanocytes (cells that ascend upward through the epidermis as do adenocarcinoma cells in Paget's disease) in one-third of cases, causing a misdiagnosis of acral melanoma. In benign acral nevi, the pagetoid cells are more likely to be limited to the central portion of the lesion, whereas in melanomas, the pagetoid cells are more likely to extend into the margins. Acral nevi have been called MANIAC nevi (melanocytic acral nevus with the intraepidermal ascent of melanocytes).