Alendronate, risedronate, and ibandronate are given orally, most commonly at weekly (alendronate, risedronate) or monthly (risedronate and ibandronate) intervals. The administration of zoledronic acid and pamidronate is intravenous, and there is also an intravenous preparation of ibandronate. Intravenous preparations are beneficial in patients who cannot tolerate oral bisphosphonates or where oral bisphosphonates are contraindicated, such as the presence or history of esophageal stricture.

Alendronate is given as 35 mg once weekly for the prophylaxis of osteoporosis in postmenopausal females and as 70 mg once weekly for the treatment of osteoporosis in men and women. For Paget disease of bone in males and females, alendronate is given orally as 40 mg once daily for six months, and risedronate is given 30 mg orally daily for two months. Risedronate is given as 35 mg once weekly and 150 mg once a month. Ibandronate sodium is given as 150 mg orally once a month or 3 mg intravenously every month. Zoledronic acid is given as 4 mg to 5 mg intravenously over at least 15 to 30 minutes every 12 months to treat osteoporosis. Pamidronate is given as 30 mg to 60 mg by slow intravenous infusion every 3 to 6 months for the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy, Paget disease, and bone metastasis.

Patients should receive supplemental calcium 1000 to 1200 mg/day and vitamin D 800 to 1000 international units/day if dietary intake is inadequate. Patients should take oral bisphosphonates as the first medication in the morning and more than 30 minutes before the first food intake, beverage (except water), or any other medication. Patients should receive instruction to stay upright, not to lay down for at least thirty minutes or until the first food intake of the day to reduce esophageal irritation/ulceration. Milk and milk products, coffee, orange juice, and food may decrease the absorption of oral bisphosphonates.