The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual; fifth edition (DSM-V), the principal authority on psychiatric diagnoses, strays from offering a hard definition of “psychosis.” Instead, they allow for psychotic disorders, primary or medically related, to be defined by abnormalities in one of the following five domains, which this activity will discuss in detail below. It will be useful to think of these five categories when the term “psychosis” arises in a medical setting.

- Delusions

- Hallucinations

- Disorganized thought

- Disorganized behavior

- Negative symptoms

**Delusions**are fixed, false beliefs for which a person lacks insight into, even in the face of evidence that proves contrary to their validity. A variety of different types of delusions exist. Persecutory delusions are the most common; this is where one believes someone or something is out to get them. Referential delusions are beliefs that things the patient sees and hears in the external environment are directed at them. Grandiose delusions are grand, magnificent, and self-inflating, yet unrealistic, views of oneself. Erotomanic delusions are when one believes others are in love with them. Nihilistic delusions are when one believes major catastrophes will occur. Somatic delusions are false beliefs regarding one’s own or other peoples body function. We can further separate delusions into two main categories: Bizarre and non-bizarre. Delusions are bizarre when they are outside the realm of possibility and defy the laws of the physician universe. For example, “Flying mutant alien chimpanzees have harvested my kidneys to feed my goldfish.” Non-bizarre delusions are potentially possible, although extraordinarily unlikely. For example: “The CIA is watching me 24 hours a day by satellite surveillance.” The delusional disorder consists of non-bizarre delusions.

**Hallucinations**are perceived experiences in the absence of an external stimulus sufficient to evoke such experience. By definition, they are not under voluntary control. Hallucinations may occur under any sensory modality (visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, proprioceptive, tactile, etc.), although auditory hallucinations are the most common in the schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Subjects usually experience these as voices “outside” one's head. Visual and tactile hallucinations predominate in severe alcohol withdrawals. Visual hallucinations are also a hallmark feature of Lewy body dementia.

**Disorganized thought**usually presents through the patient’s speech and general communication patterns. In our mental status examination, we should be able to say a person not suffering from a psychotic disorder exhibits a “logical” and “goal-directed” thought process. In psychosis, one can see loosened associations or sequences of unrelated or loosely related ideas. Circumstantial thought, or a “non-linear thought pattern,” is where a person is unable to give a direct answer to a question without excessive or unnecessary detail. Tangential thought is where a person continually drifts from the topic of conversation, never to return to the original point. Word salad is an unintelligible or incoherent jumble of words. Neologisms are made up of words or phrases. Perseveration is the repetition of words and statements.

**Disorganized behavior**consists of a broad spectrum of faulty goal-directed activity, which will usually lead to a decline in daily functioning. In psychosis, it is common to see patients with unpredictable and/or inappropriate emotional responses that are incongruent with the current situation, which may present as a lack of inhibition and lack of impulse control. Sometimes patients can be found performing nonsensical actions that would mostly be considered socially inappropriate. Catatonic behavior is a notable decrease in reactivity to the external environment, which can consist of psychomotor retardation, immobility, and severe rigidity with a lack of verbal response, to an excitatory state of aimless and unrestricted motor activity.

**Negative symptoms**are a decrease or loss in normal functioning, and its components can commonly be confused with those of depressive disorders. The prodrome phase of schizophrenia commonly presents with negative symptoms. Patients can present as inexpressive or emotionally blunted, and can be described as having a “flat affect.” They can exhibit simplistic or prosodic speech patterns, along with alogia (poverty of speech). Psychomotor retardation, lack of energy, interest, concentration, and pleasure in activities once found pleasurable (anhedonia) are all potential features as well.