Venous oxygen saturation has diagnostic, therapeutic as well as prognostic value in critically ill patients. As a diagnostic, derangement in venous oxygen saturation can ascertain the underlying etiology. The oxygen consumption by the tissues by the whole body (VO2) is usually independent of oxygen delivery (DO2). This is because a decrease in DO2 is compensated by an increase in VO2, thereby preventing tissue hypoxia. However, when a 'critical' DO2 is reached, and no further oxygen can be extracted, tissue hypoxia and lactic acidosis sets in. These changes are reflected in venous oximetry and must be interpreted correctly in conjunction with other hemodynamic parameters (CO, arterial oxygen content).

The cardiovascular response to an increase in oxygen requirement and VO2 is an increase in arterial oxygen content or an increase in CO. When these compensatory mechanisms fail to occur, and DO2 drops, a decrease in SvO2 is seen. SvO2 also drops if the compensatory mechanisms are insufficient to meet the metabolic demands of the tissues. SvO2 can drop to as low as 30-50% before tissue oxygen extraction is exhausted, and there is an onset of anaerobic metabolism. Venous oximetry is a therapeutic parameter for 'early goal-directed therapy' (EGDT) and is useful in critical conditions (such as sepsis) to monitor changes in SvO2 following interventions.

The following is a summary of the clinical conditions underlying SvO2 alterations:

**Increase in SvO2**

**1. Increase in DO2**

- Increase in CO

- Increase in arterial oxygen content

**2. Decrease in VO2**

- Hypothermia

- Sedation

- Analgesia

- Mechanical ventilation

- Sepsis

- Decreased oxygen extraction (cell death, A-V shunting)

**Decrease in SvO2**

**1. Decrease in DO2**

- Decrease in CO

- Decrease in arterial oxygen content (hypoxia, anemia)

**2. Increase in VO2**

- Pain

- Stress

- Shivering

- Hyperthermia

- Infection

- Seizures