**Normal T-wave Etiology**

Normally, the T wave is formed at the end of the last phase of ventricular repolarization. Ventricular repolarization is the process by which the ventricular myocytes return to their negative resting potential so they can depolarize again. While this phase of the cardiac cycle is rapid, an upright low amplitude broad hump following the QRS complex is seen in normal T wave morphology.

**Abnormal T-wave Etiology**

Abnormalities in the T-wave may represent variations of normal cardiac electrophysiology or signs pathology. Tall T-waves (also called hyper-acute T waves) can be an early sign of ST-elevation myocardial infarction. The morphology of the T waves can begin to broaden and peak within 30 minutes of complete coronary artery occlusion, and thus may be the earliest sign of myocardial infarction on the EKG. The T waves will be broadened and peaked in the leads corresponding to the artery occlusion.

Inverted T waves are associated with myocardial ischemia. The inversion of a T wave is not specific for ischemia, and the inversion itself does not correlate with a specific prognosis. However, if the clinical history is suggestive of ischemia in the setting of inverted T waves, this is correlative.

Hyperkalemia is a condition that can cause peaked T waves. Depending on the degree of hyperkalemia, the peaked T-waves may range from a low amplitude to tall peaks to a sinusoidal pattern on ECG. The mechanism of the T-wave morphologies is through inhibition of the positively charged extracellular potassium on repolarization of the myocardium. In initial ECG changes in hyperkalemia, the T waves become narrow, pointed, and tall; these changes will be seen in all leads on the EKG. As the hyperkalemia progresses, other EKG abnormalities may occur: decreased P wave height, a widened QRS, PR prolongation, and eventually, the ECG may become sinusoidal.

Several medications are indirectly associated with T wave abnormalities. Medications such as antiarrhythmics, digoxin, and diuretics can cause electrolyte abnormalities leading to changes in T wave appearance. A key to differentiating ischemia/infarction from electrolyte-induced T-wave changes is through the distribution of changes on ECG. Electrolyte abnormalities cause diffuse changes in the T-wave morphology throughout the ECG rather than specific to a coronary artery distribution.

Diffuse, deep, symmetrically inverted T waves may be seen in a severe central nervous system trauma or pathology. These are called cerebral T waves. Conditions associated with cerebral T waves are an ischemic stroke, intracranial bleed, and traumatic brain injury.