Tumors of the lacrimal gland are similar to tumors of the salivary glands due to their shared embryologic origins. The type of proliferating cell can organize the types of tumors, and the most common distinction is epithelial versus non-epithelial.

**Epithelial**

Nearly 50% of epithelial tumors of the lacrimal gland are malignant, though this may depend on referral patterns, geographic location, and patient population.

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is the most common malignant epithelial tumor, comprising 66% of malignant epithelial tumors. It commonly presents with globe displacement, proptosis, and ptosis; pain and frontotemporal numbness are more specific symptoms as adenoid cystic carcinoma is classically known for invading orbital nerves.

Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma (CEPA, also known as pleomorphic adenocarcinoma or malignant mixed tumor) is the second most common type of epithelial malignancy and, as the name suggests, transforms from a benign pleomorphic adenoma tumor, either from a previously biopsied or resected tumor (if taken piecemeal or if the capsule was ruptured during removal), or de novo from a primary pleomorphic adenoma without prior surgery.

Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) and adenocarcinoma not-otherwise-specified (NOS) are the next most common types. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a common salivary gland tumor but a rare lacrimal gland tumor. Adenocarcinoma NOS is a primary adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland that does not have features of the other listed types. Other epithelial malignancies include ductal carcinoma (similar to mammary ductal carcinoma), acinic cell carcinoma, myoepithelial carcinoma, epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma, cystadenocarcinoma, carcinosarcoma, polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma, sebaceous cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell carcinoma.

**Lymphoid**

The overwhelming majority of lacrimal gland lymphomas are non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphomas. The most common subtype is extranodal marginal zone lymphoma (EMZL, MALT lymphoma) which makes up to 40% of lacrimal gland lymphomas. It also may be associated with inflammatory diseases such as reactive (benign) lymphoid hyperplasia, IgG4-related disease, Sjogren syndrome, and gastric H. pylori infection.

Other subtypes include follicular lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), mantle cell lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma. Lymphomas present with painless growth and usually minimal signs of inflammation. Orbital lesions often precede systemic lymphoma presentation, but the disease may be isolated to just the orbit without every developing systemic disease.

**Mesenchymal**

Malignant mesenchymal tumors of the lacrimal gland are very rare, with vascular lesions most common.

**Metastasis**

Metastases to the lacrimal gland from systemic cancers are exceedingly rare since there are no lymph nodes in the lacrimal gland. These cases are described in the literature in isolated case reports, and the most common primary site is the breast.