The formation of the nervous system begins with the process called neurulation which follows gastrulation and results in the development of the neural tube. During week three of development, the notochord secretes signaling factors to induce the transformation of the overlying ectoderm to neuroectoderm and the formation of the neural plate. Through folding and closure of the neural folds, the neural tube is formed. In the formation of the spinal cord, the basal plate, largely expressing Sonic hedgehog (Shh), induces the differentiation of motor areas ventrally, and the alar plate, primarily expressing bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) and Wnt factors, induces sensory area formation dorsally. It should be noted that these signaling factors induce appropriate development along a concentration gradient with the involvement of modulating factors and other signaling factors unmentioned here; the plates and their effects are not segregated.

The cranial parts of the CNS are formed from the prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon (cranial to caudal) which are present during week four of development. In week five, the prosencephalon develops into the telencephalon and diencephalon, and the rhombencephalon becomes the metencephalon and myelencephalon. The telencephalon will ultimately become the cerebral hemispheres and basal nuclei; the diencephalon will develop into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and retinas; the mesencephalon will give rise to the midbrain, including superior and inferior colliculi; the metencephalon will become the pons and cerebellum; the myelencephalon will form the medulla.