Patients should be coached on appropriate expectations regarding regaining function, and that full recovery may not be attainable despite providing the standard of care.

In all cases of nerve injury, continued use and engagement of the affected end organ is crucial for the plasticity of the sensorimotor and cortical neurons. Activity maximizes compensatory mechanisms, aids in avoiding the development of contractures and desensitizes the patient to neuropathic pain.

In cases of neurapraxia, closed injuries, and lower grade axonotmesis, a baseline assessment with serial exams is warranted to observe for spontaneous regeneration. If the regain of function does not occur within 3-6 months, surgical intervention should be considered.

Surgical intervention is founded upon the principle of action before irreversible damage. Surgical options include primary repair, secondary repair, (internal or external) neurolysis, nerve graft, and nerve transfer (repair types). When neurophysiologic monitoring detects intact signaling to the nerve segment distal to the damaged site, neurolysis alone is indicated as further surgical intervention does not increase the likelihood of a successful outcome.

Primary end-to-end, tension-free repair is indicated for clean, sharp injuries to the nerve and should occur within 3 hours of injury. Both nerve segments continue to retract after the initial injury and thus it is important to repair before the process of retraction precludes primary repair due to consequent ischemia-inducing tension.

Direct repair may be between epineural substance, perineural substance, or group fascicle repair. It is recommended when nerves are tension free. Immunohistochemistry and intraoperative electrophysiology will aid in coapting sensory to sensory axons and motor fibers to the motor, which is important for improved recovery.

Secondary repair is attributed to less desirable outcomes but is necessary for ragged, contusion injuries. Ragged, contusion injuries fail to demonstrate the extent of nerve damage until approximately 2-3 weeks following injury. Considering its presentation, the primary repair is not indicated. Instead, the nerve endings are attached to the surrounding muscle or fascia to mitigate retraction. Once reassessed weeks following the initial injury, devitalized tissue is excised, followed by a tension-free repair. Should the gap between the proximal and distal nerve segments be larger than 2 cm, an intervening graft is indicated. Likewise, regardless of the gap size, if the nerve appears to be under tension during repair, an intervening graft may be indicated.

If the gap is too large for primary or secondary repair, the neurosurgeon has other options available. End-to-side neurorrhaphy is the juxtaposition of a healthy nerve to the degenerated distal stump. Axons branch from the nearest node of Ranvier toward the endoneurial conduit of the damaged, degenerated nerve. Means of creating a path for nerve growth from the proximal stump to the distal nerve include graft repairs (auto- or allo-) and conduits (numerous biologic and artificial options).

Some patients will suffer disability and pain syndromes despite the best efforts of their care team. Therefore, it is important to take a multidisciplinary approach with physical therapy, neurology, neurosurgery, plastic surgery, psychiatry, orthopedic surgery, and pain medicine to address the needs of these patients. Such needs may include prostheses, therapy for chronic pain, and cosmetic solutions for muscle atrophy. The extent of services required for PNI is beyond the scope of this paper.