**The Edge-to-Edge Leaflet Repair Device**

The structural heart team is comprised of an interventional cardiologist, cardiac surgeon, cardiac anesthesiologist, and operating room nurse; this is who is required to perform the transcatheter mitral valve repair with the edge-to-edge leaflet repair device. Procedural rooms are specialized with fluoroscopic capability. The procedure involves using fluoroscopic and transesophageal echocardiographic (TEE) guidance to image the heart before, during, and after the procedure.

The following table [Table 6] demonstrates the major steps of the procedure; TEE views to guide those steps, and potential complications with each step.

Pre-procedure  cardiac assessment and evaluation of mitral valve







_________________________________________



Femoral venous access



Confirm the valvular pathology. Rule out Intracardiac thrombus before starting the procedure.



Favorable echocardiographic features

Coaptation length >/=2 mm, coaptation depth </=11mm.

Flail gap <10mm , Flail width <15 mm







________________________________________

Ultrasound guidance for femoral venous access, follow the wire in fluoroscopic view to ensure no kinking/malposition.

Assess the size of the vessel to be able to accommodate the catheter and delivery system.

Compressibility and color doppler to rule out femoral venous thrombus.

For femoral venous cannulation, consider a micropuncture kit followed by the sheath and percutaneous suture devices.



Before femoral venous cannulation -

Mid esophageal 4-chamber, 2-chamber, modified bicaval, mid-esophageal long axis, and left atrial appendage focussed views to rule out intracardiac thrombus. Color and pulse wave doppler of the left atrial appendage. Evaluate inter-atrial septum anatomy.

Determine baseline MR severity, mechanism, Doppler gradients across the mitral valve, mitral valve area measurement, presence of any pericardial effusion, and Pulmonary vein doppler profile.

Determine if any pericardial effusions are present before starting the procedure and quantify the effusion.

________________________________________





After femoral vein cannulation-

Transgastric IVC views in short and long axis to visualize the wire as it advances into IVC to the Right atrium.

Mid esophageal bicaval view to guide trans septal puncture needle into the right atrium



Transseptal puncture --->



Insertion of steerable guide catheter (SGC)---->



Introducing the edge-to-edge repair device (clip) delivery system (CDS) into the left atrium (LA)

Septal puncture is performed in the posterior superior portion of Inter atrial septum (IAS).

The tip of the transeptal puncture needle on the Interatrial septum appears like an indentation (tenting). The tip should point toward the Left atrium and confirm the Anterior-posterior and superior-inferior orientation as well as the height of the puncture above the mitral annular plane before crossing the septum.

Typically the height of the transeptal puncture should be  4-5 cm from the mitral annular plane. A septal puncture with less height may limit the maneuverability of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system and may lead to adjustments made towards the ventricular side, thus risking chordae entanglement. A septal puncture too high can limit the ability of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system to pass below leaflets and make leaflet capture difficult.



Higher height of transeptal puncture for medial jets and lower height for lateral jets.



De-airing of device delivery system to avoid air embolism.



Consider a radiofrequency transeptal needle if the spetum is very "floppy," fibrotic, or lipomatous.



Real-time TEE monitoring during transeptal puncture to ensure the puncture needle is not directed towards the aorta or posterior left atrium. Consider orthogonal plane imaging and Wide sector full-volume view of the left atrium.



Activated clotting time >250 to decrease the risk of clot formation. Heparinize and monitor ACT q 15 -30 min.



Amplatz extra stiff wire is parked in the left upper pulmonary vein under TEE and fluoro guidance. Over this, a steerable guide catheter and dilator are advanced.

The dilator is identified by its cone-shaped tip, and the double ring echo bright radiopaque appearance characterizes the guide catheter.

Once the steerable guide catheter is placed in the left atrium, Amplatz extra stiff wire is retrieved first, followed by the dilator.

The edge-to-edge repair device delivery system is advanced through the steerable guide catheter under TEE and fluoro guidance.



TO position the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system above the mitral valve, posterior torque on SGC and medial deflection of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system with retraction of the whole system is required.

Edge-to-edge repair device alignment and adjustments are monitored medial-lateral and anterior-posterior under TEE and Flouro guidance.



Direct tip of edge-to-edge repair device towards the largest regurgitant area.

Mid-esophageal bicaval 120' to orient superior-inferior orientation with tenting of the fossa -  Superior towards  superior vena cava (SVC), inferior towards Inferior vena cava (IVC )

Mid-esophageal Aortic valve short axis - anterior-posterior portion of Inter atrial septum. The anterior part is towards the aorta/ aortic valve.

Mid-esophageal 4-chamber view - Distance from the point of septal puncture to the mitral annular plane.

Real-time 3D imaging from aortic valve short axis or mitral commissural views to get a 3-dimensional assessment of the guide catheter and delivery system in the left atrium.

Media 5





Media 15,





Media 16

If a transseptal puncture it's too anterior can cause injury to the aortic valve, ascending aorta, and aortic root.

Cardiac tamponade

Air embolism.

Mid-esophageal mitral commissural view - medial, lateral orientation on mitral valve

Mid-esophageal long-axis view - Anteroposterior orientation on mitral valve

Three-dimensional en-face view of the mitral valve to help guide edge-to-edge repair device delivery system and orient it in relation to MR jet.

Real-time 3d Enface can help guide the trajectory and motion of the edge-to-edge repair device delivery system from the Left partial through the mitral valve into LV.

The device should be continuously visualized, especially the delivery system's tip, to avoid injury.

The delivery device should be perpendicular to the mitral valve's regurgitant orifice and coaptation line.

Confirm the position in relation to the regurgitant jet and mitral valve leaflets as the delivery system and device enter the left ventricle.

Ensure no entanglement exists in the subvalvular mitral valve apparatus and chordae tendinae.

May need rapid pacing or holding ventilation to add precision to the procedure.

3D en-face view of the mitral valve, looking both from the left atrial (LA) and left ventricle perspective.

Biplane imaging of mid-esophageal mitral commissural view and mid-esophageal long axis view, with and without color Doppler. To evaluate the orientation of mitral valve anterior and posterior leaflets in relation to the edge-to-edge repair device arms.

Fluoroscopy to aid orientation along with TEE

Integrate echo images and fluoroscopic images.

Orient before entering into LV and avoid too much manipulation of the device in LV, as it can lead to edge-to-edge repair device entanglement and injury to the subvalvular apparatus.

Consider holding mechanical ventilation or rapid ventricular pacing to decrease motion and achieve a better grasp.

If the coaptation defect width is significant, we may consider using the "zip and clip" technique, where the first edge-to-edge repair device can be deployed immediately medial or lateral to the largest coaptation defect and thus facilitate leaflet grip in the area of bigger coaptation defect.

Monitor for spontaneous echo contrast and monitor ACT to ensure no thrombus formation in the left atrium.

Simultaneous 2D Mid esophageal mitral commissural view and long axis view, visualization of the length of leaflets within the edge-to-edge repair device arms, and restriction of leaflet motion with edge-to-edge repair device grasping the leaflets.

Fluoroscopy to confirm the position and stability of the device.

Edge-to-edge repair device detachment, injury to mitral valve apparatus, Mitral valve leaflet injury causing severe MR not amenable to percutaneous repair,

Mitral stenosis

Assess for any complications and stability of leaflet capture and device stability.

Assess for residual MR, mitral stenosis, and edge-to-edge repair device dislodgement.

The transmitral gradient should be less than 5 mmHg.

Simultaneous assessment of 2 D mid esophageal commissural view and long axis view, 3 D  enface view from both Left atrial and ventricular perspective.

Doppler assessment of gradient at Mitral valve post deployment of edge-to-edge repair device.



Evaluate for iatrogenic atrial septal defect (ASD)

Reverse heparin with protamine to avoid bleeding and help with hemostasis

Monitor for protamine reaction

Monitor femoral venous sites for bleeding

Post-procedure complete echocardiographic evaluation to assess the repair and rule out complications

Mid-esophageal 4-chamber view, mid-esophageal commissural view, mid-esophageal long axis view, with and without color Doppler.

Mid esophageal view assessing pulmonary venous flow to assess the reduction in mitral regurgitation.

Continuous wave doppler assessment of mitral valve to assess for mitral stenosis.

The 3D enface view of the repaired mitral valve from the LA and LV view ensures leaflet grip and device stability.

3-D reconstruction and utilizing multiplanar reconstruction to assess the area of repaired double orifice Mitral valve

Mid-esophageal bicaval view, 3D imaging of Interatrial septum to assess for iatrogenic ASD