The mechanisms of action slightly vary depending on the chemical composition of particular agents. Aspirin, derived from salicylic acid, covalently – and therefore, irreversibly – binds to cyclooxygenase, resulting in a conformational change that prevents further metabolism of arachidonic acid. Unlike aspirin, NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, commonly referred to as traditional NSAIDs, reversibly inhibit COX-1 and COX-2, thereby decreasing the synthesis of prostanoids. Even further, a subclass of NSAIDs, inclusive of celecoxib, was developed as selective inhibitors of COX-2 with negligible COX-1 affinity to avoid unwanted GI adverse effects.

NSAIDs are commonly used to manage the pain of low or moderate intensity. These drugs are frequently part of treatment plans for acute musculoskeletal injury, headache, arthralgia, postoperative pain, pain associated with inflammation, and menstrual pain. Prostanoids, such as PGE2, are known effectors of pain and inflammation. The characteristic signs of inflammation, such as rubor, calor, tumor, and dolor, result from increased blood flow and vascular permeability by way of PGE2-mediated arterial dilation, while the perception of pain has been found to be partly due to PGE2’s excitation of peripheral sensory neurons as well as of certain sites within the central nervous system. The antipyretic effects of NSAIDs are due in part to the drug class’ ability to suppress PGE2-triggered hypothalamic elevation of body temperature in response to infection or inflammation. The role of NSAIDs in thrombosis and cardioprotection highlights the particular actions of aspirin in mature platelets where COX-1 is irreversibly inhibited, preventing the generation of thromboxane A2 and its potent effects on platelet activation and vasoconstriction. Aspirin’s irreversibility allows its effects to last the life of the platelet, averaging approximately one week. For this reason, continued doses of aspirin produce a cumulative antiplatelet effect. Aside from these major uses, the therapeutic benefit of NSAIDs is also indicated for other conditions; neonatal cases of patent ductus arteriosus, to increase niacin tolerability, and in rare disorders of upregulated prostaglandin synthesis such as systemic mastocytosis resistant to antihistamines.