**Dosage Formulations**

- Intramuscular suspension (medroxyprogesterone acetate):150 mg/mL (1 mL) injection vial or a prefilled syringe

- Subcutaneous suspension (medroxyprogesterone acetate): 104 mg/0.65 mL (0.65 mL)

- Tablet, Oral, as acetate: 2.5 mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg

MPA inhibits ovulation for 14 weeks and must be administered every three months (12 weeks) for continuous contraception. Administration can be either intramuscular (IM) or subcutaneous. Severe adverse reactions can occur if administered IV.

**Oral Administration**

- MPA tablets can be ingested sublingually and with no regard to meals.

**Injectable Administration**

- Inspect the product for discoloration and particulate matter before usage.

**Intramuscular Administration**(Contraceptive injection suspension)

- The injection must be administered to the gluteal or the deltoid region.

- Before injecting, shake the suspension.

- Before injecting, do not dilute the suspension.

- The injection must not be administered IV.

- It is important to exclude the possibility of pregnancy, especially if 14 weeks have passed since the first dose.

**Subcutaneous Administration**

- Inject prefilled syringe into the anterior thigh or abdomen at a 45-degree angle. Pull the skin away from the body before injecting the drug.

- Shake the tube vigorously for 1 min before usage.

- After injecting, press the area lightly but do not rub.

- Avoid giving this intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously (IV).

- Must be administered within five days of onset of menstrual bleeding.

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding Considerations**

Three percent of the users experienced an unintended pregnancy, and efficacy was determined to be 99%. The drug is not recommended for women considering pregnancy in the near future as it may delay the return of fertility after discontinuation. Manufacturers recommend not using MPA until six weeks postpartum in breastfeeding women as infants can suffer exposure through breast milk.

**Pediatric Considerations**

medroxyprogesterone acetate use is not recommended before menarche. Use is associated with a significant loss of bone mineral density. Which is an important concern during adolescence and/or early adulthood.

**Geriatric Patients**

Medroxyprogesterone acetate has not been studied in postmenopausal women and is not indicated in this population.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

No dose adjustment recommendations are studied/provided in the manufacturer’s prescribing label.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

Medroxyprogesterone acetate should not be administered to women with significant liver impairment. If women develop jaundice or liver function disturbances, use should be stopped.

**Drug Interactions**

In vitro, MPA is metabolized by CYP3A4. Therefore, inducers and inhibitors of CYP3A4 can affect the metabolism of MPA.