Opioids bind to receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems (primarily delta, kappa, and mu), with treatment effects for pain, cough, and diarrhea. Action on these same receptors induces intense euphoria. This causes many individuals to continue using with the intention of recreating that first high. Most people who misuse opioids do so for pain relief or to prevent withdrawal symptoms. Increasing evidence is dispelling the myth that opioids are effective long-term analgesic medications.

Below are receptors matched to physiologic effects in the central nervous system (nociceptin and zeta receptors are increasingly researched):

- Delta: analgesia, antidepressant, convulsant, physical dependence, modulate mu-related respiratory depression

- Kappa: analgesia, anticonvulsant, depression, hallucination, diuresis, dysphoria, miosis, neuroprotection, sedation

- Mu: analgesia, physical dependence, respiratory depression, miosis, euphoria, reduced GI motility, vasodilation. Peripheral mu receptors are tissue-specific with higher concentrations in bronchial smooth muscle and the digestive tract. This is the reason for opioids suppressing the cough reflex and causing constipation.

Withdrawal symptoms manifest when opioids are discontinued abruptly, though can occur with tapered cessation of medications. Withdrawal symptoms present in acute, subacute, and chronic phases. Most healthcare providers are aware of the acute withdrawal symptoms: hot/cold flashes, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, lacrimation, insomnia, anxiety, generalized muscle pain, tachycardia, piloerection, and dehydration. However many providers do not have experience with the prolonged subacute chronic phases.