**Acute Management**

Cardiac arrest is the life-threatening presentation of ventricular tachycardia. Patients presenting with cardiac arrest secondary to ventricular tachycardia should be resuscitated and managed according to the advanced life support (ACLS) algorithm.

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) storm is one of the presentations of VT in patients with structural heart diseases. It is defined as three or more episodes of sustained ventricular tachycardia within 24 hours, which requires intervention in the form of antiarrhythmic drugs, anti-tachycardia pacing, or direct current cardioversion.

In patients with structural heart disease and hemodynamically stable ventricular tachycardia, intravenous procainamide, amiodarone, and sotalol (depending on availability) are recommended for the acute treatment of ventricular tachycardia.

Intravenous beta-blockade and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers are the first choice drugs for treating hemodynamically stable patients with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia.

Intravenous beta-blockade is the mainstay of treatment in hemodynamically stable patients with VT secondary to underlying cardiac channelopathies.

**Long-Term Management**

All patients with structural heart disease and left ventricular systolic dysfunction should be offered guidelines-directed medical therapy for heart failure.

In patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy who present with ventricular tachycardia, the long-term beta-blockade is recommended to prevent the recurrence of VT and reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death. If the patients present with recurrent episodes of ventricular tachycardia or ICD shocks despite being on the optimal doses of beta-blocking drugs, amiodarone, and sotalol are recommended to suppress the recurrent ventricular tachycardia.

Catheter ablation has been proven as an effective treatment option for patients with drug-refractory ventricular tachycardia. It is recommended in a select group of patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy who continue to have sustained VT on antiarrhythmic drugs or are intolerant of amiodarone or other antiarrhythmic medications.

Patients with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy who survive sudden cardiac death due to VT or develop sustained VT with no reversible cause should have an ICD implanted for secondary prevention of SCD if they have an expected survival of more than a year with good quality of life. While amiodarone can be considered for preventing sudden cardiac death and recurrence of VT if the expected meaningful survival is less than a year.

In patients with ventricular tachycardia due to arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), the beta-blockade is helpful in reducing recurrent arrhythmia. All patients with ARVC who survive sudden cardiac death are recommended to have an ICD implanted for secondary prevention of sudden cardiac death.

Beta blockade is the mainstay of treatment for patients with congenital long QT syndrome and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT).

Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers and beta-blockade are effective treatment options for patients with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia. Most patients respond very well to beta-blockers and verapamil and do not require further treatment options.