Malignant hyperthermia is a life-threatening condition that occurs primarily in individuals with a genetic predisposition with a mutation in the ryanodine receptor of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. When these individuals suffer exposure to volatile anesthetic agents or the muscle relaxant succinylcholine, there is a massive release of intracellular Ca2+ from the ryanodine receptors and insufficient Ca2+ sequestration by the SERCA pump. This mechanism results in muscle contraction, rhabdomyolysis, severe hyperthermia, and possibly death. The only treatment for malignant hyperthermia is dantrolene, which binds to the ryanodine receptor to prevent further Ca2+ release.

Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease that affects the neuromuscular junction. It is characterized by fatigable skeletal muscle weakness that worsens with repetitive movements and improves with rest. Most commonly, myasthenia gravis initially involves weakness of the ocular muscles with eventual progression to limb muscles. Most patients with this disease have autoantibodies against the nicotinic ACh receptors of the neuromuscular junction, which causes endocytosis and degradation of the receptors. Without ACh binding to the receptors, action potentials are unable to propagate down the muscle fiber, and consequently, muscle weakness occurs. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors prevent the breakdown of ACh and are used to increase neuromuscular transmission as a treatment for myasthenia gravis.

Botulinum toxin is an agent that alters neuromuscular function. This toxin, produced by C. botulinum, prevents the release of ACh from the presynaptic membrane of the motoneuron. Consequently, skeletal muscle is unable to contract, resulting in flaccid paralysis.

Skeletal muscle cramps are due to sudden and involuntary muscle contractions that last from seconds to minutes resulting in pain. Although they may be associated with diseases, muscle cramps most commonly occur in the absence of any clear pathology. They most frequently present in patients who are elderly, pregnant, or exercising vigorously. Because cramps are the product of muscle contractions, immediate relief from the pain may be provided from stretching the muscle affected.