The most common emergency caused by marijuana ingestion is a panic attack.

- Marijuana use has also been linked to acute reversible psychotic reactions and 24% of new psychosis cases in adolescents. Marijuana use has also been linked to acute reversible psychotic reactions and 24% of new psychosis cases in adolescents. It has also been shown to increase the risk of psychotic disorders and exacerbate or relapse symptoms in those with psychotic disorders.

- Some studies suggest an increased risk of lung cancer from inhalation of marijuana, as well as an association between inhalational marijuana and spontaneous pneumothorax. It is also linked to bullous emphysema and COPD complications, such as increased wheezing, cough, and phlegm production.

- Long-term use has also been associated with periodontal disease, pre-term birth if used at 20 weeks gestation, and more frequent pain crises in sickle cell patients.

- Approximately one in 10 adult users of marijuana develop an addiction, with higher rates reported in adolescents.

- Studies have shown that adolescents who used marijuana were significantly less likely than their non-using peers to finish high school or obtain a degree and were more likely to develop dependence, use other drugs, or attempt suicide. Marijuana has also been shown to worsen verbal memory, some cases of depression, anxiety disorders, and pre-existing schizophrenia.

- Chronic use has also been well documented as a cause of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome(CHS), first described in Australia by Allen et al. in 2004. This syndrome is characterized by recurrent episodes of nausea and vomiting relieved by hot showers.

- There have also been complications linked to the abrupt cessation of marijuana after chronic use. Cannabis withdrawal typically requires no treatment. Symptoms may include irritability, poor sleep, poor appetite, and restlessness.

- Impaired spermatogenesis