Fluid resuscitation and maintenance, insulin therapy, electrolyte replacement, and supportive care are the mainstays of management in diabetic ketoacidosis.

**Hydration**

In patients with DKA, the fluid deficit could be up to 10-15% of the body weight.

**Choice of Fluids**

Isotonic fluids have been well established for more than 50 years as preferred fluids. Colloids vs. crystalloids were compared for critically ill patients, in a 2013 meta-analysis, and crystalloid was found to be non-inferior.

**Infusion Rate**

Initial:

Infusion of 15-20 ml per Kg body weight in the first 1 hour is typically appropriate. Aggressive hydration with 1 liter/hour for 4 hours has been compared in a study to a slower rate of hydration at half the rate. Slower hydration was found to be equally effective.

Maintainance:

The subsequent choice for fluid replacement depends on hemodynamics, the state of hydration, serum electrolyte levels, and urinary output.

**Insulin Therapy**

The discovery of insulin, along with the antibiotics, has led to a drastic decrease in mortality with DKA, down to 1%. Intravenous insulin by continuous infusion is the standard of care. Previous treatment protocols have recommended the administration of an initial bolus of 0.1 U/kg, followed by the infusion of 0.1 U/kg/h. A more recent prospective randomized trial demonstrated that a bolus is not necessary if patients are given hourly insulin infusion at 0.14 U/kg/hr.

Treatment of adult patients who have uncomplicated, mild diabetic ketoacidosis can be treated with subcutaneous insulin lispro hourly in a non-intensive care setting may be safe and cost-effective as opposed to treatment with intravenous regular insulin in the intensive care setting as shown in many studies.

Patients with DKA should be treated with insulin until resolution. Criteria for resolution of ketoacidosis include blood glucose less than 200 mg/dl and two of the following criteria: a serum bicarbonate level >=more than 15 mEq/l, a venous pH more than 7.3, or a calculated anion gap equal or less than 12 mEq/l. Patients can be transitioned to subcutaneously administered insulin when DKA has resolved, and they are able to eat. Those previously treated with insulin might be recommended on their home dose if they had been well controlled.

Insulin-naive patients should receive a multi-dose insulin regimen beginning at a dose of 0.5 to 0.8 U/kg/day. To prevent the recurrence of ketoacidosis in the transition period, insulin infusion should be continued for 2 hrs after the starting of subcutaneous insulin and check blood sugar and complete metabolic profile again before stopping the insulin drip. If the patient cannot tolerate oral intake, intravenous insulin, and fluids may be continued. The use of long-acting insulin analogs during the initial management of DKA may facilitate the transition from intravenous to subcutaneous insulin therapy.

**Electrolyte Replacement**

**Potassium**

Patients with DKA are often found to initially have mild to moderate hyperkalemia, despite a total body deficit of potassium. The initiation of insulin causes an intracellular shift of potassium and lowers the potassium concentration, potentially resulting in severe hypokalemia.

**Magnesium**

Hypokalemia is commonly associated with hypomagnesemia. Repletion of both potassium and magnesium may need to be done, and it may be difficult to improve potassium levels until magnesium levels are repleted.

**Bicarbonate**

Bicarbonate replacement does not appear to be beneficial. In one study, the difference in time to resolution of acidosis (8 hours vs. 8 hours; p = 0.7) and time to hospital discharge (68 hours vs. 61 hours; p = 0.3) was found to be statistically insignificant between patients who received intravenous bicarbonate (n = 44) compared with those who did not (n = 42).

**Phosphate**

The role of phosphate replacement in DKA has been looked at in different studies. In one randomized study with 44 patients, phosphate therapy did not alter the duration of DKA, insulin dosage required to correct the acidosis, abnormal muscle enzyme levels, glucose disappearance, or morbidity and mortality. Although theoretically appealing, phosphate therapy is not an essential part of the treatment for DKA in most patients, an unusual case of severe hypophosphatemia (1.0 mg/dl) related seizure in a child with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) has been described in the literature.

**Laboratory Monitoring**

- Hourly point-of-care testing (POCT) glucose should be performed

- Serum glucose and electrolyte levels may need to be done every 2 hours until the patient is stable, then every 4 hours

- Initial blood urea nitrogen (BUN)

- Initial VBG or ABG monitoring, followed by as-needed precipitating events

**Intubation**

There are multiple risks associated with intubation in patients with DKA. Intubation should be avoided if at all possible. Treating as above with a focus on administering fluids and insulin will almost always lead to an improvement in acidosis and overall clinical presentation. Patients attempt to compensate for severe acidosis by creating a compensatory respiratory alkalosis that manifests via tachypnea and Kussmaul breathing. If patients are no longer able to generate respiratory alkalosis due to comatose state or severe fatigue, intubation should be considered. However, the risks of intubation in DKA include a rise in PaCO2 during sedation and/or paralysis, which can decrease pH further, increasing the risk of aspiration due to gastroparesis, and difficulty matching the degree of respiratory compensation once the patient is on a ventilator. If a patient is intubated and placed on a ventilator, it is essential to attempt to match the patient's minute ventilation such that respiratory alkalosis is created to compensate for the metabolic acidosis of DKA. If not, there will be worsening acidosis, which can ultimately lead to cardiac arrest. It is reasonable to start with a tidal volume of 8 ml/kg based on ideal body weight and respiratory rate, similar to the patient's compensating respiratory rate. However, care should be taken that auto-PEEP is not occurring due to the rapid respiratory rate.

**Cerebral Edema**

Mental status and neurologic exam should be monitored in all patients with DKA. In any patient who is severely obtunded or comatose or who has declining mental status despite treatment or focal neurologic deficits, there should be a very low threshold to treat for cerebral edema. Mannitol is typically the first-line agent, though there are also studies in both TBI literature and DKA literature regarding the use of 3% saline.

**Precipitating Events**

Infection is a very common trigger for DKA in patients who have new-onset diabetes and previously established diabetes. If there is any suspicion of infection, antibiotics should be administered promptly. As discussed, there can be other events that trigger DKA as well. Treating both DKA and any other underlying etiologies should be done.