Atypical moles may have different morphological appearances ranging from flat to mildly elevated or even papilloma-like pigmented lesions. Although atypical moles are commonly present in sun-exposed areas, they are most abundant in the trunk area for males and calves for females. The identification of atypical moles during physical examination usually follows the 'ABCDE' guidelines for melanoma.

That system refers to asymmetry, irregularity of the nevus border, color variegation, a relatively large diameter (greater than 6 m), and the evolution of the lesion. Most atypical moles appear during childhood and early adolescence. Atypical moles rarely develop in those over the age of 60; the development of atypical moles in elderly patients is often regarded as an early sign of melanoma in situ or nevoid lentigo maligna.

There are five clinical subtypes of atypical moles:

- **Fried-egg subtype:**the lesion has a raised central portion, with dark brown pigmentation. This is surrounded by a macular and ill-defined area of lighter brown pigmentation.

- **Lentiginous subtype:**the lesion has an entirely flat surface with a brown or dark brown pigmentation.

- **Seborrheic keratosis-like subtype:**the lesion has a dark brown pigmentation with a rough verrucous surface resembling seborrheic keratosis.

- **Targeted subtype:**the lesion has a central annular zone with variable pigmentation.

- **Erythematous subtype:**the lesion has a characteristic pink pigmentation and exhibits few pigmentation remnants.

The number of atypical moles varies amongst individuals. In cases where patients have more than 100 lesions, a diagnosis of dysplastic nevus syndrome must be considered. Dysplastic nevus syndrome can be sporadic or familial. Diagnostic criteria include the presence of at least 100 atypical moles with a diameter that of greater than 8 mm.