Synostotic (bi-coronal and/or bi-lambdoid synostosis) brachycephaly in infants may be associated with multiple syndromic conditions. It is, therefore, essential to follow a standardized pattern of physical examination to avoid overlooking any vital etiological clues. Some of the common syndromes included in the differential diagnosis are as follows:

- Crouzon syndrome: Bicoronal synostosis resulting in brachycephaly, proptosis, hypoplasia of the midface with a characteristic underbite (mal-occlusion), and an upturned nose.

- Apert syndrome: Bicoronal synostosis with syndactyly of digits 2,3, and 4. May have mental retardation and mid-face hypoplasia.

- Pfeiffer syndrome: Craniosynostosis, abnormally broad and medially deviated thumbs and great toes, varying degrees of protruding eyes, and conductive hearing loss.

- Type 1: Turribrachycephaly, midface hypoplasia, high forehead, ocular hypertelorism, hypoplastic maxilla, and dental abnormalities. Intelligence is usually normal.
- Type 2: Cloverleaf skull (or Kleeblattschadel type craniosynostosis), hydrocephalus, ocular proptosis, beak-shaped nose, and neurological problems due to severe involvement of the brain.
- Type 3: Same as type 2 except for the absence of Cloverleaf skull. Additionally, there is a presence of natal teeth and an anterior cranial base.

- Saethre-Chotzen syndrome: Also called "acrocephalosyndactyly" - craniosynostosis and or syndactyly of certain digits and characterized by a low-set hairline and facial asymmetry.

- Carpenter syndrome: Craniosynostosis, syndactyly of certain digits and/or polydactyly. May have short stature and congenital heart defects.

- Antley-Bixler syndrome: Craniosynostosis, proptosis, low set ears, mid-face hypoplasia, radiohumeral or radioulnar synostosis, arachnodactyly, and joint contractures.

- Muenke syndrome: Coronal craniosynostosis, carpal synostosis, hearing loss, developmental delay, Cone-shaped epiphysis, and High narrow palate.

- Beare-Stevenson cutis gyrata syndrome: Craniosynostosis, cutis gyrata (furrowed and wrinkled appearance of skin and acanthosis nigricans), choanal atresia, abnormality of the pancreas, and aplasia/Hypoplasia of the earlobes.

- Jackson-Weiss syndrome: Craniosynostosis, midfacial hypoplasia, broad great toes, and/or malformation or fusion of certain bones within the feet.