**Disease-modifying Therapies**

Riluzole, an NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor antagonist, reduces glutaminergic transmission by acting on the presynaptic voltage-gated sodium channels. Relative glutamate excess has been shown to lead to upper and lower motor neuron excitotoxicity contributing to neuronal cell death.

The standard dose of Riluzole in the management of ALS is 50 mg two times daily.

Edaravone has also been shown to impede disease progression in those patients with early-onset disease and rapid disease progression.

**Symptom Directed Treatment**

**Spasticity:**

Spasticity may be present in most of the patients with primary lateral sclerosis, though it may only be present with a lesser frequency in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Siallorhoea is caused by the inability to swallow saliva, which may be the result of tongue spasticity, weakness of the facial, mouth and pharyngeal muscles, loss of pharyngeal coordination, and function.

**Pain:**

15% to 85% of patients, more commonly nociceptive than neuropathic in nature. Later stages of the ailment may be characterized by musculoskeletal pain, which arises as a result of the loss of protective sheath comprising of muscles that protect the bones and joints. Muscle contractures and bone stiffness may also be a source of pain. Decubitus ulcers seen in 16 percent of patients may also be associated with pain. Increased intensity of pain in the later stages of the disease has also been associated with assisted suicide.

**Muscle cramps:**

Cramps are caused by the instability of motor units.

**Dysphagia:**

Strategies to mitigate this particularly distressing symptom include dietary changes. That consists of the change in consistency of the diet, high calories, and high protein diets, fluid thickeners along with exercises to facilitate swallowing. Insertion of a percutaneous gastrostomy tube for enteral nutrition has also been advised in those with a weight loss in excess of five percent and in whom swallowing can be associated with the occurrence of dangerous complications. In those in whom these procedures are contraindicated or those with respiratory insufficiency, feeding through a central venous catheter should be tried.

**Dysarthria:**

Up to 30 percent of the patients with ALS develop dysarthria. This might extend to 80 percent of patients during the course of the disease.

**Coagulation abnormalities (Deep venous thrombosis):**

The annual incidence of coagulation abnormalities has been in the range of 3 and 11 percent. The use of prophylaxis, compression stockings, and standard doses of anticoagulation as per existing guidelines have been advised.

**Neuropsychiatric disturbances:**

Neuropsychiatric disturbances such as pseudobulbar affect and depression have been reported.

Though no specific agents have been found to be useful in the treatment of cognitive symptoms, SSRIs have been found to be helpful in controlling symptoms such as control of loss of inhibition, overeating, and compulsive behaviors. In contrast, antipsychotics have been found helpful in the treatment of restlessness.

**Respiratory symptoms:**

The weakness of respiratory muscles may present in the form of the loss of ability to cough and respiratory insufficiency.

The presence of dyspnoea, orthopnoea, and daytime fatigue, vital capacity less than 80 percent of the normal, partial pressure of CO2 more than 45 mm of Hg, nocturnal hypoventilation (when the oxygen saturation is less than 88-90 percent for more than 5 percent of the time is asleep), maximal inspiratory pressure less than 60 percent predicted, sitting fixed vital capacity less than 50 percent, sniff nasal inspiratory pressure less than 40 percent have been listed as various indications for non-invasive ventilation. NIV is poorly tolerated in 30 percent of patients due to anxiety, emotional lability from pseudobulbar damage, hypersalivation, claustrophobia, and soreness of the nasal bridge.

Persistent respiratory insufficiency, despite the use of NIV and severe bulbar dysfunction, has been reported as indications for tracheostomy.

The use of diaphragmatic muscle pacing, where four electrodes are placed on the motor roots of the phrenic nerve on the abdominal surface of the diaphragm has also been studied.

**Fatigue:**

Fatigue has been reported as a frequent and debilitating symptom characterized by reversible weakness. It is characterized by a feeling of tiredness, which is not relieved by rest. Both pharmacological measures (Modafinil) and non-pharmacological measures (resistance exercise, respiratory exercise, and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation) have been used in the management of fatigue. The quality of evidence for the effectiveness of these interventions has been reported to be very low, and more research is needed on this topic.

**Palliative Medicine Interventions**

Palliative medicine interventions include adequate symptom control, prognostication about goals of care, discussions surrounding degree of aggressiveness of treatment, advanced care planning, provision of quality home-based care, possible liaison with organizations providing community palliative services,  anticipatory prescribing, provision of support to family members (addressing caregiver burden), and bereavement support.

Formal care at the end of life should incorporate measures to improve the quality of life (such as a system to enable effective communication) and focus upon the management of commonly encountered symptoms. The use of opioids and benzodiazepines for breathlessness, glycopyrrolate for increased secretions, antipsychotics for delirium, and other non-pharmacological treatment options may be indicated in patients approaching their end of life.

Reduction in ICU utilization at end of life, the number of deaths inside the hospital setting (transition in the place of care), and costs of treatment are essential indicators of the efficacy of provision of high-quality care.

**Physiotherapy**

Exercise programs such as structured exercise programs may improve stiffness, prevent contractures, reduce discomfort, and optimize the quality of life. Provision of the orthosis, if necessary, should be facilitated without delay.

**Communication**

Communication should be assessed by a speech and language therapist. Constant review during interdisciplinary meets is advised. The provision of augmentative and alternative communication strategies that cause the least interference with the patient’s quality of life is recommended.

**Future therapeutic options**

The use of antisense oligonucleotides in SOD 1 related and C9orf related ALS are subjects of research in future clinical trials.

**Use of stem cell therapy**

The proposed mechanism of the utility of stem cell therapy includes the differentiation of stem cells into spinal neurons that synapse with existing motor neurons to establish or maintain neurocircuitry and provide neurotrophic support. Differentiation of stem cells into non-neuronal cells can also impact disease progression by providing neurotrophic support, preventing oligodendrocyte dysfunction and toxicity. Peripheral stem cell transplantation can maintain the neuromuscular junction. The immunomodulatory effect of mesenchymal stem cells mobilized from the bone marrow can also attenuate the inflammatory response via the production of anti-inflammatory mediators. The commonly used stem cell therapies include olfactory ensheathing stem cells, endogenous mesenchymal stem cells, autologous mesenchymal stem cells, and neural progenitor cells. The most significant number of trials of stem cell therapy involves the use of mesenchymal stem cells.