Tinel test and Phalen test are of fundamental importance for the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome. If the history and physical exam are inconclusive to differentiate between a nerve root injury and a distal median nerve injury, electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction study are diagnostic options.

A nerve conduction test can detect impairment in the median nerve conduction across the carpal tunnel while having normal conduction along everywhere else in its path. An EMG can be used to determine if there is pathology within the muscles innervated by the median nerve. Of note, the usefulness in EMG is in the exclusion of polyneuropathy or radiculopathy. Nerve conduction studies have been demonstrated to be up to 99% specific for the carpal tunnel, although it may be normal in patients with mild symptoms.

According to the nerve conduction velocity, carpal tunnel syndrome can classify as:

- Mild carpal tunnel syndrome. Prolonged sensory latencies, a very slight decrease in conduction velocity. No suspected axonal degeneration.

- Moderate carpal tunnel syndrome. Abnormal sensory conduction velocities and reduced motor conduction velocities. No suspected axonal degeneration.

- Severe carpal tunnel syndrome. Absence of sensory responses and prolonged motor latencies (reduced motor conduction velocities).

- Extreme carpal tunnel syndrome. Absence of both sensory and motor responses.

On musculoskeletal (MSK) ultrasound, a cross-sectional area of 9 mm or more is 87% sensitive for carpal tunnel syndrome.