The inequitable care often received by minority women is striking. As we have elucidated, breast cancer outcomes are driven in part by a lack of access to care within a given health system. This highlights the need for innovative methods of delivering cancer care and eliminating barriers for the most vulnerable patient populations.

Several strategies to combat breast cancer disparities have been proposed. Implementation of these strategies, which focus on increasing healthcare access, is more important than ever with the current national debates over the viability of Medicaid expansion or the potential reversal of the Affordable Care Act. First, it is critically important that minority populations have representation among the political leaders, researchers, and medical professionals in the decision-making processes regarding medical research, national screening guidelines, healthcare delivery, social policies, and public health interventions so that racial disparity in breast cancer can be more fully addressed.

Multiple studies have shown that policy factors such as decreased co-payment, availability of generic alternatives, and low-income subsidies can increase adherence to endocrine therapy among minority women, in turn, potentially improving outcomes. Furthermore, interventions such as patient navigation can help mitigate differences in health literacy, self-advocacy, and access to resources, which can improve the timeliness of diagnosis and initiation of treatment.

Other evidence-based interventions that increase early breast cancer screening and timely follow-up include group education, one-on-one patient education, client reminders, reduction of out of pocket expenses, performance-based provider reimbursement, and quality assurance–reporting protocols. Feedback interventions have the potential to improve cancer care through automated functions that alert providers when gaps in care occur. In addition to social, cultural, economic, and environmental factors, it is becoming apparent that biologic factors also contribute to racial disparity. Accordingly, allocating more funds toward research of the underlying mechanisms of more aggressive tumors within minority populations could help develop effective treatment strategies against these subsets of tumors.

Moreover, an examination of conflicting mammography screening guidelines may lead to new, more inclusive models of generating national breast cancer recommendations and more nuanced guidelines for minority women.

As providers, it is imperative that we advocate for and implement the various strategies proposed in order to make breast cancer care equitable among all women. The ultimate goal should be high-quality, timely care at each step along the pathway from early screening to post-treatment follow-up. Only then can we continue to lower the mortality rate and improve outcomes for all women with breast cancer.