Since HSIL is caused by HPV infection, it is found more commonly in women with specific genetic and behavioral factors which increase their risk of acquiring HPV. HPV prevalence is highest in young, sexually active females, then progressively drops until menopause, with some studies showing a slight increase after menopause.  This decline in middle-age is thought to be the result of an effective immune response after exposure to HPVs, in addition to the likelihood of less exposure to the HPV virus.  An immunocompromised state, such as after transplant therapy and HIV-infected individuals, increases a patient’s risk of persistent infection and development of a squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL).  Studies indicate a younger age of coitarche and the number of sexual partners increases the risk of HPV infection as well as more recent sexual activity.  Male partner promiscuity is also a factor as well as condom use and circumcision, as both significantly reduce the risk of HPV infection.  Women who have sex with women also have an increased risk of cervical neoplasia.  Multiparous women, specifically greater than 7, are also at increased risk.  There is a strong association between smoking and cervical neoplasia, independent of HPV status, presumably due to the presence of carcinogens within the cervical mucus. Certain HLA class II haplotypes, notably HLA B*07+HLA-DQB1*302, have a positive association with SILs and invasive cancer with evidence suggesting that the haplotype may influence HPV antigen presentation and immune response.  Other HLA class II haplotypes have been found to be protective.  Oral contraceptive use may somewhat increase a patient’s risk of cervical neoplasia, though studies have not been consistent.