An interprofessional team that provides an integrated approach, and specializes in postoperative care is essential to achieve the best possible outcomes in patients presenting with suture hypersensitivity. It is crucial for healthcare providers to avoid products with potential allergens when treating patients with suspected wound hypersensitivity. The primary clinicians should know the signs and symptoms of suture hypersensitivity. Wound hypersensitivity is suspected if eczematous changes appear around the wound. Once suture hypersensitivity is suspected, removal of the allergen is required to avoid further recommendations.

Early consult with a dermatologist, allergist/immunologist, nutritionist, and enterostomal therapy nurse is recommended for proper diagnosis and management of complications. If the wound opens, anastomotic rupture occurs, or bowel obstruction occurs, the surgical team must be contacted. In case the team is unable to find the allergen, patch testing for potential allergens can be performed after a review of the allergen exposition. In case the health care team is unable to find the potential allergens, skin testing with pieces of the patient's wound care products like bandages, ointments, and dressings could be done. If necessary, these products should be covered and left on the skin for 48 hours, to help identify the potential allergens that do not appear in the standard patch test series.

If a surgical wound hypersensitivity occurs, the role of the laboratory and diagnostic laboratory cannot be undermined. If malignancy is suspected, fine-needle aspiration is required for a proper diagnosis. If the patient is to be discharged home with local wound care, consultation should be made with a social worker and community nurse who specializes in wound care and can monitor the patient, give proper wound care and make referrals as needed.

Clinicians should be able to recognize the allergens commonly found in wound care products and their potential for sensitization. It is essential that these wound care products have a complete label of potential allergens on medical devices like dressings, ostomy appliances, adhesives, and bandages, for possible allergen screening. Also, these manufacturers should be encouraged to eliminate common allergens from wound care products. Interprofessional team collaboration in decision-making and communication are key elements for a good outcome. Patients with suture hypersensitivity have a better prognosis and outcomes when signs and symptoms are identified early.