Patients are instructed to void just before their renal scan since a full bladder delays upper urinary tract emptying and interferes with the study results reliability especially when working up a case of obstructive uropathy. Occasionally foley catheterization is used to keep the bladder empty. Patients are pre-hydrated before tracer injection and post hydrated after injection.

The choice of radiopharmaceutical used is related to the type of renal scan being performed.

The various radiotracers agents used for renal scintigraphy include:

1- Technetium-99m diethylene triamine penta-acetic acid (Tc-99m DTPA): Primarily cleared by glomerular filtration and therefore useful to measure GFR and to evaluate flow through the pyelocalyceal system through the ureter and into the bladder. Dose: Up to 15 Millicurie (mCi) for adults and 0.1-0.2 mCi/kg for children with a maximum pediatric dosage of 5 mCi.

- Technetium-99m dimercaptosuccinic acid (Tc-99m DMSA): This agent predominantly binds to renal tubular cells in the renal cortex allowing cortical imaging. Because it is bound to the cortex for a long time (40% of dose concentrated in kidneys at 6 hours post-injection), it is primarily used for cortical anatomy and assessment of pathologies such as renal ectopia or renal scarring. However, because of its effective long half-life of 6 hours in the kidneys, exposing the kidneys to greater radiation exposure than other agents, many people use technetium-99m mercaptoacetyl triglycine (Tc-99m MAG3) for cortical imaging. Of note, DMSA also is disadvantaged by a short shelf life after preparation. Dose: 5 mCi in adults and 0.05 mCi/kg for children with a maximum pediatric dosage of 2.7 mCi.

- Technetium-99m mercaptoacetyl triglycine (Tc-99m MAG3): This agent is secreted predominantly by proximal renal tubules with a small component (approximately 5%) of it filtered by the glomeruli. Dose: Up to 10 mCi for adults and 0.15 mCi/kg for children with a maximum pediatric dosage of up to 4 mCi. Tc-99m MAG3 is extracted from plasma with greater efficiency resulting in retained parenchymal activity and allowing renal parenchyma evaluation.

Radiotracers are given by bolus injection and patients are then placed under the gamma camera. For native kidney function evaluation, images are acquired of the patient, posteriorly. Anterior image acquisition is usually performed for renal transplant evaluation, as renal grafts are usually placed in the anterior iliac fossa. The scintillation gamma cameras placed below the patient convert emitted radiation into a displayed image (see equipment section).

Serial static or dynamic image acquisitions are set up at different times during the study with the exact technique depending on the study being performed. A bolus of radionuclide placed in an antecubital vein typically reaches the renal arteries from the aorta within 1 second.  For renal blood flow evaluation, serial dynamic images are acquired every 1 to 2 seconds for up to a minute. The kidneys are usually seen by 5 to 6 seconds from injection and show maximal activity in normal patients by 30 to 60 seconds. To evaluate renal parenchymal function, a series of images are obtained after 1 minute of the renal perfusion phase. Images are acquired at 15-60 seconds intervals for a period of 3-5 minutes when using 99mTc-DTPA and for 20-30 minutes when using 99mTc-MAG3. This phase allows for the best imaging of renal anatomy via parenchymal uptake. Radiotracer activity usually starts appearing in the collecting system or urinary bladder by 4-8 minutes. Collecting system evaluation is accomplished after ambulating to promote pyelocalyceal system drainage or after a diuretic (Lasix dosage is dependent on age and renal function) is given. An indwelling open bladder catheter is required for patients with urinary bladder non-compliance or difficulty in urination, as a full bladder limits/delays upper urinary tract emptying.

Renal anatomy and function are assessed visually from the acquired images. In addition, a time-activity curve is generated based on the series of images, and renal function is quantified from the time-activity curve in e.g. Tc-99m MAG3 renal scanning. Time activity curves are generated by the system's computer based on the assessment of radionuclide activity over a region of interest (ROI). For renograms, the ROI is placed over each individual kidney. Radiotracer activity beyond the kidneys is subtracted out of the image. Information is graphically displayed to about 20 to 30 minutes after radiotracer injection. A typical renogram has 3 phases. The first phase is known as the vascular transit phase which represents radiotracer entering the kidneys. It usually lasts about 30 to 60 seconds. The second phase is known as the tubular concentration phase or parenchymal transit phase normally lasts 1 to 5 minutes when radiotracer appears in the tubules. It is represented by a peak in the renogram. The third phase is noted by a downslope in the renogram indicating excretion of the radiotracer from the kidneys and clearance from the collecting system. It usually starts at 4-8 minutes after radiotracer injection (See image- 3).

For accurate renal perfusion assessment, a different time activity curve can be created. The ROI is placed on each kidney but is compared with a time-activity curve obtained from the aorta. Entry of the radiopharmaceutical into the aorta is shown as an upstroke in the aortic flow curve. It is usually seen at 30 to 60 seconds after injection. Flow into each kidney is assessed in relationship to flow in the aorta. A flat curve would suggest abnormal flow from the aorta to the kidney.

As a note, when evaluating renal cortical function, the ROI should be restricted to the renal cortex and excluding renal pelvic activity, as the retained radiotracers in the renal pelvis confuse the renal cortical assessment.

Various semiquantitative data such as time to peak activity (Tmax), relative uptake ratios, half time excretion (T1/2), and 20-minute time to peak count ratios (20 min/maximum count ratio) can be obtained from the renogram.

Diuretic renography: Diuretic renography is used for the assessment of urinary tract obstruction. It can distinguish between genuine obstruction and non-obstructive atonicity of the ureter that occurs with vesico-ureteric reflux, congenital malformations, or a non-compliant urinary bladder.

When radiotracer excretion increases after the diuretic, the exam is interpreted as non-obstructive dilation. If after given a diuretic excretion is unaffected or shows little change, the diagnosis is obstructive uropathy.  In obstructive uropathy, the renogram demonstrates continuous rising and little or no downsloping during the excretion phase (see image-4). A renogram may be flattened at the perfusion phase in cases of high grade-long standing obstruction which often leads to a decrease in renal perfusion. A T1/2 calculation obtained from the renogram represents radiotracer activity falling to 50% of its maximum value. It is calculated from the time of furosemide injection.

Gravity assisted diuresis (GAD) (keeping the patient, often a child, in an upright position for 5 minutes after the renal scan to obtain further tracer drainage) often helps to confirm a diagnosis of true ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) junction obstruction. when T1/2 is in the grey zone of 10 to 20 minutes. If more than 50% of the quantifiable residual radio-tracer activity is present after GAD, true obstruction is confirmed.

Angiotensin-converting inhibitor (ACEI) renal scintigraphy: ACEI renal scintigraphy is used for renovascular hypertension evaluation. ACEI induced renography has 90% sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of renovascular hypertension in patients with normal renal function including GFR.

Over the last decades, CT and MR angiography have proven to be more useful modalities for renal arterial flow analysis as they provide renal artery anatomic information as well. ACEI renography is useful for the assessment of renovascular hypertension in patients with renovascular hypertension that has ACE compensation. It cannot detect anatomic renal artery stenosis if such compensation has not occurred. Its importance is questionable in cases of bilateral renal artery stenosis.

DMSA renography: Tc-99m DMSA demonstrates homogeneous cortical uptake, remaining bound to the cortical tubules for at-least 6 hours. The exam is simply a parenchymal imaging scan. High-resolution pinhole collimators are used for better delineation of the cortex.

DMSA renography is highly sensitive and has proven more helpful than ultrasonography for the early diagnosis of pyelonephritis in children over 5 years of age. Early detection and timely treatment of pyelonephritis are important in preventing complications such as cortical scarring and its associated loss of renal function.

Imaging findings of acute pyelonephritis include defects in cortical uptake of 99mTc-DMSA which can be focal or multifocal. Sometimes acute pyelonephritis presents as diffusely decreased activity due to renal edema. A bulging cortex may be noted in diffuse acute pyelonephritis.

Renal cortical scarring is a common complication occurring after pyelonephritis and vesicoureteric reflux (VUR). DMSA scintigraphy shows defects in cortical uptake at the region of the scars with associated parenchymal volume loss. It is highly sensitive in detecting post VUR scarring in children less than 2 years of age who presents with febrile urinary tract infection. Some work with ultrasound contrast agents has shown another method, without radiation, to evaluate renal scarring.

DMSA scintigraphy is sometimes used to evaluate functioning parenchyma related to a renal mass. Nonfunctioning parenchymal masses e.g. renal neoplasm, hematoma, abscess, cyst, or infarcts appear as photopenic areas in DMSA scintigraphy. CT sonography and MRI have become more useful for renal mass evaluation.

Renal transplant evaluation: Renal scanning with 99mTc-MAG3 is used to evaluate function, complications, and treatment monitoring of renal transplant.

Early postoperative evaluation of time to peak in 99mTc-MAG3 clearance is used to predict renal cadaveric graft survival.

Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) is one of the complications, which usually occurs during the first 3 to 4 days after transplantation. ATN usually develops because of ischemia of the transplant after harvesting and before transplantation. This is most frequently seen in cadaveric transplants. Scintigraphy shows the diminished renal function and cortical retention on 99mTc- MAG3 scintigraphy.

Renal transplant toxicity from the antirejection drug cyclosporin demonstrates similar findings of normal uptake and increased cortical retention with little or no excretion due to poor tubular function.

Post-surgical complications include leakage of urine and urinoma development. Urinomas are seen as accumulations of radiotracer adjacent to the point of leakage and beyond the expected location of the renal graft, ureter, and bladder. In hyperacute transplant rejection, renal scanning demonstrates absent renal perfusion and function within 0-24 hours of surgery. It occurs due to venous thrombosis secondary to the recipient's pre-formed antibodies to a foreign body, in this case, the transplant. Acute rejection usually occurs in 2 to 3 months due to cell-mediated lymphocytic infiltration. Nuclear scanning shows decreased renal perfusion as well as radionuclide uptake and excretion. Chronic rejection is an antibody-mediated process occurring beyond 3 months to years after surgery. Nuclear scanning, in such cases, shows gradual deterioration of transplant perfusion and function.