**Blood Cerebrospinal Fluid Barrier**

The choroid plexus epithelial cells connected via tight junctions form the blood-cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) barrier.

**Cancer Metastasis**

The process of metastasis can be summarized into three steps:

- Intravasation

- Extravasation

- Adhesive arrest

Intravasation involves the breakage of tumor cells away from the primary tissue and invasion of the surrounding tissues, venules, capillaries, and lymphatic system. Tumor cells that intravasate into the circulation through the lymphatics or blood vessels interact with macrophages to form actin-rich degradative protrusions—these protrusions aid in clearing the extracellular matrix.

Extravasation involves the egress of these cells from the circulation into the tissue. Circulatory tumors cells, upon metastatic extravasation, undergo adhesive or circulatory arrest. Brain metastases tend to occur at areas with relatively longer mean transit times, such as the white and grey matter interface and watershed territories, which provide cells relatively longer times to egress from the circulation. Tumor cells may lie dormant at the target site of extravasation and arrest, or undergo apoptosis. Cells undergo adhesive circulatory arrest followed by extravasation either as single cells or a tumor embolus.

Factors that favor increased chances of homing to the brain include a dense microcapillary network and higher blood flow in proportion to other organs. Slowing of tumor cell movement at branch points in capillaries and the larger size of tumor cells compared to red blood cells favor the process of circulatory arrest. Specific interactions between tumor cells and endothelium have been shown to predispose to circulatory arrest. The upregulation of glycosyltransferase ST6GALNAC5 has been shown to lead to the homing of breast cancer tumor cells to the vascular endothelium.

**Radiobiology**

The selection of dosing of treatment depends upon the biological behavior of the tissue to radiation therapy. Late responding tissues are more susceptible to a single high dose of irradiation than early responding tissues. Most malignant tumors (brain metastasis, glioblastoma multiforme, low-grade glioma) behave as early responding tissues (meningioma, acoustic neuroma), while benign tumors behave as late responding tissues.