Stoma care begins in the elective setting before the actual surgery and stomal creation. It begins when the patient is diagnosed and informed about the possibility of stoma creation. It requires mental health and guidance counselors to address any concerns the patient may have about their self-image and societal status. It also requires an entero-stomal therapist to discuss with the surgeon the location of the possible creation of the stoma and to go on and mark the colostomy site in the preoperative period.

In the immediate postoperative period, the colostomy may need dilatation and application of hyperosmotic agents like glycerine by the nursing staff so as to reduce stomal edema.

When the stoma becomes functional, generally between postoperative days 2 and 4, the colostomy will need a colostomy bag or appliance application. In the initial days, it is either done by the nursing staff or in larger hospitals, by an entero-stomal therapist. This is done with a view to teaching patients or in case of children, their guardians, how to do it themselves at home. They are informed about the various devices available, about the functioning of these devices, about their own colostomy and the kind of effluent that would be seen, about the complications of the stoma and the colostomy bags.

The most important person involved in colostomy care is the patient himself. Once the patient is discharged from the hospital, they are in charge of their own colostomy care. The patient must regularly change their colostomy bag as required and should visit the provider regularly to assess the stoma in the normal run, or in case of any complications. As a rule, the stoma bag should be emptied when it is filled up to 1/3rd to prevent peeling off of the baseplate from the skin and leaks.