The diagnosis of Lemierre syndrome is primarily clinical, but adjunctive testing can be helpful. Comprehensive laboratory evaluation is indicated in patients presenting with concern for sepsis or with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria. Some of the more frequent laboratory abnormalities include leukocytosis, mild to severe renal impairment, abnormal liver function tests including elevated bilirubin, thrombocytopenia, as well as other evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Blood cultures should be collected, and growth typically occurs over 2 to 7 days and shows Fusobacterium species in over 70% of cases. Blood cultures may be negative in LS due to the difficulties that can be associated with culturing anaerobic organisms.

The lungs are the most common site of metastatic infection, and imaging should include a chest radiograph to evaluate for septic emboli and other pulmonary complications including pulmonary effusions, lung abscess, and empyema. Additional sites of bacterial metastasis may result in septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, meningitis, pericarditis, and hepatic abscess. Other imaging modalities used to evaluate for septic thrombosis of the internal jugular vein may include ultrasound, CT of the neck with contrast, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRV has the highest sensitivity (97%) for detecting internal jugular thrombosis, while CT is usually the most available and most widely used clinically. Ultrasound can be a useful modality given its comparatively lower cost and lack of radiation risk, but the low echogenicity of fresh clots combined with anatomic constraints of the lower neck may result in lower sensitivity for the detection of acute thrombosis.