Fenofibrate capsules and tablets are administered orally once daily with or without food. The capsules should be swallowed whole and should not be crushed, dissolved, or chewed. Fenofibrate therapy may be considered an option for individuals taking moderate-intensity statin therapy if the benefits (i.e., decreasing cardiovascular disease risk) outweigh the potential risks of adverse effects. Dose adjustments are made at 4 to 8-week intervals based on the individual patient response.

It is available in the following oral dosage formulations, and formulation change should be done carefully as formulations are not bio-equivalent:

Capsule of fenofibrate: 30 mg, 43 mg, 50 mg, 67 mg, 90 mg, 130 mg, 134 mg, 150 mg, and 200 mg

Delayed-Release capsule of choline fenofibrate: 45 mg and 135 mg

Tablet of feno-fibric acid: 35 mg and 105 mg

Tablet of fenofibrate: 40 mg, 48 mg, 54 mg, 120 mg, 145 mg, and 160 mg

**Adult Dosing**(dose of tablets of fenofibrate)

- Hypertriglyceridemia (type IV or V)

- 54 to 160 mg daily

- Primary Hypercholesterolemia

- 160 mg daily

- Mixed dyslipidemia

- 160 mg daily

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, the drug should be used with caution in these patients. Liver function monitoring is recommended.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with renal impairment if creatinine clearance is above 80 mL/min. For moderate impairment, start the patient at 40 to 54 mg daily. Fenofibrate is contraindicated if creatinine clearance is under 30 mL/min or if the patient has severe renal dysfunction.

- **Pregnancy Implications:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. However, due to limited data on fenofibrate use in pregnant women, it is not sufficient to determine the risk of major congenital disabilities, adverse maternal or fetal outcomes, or miscarriage-related risk associated with this drug.

- **Breastfeeding Implications:**There is no information available on the presence of this drug in human milk. The effects of the drug on milk production or the breastfed infant are also unknown.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy are not established in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**Based on the safety and efficacy studies in elderly volunteers 77 – 87 years of age, the oral clearance of the drug in geriatric patients is similar to that of adults, so there is no dose adjustment or specific dosage regimen needed for geriatric patients. It is recommended to start the dose based on renal function and product-specific labeling.