A thorough but brief airway assessment is essential for patients requiring advanced airway management. Indications for airway management are a failure to oxygenate, ventilate, or maintain a patent airway. The modality of airway management primarily depends on the cause and severity of the patient's condition but is also subject to environmental factors and clinician skills. A patient needing airway management requires assessment for a difficult airway. A difficult airway may prohibit mask ventilation or increase the risk of a failed intubation attempt. Obtaining an airway-specific history from the patient aids in determining if there has been a previous airway problem. A systematic airway assessment can be accomplished via several simple, quick methods. This activity describes the importance of airway assessment in patients at increased risk for requiring advanced airway management and several methods used in airway assessment applicable in the prehospital or hospital setting. The activity also highlights the interprofessional team's role in managing patients in respiratory distress or failure.

**Objectives:**
- Delineate the clinically relevant anatomical structures examined during an airway assessment.
- Correlate findings obtained during an airway-specific history and physical examination with the risk of a difficult airway.
- Efficiently apply the methods of airway assessment at the bedside, incorporating technical advancements as clinically indicated.
- Collaborate with interprofessional team members to coordinate care and improve outcomes for patients affected by airway compromise.