Three distinct processes can reasonably explain the pathophysiology underlying the aging process:

**Production of Free Radicals**

Free radicals are well known in the biochemical world as a normal byproduct of healthy physiology in well-regulated, relatively small amounts. They exist as a molecule with a single, unpaired valence electron, rendering them highly reactive in the presence of other substances as they attempt to interact with other substances to obtain additional valence electrons and balance the electron configuration.

The exact underlying mechanisms underlying the downstream adverse effects of free radical generation and subsequent interaction with cellular components are beyond the scope of this paper, but it bears mentioning that free radicals can denature proteins, destroy membrane lipids, nucleic acids, and certain organelles such as lysosomes and proteasomes.

**Glycation**

Advanced glycosylation end-products form when reactions occur between aldehyde groups of reducing sugars and amino groups of proteins. The formation of these metabolic products occurs in a fashion dependent on elevated blood glucose.

**Reduced Regenerative Capacity**

In healthy individuals, a balance exists between one cell’s apoptosis and the maturation and healthy development of another cell that essentially takes the place of the first. Researchers believe that mechanisms within the cell cycle control the programmed death of a senescent cell and also signal externally to other cells the need to develop a new, healthy cell to backfill whatever metabolic demands the senescent cell might have been meeting. The progression between stages in the cell cycle is controlled by regulatory proteins, whose function demonstrably declines in senescent cells compared to younger, healthy cells. The ability of these protein-derived signaling pathways to communicate the need for cell regeneration and maturation in the healthy, young cells seems to be reduced in the aging process, while the pro-apoptotic pathway signaling mechanisms continue to function, leading to a net decline in functional, healthy cells.