# Continuing Education Activity

Morning glory syndrome (MGS) is a disorder characterized by a funnel-shaped optic nerve head. It is a primary mesenchymal abnormality. Most of the cases present in early childhood with decreased vision or strabismus. Some cases have systemic associations. If not diagnosed on time, these patients can lead to potentially serious complications. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of MGS and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of MGS.
- Summarize the evaluation process of MGS.
- Review the differential diagnoses of MGS.
- Explain the management of patients with MGS.

# Introduction

Morning glory syndrome (MGS) is a congenital optic disc pathology.

This review summarizes the etiology, epidemiology, histopathology, clinical features, differential diagnoses, associations, complications, evaluation, and the management of MGS.

# Etiology

The pathogenesis of the MGS is not fully understood.

Nagy et al. suggested hereditary association and reported a mother and daughter with MGS.

Pedler suggested that there can be an improper fusion of the posterior sclera, which can cause herniation of the disc and the adjacent retina.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of MGS has been reported to be 2.6 per 100,000.

# Histopathology

Dempster suggested that abnormal mesodermal differentiation can result in abnormal closure of the posterior sclera and herniation of the retina and optic nerve head.

These all are mesodermal derivatives. In another case, the histopathology demonstrated smooth-muscle cells and fat cells in the peripapillary staphylomatous scleral tissue.

# History and Physical

The mean age at presentation was 8.8 years (range 0.25 to 46 years) in a large study of 51 eyes of 44 patients—most patients present with either vision loss, strabismus, or leukocoria. Unilaterality is seen in around 85% of cases, while bilateral findings are seen in 15%. Gender predisposition is not seen. Family history is usually not present, though familial cases of CODA have been reported.

Fundus evaluation reveals an enlarged disc situated centrally within an excavated area.

The retinal blood vessels arise from the peripheral disc and course radially towards the retinal periphery. They are abnormally straight and branch at acute angles. It is often difficult to differentiate an artery from a vein. Vascular sheathing may be present. The macula may be incorporated in the funnel-shaped excavated area, a finding known as "macular capture." Persistent hyaloid remnants may be found in the fellow or the affected eye.

Retinal detachment may be present. It may be found in 38% of cases.

In other cases, there may be a communication between the subretinal space and the subarachnoid space allowing the cerebrospinal fluid in the optic nerve to reach the subretinal space and cause a retinal detachment. In one such case of MGS with retinal detachment, metrizamide was injected intrathecally. It was radiographically found to move into the subretinal space. Reattachment happened after optic nerve sheath fenestration, thus confirming the existence of this connection.

Irvine and associates were able to reattach the retina through optic nerve sheath fenestration. They also observed the gas bubbling out of the optic nerve sheath defect when injected into the vitreous. They suggested the possibility of continuity between the subretinal space and perineural space.

In another histopathological study, Manschot described clear fluid leaking from a hole in the optic nerve during sectioning.

The fellow eye can have Mittendorf's dot, cataract, microphthalmos, and retinal detachment. Close monitoring of the fellow eye is important as retinal complications may occur when a disc or retinochoroidal coloboma is present.

# Evaluation

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) helps in evaluating the optic disc anomaly. Studies have shown a well-defined epiretinal membrane pulling the retina centripetally.

Rajendran and Kumar described the spectral domain OCT features and observed that the dominant movement during contraction was the anterior movement of the walls of the peripapillary excavation.

Cennamo et al. have described the OCT angiography features in patients with contractile optic discs in MGS. They found a dense microvascular network in the peripapillary capillary layer with no difference between the superficial vascular plexus and the deep vascular plexus around the optic nerve.

Lytvynchuk LM et al. reported a case of intraoperative OCT-assisted pars plana vitrectomy for retinal detachment in MGS. There was no break. They found strong vitreous traction and adhesion above the optic disc and macula, which was the cause of the retinal detachment. They induced a vitreous detachment, peeled the epiretinal and internal limiting membrane, and gave an air tamponade, leading to retinal reattachment.

Peripheral capillary nonperfusion has been reported in MGS.

The diagnosis of MGS is mainly clinical, but sometimes the diagnosis can be confusing. MGS should be distinguished from optic disc coloboma. Optic disc coloboma may be associated with multisystemic congenital syndromes.

MGS can be associated with systemic anomalies. The abnormalities of the face and central nervous system should be recognized. Facial abnormalities could be capillary hemangiomas, hypertelorism, cleft lip, and cleft palate.

These defects can be misdiagnosed as nasal polyps; it is thus important not to biopsy such lesions. These encephaloceles can be treated surgically. Another associated central nervous system abnormality is agenesis of the corpus callosum.

Moyamoya disease may be associated with MGS. It is characterized by abnormal narrowing of the cerebral arteries, which can result in cerebral ischemia or hemorrhage. This association was first described by Hanson et al. in 1985. Since then, many cases have been reported.

Moyamoya disease can cause stroke, seizures, intellectual impairment, and transient ischemic attacks. Patients can present with decreased vision before the onset of cerebral dysfunction. Thus all patients with MGS should be evaluated for Moyamoya disease. Also, in patients with Moyamoya disease, a retinal examination should be done. It is essential for both neurologists and ophthalmologists to be aware of the association between cerebrovascular disease and ocular manifestations to achieve a diagnosis.

Renal coloboma syndrome (RCS) or papillorenal syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by optic nerve dysplasia and renal hypodysplasia.

# Treatment / Management

Early diagnosis and treatment in MGS are essential. The strabismus and anisometropia should be corrected to prevent amblyopia. Full cycloplegic refraction is done, and spectacles are given. Squint may be managed surgically. Retinal detachment is an associated condition that requires management surgically. Pars plans vitrectomy with or without encircling band is employed. First, a core vitrectomy is done. Then triamcinolone-assisted posterior vitreous detachment is induced. Meticulous base shaving is done. All breaks are identified and diathermized. If an epiretinal membrane is present, membrane peeling has to be done. Fluid air exchange is done, and subretinal fluid is drained. All breaks are lasered, and a peripheral barrage laser is done. Silicone oil or gas tamponade is given. Chang et al. and Zhang et al. reported retinal reattachment in all cases with pars plana vitrectomy.

In some cases of retinal detachment, spontaneous attachment has been noticed. Haik et al. reported spontaneous attachment in four patients over seven and half years. Thus it is important to consider this factor prior to any surgical treatment.

Close monitoring of the fellow eye in unilateral cases of MGS is essential. The fellow eye may develop a cataract or retinal detachment. Accordingly, phacoemulsification and lens implantation is done, or vitreoretinal surgery is undertaken.

# Differential Diagnosis

The MGS closely resembles an optic nerve head coloboma. Optic nerve coloboma is characterized by a large excavation which is usually decentred inferiorly, corresponding to the position of the embryonic fissure.

Coloboma may occur with systemic conditions such as CHARGE syndrome (ocular **C**oloboma,**H**eart defects, choanal**A**tresia, growth**R**etardation,**G**enital abnormalities, and**E**ar abnormalities), Walker-Warburg syndrome, Aicardi syndrome, Goldenhar syndrome, and Goltz dermal hypoplasia.

MGS is characterized by a central excavated or conical optic disc. It is not decentred inferiorly. It has a central glial tissue and peripapillary pigmentary disturbance, not present in optic coloboma. The retinal vessels exit radially from the morning glory disc, while in optic coloboma, they exit in a branching fashion. Microcornea and iris coloboma are not seen in MGS. It is associated with persistent hyaloid tissue, lid hemangiomas, retinal gliosis, peripapillary contractile staphyloma, optic disc pit, lens coloboma, glaucoma, and Duane’s retraction.

Optic nerve head avulsion (ONHA) can mimic MGS. ONHA is seen after severe blunt trauma.

Optic nerve aplasia (ONA) is another differential to consider. ONA is a congenital anomaly characterized by the absence of the optic nerve head, optic nerve fibers, retinal vessels, and retinal ganglion cells. The patient presents with nil perception of light and afferent pupillary defect. Fundus evaluation reveals an absent optic nerve head and retinal blood vessels. USG B-scan shows an absent optic nerve shadow.

MGS can be confused with optic disc pit (ODP). ODP is a unilateral, single, oval, grey-white excavation in the inferotemporal quadrant of the optic disc. The size of the pit is 1/8 -1/4 of the optic disc size.

Advanced glaucomatous optic neuropathy (AGON) can mimic MGS. AGON is characterized by a generalized or focal enlargement of the cup with a vertical cup disc ratio of 0.9. There is thinning of the neuroretinal rim generally at superior and inferior poles. There is nasalization of vessels and baring of circumlinear vessels. Parapapillary atrophy and laminar dots are present.

Peripapillary staphyloma is another differential that needs to be considered. It is a congenital anomaly in which a deep fundus excavation is present around a normal optic nerve head.

# Prognosis

The visual prognosis in individuals with MGS is usually poor. These patients have high refractive errors and strabismus that cause amblyopia. The chances of retinal detachment are high as the optic disc is abnormal.

After a successful retinal surgery, final vision depends upon the duration of retinal detachment and preexisting amblyopia. Longstanding retinal schisis leads to atrophic changes, which further limit visual recovery. Visual acuity generally ranges from 20/200 to no perception of light. Even in patients without retinal detachments, vision is poor, usually 20/200 or worse.

# Complications

Longstanding strabismus and the uncorrected refractive error may cause amblyopia which may be resistant to treatment.

Low contrast between the white scleral tissue in the optic nerve and the thin retina makes it challenging to visualize the break clinically or intraoperatively.

Subretinal neovascularization in the peripapillary retina and macula is a known complication.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patient should be counseled properly regarding the prognosis and complications of MGS. These cases require a thorough ocular and systemic evaluation. Family members should also be evaluated by an ophthalmologist.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Any patient presenting with MGS should receive an interprofessional team evaluation by an ophthalmologist, a neurologist, and a physician. A review by a vitreoretina specialist and neuro-ophthalmologist may be necessary. The patient most often presents to the primary clinician with ocular problems, and these professionals should be aware of the condition. Systemic anomalies like moyamoya disease or encephalocele can be associated with MGS; therefore, prompt referral to a neurologist is necessary. These patients can then be followed by their primary clinicians.

Compliance with treatment should be ensured. The nursing staff is the first in the department to come in contact with patients on follow-up. They can evaluate compliance with medication and lifestyle measures and report any issues to the primary care clinician. This collaborative and interprofessional approach to care can ensure optimal patient outcomes.