The evaluation of filarial hydrocele includes laboratory investigations e.g., complete blood count to check for eosinophilia (active filariasis), and peripheral blood examination for microfilariae. However, it is expected that the active infection will not be present by the time chronic hydrocele develops. Urinalysis may be done to check for the presence of chyluria, proteinuria, or hematuria. Rarely microfilariae may be detected in urine samples.

The best and most sensitive method to diagnose lymphatic filariasis is by detecting circulating filarial antigen (CFA) of W. bancrofti DNA in the blood. Circulating filarial antigens can also be detected by ELISA immunoassay or other rapid field tests.

Other serological investigations to check for elevated levels of immunoglobulins and interleukins may be done to determine inflammatory response. Circulating filarial antigens can be detected by ELISA immunoassay with Og4C3 antibodies. In recent years several recombinant antigens, e.g., WbSXP-1, have been developed for use in immunoassays. These antigens detect circulating filarial antibodies to W. bancrofti antigens in the blood. Unlike when testing for the presence of microfilariae, the blood samples can be drawn during the daytime. Since some patients can have an asymptomatic infection, testing can be of additional help to detect and treat patients.

The mainstay of imaging studies is ultrasonography (US). It can help detect even non-palpable levels of fluid collection in the tunica vaginalis. Lymphatic obstruction can be visualized by the US. The structures examined by ultrasound include visualization of the scrotal lymph vessels, testes size and morphology, epididymis for nodules, spermatic cord for nodularity, and layers of the tunica vaginalis for any fluid.