Genetic molecular testing has become a fundamental method for evaluating a growing number of inherited disorders, somatic or acquired diseases with genetic associations, and pharmacogenetic responses. Genotyping can provide valuable disease diagnosis, prognosis, and progression indicators, guide treatment selection, and response, and interrogate targets for gene-specific therapies.

DNA in human cells is wrapped around histone proteins and packaged into nucleosome units, which are compacted further to form chromosomes.

The completion of the full human genome sequence, the identification, and cloning of numerous genes associated with inherited and acquired conditions and diseases, plus the advent of powerful methods for molecular analysis of these genes in clinical specimens, have revolutionized the practice of molecular genetics and molecular pathology. Molecular genetic, nucleic acid-based techniques are often the only approaches available for these applications. As such, they offer a powerful tool for diagnosis, genetic consultation, and prevention of heritable diseases.

Many types of genetic tests are available to analyze changes in genes, chromosomes, or proteins. A healthcare provider will consider several factors when selecting the appropriate test, including what condition or conditions are suspected and the genetic variations typically associated with those conditions.

Molecular tests look for changes in one or more genes. These types of tests determine the order of DNA, building blocks (nucleotides) in an individual's genetic code, and a process called DNA sequencing. These tests can vary in scope.

Whole exome sequencing/whole genome sequencing tests analyze the bulk of an individual's DNA to find genetic variations. This test is typically used when a single gene or panel testing has not provided a diagnosis or when the suspected condition or genetic cause is unclear.

Gene expression tests look at which genes are turned on or off (expressed) in different types of cells. When a gene is turned on (active), the cell produces a molecule called mRNA from the instructions in the genes, and the mRNA molecule is used as a blueprint to make proteins.

Mutations associated with heritable disorders are detectable in all nucleated cells and thus are considered germline or constitutional genetic changes. Somatic genetic changes are characteristic of acquired or sporadic diseases, such as cancer.

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), and cytogenetic analysis (karyotyping) can be used to detect gross mutations like whole and large-scale gene deletions, duplications or rearrangements. Conventional karyotyping is limited to detecting rearrangements involving more than 5 Mb of DNA.