# Continuing Education Activity

Lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma is the rarest subtype of classic Hodgkin lymphoma, accounting for 1% to 1.5% of classic Hodgkin lymphoma cases in western countries. Most patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma experience B symptoms such as unexplained fever more than 100.4 F (38 C), drenching night sweats, and unexplained loss of more than 10% of body weight over 6 months. The 5-year progression-free survival and overall survival rates are significantly lower in these patients than those with other subtypes of classic Hodgkin lymphoma. This activity describes the evaluation and management of lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma.
- Outline appropriate evaluation of lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma and proper referral.
- Review the management options available for lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma.
- Summarize some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes in patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma.

# Introduction

Lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma is the rarest subtype of classic Hodgkin lymphoma globally, although it may be more common in developing countries.

# Etiology

Although certain viral infections such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have been associated with this disease, no specific causal link has been identified.

# Epidemiology

Lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma is regarded as the rarest subtype of classic Hodgkin lymphoma, accounting for 1% to 1.5% of classic Hodgkin lymphoma cases in Western countries.

# Pathophysiology

The etiology of lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma has not been established. However, genetic factors and viral infections such as EBV and HIV may play a role in the pathogenesis of this disease.

**1. Genetic Disorders**

Various gene mutations and chromosomal abnormalities in classic Hodgkin lymphoma affect transcription factors, signaling molecules, tumor suppressor genes, and immune regulators. These result in the transformation of germinal center B-cells to characteristic Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells.

**1.1.**Genetic Abnormality****

A genetic amplification or copy number gain of chromosome 9p24.1 leads to overexpression of programmed death-ligand 1 and 2 (PD-L1 and PD-L2).

**1.2. Aberrant Signaling**

Constitutive activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) in HRS cells is hypothesized to stimulate proliferation, encourage migration, and inhibit apoptosis of malignant cells.

**2. Viral Infections**

**2.1. Epstein-Barr Virus**

EBV infection is present in 60% to 72% of patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma, which is relatively more common than other subtypes of classic Hodgkin lymphoma.

Moreover, LMP 1 acts as a functional homolog of CD40.

**2.2. Human Immunodeficiency Virus**

Approximately 15% of patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma have HIV infection that induces chronic B-cell activation via interacting with CD40-ligand-bearing virions, HIV-associated proteins such as gp120, p17, and nef, and altering cytokine production and release.

# Histopathology

The lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis requires a histopathologic finding of characteristic HRS cells with abundant basophilic cytoplasm and a distinctive bi-nucleate morphology resembling owl's eyes appearance.

# History and Physical

Most patients experience B symptoms such as unexplained fever of more than 100.4 °F (38 °C), drenching night sweats, and unexplained loss of more than 10% of body weight over 6 months.

# Evaluation

For a definitive diagnosis of lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma, an excisional lymph node biopsy is generally preferred over a core-needle biopsy.

Proper staging is important to assess the extent of the disease and to guide therapy. Positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT) scans are routinely done for staging evaluation in Hodgkin lymphoma, but contrast-enhanced CT scans can also be used.

- Stage I: A single lymph node, a group of adjacent lymph nodes, or single extranodal lesions without nodal involvement

- Stage II: Two or more lymph node groups on the same side of the diaphragm or limited contiguous extranodal involvement

- Stage II bulky: Stage II as above with a bulky feature defined as a single nodal mass of 10 centimeters or greater than a third of the transthoracic diameter

- Stage III: Nodes on both sides of diaphragm or nodes above diaphragm with spleen involvement

- Stage IV: Additional noncontiguous extra lymphatic involvement

# Treatment / Management

Clinical outcomes of classic Hodgkin lymphoma have been improving with the advancement of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and targeted therapies.

**1. Risk Stratification**

Patients are generally classified into 3 groups: early-stage favorable (stage I–II without unfavorable factors), early-stage unfavorable (stage I–II with any of the unfavorable factors), and advanced-stage disease (stage III-IV). The National Comprehensive Cancer Network defines unfavorable factors for early-stage disease as the presence of B symptoms, erythrocyte sedimentation rate ≥ 50 millimeters per hour, bulky mediastinal disease (mediastinal mass ratio > 0.33, or adenopathy > 10 centimeters), and > 3 sites of disease.

The International Prognostic Score (IPS) helps determine the clinical management and predict prognosis for those with advanced-stage disease.

**2. Risk-Adapted Initial Therapy**

**2.1. Early-Stage Hodgkin Lymphoma**

Two cycles of ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) chemotherapy followed by 20 Gy of involved-field radiation therapy (IFRT) is generally considered as the standard therapy for early-stage favorable Hodgkin lymphoma.

**2.2. Advanced-Stage Hodgkin Lymphoma**

Six cycles of ABVD is a preferred therapeutic approach for adult patients with advanced-stage Hodgkin lymphoma.

**3. Response-Adapted Therapy**

After 2 cycles of ABVD, patients typically undergo the first interim response assessment using PET/CT scans.

- Score 1: no uptake

- Score 2: uptake is equal to or below mediastinum

- Score 3: uptake is above mediastinum but equal to or below the liver

- Score 4: uptake is moderately higher than liver

- Score 5: uptake is markedly higher than liver, any new lesions, or both

- Score X: new areas of uptake that are unlikely to be related to lymphoma

Depending on the Deauville score, further management is individualized for each patient.

**4. End-of-Treatment Assessment**

At the end of treatment, PET/CT scans help establish remission status using the Deauville criteria.

**5. Relapsed or Refractory Hodgkin Lymphoma**

A diagnosis of relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma must be confirmed histologically by biopsy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Lymphadenopathy can be seen in various conditions such as infection, autoimmune disorders, and malignancies. Patients with lymphadenopathy should undergo proper workups. A definitive diagnosis requires a biopsy with histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations. It is prudent to obtain adequate tissue for histopathologic analysis, particularly for patients with suspected Hodgkin lymphoma, to yield a definitive diagnosis.

# Prognosis

Patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma have more adverse risk factors than those with other subtypes of classic Hodgkin lymphoma. The 5-year progression-free survival and overall survival rates are significantly lower in these patients than those with other subtypes of classic Hodgkin lymphoma.

# Complications

In long-term survivors of Hodgkin lymphoma, the most serious late complications include secondary cancers, cardiovascular diseases especially in patients treated with mediastinal irradiation and/or anthracycline-based chemotherapy, hypothyroidism related to mediastinal irradiation, and infertility particularly associated with BEACOPP regimen.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Being diagnosed with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma and undergoing treatment can have significant psychosocial impacts on patients and their families. These can bring dramatic changes in their physical, spiritual, emotional, and interpersonal dimensions. Every clinic visit should include screening and assessing the emotional and social concerns of patients and their families. They should also be well-informed of the types of treatment, such as combined modality therapy versus chemotherapy alone, pros and cons of each treatment, side effects, supportive measures, regular follow-up, and long-term management plan.

Furthermore, as some chemotherapeutic agents are known to affect fertility, patients should be counseled for options such as sperm banking and egg freezing to preserve fertility. Regular follow-up with primary care physicians and oncologists is also important to monitor treatment response and treatment-related toxicities such as cardiotoxicity and pulmonary toxicity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A patient-centered teamwork approach is of vital importance when managing patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma. An interprofessional team comprising of primary care physicians, oncologists, nursing staff, radiologists, palliative services, social workers, and case managers should work together in every step of treatment to provide comprehensive care for patients and their families, in prevention and management of complications, regular follow-up, survivorship care, psychosocial support, and in end-of-life care.