Pilomatrixomas are benign tumors that can be observed without further need for treatment unless characteristics of the tumor change such as an increase in size or pain. Surgical excision is the treatment of choice when indicated. There is a 2% to 6% chance of recurrence, and that could be due to incomplete excision. There are no current guidelines on appropriate margins.

Malignant pilomatrixoma can arise from benign pilomatrixoma through transformation, but de novo tumors can occur. There are 125 reported cases of these rare, malignant pilomatrixoma, which are termed "pilomatrix carcinomas." Pilomatrixomas that are likely to undergo malignant transformation have a higher degree of cellular pleomorphism, high mitotic rate and atypia, central necrosis, and more extensive infiltration into the skin, soft tissue, and blood and lymphatic vessels. It occurs more commonly in men in the fifth to the seventh decade of life. There is only one known case of the carcinoma occurring in a child. It presents similar to pilomatrixoma and is firm non-tender nodules on the head or neck. The tumor is locally aggressive and can metastasize in 10% of cases. A predictor of metastasis is a local recurrence. The most common site of metastasis is the lungs. Treatment is excision with wide margins (5 to 30 mm), but the recurrence rate is high (50% to 60%). Adjuvant radiation therapy or chemotherapy is used for recurrent disease or metastatic disease.

Pilomatrixomas usually occur as solitary lesions, but multiple lesions can occur, often seen in syndromes such as myotonic dystrophy, Familial adenomatous polyposis, Gardner syndrome, Turner syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Sotos syndrome, and basal cell nevus syndrome.