**Bladder Function**

A multicenter case series of 119 patients, treated initially with drainage and then cystoscopic ablation, found that one third developed severely abnormal bladder function necessitating clean intermittent catheterization.

Given the high prevalence of this complication, urodynamic studies are an essential component of the ongoing care of patients with posterior urethral valves. Other studies have shown as many as 41% of patients to be symptomatic with bladder dysfunction, although 42 of the 55 children toilet trained in this study were able to be continent. Both sets of patients were treated with alpha-blockers to lower post-void residual volume if indicated following urodynamic studies.

**Renal Function**

In a series of 274 patients, all of whom underwent initial treatment in the first 90 days of life at five different hospitals, 16% required renal replacement therapy within ten years. Patients were risk-stratified based on this by the lowest creatinine recorded in the first year.

**Vesicoureteric Reflux and Urinary Tract Infection**

Due to elevated intravesical pressure, one-third of patients with posterior urethral valves will develop vesicoureteric reflux. It is usually treated with antibiotics to reduce the risk, but alpha-blockers and anticholinergics may be additionally utilized to aid in voiding. In cases with recurrent UTI with renal damage and reflux sufficiently severe to impair bladder emptying, urinary reconstruction may be required. Even in the absence of vesicoureteric reflux, recurrent infections with high post-void residual volumes may cause stagnant urine, which is more prone to infection. Recurrent urinary tract infections may be exacerbated in cases with dilated upper urinary tracts.