The bioavailability of a drug can be influenced by both intrinsic and extrinsic variables. Intrinsically, a drug’s bioavailability can be affected by the drug’s required metabolic steps to activation, the specificity of its target receptors, the patient’s unique physiology (including phenotypic polymorphisms), route of administration of the drug, and site of drug absorption. Extrinsic variables affecting drug bioavailability include interactions with concurrent food or substance metabolic processes and drug interactions with medications.

A common clinical experience where an appreciation for bioavailability becomes important is the interactions between warfarin and albumin in the plasma. Warfarin has a propensity for binding with human serum albumin. Albumin-warfarin binding inactivates warfarin and reduces the fraction of active, free warfarin in the systemic circulation. When albumin sequesters warfarin in the blood, both the clearance and bioavailability of warfarin is reduced.

The use of nitroglycerin in angina relief is another common clinical example that illustrates how differences in routes of administration with disparate bioavailabilities can affect clinical outcomes. Nitroglycerin delivered orally will be affected by the first-pass metabolism in the liver, reducing the rate and extent of the drug that reaches its target sites. In consequence, the therapeutic effect of oral nitroglycerin should be slower in development and more sustained. For these reasons, oral nitroglycerin is commonly prescribed to patients with coronary artery disease for prophylactic use.

In contrast, oral administration of nitroglycerin might not be the most appropriate route of administration for the immediate relief of angina. Sublingual nitroglycerin diffuses immediately into the bloodstream, bypassing intestinal absorption and first-pass metabolism. Consequently, its therapeutic effects are manifested as early as 2 minutes, yet last only 10-15 minutes in duration.

Fortunately, many AUC and bioavailability data have been previously calculated in pharmacokinetic studies, which are available to providers. The clinical pearl here is being able to use these numbers to make pharmacologic decisions such as dosage and schedule.

Factors such as dose (D), route of administration, bioavailability (F), and total clearance (CT) will affect AUC.

**Equation 4:**AUC = (F x D) ÷ CT

Understanding bioavailability is important for the clinician to determine the most appropriate route, schedule, and dose of administration, a drug should be delivered in specific clinical scenarios. Bioavailability is integral in evaluating an appropriate loading and maintenance dose. The loading dose is part of the initiation of treatment and is typically higher than the maintenance dose. It is intended to frontload an adequate plasma drug concentration that will be subsequently maintained by the maintenance dose. If the volume of distribution (Vd), desired steady-state concentration (Css), and bioavailability (F) are known, one can calculate the loading dose (LD) using Equation 5. If the desired steady-state concentration (Css), dosing interval (DI), bioavailability (F), and clearance (CL) are known, the maintenance dose (MD) can be determined (Equation 6).

**Equation 5:** LD = (Css x Vd) ÷ F

**Equation 6:**MD = (Css x CL x DI) ÷ F

Prescribing doses that are most appropriate for the clinical scenario is critical to patient outcomes. For example, an antimicrobial dose that cannot maintain a plasma concentration within the therapeutic window could fail to treat a patient’s infection and possibly contribute to antimicrobial resistance. Conversely, prescribing a dose too high could result in toxicities idiosyncratic to that drug. When considering the administration of a drug, it is imperative to appreciate the relevance of bioavailability in each drug and patient interaction.