The four levels of protein structure are:

- Primary Structure

- Secondary Structure

- Tertiary Structure

- Quaternary Structure

**Primary Structure**

Foundationally, a protein is a chain of amino acids bound one to another via peptide bonds. Similar to a string of beads, these strings can twist and fold into a final protein shape. When someone eats protein, it will break down into its amino acids. These amino acids are composed of a central carbon atom bonded to an "amino" or nitrogen-containing group and a carboxylic "acid" group, hence the name "amino acid." The carbon also has a single hydrogen atom and a side chain, or "R-group," which is unique to each amino acid. The exception to this is Proline, which is a ring structure.

**Secondary**** Structure**

The secondary structure is the protein structure level at which two common confirmations occur, alpha-helix and beta-pleated sheets. Biologically, this level can further subdivide into three common structures. The third is a combination of alpha-helices and beta-plated sheets, which can form some enzymes.

The first is alpha-helices, which can be present in proteins such as hemoglobin and intermediate filaments. Alpha helixes are amino acids in a coiled or spiral confirmation, allowing hydrogen bonding to form between nitrogen and hydrogen, otherwise known as nitrate groups of one amino acid with the carboxyl group of another amino acid four residues earlier. Some amino acids are more prone to form alpha helixes. Some examples being methionine, glutamine, cysteine, histidine, and lysine.

The second is beta-pleated sheets, which appear in fatty acid transport proteins and antibodies. Beta pleated sheets are amino acids in a series of adjacent rows, allowing for lateral hydrogen bonds to form between the amino acid group with the carboxyl group of another amino acid. When there is a kink in the pattern, it indicates that there is a proline amino acid located at that position. Some amino acids are more prone to form beta-pleated sheets. Some examples being isoleucine, tyrosine, tryptophan, and valine.

Furthermore, there are two biological characteristics of secondary structure—those that are functional and those that are acute phase reactants.

The bone marrow and liver make those classified as functional. The bone marrow produces immunoglobulins. In the liver, albumin, fibrinogen, and alpha-1-antitrypsin are all produced. The liver produces approximately 90% of the proteins that serve as the osmotic gradient within the serum. An osmotic gradient is needed to pull fluid in and out of the capillaries.

The acute phase reactants are those proteins made during inflammation. They are non-specific and used to monitor whether inflammation is occurring in the body. Examples include transferrin and ceruloplasmin.

**Tertiary Structure**

The most critical factor that contributes to the tertiary structure is its hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions. The hydrophobic fat-soluble amino acids within a protein will fold towards the protein's "inside" and away from contact with water. In contrast, hydrophilic water-soluble amino acid residues will fold towards a protein's "outside," towards contact with water. Also, tertiary is the level at which covalent bonds form. All of these characteristics contribute to the three-dimensional shape that ultimately forms.

**Quaternary Structure**

Quaternary structure is the level at which two or more proteins interact with each other and is termed cooperativity.

When cooperativity is applied to the composition of enzymes, it classifies as an allosteric enzyme. And allosteric enzymes are usually rate-limiting enzymes. They are the proteins that control a specific step within a pathway. The rate-limiting enzyme is therefore involved in the step that is termed the" rate-limiting step." If the rate-limiting enzyme becomes slower, then the downstream or subsequent steps also slow down. The vice versa is also true. If the rate-limiting enzyme becomes more efficient, it will increase its speed of a reaction because the downstream steps ultimately occur sooner. So by definition, the rate-limiting enzyme should be the slowest catalyst within the reaction. It also bears mention that most genetic conditions that are clinically significant affect the rate-limiting enzyme of a biochemical reaction.

The kinetic curve of an enzyme will be shaped in a specific way if the protein is allosteric. The most likely confirmation is sigmoidal, which is significant in first-order elimination. While the pharmacokinetic aspects are beyond the scope of this article, one must appreciate that first-order elimination is associated with substrate concentration and Vmax. When proteins have multiple active sites, their Vmax increases. Proteins are said to be saturated when a substrate occupies all active sites. Clinically this is how protein channels and transporters affect glomerular filtration rate.