Antihistamine medications carry a broad range of adverse effects depending on the specific class of drugs utilized. H-1 receptor antihistamines will generally cause clinically noticeable adverse effects that are dose-dependent. These side effects are far more commonly seen in first-generation antihistamines. Second-generation antihistamines do not easily cross the blood-brain barrier, and therefore their side effect profile is far more limited. In contrast to H-1 receptor antihistamines, H-2 receptor antihistamines do not commonly cause adverse effects except for cimetidine.

H-1 receptor antihistamines have anticholinergic properties, which are adverse effect-inducing; this principally occurs only in the first generation category of antihistamines. As a whole, they are sedating but may cause insomnia in some users. Due to their anticholinergic properties, dry mouth is a relatively common adverse effect. Some users experience dizziness and tinnitus. At increasing doses, euphoria and decreased coordination may also occur, and delirium is a potential adverse effect at even higher dose ranges.

H-2 receptor antihistamines are generally well tolerated by users but do carry the risk of uncommon side effects. Gastrointestinal changes can be seen, including both diarrhea and constipation. Reports exist of fatigue, dizziness, and confusion. One specific drug in this category that may cause a range of adverse effects is cimetidine. Its antiandrogenic effects correlate with the possible occurrence of gynecomastia in men. In women, it can cause galactorrhea. Other H-2 receptor antihistamines do not exhibit the same properties as cimetidine.

H-2 receptor antihistamines can cause inhibition of the cytochrome system, especially cimetidine, thereby leading to drug toxicity and interactions with other medications.

Patients who present with hemodynamic alterations, increased intraocular pressure or increased urinary retention should use antihistamines with caution as these conditions can become exacerbated.