Non-Seminomatous Germ Cell Tumors (NSGCT) are broadly classified into two classes according to histology: seminomas and non-seminomatous germ cell tumors. Non-seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT) are further classified into four types: choriocarcinoma, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, and yolk cell carcinoma. Mixed histology tumors are common, and even seminomatous elements may be included in NSGCT malignancies. When mixed, the treatment and overall prognosis are generally that of the most aggressive of the NSGCT elements.

**Choriocarcinoma**

Choriocarcinoma is a rare and very aggressive testicular cancer that is typically seen with extremely highly elevated serum human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) levels and metastatic disease. Pure choriocarcinomas are rare at only 1% of all testicular malignancies, but they may be found as a component in up to 15% of all mixed germ cell tumors.

Microscopically, the tumor is composed of both syncytiotrophoblasts and cytotrophoblasts, with the former staining positively for HCG. In fact, the HCG levels may become quite high, resulting in male gynecomastia. Testicular choriocarcinomas are highly vascular and prone to hemorrhage, often spontaneously and sometimes immediately after chemotherapy is initiated. This hemorrhaging can be catastrophic, especially when the bleeding is significant and occurs in the lungs or brain. Elevated HCG levels are usually associated only with seminomas, except for choriocarcinoma and sometimes embryonal carcinoma.

**Embryonal Carcinoma**

Embryonal carcinoma consists of undifferentiated malignant cells resembling primitive epithelial cells from early-stage embryos with crowded pleomorphic nuclei.

**Teratoma**

These tumors contain well or poorly differentiated elements of at least two of the three germ cell layers: endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. All components derived from these three germ layers are characteristically intermixed. Mature teratomas are defined as well-differentiated tumors, whereas those that are poorly differentiated are called immature teratomas. In adolescent and adult men, histopathologists do not distinguish between the two entities, and its distinction is clinically insignificant.

Mature teratomas may include mature bone, cartilage, teeth, hair, and squamous epithelium. Due to these findings, teratomas are roughly called “monster tumors” in Greek. The gross appearance largely depends on the elements within it. Most of these tumors have two physical components, i.e., solid and cystic areas. They are typically associated with normal serum tumor markers (LDH, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)), but they may cause slightly elevated serum AFP levels. Approximately 47% of adult mixed germ cell tumors contain teratomatous elements, but pure teratomas are uncommon. Mature teratoma often constitutes the remnant of non-seminomatous germ cell tumors after treatment with chemo or radiation therapy, as they are relatively resistant to both. Treatment often requires surgery.

**Yolk Sac Tumor**

Pure yolk sac tumors (sometimes called endodermal sinus tumors) constitute a very small percentage of adult primary testicular and retroperitoneal germ cell tumors. They are most commonly found in mediastinal locations and the pediatric age group. They are the most common testicular malignancy in male children 3 years of age and younger, comprising about 30% of all testicular cancers in this age group.

The median age at diagnosis is 18 months. Yolk sac tumors typically grow in a glandular, papillary, or micro-cystic pattern and often make alpha-fetoprotein. Children usually have pure yolk sac tumors, while in adults, it is found as part of a mixed germ cell malignancy. Most yolk sac tumors, up to 75%, will demonstrate Schiller-Duvall bodies which resemble glomeruli with a fibro-vascular core. If present, these are pathognomic for yolk sac tumors.  Prognosis is usually good with treatment, especially in children.