# Definition/Introduction

There is a need to reconstruct damaged hard tissue for several reasons that include traumatic or non-traumatic events, congenital abnormalities, or disease. Damaged tissues stemming from these events can become a major issue in orthopedic, dental, and maxillofacial surgery. A study on numerous biomaterials revealed that calcium phosphates had been used in hard tissue reconstruction for more than 6 decades. Hydroxyapatite (HA) was the primary material used in orthopedics and dentistry.

Hydroxyapatite (HA) is an inorganic mineral that has a typical apatite lattice structure as (A10(BO4)6C2) where A, B, and C are defined by Ca, PO4, and OH. Pure HA contains 39.68% by weight calcium and 18% by weight phosphorus resulting in a Ca/P mole ratio of 1.67. In fact, there are commercial HA products with the Ca/P ratio bigger or smaller than 1.67. The variety in the Ca/P ratio indicates the phase shift between tricalcium phosphate (TCP) and calcium oxide (CaO). HA with Ca/P ratio bigger than 1.67 comprises more CaO than TCP and vice versa

HA crystals present in the human body both inside bone and teeth. In terms of human bone, the HA crystals as a bioactive ceramic cover 65 to 70% by weight of the bone. Furthermore, the architecture of the bone comprises of type-I collagen as an organic component and the HA as an inorganic component. These 2 components form a composite structure at the nanoscale, in which nano-HA is interspersed in the collagen network. This composite forms mineralized collagen and is the precursor of biological mineralized tissue from tendons and skin to hard mineralized tissues such as bone and teeth. Moreover, in the bone, the HA crystals present in the shape of plates or needles, are about 40 to 60 nm long, 20 nm wide, and 1.5 to 5 nm thick

About concerning the dental role of HA crystal, it covers 70 to 80% by weight of dentin and enamel. Within the human body, the enamel is the hardest substance consisting of relatively large HA crystals (25 nm thick, 40 to 120 nm wide, 160 to 1000 nm long)

Overall, the pressure-point in hard tissue reparation is on HA due to its chemical proportion that occupies the majority of hard tissue composition, and also its mechanical properties that support tissue integrity

# Issues of Concern

Hydroxyapatite has been long used in hard tissue engineering due to its chemical similarity to the mineral of hard tissue. The era of hydroxyapatite (HA) in regenerative science dates back to the 1950s when bioceramics were used to fill the bone defects. However, after more than 6 decades of scientific innovation through research and development, HA has restructured the traditional philosophy of using ceramics in medical sciences through the wide range of its applications in dentistry and drug delivery.

HA application in orthopedics can vary from bone defects repair and bone augmentation to coatings for human body metallic implants. The HA-based implant can provide an interlocked porous structure

Another significant application of HA can be seen in dentistry since 1979. HA cylinders have been used for tooth replacement. This application was followed by the utilization of HA blocks and coating to enhance the bone fixation in a restorative dental procedure in the early 1980s. Now, HA is found not only in dental cement and fillings but also in toothpaste. HA in toothpaste acts as a polisher to decrease the deposition of accretions on teeth

The application of HA also can be found in drug delivery. The naturally porous structure with a high-binding affinity of HA provides a niche for drug loading, thus makes HA a good fit as a drug carrier

The applications of HA in hard tissue restoration and drug delivery do not use HA in pure form. The mechanical properties of pure HA are relatively low and brittle for load-bearing applications. Therefore, HA is usually incorporated in composite or polymer to increase its application

There are several methods to produce HA either from synthetic material or natural sources. Synthetic HA uses raw materials in the form of calcium carbonate, calcium hydroxide, calcium nitrate, diammonium hydrogen phosphate, and ammonium hydroxide. The fabrication process of HA is known as a wet method and solid-state reaction, followed by calcination or sintering process. Both of these methods use chemical reaction by varying the content of calcium oxide (CaO) and tricalcium phosphate (TCP) to reach HA stoichiometric conditions.

The wet method produces non-stoichiometric HA powder, with impurities such as ions of hydrogen phosphate, carbonate, chloride, and sodium. These impurities cause the formation of calcium-deficient HA

Hydroxyapatite from the natural source is commonly fabricated from fishbone, coral, bovine bone, eggshell, and seashells through the calcination process. HA produced from natural sources is non-stoichiometric due to the presence of trace ions found in the natural sources

The mechanical properties of HA depend on several variables, such as phase composition, crystal size, and the synthesis process. Pure HA has bending, compressive, and tensile strength is in the range of 38 to 250 MPa, 120 to 150 MPa, and 38 to 300 MPa, respectively. Young’s modulus varies from 35 to 120 GPa, depending on the impurities

Phase composition and preparation method affect the chemical stability of HA. For example, the exchange between magnesium, carbonate, or strontium with the apatite promotes an increase in solubility

# Clinical Significance

Synthetic and natural hydroxyapatite have been long preferred as the material used in hard tissue repair over autografts and allografts. This is due to problems that the grafts are naturally associated with several issues including graft shortage, donor site morbidity, disease transmission, and graft rejection.

In bone tissue engineering, the bioactivity of HA, which is marked by osteoconductive and osteoinductive processes, has proved to support osseointegration. The osteoconductive property of HA provides a template to guide the new bone formation on its surface down to the pores of the implant body

The advance in the materials fabrication process leads to the development of nano-HA particles which can induce fast dentin remineralization

Atomic bonds in HA are quite strong contributes to the fact that HA does not swell or change in size under the range of PH and temperature

There are several problems regarding HA application in medicine. For instance, the use of HA as an implant has inherent defects/fine porosity that could act as a crack initiator. Following this event, the crack propagation can cause catastrophic deterioration during application. Furthermore, the application of bulk HA sometimes can cause the modulus mismatch between bone and the implant which later causing the disproportionate load sharing

Another issue that occurs by using HA in medical applications is how to fine-tune the degradation rate. Poor mechanical properties of the HA-based implant can induce not only fast degradation but also implant failure and chronic inflammatory reaction