**Olfactory Dysfunction Secondary to Sinonasal Disease**

This is one of the most common causes of olfactory dysfunction and often caused by rhinosinusitis (acute: < 12 weeks versus chronic ≥ 12 weeks) with hyposmia or anosmia as an important symptom besides rhinal symptoms (such as nasal discharge, pressure-like pain in the face and nasal obstruction).

**Post-infectious Olfactory Dysfunction**

This is typically caused by (severe) upper respiratory tract infection by a virus, and it is one of the most common causes of olfactory decline. The onset of perceived loss of smell and possibly loss of flavor perception may occur somewhat suddenly. Patients often report on parosmia (perception of an odor when an odor’s stimulus is present, but the perception is distorted). As with olfactory dysfunction secondary to sinonasal disease, olfactory testing with post-infectious olfactory dysfunction shows diminished odor threshold but normal odor identification.

**Posttraumatic Olfactory Dysfunction**

This may occur suddenly or with a delay after injury. Frequently patients describe phantosmia (perception of an odor when no odorous stimulus is present). Typically, olfactory tests show diminished odor threshold and odor discrimination ability, while odor identification is normal.

**Olfactory Dysfunction Associated With Neurological Disease**

Several neurological disorders are associated with olfactory decline, and thus diminished sense of smell is not specific to a distinct neurological illness.

**Olfactory Dysfunction Associated with Exposure to Drugs and Toxins**

Several drugs and toxins can cause olfactory decline.

**Congenital Olfactory Dysfunction**

This type of olfactory decline is present from birth and is severe. There is no parosmia. Besides olfactory testing, which typically reveals anosmia, information from neuroimaging is increasingly recognized as an important component in making the diagnosis.

**Olfactory Dysfunction Associated with Aging**

As with other sensory modalities, the sense of smell decreases with age. For instance, while about one-fifth of the general population has diminished olfaction,

**Other Disorders Associated With Olfactory Decline**

Several different conditions can cause diminished olfaction. These may include:

- Tumors (of nose and brain)

- Surgery of nose, sinuses, and skull (such as septoplasty or surgery of the anterior skull base)

- Disorders of the endocrine system and metabolic disorders (such as thyroid disorders and diabetes mellitus)

- Metabolic disorders such as diabetes mellitus

- Vitamin deficiency (such as deficiency of vitamin B12)

- Substance misuse (such as alcohol and cocaine)

- Nicotine use/tobacco use to some degree; however, this association is controversial.

**Idiopathic olfactory dysfunction:**

This diagnosis is made by carefully excluding all other causes of olfactory decline. Even though this diagnosis is the product of a comprehensive assessment, follow-up assessment with an interdisciplinary approach may be considered as the olfactory decline found could be an early sign of a neurodegenerative disorder such as Parkinson disease.