As briefly described previously, mammography utilizes x-rays to evaluate the different anatomic structures within the breast. Initially, mammograms were performed using traditional film-based radiographic techniques. However, film mammography has been replaced by systems that use phosphor storage technology or direct digital capture. The phosphor storage systems use a crystal that transforms x-rays into visible light, which is subsequently digitized. The direct digital capture systems utilize a CCD array that can directly transfer the x-ray into a digital image. There are many advantages to these newer technologies over film mammography, most notably, the dynamic range and contrast resolution can be adjusted after image capture; this allows radiologists to assess subtle differences within tissues better and optimize image rendering at the workstation.

Recently, digital breast tomosynthesis (DBT, also known as "3D mammography") has gained popularity. Briefly, DBT is performed by obtaining multiple mammographic projections per view, and these projections are acquired serially along an arc. The images are then reconstructed via post-processing techniques into a series of stacked images of 1mm slice thickness. The image stacks combat the challenges of superimposed tissues seen in single-projection mammography by allowing the breast to be assessed in the X, Y, and Z dimensions.

The essential mammography components include an x-ray generator, an image detector, and a breast compression paddle. The x-ray generator and image detector are set at a fixed distance and are oriented orthogonally to one another, but the entire unit can be rotated to obtain the required mammographic views. Additional protective equipment is necessary for the technical personnel who take the mammograms; this includes a protective shield with a remote control station to operate the equipment.