To successfully manage oral fungal infections and eradicate underlying systemic disease, interprofessional healthcare team effort is required. Dentists play an important role in the early diagnosis of fungal infections and in referring patients appropriately to manage underlying conditions. Patient compliance is pivotal for preventing a recurrence. Hence, dentists, dental therapists, and dental hygienists should educate patients about oral health care. Pharmacists should emphasize compliance with the antimicrobial regimen, alert patients about antimicrobial resistance, and verify the appropriateness of the chosen agent for the pathogen.

Oral manifestation may be the first sign of systemic infections. Hence the primary health care provider must look out for oral lesions, especially in immunocompromised patients and those with uncontrolled diabetes. Nurses should provide the patients with appropriate counseling for tobacco cessation and ensure regular monitoring of blood sugar levels for patients with diabetes.

Attention should be given to the ventilation system in the hospital to prevent exposure to airborne fungal spores and thereby prevent nosocomial infections. Consultation with ENT surgeons, infectious disease specialists, thoracic surgeons, pulmonologists, and oncologists is indispensable in cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy and chemotherapy and infected with immunodeficiency viruses at increased risk of developing oral mycoses.

All interprofessional team members must be able to communicate with other team members regarding any patient status changes or concerns, and every interaction or intervention must be accurately recorded in the patient's medical record. Interprofessional coordination will drive optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]