History and physical exam start with an exploration of the underlying illnesses. When exploring dyspnea, relevant dimensions of the symptom include occurrence, distress, intensity, frequency, duration, whether it is constant or episodic, and meaning.

The biopsychosocial model of “total dyspnea,” modeled after the concept of “total pain,” recognizes that many aspects of the patient’s situation affect the experience of their dyspnea. Physical aspects, psychological aspects such as anxiety, levels of coping, spiritual aspects, such as the degree of acceptance, meaning, suffering, and social aspects, including relationships, family experience, and financial situations, all contribute to the experience.

Physical exam findings can vary based on the situation and underlying illness. Findings can correlate with the underlying illness, reveal new abnormalities responsible for acute or changing dyspnea, or may even be normal in patients that are nonetheless dyspneic.

A large part of the exam focuses on the respiratory system. While inspecting the patient, any abnormalities in the respiratory rate should be noted. There may be visible indications of increased respiratory effort, such as retractions, accessory muscle use, or paradoxical abdominal breathing.

Auscultation can reveal a variety of findings. The presence of grunting, stridor, or voice changes should be noted. Lung fields should be auscultated, listening for prolonged expiratory phase, wheezing, rhonchi, or crackles. The overall degree of air excursion should be noted.

Physical exam findings outside the respiratory system will also contribute to identifying the underlying causes of dyspnea. For example, the presence of peripheral edema, jugular venous pulse, heart rate, and rhythm, the distance of heart sounds, tracheal positioning, hepatojugular reflux, abdominal distention, or pallor all contribute valuable information to the physical exam for dyspnea.

Furthermore, psychological, social, and spiritual factors can contribute to the overall burden of dyspnea and can be explored as indicated.