The usual presenting complaints are horny lesions over the extremities, particularly involving the palms and soles, which may be associated with pain and/or fissuring. The lesions are insidious in onset and gradually increase in number and size. On physical examination, multiple yellowish to pigmented hyperkeratotic papules and plaques that start over the pressure points over soles and palms are seen. As the disease progresses, the lesions increase in number, size, and thickness and can coalesce to form large verrucous plaques.

- Mild- Slight thickening of skin or papules of size less than 2 mm on a background skin with grit-like texture, best appreciated by palpation.

- Moderate- Multiple raised, warty, keratotic, corn-like papules of size 2-5 mm.

- Severe- Keratotic papules of size more than 5mm or confluent keratotic plaques, with or without fissures.

Arsenical keratosis is often accompanied by pigmentary disturbances, which can be generalized/ diffuse hyperpigmentation or localized patchy hyperpigmentation predominantly involving the skin folds.

CAT is a multisystem disorder, and patients with arsenical keratosis can have symptoms of chronic liver disease, chronic lung disease, distal sensorimotor neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease, ischemic heart disease, chronic kidney disease, and non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms like anorexia, dyspepsia, and diarrhea. They may also complain of headache, weakness, fatigue, redness of eyes (conjunctival congestion), and swelling of legs (non-pitting pedal edema). Diabetes and hypertension are prevalent in these patients.

Thus, while evaluating a patient from an arsenic-endemic area, presenting with acquired palmoplantar keratoderma, arsenical keratosis should be suspected, and the clinician must look for other skin manifestations and systemic symptoms of CAT. This should be followed by appropriate laboratory investigations to confirm the diagnosis.