**Clinical Work-Up**

A comprehensive history, along with a full head and neck examination, is mandatory before considering surgery. Vision examination, including visual acuity, perimetry, and gaze restriction, should be documented. Preoperative nasal endoscopy is crucial to rule out anatomical obstruction or sinonasal disease, which would need to be addressed intraoperatively or preoperatively.

An evaluation of the pituitary function and hormone status before surgery by an endocrinologist is indispensable. Inadequate pituitary reserve before surgery would increase the risk of hypopituitarism in the perioperative period. At the end of the evaluation, the interprofessional team should be aware of the following:

- Secretory or nonsecretory nature of the tumor

- Preoperative baseline pituitary function

- Identify patients in whom medical therapy would be efficacious and initiate it (e.g., cabergoline in prolactinoma)

Measurement of growth hormone (GH), cortisol, serum prolactin, triiodothyronine, thyroxine, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH) are done. Thyroid and cortisol hormone levels are the most crucial preoperatively. In the case of hypocortisolemia or hypothyroidism, replacement with exogenous glucocorticoids or thyroid supplements is essential in anticipation of surgery.

**Imaging Studies**

Imaging, in the form of CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, is critical for any skull base surgery. T1W MRI with and without contrast, in coronal and sagittal planes, is the best method of defining sellar pathology and planning surgical approach. MRI is superior to CT scan due to its greater soft-tissue contrast, which allows the delineation of vital structures such as optic chiasm, intracavernous carotid arteries, optic nerves, and cavernous sinuses. MRI aids in understanding the exact tumor extension, tumor composition, and differentiating mass from obstructed fluid/mass. Also, it provides information on dural involvement or invasion.

Microadenomas are a diagnostic challenge. On T1W images, microadenomas are hypointense to the pituitary gland and enhance less than the normal gland. Its appearance in T2W can be variable. Microadenomas show early enhancement followed by early washout, in comparison with late and intensely enhancing pituitary gland. Macroadenomas are usually hypointense or isointense to grey matter on T1W and variable on T2W. In postcontrast images, macroadenomas enhance well, making them easy to diagnose.

Pituitary adenomas are isointense to brain parenchyma on CT without contrast. It shows intense enhancement with contrast. CT scans can demonstrate bony erosion and expansion of the sella accurately. More importantly, CT scans are vital for the planning of the surgical approach. It can help identify septal deviations, sinonasal disease or nasal polyps, the extent of pneumatization of sinuses, ease of transnasal access to the sphenoid sinus, and anatomical variations such as Onodi cell, aberrant carotid artery, or bony dehiscences at the skull base.

**Past Nasal Surgery**

History of prior nasal surgery and, if present, its indication has to be sought. The presence of past nasal or septal surgery makes the preoperative planning and preparation more complex. If the indication for the previous surgery was a chronic disease (e.g., nasal polyps) or a tumor, then its current status needs to be evaluated in the form of nasal endoscopy and radiological imaging. Sometimes, if the previous condition is unresolved, then revision surgery may have to be undertaken before undertaking pituitary surgery. If the previous surgery was septoplasty or involving raising the septal flap, evaluation of the septal mucosa needs to be done with preoperative nasal endoscopy. Scarred mucosa or the presence of septal perforation may impede the harvest of a nasoseptal flap and warrant the use of alternate methods of reconstruction after sellar surgery. Additionally, nasal endoscopy helps identify residual septal deviations or synechiae (post-surgery), which may be corrected earlier or concomitantly with pituitary surgery.