More than 50% of patients considered high-risk due to vascular involvement are over-treated; hence long-term toxicity assessment is crucial. There is a high rate of unfavorable changes in body mass index and blood pressure, which consecutively results in an increased risk of cardiovascular disease in patients after chemotherapy for testis cancer.

Etoposide has been reported with secondary leukemia. Secondary malignancies have been reported with radiotherapy and chemotherapy. There is a relative risk of 2.9 to develop solid malignancy like esophageal carcinoma, carcinomas of the lungs, bladder, colon, and pancreas. Studies have shown no effects on long-term fertility. However, no good long-term data on fertility is available after adjuvant chemotherapy, and hence cryopreservation is recommended before chemotherapy. In summary, long-term studies with advanced disease have indicated only some long-term toxicity of chemotherapy. Extrapolation of data suggests no significant long-term toxicities of two cycles of PEB.

Management of infertility in patients with NSGCT can be challenging. There may be pre-existing infertility before the discovery of the testicular malignancy. All of the definitive treatments for NSGCT, with the possible exception of the initial radical orchiectomy, are likely to have a deleterious effect on male fertility due to ejaculatory dysfunction, interference with spermatogenesis, or disruption of pituitary hormones in men who receive radiation for brain metastasis. The reported pregnancy rate from cryopreservation of sperm in such situations is 18% to 50%. If semen preservation is not done, sperm can still be retrieved directly from the remaining testicle via testicular sperm aspiration and similar techniques, followed by intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). This technique has a reported successful pregnancy rate of up to 31%.