# Continuing Education Activity

Exertional compartment syndrome is a commonly underdiagnosed entity that occurs secondary to elevated intra-compartmental pressures in the absence of trauma. There are two forms: chronic, in which symptoms such as pain or paresthesias typically resolve with rest, and acute, which is a surgical emergency in which unremitting symptoms may cause loss of limb. This activity describes the evaluation and management of exertional compartment syndrome and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the clinical manifestations of chronic exertional compartment syndrome.
- Explain the pathophysiology of exertional compartment syndrome.
- Describe the clinical presentation of acute exertional compartment syndrome.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to ensure appropriate identification and treatment for a patient with exertional compartment syndrome.

# Introduction

Exertional compartment syndrome is often a diagnosis of exclusion and occurs secondary to increased pressures in a muscular compartment, with resultant ischemia manifesting most commonly as pain.

Chronic exertional compartment syndrome (CECS) occurs in the setting of recurrent, reversible ischemic episodes following the cessation of activity resulting in the predictable decrease in fascial compartment pressures.

Acute exertional compartment syndrome (AECS) is a rare entity that, unfortunately, its diagnosis is often delayed.  Just as in acute compartment syndrome (ACS), the diagnosis implies a surgical emergency requiring fasciotomies to help mitigate the risks of ensuing irreversible muscle ischemia and neurovascular injury, which can occur after just a few hours alone.

# Etiology

The major differentiating clinical variable separating the two forms of ECS from ACS is the absence of a specific traumatic event in the former.  The literature consistently reports the clinical underappreciation of ECS types, particularly the acute subtype, given that there is most commonly an atraumatic presentation.

Multiple etiologies underlie CECS.  During exercise, specific muscle compartments swell up to 20%, secondary to increased blood flow and fluid volume.

The pathophysiologic cascade following this abnormal increase in intracompartmental pressure results in reduced myocyte oxygenation and ultimately resulting in myonecrosis and neurologic damage

Other etiologies of CECS include various overuse injuries or repetitive mechanisms where tissue degeneration or scar formation occurs as a result of microtrauma. Another predisposing risk factor may occur in individuals with inherently decreased elasticity of the fascia, which predisposes to nerve entrapment and quicker rises in pathologic pressures overriding the capillary perfusion pressure of the corresponding compartment.[10]. Amendola et al., in their study, felt that CECS was secondary to increased fluid content, which impaired muscle or nerve function in a tight compartment.

# Epidemiology

Chronic exertional compartment syndrome is typically considered a rare cause of lower extremity pain, with a reported incidence rate in active patients presenting with exercise-induced leg pain to be 33%.

Waterman et al., in their retrospective study involving a military population, showed an average annual incidence of 0.49 per 1000 at-risk person-years. CECS is relatively common, especially amount young adult athletes involved in running, endurance training, soccer, field hockey, and lacrosse.

In a retrospective study, Brujin et al. looked at 1411 heterogeneous patients who had complaints of lower extremity pain and had dynamic intracompartmental pressures performed. Of the 1411 patients included in the study, 698 patients had a diagnosis of CECS.

# History and Physical

A strong index of clinical suspicion is needed to rule out ACS and AECS; it is particularly crucial given the latter condition occurs in the absence of a traumatic injury or fracture. AECS is essentially a hybrid of ACS and CECS and is often overlooked or diagnosed in a delayed fashion. AECS patients often present following sport-related activity or exertion with nonspecific leg pain and persist after strenuous or repetitive activity. CECS clinically differentiates in that symptoms will predictably abate following activity cessation. While CECS is often a diagnosis of exclusion, AECS should be ruled out first before considering other diagnoses, which one accomplishes by measuring the patient's compartments in question.

The diagnosis of CECS has its basis in a thorough clinical history, paying particular attention to a patient's characterization of pain during strenuous activity, well-localized to a specific compartment, and the pain/symptoms disappear quickly after the cessation of activity.

In 70 to 95% of cases, the pain is bilateral.

Formal CECS testing following stress-testing gets confirmed by compartment pressure measurements before and after exercise utilizing the Stryker pressure monitoring system as described previously.

# Evaluation

History is key to suspecting this diagnosis as this condition is easy to overlook or fail to consider. Once CECS is suspected, diagnosis is confirmed by dynamic intra-compartmental pressure measurement at rest and then after exercise.

The Pedowitz criteria are often used to obtain or rule out a diagnosis of CECS in each compartment of interest

- A resting pressure of greater than or equal to 15 mmHg and/or a pressure of greater than or equal to 30 mmHg at 1 min post-exercise in any compartment, and/or;

- Post-exercise pressure greater than 20 mmHg at 5 minutes post-exercise

# Treatment / Management

Just as in the setting of ACS, emergent fasciotomies must be performed in a patient presenting with AECS. Otherwise, CECS is typically managed nonoperatively for a one- to three-month duration, and surgical management may often be delayed and/or electively performed after having a discussion with the patient (or athlete) regarding the ideal timing given the athletes current sport-specific requirements.

Conservative management consists of rest, activity modification, stretching, orthotics, and physical therapy, but these measures are generally ineffective.

- NSAIDs

- Botulinum toxin injections

- Limited efficacy

- Gait training

- Diebal et al. published two case series of patients with CECS prospectively treated with a gait training optimization program focusing on forefoot strike patterns
- One study analyzed 10 study participants, concluding that none of the ten subjects required surgery at 1-year post-intervention.

In refractory cases, or following at least a multiple month trial of nonoperative management modalities, operative management is discussed, keeping in mind the patient/athlete's expectations for return to baseline activity and/or sport.

Open fasciotomy is the predominant technique. However, other minimally invasive endoscopic techniques are also options.

In general, for the lower leg:

- Dual incision technique

- Lateral
- Anterior and lateral compartment access for release
- 12 to 15 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus
- Caution to protect/avoid the SPN


- Medial
- Superficial and deep posterior compartment access for release
- Release at the middle of the tibia along the posterior border

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for CECS can be quite broad. Most commonly, CECS initially gets misdiagnosed as shin splints or medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS).

Other considerations include

- Vascular pathologies

- Intermittent claudication
- Popliteal artery impingement.

- Tibial stress fractures

- Tendon pathologies (tendinitis, tendinosis, or tendon rupture)

- Nerve entrapment

# Prognosis

In general, patients with isolated anterior and/or lateral compartment (over 80%) involvement generally report superior outcomes compared to their deep posterior compartment counterparts (60%).

Campano et al. in their systematic review of 24 articles showed a 66% success rate and an 84% satisfaction rate (short and mid-term follow-up) after surgical repair.

# Complications

CECS is a relatively benign condition characterized by resolution of symptoms with rest, AECS is a true surgical emergency where the symptoms do not resolve.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Knowledge is key. In the setting of an underdiagnosed and easily missed clinical entity, educating providers and patients is paramount. Any patient with a history of exertional extremity pain which resolves with rest should trigger consideration of CECS and seek medical attention. Additionally, any patient with atraumatic extremity pain with findings of the pain out of proportion, pain on a passive stretch, and tender compartments merits consideration of AECS and should seek care.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Exertional compartment syndrome (ECS) requires awareness by a multitude of providers in various fields. Physical therapists, advanced providers, nurses, and physicians may all encounter this entity in fields like primary care, emergency medicine, sports medicine, and orthopedics. These various disciplines need to work collaboratively across interprofessional lines to help bring about optimal outcomes for these patients. [Level V] Ultimately, once suspected, the condition would need confirmation and definitive management with surgical fasciotomy by a specialist like an orthopedic surgeon. Primary care and emergency medicine practitioners must be especially aware of the limb-threatening form of acute exertional compartment syndrome (AECS).