During urogenital development, the cloaca is divided by the urorectal septum to separate the ventral urogenital sinus from the dorsal anal canal. The Wolffian ducts (mesonephric ducts) and Mullerian ducts (paramesonephric ducts) are the two main ductal systems that give rise to specific structures in the male and female genital and urinary tracts. The Wolffian duct develops from the paired urogenital ridges and grows caudally to induce the formation of the mesonephric tubules. Additionally, the Wolffian duct induces the development of the Mullerian ducts from the coelomic epithelium of the paired urogenital ridges. The Mullerian ducts grow caudally using the Wolffian ducts as guides. The close association of the Mullerian ducts and Wolffian ducts during development explains the high incidence of urinary tract anomalies in women who also have Mullerian anomalies. The fusion of the Mullerian ducts forms the uterovaginal canal that gives rise to the uterus, cervix, and upper two-thirds of the vagina. The distal point of contact of the Mullerian ducts with the urogenital sinus is the site of the proliferation of the urogenital sinus epithelium, thereby forming the sinovaginal bulb. The sinovaginal bulb develops into the vaginal plate.

The embryological origin of the lower third of the vagina is the urogenital sinus. The precise embryological origin of the imperforate hymen is controversial. It is thought that the hymen normally perforates during the perinatal period at approximately 22 weeks. The most popular theory is that the hymen may fail to canalize with the rest of the vagina during development when the sinovaginal bulbs canalize at the site where the uterovaginal canal meets the urogenital sinus.

Redundancy of the newborn hymenal tissue leading to an inverted appearance is a common finding at birth, and over half of the newborn females will have reduced tissue redundancy by one year of age.

Microperforate hymen is thought to result when epithelial cells in the center of the developing hymen do not normally degenerate.