**Antiprotozoal Agents**

Antimalarial agents

- Amodiaquine is a 4-aminoquinoline. It restricts the detoxification of heme by inhibiting heme polymerase activity, leading to the accumulation of free heme, which is toxic to parasites. It works similarly to chloroquine, making it a good alternative for chloroquine-resistant strains.

- Artemisinins are sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxides and include artesunate, artemether, and dihydroartemisinin. The drugs bind to heme, decomposing its endoperoxide bridge, leading to the release of toxic free radicals that damage the parasite.

- Lumefantrine belongs to the aryl amino-alcohol group and is highly lipophilic. It prevents heme detoxification in the food vacuole, leading to the build-up of toxic heme that damages the parasites. It is not available as monotherapy but works in a fixed combination with artemether to treat P. falciparum malaria.

- Chloroquine is a 4-aminoquinoline that inhibits heme detoxification and nucleic acid biosynthesis.

- Atovaquone-proguanil is a synergistic quinone-folate antagonist combination that interferes with the cytochrome electron transport system (atovaquone) and inhibits dihydrofolate reductase (proguanil).

- Quinine belongs to the amino alcohol group and also inhibits heme detoxification inside the food vacuole.

- Primaquine is an 8-aminoquinoline. Its metabolism in the liver leads to the production of toxic intracellular oxidative species.

- Mefloquine, like other quinolones, also inhibits heme detoxification in the food vacuole of parasites.

- Doxycycline is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial and disrupts the normal function of the apicoplast in malaria parasites.

Antibabesial agents

- Clindamycin-quinine: Clindamycin targets the parasite apicoplast (a novel organelle), and quinine may target parasite proteins such as K channels or methyltransferases.

- Atovaquone-azithromycin: Atovaquone targets the cytochrome complex in the parasite, and azithromycin targets the parasite apicoplast.

Antiamebic agents

- Iodoquinol is a halogenated hydroxyquinoline. It interferes with protozoal metabolism by increasing protein-bound serum iodine, establishing its role as a chelating agent that reduces ferrous ions necessary for protozoal metabolism.

- Paromomycin is an aminoglycoside antimicrobial that acts by inhibiting protein synthesis. It has also been shown to be effective against visceral leishmaniasis.

- Diloxanide Furoate has an unknown mechanism of action, but it is split into diloxanide and furoic acid on ingestion and gets partially absorbed by the gut. The unabsorbed diloxanide acts as the amoebicide and directly kills luminal trophozoites. It is the pharmaceutical agent of choice for asymptomatic infection.

- Metronidazole and tinidazole are 5-nitroimidazole derivatives. Metronidazole has both antibacterial and antiprotozoal properties. It is active against amoebiasis and other protozoal diseases such as trichomoniasis and giardiasis. Within the parasites, it engages in redox reactions, releasing toxic reactive intermediates, making it effective as a luminal and extra-luminal amoebicide. The metronidazole metabolites are taken up by the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), leading to the DNA disruption and, consequently, protein synthesis inhibition. Tinidazole has a similar structure to metronidazole and shares a similar activity profile. However, tinidazole has a higher cure rate for protozoal infections and a better toxicity profile than metronidazole.

- Emetine is an alkaloid derived from ipecac. It acts by inhibiting protein synthesis as it restricts the ribosomal movement and that of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA). It has a high toxicity profile, and use is reserved for severe cases of intestinal and extraintestinal amebiasis.

Antigiardial agents

- Metronidazole - The first choice of medication for giardia is metronidazole (see antiamoebic agents).

- Furazolidone is a nitrofuran compound with antibacterial and antiprotozoal activity. It is an alternative to metronidazole and like metronidazole, undergoes a reduction in the trophozoite, releasing toxic reactive intermediates. Its use is encouraged among the pediatric population as it is available as a liquid suspension.

- Tinidazole – see antiamoebic agents.

- Albendazole – see anticestodal drugs.

Trypanocidal agents:

- Benznidazole is one of the only two drugs available to treat Chagas disease caused by T. cruzi. It is a 2-nitroimidazole and forms nitro-reduction intermediates that are toxic to the parasites.

- Nifurtimox is the second drug available for treating Chagas disease, after benznidazole. It is a 5-nitrofuran derivative and generates nitro anion radicals that are oxidized to form reactive intermediates that are toxic to the parasites.

- Pentamidine is the first-line drug for early symptoms of West African trypanosomiasis caused by T. brucei gambiense; it is an aromatic diamidine that works by disrupting the membrane potential of the protozoan mitochondria.P. jirovecii (which is currently classified as a fungus) and is also used to treat visceral leishmaniasis as an alternative to sodium stibogluconate.

- Eflornithine irreversibly inhibits the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase and is the first-line drug for the second stage of West African trypanosomiasis.

- Suramin inhibits adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production via glycolysis and also occupies the ATP and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) binding sites present in glycolytic enzymes.T. brucei rhodesiense infection (East African trypanosomiasis) and an inferior alternative to pentamidine in the management of early West African trypanosomiasis. It also has activity against onchocerciasis.

- Melarsoprol is a trivalent organic arsenical compound. It is a liposoluble drug that can cross the blood-brain barrier, making it ideal in the management of central nervous system symptoms in the second stage of T. brucei rhodesiense infections. Within the organism, melarsoprol competitively inhibits trypanothione reductase, an antioxidant enzyme.

Antileishmanial agents:

- Sodium stibogluconate is a pentavalent antimonial that is thought to decrease leishmania viability by inhibiting phosphorylation of ADP and guanosine diphosphate (GDP) to ATP and guanosine triphosphate (GTP) thus inhibiting glycolysis and the citric acid cycle.

- Meglumine antimoniate is also a first choice pentavalent antimonial used in the treatment of all types of leishmaniasis. Although its mechanism is similar to that of sodium stibogluconate, it is more effective than sodium stibogluconate for intralesional applications.

- Pentamidine – see trypanocidal agents

- Amphotericin B is an antifungal drug used as a liposomal preparation in treating refractory visceral leishmaniasis. As an antileishmanial agent, it is thought to disrupt the parasite’s membrane by binding to its ergosterol precursors.

- Paromomycin – see antiamebic agents.

Anti-toxoplasma agents:

- Pyrimethamine-sulfadiazine – Pyrimethamine is a dihydrofolate inhibitor, inhibiting DNA and protein synthesis. Sulfadiazine is an inhibitor of dihydropteroate synthetase, which is essential in the folate synthesis pathway and works synergistically with pyrimethamine to treat toxoplasmosis. Together, they block consecutive steps in the folate synthesis pathway. They are also useful in the management of chloroquine-resistant uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria and P. jiroveci (P. carinii) pneumonia.

**Anthelminthic Agents**

Anticestodal agents:

- Praziquantel is a synthetic isoquinoline – pyrazine derivative and acts by disrupting ion transport in both cestodes and nematodes by increasing cell membrane permeability to calcium.

- Niclosamide is a salicylamide derivative that works by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation and is also involved in the regulation of diverse signaling pathways.

- Albendazole – see antinematodal agents.

Antinematodal agents:

Intestinal nematode infections

- Albendazole and mebendazole belong to the class of broad-spectrum benzimidazoles and act by inhibiting microtubule synthesis.

- Piperazine (discontinued in USA) has paralyzing effects on helminths because it inhibits acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction, leading to the expulsion of the organism.

- Pyrantel pamoate is a neuromuscular blocking agent that acts on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of nematodes, causing paralysis, leading to expulsion.

Tissue nematode infections

- Diethylcarbamazine reduces the number of microfilariae by sensitizing them to phagocytosis.

- Ivermectin interacts with glutamate-gated chloride channels on nematode motor neurons and leads to hyperpolarization and paralysis.

- Suramin sodium - see trypanocidal agents.

- Praziquantel - see anticestodal agents.

Antitrematodal agents:

- Praziquantel - see anticestodal agents

- Metrifonate is an organophosphorus compound that acts as a cholinesterase inhibitor. It is crucial as an alternative in the management of schistosomiasis.

- Oxamniquine is a 2-aminomethyl-tetrahydro quinoline that inhibits nucleic acid synthesis in parasites and acts as an alternative to praziquantel in managing schistosomiasis.

- Triclabendazole is a benzimidazole that is thought to inhibit microtubule formation, inhibiting protein synthesis, and motion. It is the drug of choice for fascioliasis caused by Fasciola hepatica.

- Bithionol is thought to competitively inhibit the action of rhodoquinone in the electron transport system, inhibiting anaerobic energy metabolism in parasites.

**Ectoparasiticides**

- Pyrethroids act on the neuromuscular system of ectoparasites, paralyzing them. It induces nerve excitation by changing the permeabilities on sodium and potassium on the nerve membrane.

- Permethrin is a neurotoxin that causes sodium channel depolarization on nerve axons.

- Lindane inhibits chloride channels on the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptors in insects.

- Ivermectin – see antinematodal agents.

- Benzyl benzoate also exerts toxic effects on the nerves of parasites.