# Introduction

In collaboration with physiologist W. M. Bayliss, English physician E. H. Starling discovered secretin in 1902.

Secretin is secreted by S cells in the duodenum and affects numerous other organ systems. Secretin receptors (SR) are expressed in the basolateral domain of several cell types.

# Cellular Level

Initially, secretin begins as an amino acid precursor known as prosecretin until activation via gastric acid. Prosecretin contains an N-terminal peptide, spacer, secretin, and C-terminal peptide; while the N-terminal is a single peptide, secretin itself makes up residues 28 to 54, and the C-terminal peptide is 72-amino acids.

Secretin is produced in the duodenal mucosa and acts on the pancreas where it stimulates the release of bicarbonate and water. While this role in digestive physiology has been known, studies recently identified the mediating receptor function of secretin.

The mechanisms of secretin receptors signal termination involve phosphorylation

# Function

Secretin has 3 main functions: regulation of gastric acid, regulation of pancreatic bicarbonate, and osmoregulation.

**Regulation of Gastric Acid Secretion and Pancreatic Bicarbonate**

The major physiological actions of secretin are stimulation of pancreatic fluid and bicarbonate secretion. S cells in the small intestine emit secretin. Gastric acid stimulates secretin release, allowing movement into the duodenal lumen. Secretin causes an increase in pancreatic and biliary bicarbonate secretion and a decrease in gastric H+ secretion. Secretin stimulates the secretion of bicarbonate-rich pancreatic fluid.

Secretin neutralizes the pH in the duodenum by optimizing the functionality of pancreatic amylase and pancreatic lipase. (1) Via the second messenger action of cAMP, bicarbonate release causes neutralization of the acidic environment, thus establishing a pH favorable for the action of digestive enzymes.

**Osmoregulation**

Water homeostasis is crucial in maintaining the balance between water intake and excretion in the body.

Osmoregulatory functions of secretin in the brain are similar to those of angiotensin II.

# Related Testing

Clinically, the main use of secretin is in the diagnosis of gastrin-secreting tumors, such as in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Under normal physiologic conditions, secretin inhibits gastrin release; however, in gastrinoma pathologies, the administration of secretin will cause an overall increase in gastrin release. This idea is the basis for the secretin stimulation test, which is used to determine the presence of gastrin-producing tumors.

Secretin plays a role in diagnosing pancreatic insufficiency. Administration of secretin increases pancreatic secretions and causes dilation of pancreatic ducts. Therefore, secretin administration occurs during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) to aid in cannulization.

# Pathophysiology

Despite the primary action of secretin being the bicarbonate secretion and production of pancreatic fluid

Similar to other intestinal peptides, secretin displays satiety-inducing features when administered.

Abnormalities in secretin release parallel abnormalities in underlying pathologies, such as Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). Patients with SIADH have normal vasopressin function, but undergo translocation of aquaporin 2; therefore, without the release of secretin from the posterior pituitary, no vasopressin release would occur due to lack of stimulation on the hypothalamus.

# Clinical Significance

**Cystic Fibrosis**

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder affecting multiple organs. CF is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein cause it.

**Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorder**

Recent studies hypothesize that secretin can be used to treat autism and pervasive developmental disorder (PDD). In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, researchers gave a single dose of IV porcine secretin to participants. The study resulted in improved language and behavior in children with these disorders and chronic diarrhea. Children with chronic, active diarrhea showed a reduction in abnormal behaviors when treated with secretin.