The Sexual Maturity Rating grants providers a lens through which to evaluate and counsel patients through puberty. A patient’s age of pubertal onset, estimated final height, and potential environmental exposures can all be correlated through proper physical examination and SMR.

It is crucial to keep in mind the hormonal axes that contribute to the development of each examined aspect. When examining males, long bone growth, deepening of the voice, and facial hair all rely on gonadal hormones. When examining females, long bone growth, breast enlargement, and the onset of menarche also rely on gonadal hormones. Pubic and body hair both rely on adrenal hormones.

Listed below are the criteria for the Sexual Maturity Rating.

**Sexual Maturity Rating**

**Pubic Hair Scale:**(both males and females)

- Stage 1: Absent hair

- Stage 2: Downy hair present

- Stage 3: Scant terminal hair present

- Stage 4: Terminal hair that fills the whole triangle overlaying the pubic area

- Stage 5: Terminal hair extending beyond the inguinal crease onto the thigh area

**Female Breast Development Scale**:

- Stage 1: No glandular breast tissue palpable

- Stage 2: Breast bud palpable under the areola (first pubertal sign in females)

- Stage 3: Breast tissue palpable outside areola; no development of areola

- Stage 4: Areola elevated above the contour of the breast, forming a “double scoop” appearance

- Stage 5: Areolar mound recedes into single breast contour along with hyperpigmentation of areola, papillae development, and nipple protrusion

**Male External Genitalia Scale**:

- Stage 1: Testicular volume less than 4 ml or long axis less than 2.5 cm

- Stage 2: 4 ml to 8 ml (or 2.5 to 3.3 cm long) (first pubertal sign in males)

- Stage 3: 9 ml to 12 ml (or 3.4 to 4.0 cm long)

- Stage 4: 15 to 20 ml (or 4.1 to 4.5 cm long)

- Stage 5: greater than 20 ml (or over 4.5 cm long)

Utilizing an ultrasound to assess testicular volume is the gold standard of measurement; however, this method may be inconvenient, costly, or inaccessible.

**Ages associated with SMR Stages (female)**

- Stage 1: 0 to 15 years

- Stage 2: 8 to 15 years

- Stage 3: 10 to 15 years

- Stage 4: 10 to 17 years

- Stage 5: 12.5 to 18 years

**Ages associated with SMR Stages (male)**

- Stage 1: 0 to 15 years

- Stage 2: 10 to 15 years

- Stage 3: 10 to 16.5

- Stage 4: 12 to 17

- Stage 5: 13 to 18

**Additional body changes seen in females that may correlate to SMR stages**

- Peak growth velocity typically occurs soon after stage 2

- Menarche occurs in approximately 2% of girls in late stage 3

- Menarche typically occurs in stage 4, approximately 1 to 3 years after thelarche

- Approximately 10% of girls will undergo menarche in stage 5

**Additional body changes seen in males that may correlate to SMR stages**

- Development of axillary hair and facial hair begins around stage 4

- Approximately 20% of boys reach peak growth velocity during stage 5

It is important to remember that the Sexual Maturity Rating is not used for the age estimation of an individual. As the name alludes to, the Sexual Maturity Rating corresponds to the maturity stage of an individual rather than their chronological age.

The Sexual Maturity Rating is an important tool used in managing HIV, with the SMR stage of a patient used to guide the antiretroviral therapy regimen.