History of present illness may help to differentiate MIRM from other mucocutaneous eruptions, such as EM and SJS/TEN. Nearly all patients with MIRM will have prodromal symptoms, such as fever, cough, and malaise approximately one week before the onset of the rash

Physical exam findings in MIRM include a predominance of mucosal rashes: oral mucosa (94%), ocular (82%) and urogenital (63%). Other mucosal sites include the nares and anus. Mucosal lesions are typically described as ulcerative or hemorrhagic and may be painful. Nares may demonstrate “dense hemorrhagic crusts,” sometimes manifesting as blood on the tissue. The anus, as part of the GI mucosa, may have lesions that cause pain with defecation.

Additionally, a non-mucosal, cutaneous rash is present in 47%, and it is absent in the remainder of cases and classified as MIRM sine rash.  When present, the cutaneous rash of MIRM demonstrates some pattern differences compared to other mucocutaneous eruptions in that MIRM is sparse in overall distribution and, specifically, located more in the acral (limbs) regions (46%) than the trunk (23%). The cutaneous rash morphology is predominantly described as vesiculobullous (77%), as well as both typical target lesions which have three circumferential zones of demarcation, and atypical target lesions which have two color zones (48%). Less commonly, rashes are described as papules (14%), macules (12%), or morbilliform (9%). The amount of skin that is detached is usually less than 10% of the body surface area.

In contrast, EM presents initially as a cutaneous acral rash with macules that evolve into papules, plaques, and subsequently, typical target lesions and/or atypical target lesions (those that are raised). These target lesions spread centripetally to the trunk and face. EM minor has little or no mucous membrane involvement, and EM major has a rash to one or more mucous membranes. SJS/TEN manifests as a rash of macules, purpura, diffuse erythema, atypical target lesions (those that are flat), flaccid blisters that are extensive (not sparse) in number and initially more centrally located and then coalesce and spread to the face and limbs, with extensive mucous membrane involvement to two or more mucosal sites. The amount of skin detachment differentiates the extent of SJS/TEN. SJS has less than 10% skin detachment. Ten to 30% skin detachment is overlap SJS/TEN.  Greater than 30% skin detachment is TEN.