The uterus is a female reproductive organ that is responsible for many functions in the processes of implantation, gestation, menstruation, and labor.

**Anatomic Overview**

The uterus is a thick-walled muscular structure that lies in the midline of the abdominal pelvic cavity. It contains three layers: the endometrium (innermost layer), myometrium, and the perimetrium (outermost layer). The endometrium’s thickness and structure vary based on hormonal stimulation

The uterus has four parts: the fundus, corpus, isthmus, and cervix. The corpus is the largest segment and connects to the cervix via the isthmus. The cervix connects the uterine body to the vaginal lumen. The uterus sits posterior to the bladder and anterior to the rectum.

**Uterus Support Structure**

The round ligament connects the uterus to the abdominal wall and includes the artery of Sampson. The broad ligament connects the lateral portion of the uterus with the fallopian tube and ovary. The uterine artery, cardinal arteries, and ureter travel within the broad ligament. The ovarian ligament connects the ovary to the lateral surface of the uterus. The infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament connects the ovary to the abdominal wall. Within the IP ligament are the ovarian artery and vein.

**Uterine Vasculature**

The uterine artery is the main blood supply to the uterus, with some collateral supply from the ovarian artery.

**Uterine Innervation**

The uterus is innervated sympathetically and parasympathetically through the hypogastric nerve and pelvic splanchnic nerves, respectively.