Reconstruction should be delayed whenever there is an active infection in the wound bed, as an ongoing infection risks graft compromise.

Non-vascularized graft reconstruction should not be performed if the patient will shortly be undergoing radiotherapy as part of cancer treatment because the resulting decrease in the surrounding tissue's vascularity substantially increases graft necrosis risk. Further, any bony reconstruction should be delayed until after radiotherapy if the surgery will delay starting definitive cancer management. Patients who are candidates for vascularized bony reconstruction should undergo thorough cardiovascular evaluation before surgery. Osteocutaneous free tissue transfer can take several hours in the operating room; therefore, patients' hearts and lungs should be medically optimized before surgery. Further, free tissue transfer often requires a blood transfusion during or after surgery, so patients should be screened and blood prepared if it is needed.

In fibular free tissue transfer, patients must undergo imaging evaluation of the blood supply to their feet. Commonly, the peroneal, anterior tibial, and posterior tibial arteries all perfuse the foot. However, in some patients with peripheral vascular disease, prior leg surgery, or other conditions, one or more of these arteries may be compromised. In that case, if a fibula is harvested for osteocutaneous free tissue transfer with its peroneal artery, the patient is at risk for foot necrosis. If a patient does not have "three-vessel runoff" to the foot or appropriate collateral circulation, he should not undergo fibula harvest.