The nasoseptal flap is an increasingly common technique in anterior skull base reconstruction. It is often a part of a multidisciplinary surgical team which can include counseling from otolaryngology, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, medical oncology, radiation oncology, neuroradiology, and endocrinology. As such, clear lines of communication must be maintained between providers and specialty teams regarding consensus on surgical planning and counseling. Although the procedure confers low morbidity and low risk of complications, all aspects of the risks, benefits, and alternatives must be discussed with the patient to maintain informed consent. When many surgical teams are involved, these discussions are at risk of being omitted if it is assumed that other medical teams have already performed them. Clearly outlining surgeon roles and erring on the side of redundancy will ensure that the patient is appropriately counseled about hyposmia, septal perforation, CSF leak, and meningitis.

Discussions between all involved surgical and medical providers are critical given the differences in training and surgical approach to ensure no contraindications or foreseeable intraoperative complications are overlooked. Review of the case and imaging at a multidisciplinary tumor board provides optimal care for these complex patients. It allows for discussion of adjuvant therapy, clinical trials, and novel planned approaches. Multidisciplinary tumor boards have been linked to improved outcomes for patients and as much as a 98% increase in adherence to clinical practice guidelines.