Symptoms of plica syndrome are often similar to many other etiologies of knee pain. As a result, the differential diagnosis can be lengthy and may include osteochondritis dissecans, patellofemoral syndrome, patellofemoral subluxation, meniscal disease, osteoarthritis, patellar tendonitis, cruciate ligament pathology, and pigmented villonodular synovitis. These differential diagnoses can be differentiated from plica syndrome as follows:

- Osteochondritis dissecans: Differentiated with radiographs and MRI.

- Patellofemoral syndrome: Patellofemoral knee pain can be difficult to distinguish from plica syndrome as the symptoms overlap significantly. Other causes of patellofemoral pain, such as chondromalacia, may be apparent in history and imaging.

- Patellofemoral subluxation: Patients with patellofemoral subluxation will often provide a history consistent with subluxation and may have apprehension with a displacement of the lateral patella.

- Meniscus pathology: Meniscus pathology will have tenderness at the joint line, whereas plica pain tends to localize above the joint line. Also, physical exam tests such as Apley, Thessaly, bounce home, and/or McMurray can help distinguish the 2 entities.

- Osteoarthritis: Differentiated with radiographs showing decreased joint space, osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cysts, among others, although this does not rule out also having symptomatic plicae.

- Patellar tendonitis: Differentiated by palpating the patellar tendon on either the proximal or distal attachment.

- Cruciate ligament dysfunction: Differentiated by physical exam techniques suggesting laxity including Lachman, anterior drawer, or posterior drawer that would likely be positive in cruciate ligament injury.

- Pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS): Differentiated via MRI.