Regardless of the anatomic site, the goal of distraction osteogenesis is to elongate the chosen bone in order to restore more normal anatomic function.

**Mandibular Hypoplasia/Pierre Robin Sequence**: Neonates may present with airway obstruction secondary to mandibular hypoplasia. Pierre Robin sequence (PRS) describes a triad of micrognathia in conjunction with glossoptosis and cleft palate. These patients will often have feeding difficulty in addition to intermittent upper airway obstruction due to retrodisplacement of the tongue. When conservative measures have failed (prone positioning, nasopharyngeal airway, tongue-lip adhesion, etc.) mandibular distraction osteogenesis has provided a viable alternative to tracheostomy placement. Distraction can also be used in a vertical vector to increase the height of the mandibular ramus as a component of craniofacial microsomia, for example.

**Midface Hypoplasia**: Midface hypoplasia can present as a result of several craniofacial syndromes (Treacher Collins, Cohen syndrome, etc.) and in patients with isolated cleft lip or palate. Patients will often have visible malar retrusion, class 3 malocclusion, and a degree of exorbitism due to isolated retrodisplacement of the inferior orbital rim. Similar to mandibular hypoplasia, patients may present with airway obstruction or severe sleep apnea. Distraction osteogenesis has proven a useful tool in correcting these abnormalities.

**Craniosynostosis**: Craniosynostosis describes the premature fusion of calvarial suture lines. Left untreated, the condition can result in severe craniofacial deformity, intracranial hypertension, cognitive impairment, developmental delay, seizures, blindness, and death. Distraction osteogenesis provides an alternative to traditional surgery for single or multisuture craniosynostosis. This can be used to expand the anterior, or more commonly, the posterior cranial vault. Increasing the size of the cranial vault provides relief of the increased intracranial pressure caused by craniosynostosis.