**Nasal bone assessment in prenatal screening**

Hypoplasia or absence of the nasal bone is highly associated with Down syndrome. Ultrasound screening for Down syndrome in the first trimester has shown the absence of the nasal bones in 65% of Down syndrome cases, while only 1% in healthy fetuses. Generally, 50% of Down syndrome cases have abnormally short nose root. However, the use of nasal bones as a marker for down syndrome should be done after 11 weeks of gestation, as the nose ossification usually begins at this time.

The absence of the nasal bone is also one of the abnormalities that are detectable during the prenatal ultrasound screening of tetrasomy 9p, which is a very rare chromosomal disorder characterized by the presence of two additional copies of the short arm of chromosome 9.

**Nose maldevelopment**

Nose maldevelopment can present in many forms; including the isolated absence of the nasal bones, hemi-aplasia, the complete absence of the nose (arrhinia), and others. The effects of these maldevelopments vary from mild aesthetic concerns up to airway obstruction and feeding problems. Establishment of the airway is highly critical in the neonatal period. Later in life, the cases are usually managed individually, and the type of surgical reconstruction done will be based on the type of the deformity. Minor surgeries involving small flaps are often used to correct the defects that are bound only to a small area, while major surgeries with large flaps using bone or cartilage grafts are the choice if the external nose is completely absent.

In addition, deformities of the nasal pathways leading to the nasal cavities can also occur.  Chonal atresia is stenosis of the nasal canals and occurs in infants. Pathology of nose formation can also be a sign of CHARGE syndrome.

**Nasal deviation**

Nasal deviation involves cartilage deviation and, in most cases, bony deviation as well. The etiology may be congenital or due to nasal trauma such as nasal fractures. On the same side of the deviation, the nose is usually shorter, has slanted bone and cartilage sidewalls, while on the contralateral portion, the nose is often longer and has a gradual angularity with the cheeks. As a result, both sides of the nasal airway can be obstructed partially or entirely, which lead to both functional and esthetic problems. To correct this deviation, the nasal bones must be imparted to the midline to straighten it, and this is accomplished by rhinoplasty.

**Nasal injuries in sport**

The most common nasal injury in sport is epistaxis, followed by lacerations and then fractures. These injuries often happen by the cause of direct blow to the nose in contact sports.

**Epistaxis**

Epistaxis following nasal trauma can be substantial, however, there is no relationship noted between the severity of the injury and the amount of bleeding.

**Lacerations**

Football helmets or hockey sticks often cause nasal lacerations. They can be associated with fractures, so it is highly important in case of lacerations to palpate the nasal bones to ensure there are no fractures. Lacerations are managed by irrigation and approximation to avoid infection and contamination.

**Nasal bone tumors**

Nasal tumors are rare, although there are reports of some cases. Osseous hemangiomas are rare benign bone tumors, comprising less than 1% of bone tumors, they mostly involve the vertebra; however, there is a case report of a 16 years old female involving the nose.**
**