The classic presentation of erythromelalgia is a triad of redness, warmth, and burning pain in the extremities that occur in episodes. Erythromelalgia most commonly affects the feet (in 90% of patients) and less commonly the fingers and hands (in 25% of patients). Occasionally in 2% to 3% of patients, it can involve the head, neck region, and genitals. The symptomatic episodes are generally triggered by exercise, warm climates, standing, and wearing tight-fitting shoes, which may last minutes to days, and the symptoms typically get relieved by cooling (use of fans, ice packs) and elevating the affected area. Episodes most commonly precipitate at night, probably due to increased ambient temperature. The symptoms often begin with an itching sensation of the affected area, progressing to a more severe burning pain. The involvement is typically bilateral but can be asymmetric.

Between the episodes, the affected area is typically normal, i.e., no redness, warmth, and burning pain. Reports suggest that in some patients, the features of Raynaud phenomenon have been reported in between the episodes.

Myeloproliferative disorders like essential thrombocytosis and polycythemia vera have a median onset of approximately 2.5 years after the onset of clinical symptoms of erythromelalgia. Rapid improvement with aspirin is typical of erythromelalgia in thrombocythemia that can aid in the diagnosis of myeloproliferative disorders. Other clinical features of myeloproliferative disorders like easy fatigability, weight loss, pruritus, headache, blurring of vision, and abdominal discomfort secondary to splenomegaly should be carefully asked with the patient presenting with symptoms of erythromelalgia.

It is important to ask the history of fever, recent trauma, joint pain, and malar rash/oral ulcer to rule out conditions like cellulitis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and rheumatoid arthritis that can cause erythromelalgia. Drug history and blood pressure should be carefully noted.

Physical exam findings that may be present during the episode include warmth or erythema of the affected extremity. Mild edema might be present in the affected extremity. Acrocyanosis (persistent blue discoloration of the extremities), normal joint mobility, and normal or bounding peripheral pulse may be observed. In chronic cases, distal ulcers may be seen. In addition, it is important to look for characteristic signs of underlying disease processes such as splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy in the case of polycythemia vera or skin findings associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.