The omentum is called a visceral fat depot. Its role as ''policeman of the abdomen'' was recognized by a British surgeon in the early 1900s, owing to its properties of moving around the peritoneal cavity and limiting infections and inflammations.

All primary tumors of the omentum are sporadic and usually malignant.

Primary leiomyosarcoma of omentum is a very rare tumor; more commonly, leiomyosarcomas originate in smooth muscle cells of the gastrointestinal tract, retroperitoneum, and genitourinary tract.

A solitary fibrous tumor (SFT), previously called hemangiopericytoma, is a rare mesenchymal tumor

GIST (gastrointestinal stromal tumors) are mesenchymal tumors arising from the gastrointestinal tract wall, most of it arising from the stomach. However, rarely they can arise from the omentum, which is designated as extra gastrointestinal stromal tumors (EGISTs). GISTs and EGISTs are histopathologically and immunohistochemically similar; both express gain-of-function KIT/PDGFRA mutations. As these tumors are sporadic, their malignant potential cannot be ascertained.et al. reported Cajal cells like CD117+ and CD34+ cells in normal omentum from which EGISTs can theoretically arise.

Liposarcomas commonly arise from extremities' deep soft tissue, and it is the most common soft tissue sarcoma.

Malignant mesothelioma commonly arises from the pleura and peritoneal cavity but rarely can arise from the greater omentum. Its relationship to asbestos is less obvious as compared to pleural mesothelioma.