**Congenital Generalized****Lipodystrophy**

Congenital generalized lipodystrophy is extremely rare with approximately 250 cases reported in the literature. Assuming that a minority of patients with this condition report, it is estimated that the prevalence worldwide ranges from 1 case per 200,000 persons to 1 case per 12 million persons. Patients present at birth or in early infancy.

**Familial Partial Lipodystrophy**

Familial partial lipodystrophies, including the variants of Dunnigan’s lipodystrophy and Kobberling lipodystrophy, are uncommon. It is thought that the prevalence of the Dunnigan’s variant is less than 1 case in 15 million persons. The mode of transmission is autosomal dominant. The Kobblering variant is less well characterized regarding prevalence and mode of transmission, though some sporadic cases have been reported.

**Acquired Generalized Lipodystrophy**

Acquired generalized lipodystrophy has been described in at least 100 patients though this may be under-recognized or reported. Patients most often present in adolescence. Recent proposals seek to further categorize these patients into one of three categories: panniculitis, autoimmune, and idiopathic; patients either have one of these pre-existing conditions before the development of generalized lipodystrophy or have the spontaneous development of generalized lipodystrophy. Women have affected more than men in approximately a 3:1 ratio.

**Acquired Partial Lipodystrophy**

Acquired partial lipodystrophy is also rare with approximately 250 cases described. The typical age of presentation is after puberty, with one study showing a median age of 25 years. Patients have been identified from multiple ethnic backgrounds, but the largest studies to date involve patients primarily of European descent. Women are again affected more than men with ratios that range from 4:1 to 8:1.