In managing a case of OIS, three factors need to be dealt; firstly, the ocular complications and prevention of its deleterious effects, secondly treating the associated systemic causative factor and associated comorbidities and last any surgical intervention whenever required. Thus this is a multidisciplinary approach.

**Ocular Treatment**

Increased IOP in OIS is often refractory to medical therapy. Drugs reducing aqueous production can be used like β blockers and α agonists. Drugs with a propensity to cause inflammation should be avoided as prostaglandin analogs, pilocarpine, and anticholinergics. Panretinal photocoagulation should be done prior to surgery if the view is clear; this will lead to regression of iris vascularisation in 36% of cases and control of IOP if angles are still open.

To treat anterior segment inflammation, topical steroids can be used. Sometimes patients also benefit from intravitreal AntiVEGF, which controls the NVI and macular edema associated with the disease.

**Systemic Treatment**

Patients with OIS should be thoroughly evaluated by a neurologist and physician and treated for the associated and predisposing comorbidities.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical treatment will only benefit the patient visually before development if NVI and NVG as these are signs of chronicity and irreversible damage.

**Carotid Artery Endarterectomy (CEA**)

The only landmark trial evaluating surgery in a patient with carotid stenosis is the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy (NASCET) trial. This trial demonstrated the superiority of CEA and aspirin therapy (2-year stroke rate 9%) in preventing stroke compared to aspirin only (2-year stroke rate 26%) in the patient with carotid artery stenosis, either symptomatic or asymptomatic. Thus it was recommended that CEA should be performed in symptomatic cases of carotid artery stenosis (60 to 99%) if the perioperative risk of stroke or death is <6% and in asymptomatic cases if the risk is <3%. The surgery has been proved to increase the blood flow in the ophthalmic artery and prevent or reverse the ischemic changes.

**Carotid Artery Stenting (CAS)**

This is done in the patient where CEA can be associated with complications as in the patient with difficult surgery due to previous irradiation, neck surgery, recurrent stenosis, tracheostomy, and stenosis above the level of C2 (Second cervical) vertebral body. High-risk medical comorbidities as recent myocardial infarction, unstable angina, congestive cardiac failure are also an indication for stenting.

**Bypass Surgery (Extracranial-Intracranial: EC-IC)**

This involves establishing an anastomosis between the superficial temporal artery EC branch and the middle meningeal artery IC branch. Indicated in a case of complete occlusion of ICA or CCA, or when stenosis is difficult to assess as above C2 level. This prevents cerebral ischemia.