There are currently no gold standard treatments to date, and further studies are needed to help drive better management strategies. Most therapy and recommendations are based on the observation and clinical experience of the provider. Treatment is also based on the presentation and acute versus chronic nature of the patient.

There have been trials/studies done, including elective splenectomy, high dose systemic steroids, inhaled steroids, and immunosuppressant drugs. Blood should be transfused to correct severe anemia and shock. A study by de Jongh et al. recommended screening for hemosiderosis in all patients receiving multiple transfusions.

Patients with acute IPH and respiratory failure secondary to alveolar hemorrhage may require invasive ventilation support. In these patients, it is also recommended to consider immunosuppressive therapy in addition to high-dose systemic corticosteroids. For patients with this presentation, it is recommended they be started on intravenous methylprednisolone in pulse dosing of 500 to 2000 mg/day for five days. In children, pulse dosing is weight-based at 20 mg/kg per day. Once patients clinically stabilize, they can be switched to oral steroids with tapering down to a maintenance dose of 10 to 15 mg/day.

Immunosuppressive agents such as cyclophosphamide, hydroxychloroquine, and azathioprine have been shown to help with severe disease; however, at this time, optimal dosing and duration of therapy are poorly defined.

Preventative measures include maintenance doses of prednisone or prednisolone of 10 to 15 mg/kg/day. In general, if the patient does not have any recurrence in 18 to 24 months, further tapering and discontinuation of steroids can be attempted.