Digoxin-specific antibody antigen-binding fragments (DSFab) are an effective antidote that directly binds digoxin.

DSFab is indicated for life-threatening toxicity, including:

- Ventricular arrhythmias

- High-grade heart blocks

- Hypotension

- Symptomatic bradycardia

- Potassium greater than five meq/L in acute overdose

- Acute ingestions greater than 10 mg in an adult or greater than 4 mg in a child

- Digoxin Concentration greater than 15 ng/mL measured at any time

- Digoxin Concentration greater than 10 ng/mL measured 6 hours post-ingestion.

Empiric dosing of DSFab can be given at a dose of ten to 20 vials for critically ill patients after acute overdose, three to six vials for chronic toxicity in adults, or one to two vials for chronic toxicity in children.

DSFab also can be dosed as follows:

(0.8 times the ingested dose)/0.5 = Number of vials of DSFab for acute overdose

(Digoxin level (steady state) x Weight (kg))/100 = Number vials of DSFab for acute or chronic overdose

DSFab fragments also can be given for poisoning with natural toxins, but the dosing is unclear.

The typical DSFab infusion is over 30 minutes, but it may be given as a bolus for critical patients. The onset of effect is approximately 20 minutes, with complete effect usually seen within 90 minutes.

Care should be taken to completely reverse digoxin in patients who are chronically taking digoxin, as reversal may exacerbate their underlying disease. These patients should be closely monitored afterward for the same reasons.

If DSFab is not available, then treatments such as multidose-activated charcoal, atropine, and antidysrhythmics such as phenytoin or lidocaine may be employed. Cardioversion and pacing may induce dysrhythmias and are typically not used, but they may be needed in patients without other therapeutic options.

Dialysis also may be indicated in patients with acute renal failure or refractory hyperkalemia; however, it is not useful as a treatment for digoxin toxicity itself.

Disposition depends on the patient's symptoms and stability, as well as their potassium and digoxin levels.