Often, the primary reason families of children with mild GTS request consultation is concern about the possibility of another etiology for the tics. Identifying the family’s goals for a visit is an important first step, as reassurance of the correct diagnosis may be all that is needed. Thoroughly educating the child and family about the motor and vocal tics, the natural history of the syndrome, common comorbid conditions, coping strategies, prognosis, and treatment options comes next. Given the high rate of anxiety disorder and OCD in family members of children with GTS, this conversation can sometimes be difficult and require extra reassurance. Parents are often concerned about the psychosocial impact GTS can have on their child’s life. This has been explored in many studies, and there are effective strategies for improving a child’s quality of life. The most significant influential factor in a child’s experience with GTS is whether or not they have a supportive teacher at the school. Barriers include the teacher not understanding the nature of tic disorder, the child being unaware of the tics, the tics being exacerbated when they are pointed out or when the child is anxious, and that disciplining a child for tics is not an effective strategy. Providing educational material for the parents, which can be shared with teachers, can be helpful. A study showed that a 5-minute generic presentation to students to educate them about tic disorder significantly reduced bullying and had a positive impact on the social experience of students with GTS. Ultimately, clear goals must be set for the treatment of children with Tourette syndrome. Expecting the child to sit quietly and still for the entire school day is probably not a realistic goal, so there needs to be a clear plan in place to accommodate the child’s needs.

The neurobehavioral comorbidities often are more disruptive for children with GTS than the tics themselves, particularly ADHD and OCD symptoms. Children should be thoroughly evaluated for symptoms of ADHD, OCD, depression, oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), autism spectrum disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. These comorbidities need to be evaluated separately for severity and symptom-related disability. The treatment plan for tics should take into account whether or not the child has these other disorders, as there is evidence that children with different comorbid conditions respond differently to various therapy options or medication.

Behavior therapy and/or pharmacological treatment of Tourette syndrome may be indicated if the child is experiencing an impaired quality of life. This may be the result of pain from repetitive movements or whiplash tics. There may be difficulty with specific motor tasks secondary to disruptive tics, or difficulty transitioning to sleep at night because of frequent movement. The child may experience social isolation or distress and is at high risk for mood disturbance. Considering the potential side effects associated with the medication, behavior therapy should be the first-line treatment option. Habit-reversal training (HRT), usually as the main component of comprehensive behavioral intervention for tics (CBIT) is the recommended treatment of choice in the United States practice parameter. This involves multiple approaches to treatment, including training in recognizing and redirecting tics as well as intervention for influencing factors, such as relaxation techniques for anxiety. This therapy enhances the patient’s recognition of the premonitory urge and offers a competing response or a motor movement that is not compatible with the tic. This therapy is very effective for the right patients. Studies have shown significant improvement in tic control compared to supportive psychotherapy, and over 80% of children maintained this control after 6 months of follow-up. Younger children are often less aware of the premonitory urges in tics, which may make it more difficult for them to fully understand the treatment. Other limitations include difficulty finding qualified therapists, cost, and lack of coverage by various insurance plans.

For more severe cases, alpha-2-adrenergic agonists and antipsychotics are first-line pharmacologic choices. Guanfacine and clonidine are recommended in the United States practice parameters. A couple of small trials showed equal efficacy between clonidine and risperidone and another between clonidine and haloperidol. However, there is some evidence that clonidine may only be effective in children with comorbid ADHD. Sedation is by far the most common reason children do not tolerate the alpha-2-adrenergic agonists. Other side effects include orthostatic hypotension, bradycardia, or irritability. They should be titrated off slowly to prevent rebound hypertension.

Antipsychotic medications have been the most extensively studied. Haloperidol and pimozide are the first-generation antipsychotics with the most data showing efficacy in reducing tic severity. However, their use is limited by potentially severe side effects such as sedation, acute dystonia, and other drug-induced movement disorders like weight gain, and prolonged QTc interval (pimozide). Newer atypical antipsychotic medications such as risperidone and aripiprazole both have data that demonstrate efficacy. There is a lower incidence of drug-induced movement disorders, but they are still high side effect medications.  Risperidone can cause sedation, weight gain, and metabolic disturbances including hyperprolactinemia. Aripiprazole causes sedation, nausea, and weight gain. There is weak evidence showing that topiramate reduces tic burden, with a better side effect profile, so it may be a consideration if the child cannot tolerate the other two classes of medication.

For children refractory to CBIT and pharmacotherapy, there are a couple of other options. Botulinum toxin injections may be useful for motor tics that are particularly disabling or painful. These are logistically difficult and require an experienced specialist to administer. Deep brain stimulation has been used in patients with severe GTS refractory to all of the above treatment strategies. There is debate over the appropriate age to implant a device, as some patients show improvement by adulthood. However, adolescence is a formative developmental time in a child’s life, so an argument could be made that waiting until adulthood would be missing the most significant treatment window.