The first thing requiring attention in scalp lacerations is removing foreign bodies, if present, and achieving hemostasis. The bleeding can usually be stopped by applying direct pressure with or without local lidocaine with epinephrine. If hemostasis is unachievable with these measures, the edges of the scalp are everted using hemostats or skin hooks before prompt suturing of the wound. Controlling bleeding is important as lacerations can result in significant blood loss.

Primary closure of the laceration is preferred in most cases, as delayed closure of the wound increases the risk of infection and scarring. Lacerations that are older than 24 hours with an increased risk of infection (e.g., vascular insufficiency, contamination, foreign bodies) may warrant delayed primary closure 4 to 5 days after cleansing and debriding the wound. Primary closure of wounds that look inflamed (warm, swollen, pussy, and red) is contraindicated.

It is crucial the laceration closure does not hinder definitive care and evaluation of more urgent injuries with which it is associated, such as intracranial injury.

Options for closure include surgical staples, hair apposition, and suturing.

Staples are generally the preferred closure method in lacerations through the dermis in which bleeding is under control as they are fast, cheap, and have few complications. They also achieve similar cosmetic results when compared to sutures.

Straight, small wounds (under 10cm) can be repaired using modified hair apposition if there is adequate bleeding controlled and the patient has hair that is at least 1cm in length. Even though this method is relatively time-consuming when compared to surgical staples, it is less painful and does not necessitate staple removal, and usually results in good cosmetic results with few complications.

Simple interrupted sutures may be used for closure if the wound was profusely bleeding and could not attain adequate hemorrhage control without suturing. It is also a valid option if staples are unavailable and hair apposition isn't applicable (e.g., large wound, short-haired patient).