The toxidrome associated with the various anxiolytics or sedative-hypnotics depends on the type of medication leading to toxicity. Some of the various toxidromes will be reviewed below.

BZD toxicity coming from an overdose of oral BZDs rarely cause toxicity unless co-ingested with another agent.

NonBZD hypnotics generally have a similar presentation in the event of toxicity. However, this class of medications is more often associated with complex-sleep related behaviors. Complex-sleep related behaviors include events such as sleepwalking, sleep-driving, eating, and other behaviors that can be completed while not fully awake. These effects were more common with zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone compared to other medications used for sleep.

Overdoses associated with SSRI/SNRIs rarely cause death or serious injury.

TCA overdose presents with mental status change, including sedation, confusion, delirium, or hallucination. There may be cardiac conduction delays, arrhythmias, hypotension, and anticholinergic toxicity (e.g., hyperthermia, flushing, pupillary dilation.) Patients may initially present normally and then deteriorate rapidly due to the variable absorption kinetics involved in TCAs.

Opiate Toxicity can present with depressed mental status, depressed respiratory rate, decreased tidal volumes, decreased bowel sounds/movements, and/or miotic pupils.  Normal pupil examination does not exclude a diagnosis of opiate toxicity. Heart rate ranges from bradycardia to tachycardia. Hypotension may be present. Hypotension would result from histamine release. Hypothermia may be present due to impaired thermogenesis or environmental exposure.

There are a large number of antiseizure drugs that can cause sedation and potential toxicity. The most severe reactions to these medications as a whole could include suicidality and severe skin reactions such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS). They are rare adverse effects, but important to be aware of these potential consequences.