Anatomically the liver has four lobes: right, left, caudate, and quadrate. The quadrate lobe is located on the inferior surface of the right lobe. The caudate lobe is located between the left and right lobes in an anterior and superior location.

The liver is the largest gland in the body and is ideally located to receive absorbed nutrients as well as detoxify absorbed drugs and other noxious substances. It serves as both an exocrine organ and an endocrine organ. The exocrine functionality of the liver is mainly in the synthesis and excretion of bile salts into the common hepatic duct as well as the conjugation of bilirubin and excretion into the gut. The endocrine functions of the liver include involvement in glycemic control via insulin and glucagon. The liver synthesizes important proteins such as fibrinogen, albumin, prothrombin, and other amino acids as well as modifies proteins into enzymes and peptide hormones. The liver participates in fatty acid metabolism and synthesizes lipoproteins, cholesterol, and phospholipids. Additionally, it is involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates including storing glycogen and gluconeogenesis. It also is involved in the metabolism of lactic acid and converts ammonia to urea. The liver stores vitamins, and minerals such as iron. In summary, the liver is an important mediator from the gut to the blood and plays a vital role in the metabolism of macronutrients, hormones, components of blood plasma, and exocrine and endocrine substances.