**Who should designate a Health Care Power of Attorney?**

Everybody should designate a healthcare power of attorney. Studies have shown that the prevalence of ACP participation ranges from a mere 18% to 36% among U.S. adults.

**Why should Physicians care about Power of Attorney?**

In a survey of ED physicians, only 31% self-reported themselves as very/extremely confident that they could find and use ACP documentation for patients under their care, even though 78% found power of attorney documentation as very/extremely useful, and up to 90% finding the same utility in some form of advance-care planning.

While the EHR is not without its faults, it provides an accessible format with which to obtain, store, and refer to ACP documents such as a power of attorney. Research shows that the presence of an ACP document modality in an EHR has a positive influence on the availability of ACP documents when needed.[7] Along with awareness initiatives at all levels of healthcare, availability of an ACP documentation system should be a directed goal when evaluating an EHR at any institution.

Other initiatives to increase participation in ACP include the use of a patient portal that utilizes electronic messaging with healthcare team members. Recent studies suggest that the use of technology in this way both increases ACP documentation rates as well as the self-reported level of convenience of documentation by patients, a known significant barrier to the creation of these documents.

The performing of medical care against that patient's wishes violates their autonomy and has even been defined as a form of medical error in the literature.