The donor selection criteria are more strict for pancreas transplantation as compared to other organs, thus limiting potential donors. The donor organ may be rejected due to alcohol intake or a family history of diabetes or elevated serum amylase. Pancreas with fibrosis or fat deposition upon retrieval is discarded because they are associated with severe reperfusion pancreatitis resulting in morbidity and mortality. Donors having BMI > 30 kg/m^2 are declined for donation. Pancreas from young donors is preferred, up to the age of 60 years for solid organ transplantation. The pancreas is very vulnerable to sustain an injury during retrieval, which leads to higher discard rates.

To obtain better results, the selection of deceased donors is made as close as possible to match the ideal donor criteria. Therefore adequate maintenance of the potential brain death donor is necessary to avoid hemodynamic instability. Blood compatibility in the ABO system and a negative crossmatching and the age range between 5 and 50 years is required for the donors. If the pancreas is retrieved without the liver, the weight of the donor should be between 30 and 50kg and >50kg if both pancreas and liver are procured. The presence of signs of acute pancreatitis, glandular edema, hematoma, fatty infiltration, and hardened consistency is considered on the macroscopic evaluation of the pancreas as such factors increase the risk of post-transplant complications. Type 1 diabetes, pancreatic disease, prior surgery of the duodenum, pancreas, or splenectomy, malignant tumor, positive serology for infectious diseases (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, hepatitis B and C), chronic liver disease, body mass index >40kg/m^2, and history of chronic alcohol abuse are other factors that might determine the exclusion of donors.

Transplant teams have extended their donor criteria due to the increasing lack of availability of transplant organs and high graft demand, and this has lead to include more high-risk groups. But this can result in high rates of graft rejection and low graft survival after transplantation. The pre-procurement pancreas allocation suitability score (P-PASS) has been used within the Eurotransplant area to identify suitable pancreas donors. The Eurotransplant Pancreas Advisory Committee designed  P-PASS, which is a calculated score based on nine donor-specific clinical parameters. These specific clinic parameters include patient age, body mass index, the occurrence of cardiac arrest, serum levels of sodium, amylase, lipase, adrenaline, dopamine, and the length of stay in the intensive care unit. The preoperative donor risk index (DRI) was initially used for quantification of the risk of liver graft failure after liver transplantation. The pancreas donor risk index (pDRI) is a modified form of the DRI specific for pancreas transplantation, and it is used to help in predicting outcome after a pancreas transplant. The pDRI, like DRI used for the liver, consists of the specific donor characteristics that include gender, body mass index, serum creatinine, height, age, race, cause of death, donation after cardiac death (DCD), and the parameter of pancreas preservation time. P-PASS and pDRI are used to know whether or not an organ is acceptable for transplantation. The Eurotransplant now recommends that pancreas grafts from donors with a P-PASS score of <17 should be considered for organ transplantation because they have a three-times higher acceptance rate as compare to grafts with a P-PASS score of  ≥17.

The number of new candidates on the pancreas waiting list kept on increasing until 2000, after which it started decreased until 2011 when only 1,005 candidates were added to the waiting list as active candidates. A new patient is the one who is put one of the three lists(SPK, PTA, PAK) in the given year without being listed in the previous year. Patients listed in more than one list or at multiple centers are counted once.

The waiting list of the pancreas transplant is growing in many countries. The NHS Blood and Transplant showed that over 250 patients were waiting for transplantation in March 2015.