Aggressive supportive care is needed during the post-resuscitation phase.

**Therapeutic Hypothermia and Targeted Temperature Management**

Although largely inconclusive, and contradictory at times, there is an abundance of data on targeted temperature management (TTM) in the post-ROSC patient.

Conversely, many studies on therapeutic hypothermia have been inconclusive or failed to show a statistical benefit.

Despite contradicting evidence, and due to the potential for benefit, current guidelines do recommend the use of TTM in both OHCA and IHCA, as well as in cardiac arrest due to shockable or non-shockable rhythms. In clinical practice, TTM can be provided using different methods, including surface-cooling methods (use of ice packs around the body), core-cooling methods (intravenous catheters circulating cold saline) or a combination approach. The 2015 AHA guidelines recommended either to maintain continuous normothermia (TTM to 36°C–37.5°C) for 5 days or to maintain 2 days of continuous hypothermia (TTM to 32C°–34°C) followed by 3 days of continuous normothermia (TTM to 36°C–37.5°C).

During PCAC, fever (≥38°C) should be treated aggressively, as hyperthermia has clearly been associated with increased mortality. Hypothermia is also associated with worse neurologic outcomes, so if TTM is initiated, providers are cautioned to prevent temperatures <32°C.

The best time to initiate TTM has not been determined, and current recommendations suggest considering initiation at the time of ROSC, or arrival to a capable facility. TTM should be maintained consistently for a period of 12–24 hours, and if prolonged patient transport is anticipated, it should be delayed until consistency can be maintained. Sedatives and paralytic agents should be used to ensure comfort and prevent shivering. Analgesia and sedation are best achieved with opiates and/or benzodiazepines. Agents such as rocuronium and vecuronium are commonly used paralytics in pediatrics, and have added oxygenation benefits for patients requiring ventilation. Many institutions have pharmacologic protocols to ensure proper weight-based dosing. Providers must keep in mind that paralytic agents can mask seizures and impede neurological examination.

Despite the current recommendations, much has yet to be definitively studied regarding TTM in pediatric cardiac arrests including the optimal rate of rewarming, the optimal timing of initiation of TTM, the optimal target temperature, and the optimal total duration of TTM.

**Perfusion and Hypotension**

Perfusion is compromised after cardiac arrest, and patients are often hypotensive.

To date no pediatric interventional studies have evaluated the survival effect of manipulating blood pressure after ROSC, however poor perfusion has been obviously associated with increased morbidity and mortality, anecdotally, and per data analysis. Thus, vasoactive drug therapy is recommended, and should be tailored to each patient. There is no recommended blood pressure target, and vasopressors may need to be adjusted to optimize perfusion without creating excessive myocardial work. Early and continuous epinephrine infusion for post-arrest hypotension is the preferred agent in pediatric patients.

**Oxygenation and Ventilation**

Oxygenation and ventilation status is an important piece of post-arrest assessment.

**Arrhythmia**

If the etiology of the cardiac arrest is suspected to be arrhythmia, then antiarrhythmic agents such as lidocaine or amiodarone should be considered.

After perfusion, oxygenation, neurologic, and targeted temperature management goals have been addressed, the patient’s disposition should be considered. Considerations include critical care consultation, facility capabilities, and the need for transfer to a higher level of care, as this may alter or delay the patient’s treatment plan.

Perhaps most importantly, as mentioned above, once TTM is initiated, the target temperature should be maintained consistently for 12-24 hours, without intermittent rewarming, as unintentional or early re-warming has been associated with poor neurologic outcomes compared to patients who did not undergo TTM at all.