Specific treatment is dependent upon the age of the patient and stage of the disease. For patients older than 8 years of age with early, localized disease, doxycycline is recommended for 10 days. Patients under the age of 8 should receive amoxicillin or cefuroxime for 14 days to avoid the potential for tooth staining caused by tetracycline use in young children. Longer courses and parenteral antibiotics may be required for more severe manifestations such as arthritis, atrioventricular heart block, carditis, meningitis, or encephalitis, although European data and newer studies demonstrate that oral treatment regimens or transitioning to oral therapy at hospital discharge may be appropriate for some patients.

Doxycycline is used in most patients except in children and pregnant women. In children, amoxicillin remains the drug of choice. Pregnant women show a good response to ceftriaxone.

Patients with Lyme carditis should be admitted and monitored until the ECG features of a block subside. Lyme arthritis usually resolves in 6-8 weeks. CNS Lyme disease responds well to antibiotics, most commonly with ceftriaxone. Clinicians should monitor patients for the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction when starting therapy.

The ocular feature of Lyme disease does respond to topical steroids and IV ceftriaxone or penicillin.

Some patients may experience post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome with nonspecific symptoms. These symptoms do not respond to antibiotics.

The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction is a cytokine-mediated reaction to the antibiotic-mediated destruction of spirochetes. With Lyme disease, the reaction is seen in 5% to 15% of patients and usually resolves within 1 day.