# Continuing Education Activity

The main indications for esophageal reconstruction after esophagectomy includes tumor excision, corrosive injury, radiation damage, and congenital disease. This activity describes esophageal reconstruction and explains the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, treating, and improving care for patients who undergo esophageal reconstruction.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for esophageal reconstruction.
- Describe the technique of esophageal reconstruction.
- Review the clinical significance of esophageal reconstruction.

# Introduction

The esophagus is a muscular tube that actively transports food boluses from the hypopharynx to the stomach. This complex organ is essential for enteral feeding. When issues arise within the esophagus, whether benign or malignant, alternative methods for obtaining nutrition must be evaluated, such as gastrostomy tubes or jejunostomy tubes, however, if the esophagus is removed, then esophageal reconstruction must be considered.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The esophagus is roughly 25 centimeters in length, with upper and lower esophageal sphincters marking the entrance and exit to this elongated organ.

The esophagus is fed by several different arterial branches. The cervical esophagus derives its blood supply from the inferior thyroid artery. The thoracic esophagus has direct, terminal branches from the esophagus. The abdominal portion is supplied by the left gastric artery and the left phrenic artery. Venous drainage is similarly segmental with drainage into the superior vena cava and the systemic system from the azygous and inferior thyroid veins. The distal esophagus drains into the left gastric, which empties into the portal vein. This connection of systemic and portal circulation can lead to distended veins in patients with cirrhosis called esophageal varices.

The main function of the esophagus is the transportation of the food bolus. It accomplishes this through complex, muscular coordination of peristaltic waves. The esophagus has two different types of muscle. In the cervical esophagus, the muscular layers are striated, whereas, in the thoracic and abdominal, they are smooth muscles.

# Indications

The main indications for esophageal reconstruction after esophagectomy includes tumor excision, corrosive injury, radiation damage, and congenital disease.

Patients who ingest caustic substances may require esophagectomy. Substances with extremes of pH (less than 2 or greater than 12) can create severe injury and burns in the esophagus.

Esophageal atresia is a congenital malformation of the upper gastrointestinal tract with worldwide prevalence varying from 1 in 2500 to 1 in 4500 live births.

Esophagectomy can be accomplished through several different techniques including Ivor Lewis esophagectomy, transhiatal esophagectomy, or a Mckeown three incision esophagectomy.

# Contraindications

The contraindications for esophageal reconstruction include patients who are too debilitated or malnourished to tolerate an esophagectomy. Depending on the indication for esophagectomy, patients may receive gastric or jejunal tube feedings to supplement enteral feedings.

With regards to cancer, patients who present with metastatic or locally advanced, inoperable esophageal cancer are best treated with palliative measures. Instead of esophageal reconstruction, these patients should be treated with chemoradiation, esophageal stents, and possible esophageal dilations.

# Equipment

The equipment for esophageal reconstruction depends on the type of esophagectomy, operative technique, and the choice of the conduit. Operating room equipment should be capable of manipulating abdominal and thoracic organs if the operation is done in an open fashion. These include retractors, staplers, and absorbable and nonabsorbable suture. If the esophagectomy is done laparoscopically or robotically, then the appropriate laparoscopic equipment, including ports, needle drivers, staplers, graspers, and drains, should be available. Finally, if free flaps are used for esophageal reconstruction, microscopes should be available in the operating room.

# Personnel

Personnel required for esophageal reconstruction include surgeons, specifically thoracic, plastic, or abdominal; operating room team members including nurses, scrub techs, and anesthesia; radiologists, gastroenterologists, oncologists, and radiation oncologists.

# Preparation

Before any esophageal operation, patients need preoperative cardiac, pulmonary, and anesthesia clearance. Patients should also be evaluated for optimal nutrition including serum albumin, prealbumin, and weight loss preoperatively. High prealbumin levels have correlated with improved long term survival in esophageal cancer patients.

# Technique or Treatment

There are various methods of esophageal reconstruction that have been previously described in the literature. Advances in microsurgery have made it possible to accomplish both the resection of large pharyngoesophageal tumors and subsequent reconstruction of circumferential esophageal defects in a single operation.

The posterior mediastinum is the most commonly used conduit after esophagectomy, although other routes such as substernal and subcutaneous have been described. Besides the posterior mediastinum, the alternative routes are rarely used only in special situations in which patients required esophageal diversion or when multiple operations preclude the posterior mediastinal space.

**Gastric Pull-up**

Despite the number of options, the main conduit is the stomach, which is advanced cephalad into the posterior mediastinum in the "gastric pull-up" isoperistaltic technique.

The single anastomosis of the gastric esophageal conduit makes it less technically demanding than any of the other conduit choices. Anastomotic leaks can be managed conservatively if the leak is small and contained. If there is a large leak or any undrained fluid collections, then the patient may need a thoracotomy to repair the leak. If there is complete graft necrosis, then the stomach conduit should be resected, and a cervical esophagostomy should be constructed along with exploratory laparotomy for jejunal tube placement.

**Colon Interposition**

If the stomach cannot be used for an esophageal reconstructive conduit, then the colon may be used. The right or left colon can be utilized. The main conduit is typically the right colon due to its rich blood supply, and part of the transverse colon is also typically used.

**Jejunum Free Flap**

The jejunal free flap is one of the best reconstructive options for circumferential defects of the cervical esophagus.

**Pedicled, Local Flaps: Deltopectoral and Supraclavicular Island Flaps**

The deltopectoral and supraclavicular island flaps were the mainstay for the reconstruction of partial pharyngoesophageal defects prior to the widespread use of microsurgical techniques. These flaps are still excellent options for patients who may have definite contraindications to free flap reconstruction, such as occluded donor vessels secondary to atherosclerotic disease, lack of recipient's vessels, and severely impaired cardiopulmonary reserve. The main advantages of these flaps are the fact that they are relatively easy to harvest compared to free flaps, their large arc of rotation, and their robust blood supply.

**Radial Forearm Free Flap**

The radial forearm free flap can be used for both partial and circumferential esophageal defects. In partial defects, the radial forearm flap acts can be used as a tissue patch to cover the defect. In circumferential defects, the radial forearm flap can be tubularized to restore the continuity of the esophagus and ultimately achieve adequate deglutition.

**Anterolateral Thigh (ALT) Free Flap**

The ALT flap can also be used for both partial and circumferential defects of the esophagus. It is based on the lateral descending branch of the circumflex femoral artery and its venous output on a pair of venae comitantes that drain into the profunda femoral vein.

# Complications

Esophagectomy with esophageal reconstruction is a large, complex operation. Complications after esophageal reconstruction are common. In a large systematic review with over 17,000 patients after esophagectomy, the overall morbidity was 50.8%, and mortality was 8.7%.

Procedure specific complications include anastomotic leak, conduit ischemia, or anastomotic stricture. The incidence of anastomotic leak after esophagectomy varies but is reported around 10%.

Patients with large undrained leaks or patients who become septic will likely need reoperation with thoracotomy for repair and drainage of the esophageal leak. If the esophageal conduit has large dehiscence, then the patient will need esophageal resection and diversion with a cervical esophagostomy and jejunostomy.

Conduit ischemia after esophagectomy is reported to be around 10%. Ischemia can be avoided by limiting hypotension and tension on the anastomosis. Ischemia can lead to anastomotic leakage and stricture. Anastomotic strictures occur in roughly 20-25% of patients. These strictures can be safely managed with serial dilation. Most strictures present within the first several months.

When using colonic interpositions for esophageal reconstruction, the most common late complication is colonic redundancy. This leads to mechanical dysfunction of the neo-conduit, causing disabling symptoms that may develop decades after the original surgery. When symptoms caused by food retention in the colonic loop occur, surgical correction may be necessary.

# Clinical Significance

Esophageal cancer is increasing worldwide and is currently the 8th most common cancer.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Esophageal reconstruction requires a multidisciplinary approach to treatment. Patients will likely be evaluated by several types of doctors, including hospitalists, cardiologists, oncologists, radiation oncologists, thoracic surgeons, general surgeons, and plastic surgeons. Besides physicians, these patients may need to meet with physical therapists, occupational therapists, dietitians, and even psychologists. They will also be cared for by numerous nurses, care managers, and ancillary staff. Every member of the team is required to care for these patients after esophageal reconstruction.