**During Embryonic life:**

The embryonic development of GnRH neurons closely ties to the olfactory system. Neurons that release GnRH use vomeronasal and olfactory axons as a scaffold to migrate along. Once in the forebrain, they travel to their eventual final position via a branch of the vomeronasal/terminal nerve. GnRH neuronal development takes place between the 5th and 16th embryonic weeks (EW). By the middle of the 5th EW to start the 6th EW, GnRH neurons are detectable in the olfactory placode. By the middle of the 6th EW, these neurons begin to migrate near the terminal nerve, where they enter the forebrain.

By the 9th EW, these neurons will reach the hypothalamus. Between weeks 13 and 16 of gestation is when migration is considered complete. GnRH levels are detectable at the 10th gestational week, but LH and FSH levels are detectable only after 13th gestational week, the reason of delayed appearance of LH and FSH is the formation of vascular connections between pituitary and hypothalamus around 10 to 13 weeks, after which GnRH can reach pituitary and cause the release of FSH and LH.

The levels of GnRH gradually increase and reach a peak level at the mid gestational age, after which they gradually fall toward the end of the gestational period due to the negative feedback effect of circulating placental steroids. At birth development of GnRH neurons is complete, but the functional maturation of synaptic connectivity is attained later in life, especially at puberty. After birth, these levels remain elevated for two years in girls while for six months in boys. The mechanism of suppression of GnRH after birth is still unknown, but certain neurotransmitters like GABA and Neuropeptide Y seem to play an important role in the suppression of GnRH before puberty.

**At Puberty:**

This temporary pause in GnRH release ends at puberty, and recent studies have shown that Kisspeptin neurons are responsible for activation of hypothalamic-gonadotropic axis activation causing the GnRH release at puberty. Initially, at puberty, GnRH is released in low-frequency pulses during the night, but after the maturation of synaptic connections, it matches the adult pattern. In males, the GnRH pulses occur after 2 hours, while in a female, it changes according to the phases of the menstrual cycle. It is clear that the episodic release of GnRH is a general phenomenon. Also, fluctuation in the amplitude and frequency of GnRH bursts plays a vital role in initiating hormonal charges that ultimately regulate the menstrual cycle. The frequency of GnRH bursts is decreased by testosterone and progesterone and increased by estrogens. The frequency (1 pulse of GnRH/60 to 90 mins) during the late follicular phase of the menstrual cycle is increased, culminating in the LH surge. In the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle, the action of progesterone decreases the frequency (1 pulse of GnRH/200mins). At the end of the menstrual cycle, when progesterone and estrogen secretion decreases, the frequency increases. The sensitivity of gonadotropes increases significantly during the midcycle LH surge; this is due to the exposure to pulses of GnRH at a specific frequency, which describes a critical self-priming effect of GnRH that produces a maximum LH response. Thus, changes in GnRH frequency and amplitude alters the synthesis of gonadotropin synthesis and LH and FSH release.

**At menopause:**

GnRH release changes during the perimenopausal period. As the number of follicles recruited during each menstrual cycle decreases near menopause, so does the amount of estrogen produced, resulting in the reduced negative feedback of estrogen on GnRH release leading to an increase in GnRH release frequency (every 55 mins) and amplitude. As women age from 50 to 80 years of age, the frequency of GnRH pulses decreases by 35%.