Embryo implantation requires a receptive endometrium, a functional, normally developing embryo, and synchronized embryo-endometrial cross-talk.

The preparation of a receptive endometrium is established by sequential exposure to the steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone.

The cross-talk between the synchronized embryo and receptive endometrium is facilitated by estrogen and progesterone and permits the process of embryo implantation. Implantation is defined as the process by which an embryo attaches to the uterine wall and penetrates first the epithelium and then the circulatory system of the mother to form the placenta. The implantation process occurs in three steps - apposition, adhesion, and invasion.

In natural ovulatory menstrual cycles, the fertilized ovum (zygote) travels through the fallopian tube encased in the zona pellucida, a nonadhesive coating. During this journey, the fertilized ovum divides into the morula, a mass of 12 to 16 cells. Approximately 2 to 3 days after fertilization, the morula enters the uterine cavity.

Apposition involves the hatched blastocyst orienting correctly based on its polarity and weakly adhering to pinopods on the surface of the endometrium.

Adhesion results in a stronger connection between the blastocyst and endometrium. This process involves adhesion molecules, immune cells, and cytokines, namely beta-3 integrin and L selectin.

During the process of invasion, the blastocyst penetrates the epithelial layer and invades the decidual stroma in order to secure the blood supply.

Leukemia inhibiting factor (LIF) also plays a critical role in implantation. LIF is a pleiotropic cytokine from the interleukin-6 family produced by both the embryo and the endometrium. It is expressed in the luteal epithelium and decidualized stromal cells.