The diagnosis of parkinsonism is clinical. No single test can confirm the syndrome but sometimes can help in balance the suspicion towards a different cause.

**Parkinson Disease**

Motor parkinsonism that includes bradykinesia along with either rigidity or tremor is required to diagnose PD clinically.

No blood test or otherwise is confirmatory to diagnose PD.

**Imaging**

Transcranial color-coded sonography reveals an increased echogenicity of the substantia nigra in patients with PD.

Magnetic resonance imaging can help to rule out causes of parkinsonism other than PD such as tumors, NPH, or cerebrovascular accidents.

Dopamine transporters (DATs) are presynaptic proteins that cause dopamine uptake from the synaptic cleft. Single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT), and positron emission tomography (PET) scans use DAT ligands for the diagnosis of patients with parkinsonism. On DATscan, there is reduced uptake of DAT in PD patients.

**Normal-pressure Hydrocephalus**

Neuroimaging is suggestive of enlarged ventricles with mild or absent atrophy of the parenchyma.

**Vascular Parkinsonism**

CT/MRI may help to reveal the site of the infarct, but they are not conclusive of the diagnosis. MRI may show white matter and periventricular hyperintensities. DAT scan shows a decreased putaminal tracer uptake in patients with VP.

**Drug-induced Parkinsonism**

Drugs that cause parkinsonism have the least affinity for DAT.

**Juvenile Parkinsonism**

Genetic testing may help patients with a significant family history, to find out the underlying cause of secondary parkinsonism.