After initial stabilization of circulation, airway, and breathing as a priority, specific treatment of DKA requires correction of hyperglycemia with intravenous insulin, frequent monitoring, and replacement of electrolytes, mainly potassium, correction of hypovolemia with intravenous fluids, and correction of acidosis. Given the potential severity and the need for frequent monitoring for intravenous insulin therapy and possible arrhythmias, patients may be admitted to the intensive care unit. Blood glucose levels and electrolytes should be monitored on an hourly basis during the initial phase of management.

Aggressive volume resuscitation with isotonic saline infusion is recommended in the initial management of DKA. Volume expansion not only corrects the hemodynamic instability but also improves insulin sensitivity and reduces counter-regulatory hormone levels. After starting with isotonic saline, the subsequent options can be decided on the serum sodium levels that are corrected for the level of hyperglycemia. Normal or high serum sodium levels warrant replacement with hypotonic saline, and low sodium levels warrant continuation of the isotonic saline. This fluid has to be supplemented with dextrose once the level reaches around 200 to 250 mg/dl. Along with fluids, an intravenous infusion of regular insulin has to be initiated to maintain the blood glucose level between 150 to 200 mg/dl and until the high anion-gap acidosis is resolved in DKA. Like mentioned above, potassium levels are usually high because of the transcellular shifts due to the acidosis and the lack of insulin. When the potassium levels are low, this means that the total body potassium is low. Hence, insulin therapy should be postponed until at least the level of serum potassium is greater than 3.3 mEq/L. Otherwise, a further drop in levels would put the patient at risk for cardiac arrhythmias. In the 3.3 to 5 mEq/L; range, supplementation should be added in the maintenance fluids to target a steady 4.0 to 5.0 mEq/L range, and if higher than that, insulin and intravenous fluids alone can be started with just the frequent monitoring of the serum potassium level. The treatment of the acidosis itself is more controversial. Treatment with sodium bicarbonate therapy is controversial. It has been studied and found to provide no added benefit when the arterial blood pH is greater than 6.9 and may be associated with more harm.

AKA typically responds to treatment with intravenous saline and intravenous glucose, with rapid clearance of the associated ketones due to a reduction in counter-regulatory hormones and the induction of endogenous insulin. Like in DKA, this is the first step in management because of the need for correction the hypovolemia/shock. Thiamine replacement is important in alcohol-related presentations, including intoxication, withdrawal, and ketoacidosis, and should be initially done parenterally and after that maintained orally. Electrolyte replacement is critical. Potassium losses that occur through gastrointestinal (GI) or renal losses should be monitored and replaced closely as glucose in the replacement fluid induces endogenous insulin, which in turn drives the extracellular potassium inside the cells. Also of paramount importance is monitoring and replacing the magnesium and phosphate levels, which are usually low in both chronic alcoholism and prolonged dietary deprivation as in starvation.

The treatment of starvation ketoacidosis is similar to AKA. Patients need to be monitored for refeeding syndrome, which is associated with electrolyte abnormalities seen when aggressive feeding is started in an individual starved for a prolonged time. The resultant insulin secreted causes significant transcellular shifts, and hence, similar to AKA, monitoring and replacing potassium, phosphate, and magnesium is very important.