SCA is a debilitating disease that affects a patient physically and has significant emotional and psychiatric consequences. The stigma of being diagnosed with SCA has been well documented. Many SCA patients are inaccurately labeled as drug seekers and opioid abusers due to the need for an inordinately high amount of opioids for pain control. In addition, frequent interactions with different providers (in the emergency rooms, hospital admissions, etc.) can lead to inconsistent care. In such a scenario, the patients need to be an advocate for themselves. The following points can act as a guide for patient education.

- Show consistency in outpatient clinics and show up for your appointments. Regularity in visits to your providers helps to build trust within the system.

- Discuss pain requirements for pain medications with your provider with an open mindset- They may appear restrictive in prescribing pain medications, especially opioids. Still, they are trying to help you by protecting you against overdosing.

- Try and use the same emergency room, or at least the ER within the same hospital system. It is useful and helps in developing familiarity with the people who work in that ER. It also allows easy access to your individualized plan of care, which your provider develops for such situations.

- Adherence to disease-modifying therapy will help reduce the events of pain crises and prevent long-term organ damage.

- Always be receptive to alternative ways of getting control over pain - including music therapy, self-hypnosis, and deep muscle relaxation.

- Patients can adopt protective measures- stay warm and avoid exposure to extreme temperatures, adequate hydration, and breathing exercises at home.