**Screening**

Family members of X-linked Alport syndrome patients need screening. The family members need screening on at least two different occasions and must be screened for other tests. The other causes of haematuria must be excluded.

**Genetic Testing and Counselling**

Genetic testing and counseling must be stressed if mutations are detected in other family members.

**General treatment**

Treatment usually delays the progression of end-stage renal disease (ESRD), which can reverse the lenticonus clinical condition and the need for a renal transplant.

**Medical Management**

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, and aldosterone inhibitors reduce proteinuria. A renal transplant is required in end-stage renal disease and renal failure. Corneal erosions can be managed with a pad, bandage,  topical antibiotics, and pain relief. In cases with advanced corneal disease, corneal transplantation is required. Lens aspiration and IOL implantation are necessary for patients with lenticonus and cataracts. Observation is mandated in fleck retinopathy and hearing aids for SNHL. Macular hole surgery has a poor prognosis in these cases.

**Follow-Up**

Timely and regular follow-up is required in Alport syndrome cases to control risk factors, renal failure, and reduced symptoms of hypertension, proteinuria, and hematuria in the entire life span. Ototoxic medications should be avoided, and exposure to high noise should be reduced.

Indications of surgery in cases with lenticonus

- Best corrected visual acuity of 20/100 or less

- Loss of central fixation

- Non-resolving amblyopia

**Ocular Management**

In cases with early lenticonus where visual acuity is not affected with good best corrected visual acuity, spectacle or contact lens can be prescribed. These patients are followed up closely to rule out the sudden change in visual acuity due to the development of cataracts or spontaneous rupture of lenticonus.

**Lens Removal/ Aspiration**

In cases where lenticonus is causing a reduction in visual acuity, removing the lens and implanting an IOL is imperative. The IOL power is decided based on the age of the patient. In cases with posterior lenticonus, it is essential to check the integrity of the posterior capsule and rule out posterior capsular dehiscence. Managing posterior capsular dehiscence can be a challenge under certain scenarios, and in these cases, IOL should be placed in the sulcus.

**Anterior Vitrectomy**

A thorough anterior vitrectomy is required in pediatric cases where posterior capsulorhexis has been performed. The vitreous must be cleared before implanting an IOL.

**Posterior Capsulorhexis**

This is required in pediatric cases to avoid posterior capsular opacification.

**Pars Plana Vitrectomy**

This is needed in cases where there is cortical matter in the vitreous cavity or in extreme cases where there is a nucleus or IOL drop.

**Occlusion Therapy**

This is required in pediatric cases with amblyopia once the visual axis has been cleared.

**YAG Capsulotomy**

This is needed in cases with posterior capsular opacification.

**Topical Steroids**

Topical steroids such as prednisolone 1% or dexamethasone 0.1% are needed in tapered doses of 6,5,4,3,2,1 for one week each to manage post-cataract surgery inflammation.

**Lowe Syndrome**

**Ocular**

Lowe syndrome patients having cataracts and lenticonus are treated within the first 6-8 weeks of life to prevent the development of amblyopia. The patients are left aphakic for the first two years to avoid developing irregular complications such as glaucoma. Glasses and contact lenses are needed for visual development. Lowe syndrome patients may develop irreversible glaucoma and require surgical intervention. Goniotomy, trabeculectomy, and tube shunts may be necessary for these patients.

**Systemic**

Hypotonia in Lowe syndrome early physical intervention. Antipsychotics control maladaptive behavior. Neurological problems require treatment with clomipramine, paroxetine, and risperidone. Renal tubular acidosis is treated with sodium bicarbonate and another alkali. Intravenous fluid is necessary in cases of dehydration. Vitamin D supplement is required to prevent rickets and closely monitor parathyroid hormone and calcium levels.