A solitary retinal hemorrhage can be observed and followed up for progression in size and number. Hemorrhages that do not obscure or threaten vision do not warrant immediate treatment, and the primary systemic disorder causing the hemorrhages needs to be diagnosed and addressed. Direct intervention for retinal hemorrhages is indicated in submacular, subhyaloid, and vitreous hemorrhages because of their potential to damage vision irreversibly.

Most dot and blot, splinter, and flame-shaped hemorrhages are not vision-threatening and are usually found in the posterior pole sparing the fovea and can be observed. Hemorrhages seen in retinal vein occlusions are not treated per se, but the retinal edema or the neovascularization, which follows as a sequela, needs to be treated. Roth spots are generally asymptomatic and typically resolve with treatment of the underlying disease, especially subacute bacterial endocarditis.

Subhyaloid hemorrhage is seen typically in Terson syndrome and Valsalva retinopathy.

Submacular hemorrhage (SMH) is a sight-threatening complication that can occur in a CNVM secondary to exudative ARMD, PCV, high myopia, angioid streaks, and others. CNVM appears as a dirty grey-green color lesion, deep to the retina.

Patients prone to develop CNVM are advised to self-check their retinal status weekly through Amsler grid charts. Any sudden onset of distortion of lines is suspicious of the development of CNVM. When left untreated, SMH causes irreversible vision loss by damaging the photoreceptors. The treatment strategies for SMH include:

- Pneumatic displacement of SMH with or without tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) displacement of blood from the fovea, usually by intravitreal injection of 0.3 to 0.4 ml of either shorter-acting sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) or longer-acting perfluoropropane (C3F8) followed by face-down head positioning for one to three days.

- Pharmacologic clot lysis such as with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (r-tPA)

- Intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents

- Pars plana vitrectomy with subretinal tPA/pneumatic gas displacement with and without post-operative anti-VEGF injections

Vitreous hemorrhage is commonly seen in vascular conditions such as diabetic retinopathy and retinal vein occlusions. The treatment strategies depending on the severity of hemorrhage and vision loss are as follows:

- Bed rest with head elevation helps reduce further bleeding. Bilateral eye patching helps in reducing eye movement, thereby settling the bleeding inferiorly, helping in a faster visual recovery.

- Avoid drugs like aspirin under physician supervision.

- Retinal breaks are closed by laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy (unlike cryotherapy, laser photocoagulation can close the compromised vessel in addition to the retinal tear), detached retinas are reattached with surgery, and proliferative retinal vascular diseases are treated with laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy.

- Surgical removal by Pars-Plana vitrectomy is indicated in patients with retinal detachment, unresolved VH for more than 2 to 3 months, VH with rubeosis, or Ghost cell glaucoma. Ghost cell glaucoma is a complication of long-standing vitreous hemorrhage wherein the hemoglobin-laden macrophages block the trabecular meshwork to cause raised intraocular pressure. Khaki-colored or red-tinged cells are seen floating in the anterior chamber, and reddish-brown discoloration of the trabecular meshwork is often present. The cells develop within 1 to 3 months of vitreous hemorrhage.