The muscles of the face are predominantly perfused by branches of the external carotid artery, particularly branches of the facial artery. The facial artery is generally the fourth branch off of the external carotid, after the superior thyroid, ascending pharyngeal, and lingual, and is inferior to the occipital, posterior auricular, superficial temporal, and internal maxillary branches. The first major branch of the facial artery, the submental artery, supplies the anterior digastric muscle, a portion of the platysma, and the mylohyoid, the latter of which is also fed by the inferior alveolar artery that runs through the mandible. The posterior digastric muscle is perfused by the occipital artery, while the remainder of the platysma is supplied by the suprascapular artery. After crossing the gonial notch, the facial artery courses towards the modiolus of the oral commissure, where it feeds the perioral muscles by branching into the inferior labial and superior labial arteries, the latter of which proceeds towards the nasofacial junction, becoming the angular artery. The superficial temporal artery gives off the transverse facial artery anterior to the auricular lobule, which runs parallel and superior to Stensen's parotid duct and perfuses the midfacial muscles. The superficial temporal artery continues superiorly toward the temporal region and separates into anterior and posterior branches. The anterior branch supplies the frontalis muscle, anastomosing with the supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries - branches of the internal carotid artery - to supply the corrugator and procerus muscles. The posterior branch of the superficial temporal artery supplies the temporoparietalis muscle and the lateral scalp, anastomosing with the occipital and posterior auricular arteries, the latter of which perfuses the auricular musculature.

The muscles of mastication are supplied by deeper arteries, generally branches of the internal maxillary artery, itself the largest terminal branch of the external carotid artery. This is consistent with the embryology as mentioned earlier, as the internal maxillary artery is the vessel associated with the first branchial arch.

Venous drainage from the face proceeds through a system that largely corresponds to the arterial supply; however, the superficial temporal vein splits and drains both into the deep system (which includes the retromandibular and facial veins that then drain into the internal jugular vein) as well as the superficial system, which drains into the external jugular vein. The deeper muscles of mastication, namely the temporalis, masseter, and pterygoid muscles drain into the pterygoid plexus, which itself drains into both the retromandibular vein and the cavernous sinus; the pterygoid plexus is located between the temporalis and lateral pterygoid muscles. While there exists some variability in arterial anatomy, there is substantially more in venous drainage.

Lymphatic drainage of the facial muscles occurs via nodes in the preauricular, infra-auricular, parotid, nasolabial, buccinator, submandibular, submental, internal jugular, and anterior jugular basins.