Evaluation of a patient with proteinuria should begin with excluding urinary tract infection and the presence of diabetes mellitus. Urine dipsticks are the first screening tests for proteinuria that can be performed in an office. This is a semi-quantitative test in addition to being a qualitative test. The reading of proteinuria on a urine dipstick should be interpreted, considering the concentration of the urine reflected by the specific gravity. For instance, a urine dipstick value of 11 in a well-hydrated patient producing large quantities of dilute urine represents far more severe proteinuria than a dehydrated patient with similar values on a dipstick. The urine dipstick is semi-quantitative because although a reading of 11 on a dipstick shows proteinuria greater than 1 g/24 hour, it does not signify how much the value is greater than 1 g/24 hour.

The urine dipstick diagnostic pad usually contains tetra bromophenol blue and citrate buffers. Several other dyes are also available that are more specific to albumin.

**Urine Dipstick Readings**

**False Positive**

- Dehydration

- UTI

- Hematuria

- Alkaline urine pH of more than 8

- Recent exercise

**False Negative**

- Overhydration

- Positively charged proteins (light chains)

In order to quantify the degree of proteinuria, a 24-hour urine collection is entirely accurate but cumbersome to calculate the 24-hour urinary protein excretion in mg per 24 hours. Any value greater than 150 mg/24 hours is considered abnormal and should be further evaluated for underlying reasons.

An easier and reliable alternative is the spot urine protein to creatinine ratio (UPCR) from a single specimen, which should preferably be the early morning urine sample. [(mg/l protein)/(mmol/l creatinine)*10]. A UPCR value greater than 15 mg/mmol should raise suspicion and warrant further investigation.

In addition to the protein levels, serum electrolytes, urea, and creatinine should be checked. For a nephrotic range of proteinuria with more than 3.5 g/24-hours or a UPCR of more than 350 mg/mmol, the serum albumin levels and cholesterol concentrations should be checked.

Creatinine clearance is more helpful in evaluating renal function than creatinine levels. This can be calculated using some equations, such as the modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD), CKD-EPI equation, and the Cockcroft-Gault formula (as follows).

Creatinine clearance (ml/min) = [(140-age) X weight (kgs) X C] / serum creatinine (mol/l);

where C is 1.23 in males and 1.04 in females.

Normal creatinine clearance for a healthy young adult is more than 90 ml/min. It changes as the muscle mass changes in elderly patients and bodybuilders.

Imaging (particularly renal ultrasonography), immunology screen (ANA, ANCA), and viral screen (hepatitis B and C ) are also helpful in diagnosing the underlying cause.

**Degrees of Proteinuria**

- Normal: Less than 150 mg/24 hour or 15 mg/mmol

- Nephritic: 150-3000 mg/24 hour or 12-300 mg/mmol

- Nephrotic: More than 3500 mg/24 hour or more than 350 mg/mmol

The type of protein constituting the proteinuria can be determined by immunoelectrophoresis.

**Albuminuria (mg/d)**

- Normal: Less than 30
- Microalbuminuria: 30-300
- Macroalbuminuria: More than 300

**Other Tests**

- Autoantibody determinations - including antistreptolysin O titers, antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), anti-DNA antibodies, complement levels (C3 and C4), anti-phospholipase A1 receptor autoantibody, and cryoglobulins

- Hepatitis B and C and HIV serologies

- Urine and plasma protein electrophoresis for light chains

- Anti–glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)

**Imaging Studies**

- Renal ultrasonography to review the size and echogenicity of the kidneys

- Chest radiography or computed tomography may also be indicated

**Renal Biopsy**

Renal biopsy should be considered in patients with proteinuria above 1 g per day because it can guide the choice of a specific therapy.