A systematic review of the published data regarding COVID-19 in pregnancy reported that fever, dyspnea, and cough were the most common symptoms experienced by the patients.

Similarly, the patient may present with an obstetric complication of COVID-19 as a part of her presentation. However, given the non-specificity of the complications, a retrospective diagnosis of COVID-19 may not be easy.

A patient's travel history has become more relevant than before in the present pandemic times.

Contact history is also extremely important. Decisions regarding quarantine, assessment of the risk of progression to severe disease, and exploring the option of post-exposure prophylaxis are all dependent on a good contact history.

While examining an obstetric patient, one should now remember to ask for a vaccination history and a history of being previously infected with COVID-19. Patients who are incompletely vaccinated or unvaccinated are at higher risk of progressing to severe COVID-19.

Similarly, with waning immunity, it is relevant to know the date of the final dose in a vaccination series as well. Knowing the patient's COVID-19 illness history is vital for deciding when to vaccinate next.****The relevant treatment history if previously infected would include knowing whether a monoclonal antibody product was used or not, which may further influence the timing of vaccination.

History of comorbid illnesses helps risk stratification and influences management. Comorbid illnesses as classified by the CDC, which portend higher risk for severe illness, are patients with cancer, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, chronic respiratory diseases, recipients of stem cell transplants on immunosuppression, obesity, diabetes, and hypertension. Women older than 25 years of age, those living in high transmission areas, those living in areas where appropriate social distancing is not feasible, those living in areas with low vaccination rates, and those belonging to certain racial minorities (Black, Hispanic, American Indian and Alaskan). The list continues to change per the evolving evidence.

Physical examination of a patient with COVID-19 mimics the spectrum of the disease itself, with no abnormal findings in the asymptomatic, to signs of acute respiratory distress syndrome in severe cases.

Markers on physical examination of an additional risk factor for poor outcomes would include a high body mass index (BMI) (>30 kg/m2), signs of chronic steroid use, and stigmata of liver disease.

Tachycardia, tachypnea, hypoxia (on pulse-oximetry), use of accessory muscles of respiration, and crackles on lung auscultation are the likely findings of the respiratory examination. Chest pain, hemoptysis, and unilateral lower limb swelling could indicate venous thromboembolism. Arrhythmias, hypotension, and peripheral edema could instigate an evaluation for myocardial dysfunction.

From the obstetric point-of-view, the patient may present with pain in the abdomen, regular progressive uterine contractions, leaking per vaginum, and a dilated cervix on examination: the classical presentation of preterm birth. A tender abdomen reduced fetal movements, and a non-reassuring cardiotocograph may all indicate placental abruption, which has also been seen with COVID-19. The association of abruption and COVID-19 has yet been unequivocally established, but literature in favor of the same has been published.