The treatment options depend on the presentation of the patient.

- Perioperative management: With FXIII levels above 5%, it is generally presumed that no spontaneous bleeding will happen. However, bleeding may still occur if significant stress is applied (trauma, surgery, etc.). If a 'prophylactic' dose was received within 7 days, then it is acceptable to proceed with the surgery; otherwise, a dose of FXIII concentrate would be needed.

- Severe congenital deficiency: In patients with severe (FXIII level less than 1%) and moderate (level between 1% to 4%), prophylactic therapy is advocated, especially if there is a history of intracranial bleed.

- Pregnant patients with FXIII deficiency: Replacement should start by five weeks of gestation to prevent miscarriage. FXIII concentrate is administered more frequently (every week) during the pregnancy to maintain a target of 5% to 10%, and a higher boost is given at the onset of labor to achieve a target above 30%.

- Patients with acquired FXIII deficiency: In addition to instituting factor replacement therapy, the underlying disorder must be addressed. Where a mild inhibitor may disappear with steroid therapy only, a stronger inhibitor may require B-cell-directed therapy.

Several options are available to treat patients with FXIII deficiency. The most commonly available product is cryoprecipitate, which has approximately 20% to 30% of the original FXIII of plasma.

The USFDA approved Virus-inactivated FXIII concentrate derived from human plasma in 2011 for prophylaxis and perioperative management of patients with congenital FXIII deficiency.

Another product, a recombinant FXIII-A (rFXIIIA) subunit (catridecacog), was approved by the FDA in 2013.