Pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) is performed using vertical midline incision or with a bilateral subcostal incision. A self-retaining retractor is applied. The first step of pancreaticoduodenectomy is a thorough assessment of the extent of disease to determine the resectability. Staging laparoscopy is currently widely used to determine the resectability, and it either could be done as a separate procedure or performed together with PD. The entire liver is assessed and palpated for the possible presence of metastases. Any suspicious findings on the liver but indeterminate on palpation could be evaluated by intraoperative ultrasound. The parietal and visceral peritoneal surfaces, the ligament of Treitz, the omentum, and the entire small and large intestine are examined for the presence of metastasis. The celiac axis is inspected for lymph node involvement. Any suspicious looking lymph nodes outside the planned field of dissection are sent for frozen section. PD is not performed if the biopsy is positive for metastatic cancer. The porta hepatis is inspected by mobilizing the gallbladder and dissecting the cystic duct down to the junction of the common hepatic and common bile duct. The proper hepatic artery and common hepatic artery are assessed for any presence of tumor tissue.

Kocher maneuver is performed by elevating the duodenum and head of the pancreas out of the retroperitoneum. Cattell-Braasch maneuver (extensive mobilization of the entire right colon and small bowel mesentery) is usually not necessary except for mobilization and resection of SMV or if the tumor extends into the 4th part of duodenum.

The gallbladder dissected from the liver, and the distal common hepatic duct is divided close to the level of the cystic duct entry site. The proximal bile duct is left without a clamp to avoid crush injury, and the distal bile duct is clamped or sutured to prevent the spillage of the bile and tumor cells. The bile duct is retracted caudally, and portal dissection continued at the anterior aspect of the portal vein. During these maneuvers, the portal structures should be assessed for a replaced right hepatic artery and should be protected. If the patient appears to have an accessory right hepatic artery and a significant native right hepatic artery, the accessory vessel can often be taken without consequence. The gastroduodenal artery is ligated to minimize the chance of erosion and bleeding. The division of the gastroduodenal artery also helps to expose the anterior surface of the portal vein and facilitates the dissection of the portal vein behind the pancreatic neck. The surgeon identifies the portal vein above the neck of the pancreas and SMV inferior to the neck of the pancreas. Blunt dissection downwards along the portal vein is aimed to create a plane in front of the portal vein and behind the neck of the pancreas. This plane is crucial in the surgery, and if one is unable to create a clear plane between the portal vein and the neck of the pancreas, the surgery should be aborted.

Extensive Kocher maneuver should reveal the SMV inferior to the neck of the pancreas. The superior mesenteric vein runs anterior to the third part of the duodenum and surrounded by adipose tissue as it receives tributaries from the uncinate process and neck of the pancreas, the greater curve of the stomach, and from the transverse mesocolon. Two ways of identifying the superior mesenteric vein are by following the middle colic veins to their juncture with the superior mesenteric vein or by tracing the course of the right gastroepiploic vein to the point at which it meets the superior mesenteric vein immediately below the inferior border of the pancreas. The plane anterior to the superior mesenteric vein is created under direct vision, and the splenic vein is preserved. The junction between the PV and SMV should be clearly visualized.

The vascular resection is performed if necessary. The segmental resection of the portal vein or superior mesenteric vein is usually done with the help of vascular surgeons. The vascular defect can be closed with primary repair, patch closure, or using an autologous graft (internal jugular vein, left renal vein, splenic vein, or greater saphenous vein) or with a synthetic graft (PTFE). The reconstructed portal vein should be followed up regularly postoperative for the risk of portal vein thrombosis.

For the Whipple procedure, antrectomy is performed by dividing the right gastric and right gastroepiploic arteries and dividing the antrum with a linear stapler. The pylorus is preserved in a pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy in which the proximal GI tract is divided 2 to 3 cm distal to the pylorus with a linear stapling device. The jejunum is divided between 15 to 20 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz and brought in dorsal to the superior mesenteric vessels from the left to the right side. A Penrose drain is looped under the neck of the pancreas in the created tunnel to elevate the neck of the pancreas and protect the underlying portal vein. The pancreatic neck is then divided using electrocautery after confirming a free plane anterior to the portal and superior mesenteric veins. Stay sutures are placed superiorly and inferiorly on the pancreatic remnant to reduce bleeding from the segmental pancreatic arteries running in those locations.

The specimen remains only connected by the uncinate process of the pancreas. It is separated from the portal vein, superior mesenteric vein, and superior mesenteric artery. This is performed by serially clamping, dividing, and tying the smaller branches off the portal and superior mesenteric vessels. The specimen is removed en-bloc with the pancreatic neck margin, uncinate margin, and common hepatic duct margins are marked for the pathologists. The common hepatic duct margin and the pancreatic neck margin are essential and may be sent earlier for frozen section analysis to determine the extent of further resection. After the removal of the specimen, metal clips are placed at the margins of the resection field to target postoperative radiation therapy. There are various methods available for reconstruction after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Standard reconstruction involves the pancreatic anastomosis (PA) first, followed by the bile duct, and finally, the duodenum to establish the GI continuity.

PA is the most critical step in pancreaticoduodenectomy and meticulous care given during this procedure to reduce morbidity. Either jejunum or stomach can be used for the reconstruction of the pancreatic anastomosis. There are two ways of constructing PA: duct to mucosa anastomosis or invagination technique. For the pancreaticojejunostomy, the duct to mucosa anastomosis is constructed between the end of the pancreatic duct remnant and side of jejunum in a retrocolic fashion. For the invagination technique, the pancreatic duct is junked into the jejunum. The techniques of pancreaticojejunostomy are diverse such as modified Blumgart, modified Kakita, binding pancreaticojejunostomy anastomosis, and so one. The variety of these techniques help to improve the rate of pancreatic fistula formation, but there is no single superior technique.

After the reconstruction is completed, closed suction drains are placed at Morrison pouch and in the vicinity of the pancreatic and biliary anastomosis. A feeding jejunostomy is usually not needed and depends on the surgeon’s preference. The postoperative management includes keeping the patient with nothing by mouth for day 1 and advancing with clear liquids and then gradually to a low-fat diet in frequent small feeds. The stomach is decompressed overnight after surgery with a nasogastric tube, which is usually removed the next morning if there is no high output. The drains are removed gradually once the output is minimal, there is no evidence of pancreatic fistula, and the patient is tolerating a normal diet.