On a pathologic level, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST), solitary fibrous tumors (SFT), small blue round cell tumors (SBRCT), and fibrosarcoma are the top differential diagnosis for a patient with SS.

- MPNST- MPNST can be indistinguishable from monophasic synovial sarcoma, especially if the synovial sarcoma arises intra-neurally. Certain features that favor a diagnosis of MPNST are here:

- The patient has a clinical history of neurofibromas.
- The presence of several architectural patterns within the same lesion, along with the presence of focal atypia, favor MPNST. Likewise, the presence of goblet-type cells is seen only in glandular MPNST.
- Focal CD-34 positivity exists (almost never seen in synovial sarcoma).
- Negative CK-7 and CK-19 are present (most monophasic synovial sarcoma will stain for one or both).
- SOX-10 stain has up to 63% sensitivity for diagnosing MPNST (positive for 7% synovial sarcoma) but has a very high specificity (93%) for diagnosing MPNST.
- Lack of SS18-SSX fusions

- Ewing Sarcoma/ Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumors (PNETs)

- Can resemble poorly differentiated synovial sarcoma
- Reticulin stain is positive in synovial sarcoma but negative in PNETs.
- CD99 staining- Cytoplasmic pattern of staining in synovial sarcoma, vis-a-vis a strong membranous pattern in PNET
- Expression of CK7 makes PNET less likely.
- Caveolin-1 is positive in 95% of cases with EFT (membranous and cytoplasmic pattern). However, this is not specific to EFT.
- TLE1 is rarely positive in EFT.

- Epithelioid Sarcoma (ES)

- 50% of ES may express CD34 which is never seen in synovial sarcoma
- Diffuse expression of low and high molecular weight cytokeratin compared to focal presentation in synovial sarcoma.

- Solitary Fibrous Tumor 

- Diffuse expression of CD34 and STAT6 in SFT is almost never seen in synovial sarcoma.

- Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans

- Diffuse expression of CD34 and lack of keratin distinguish this from synovial sarcoma.

- Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)

- Important to know as synovial sarcoma is well characterized in the gastrointestinal tract. Hence, KIT-negative mesenchymal tumors could be synovial sarcoma.
- DOG-1 is more commonly reported in GIST and is rarely reported in synovial sarcoma.

- Infantile Fibrosarcoma

- Occurs in the first two years of life
- It does not express keratin
- Characterized by t(12;15)(p13;q25), which gives rise to ETV6-NTRK3 fusion.

- Spindle cell Rhabdomyosarcoma

- Express focal myogenin, which is not expressed in synovial sarcoma

- Leiomyosarcoma - Can show focal dot keratin and rare EMA. Hence, it can be confused with synovial sarcoma.