The Society for Simulation in Healthcare (SSH) is a non-profit membership society serving a global community of professionals utilizing simulation for education, research, and testing in healthcare. The SSH provides accreditation for simulation programs with a focus on healthcare education. The purpose of accreditation is to recognize simulation programs that adhere to best practices in simulation as well as ensure standardization across simulation centers. Programs may apply for accreditation in one or more areas, including Assessment, Research, or Teaching/Education.

To demonstrate compliance with SSH Core Standards as well as the specific standards required for each area, programs must provide two years of supporting data. Programs may also apply for accreditation for System Integration and Patient Safety as well as Simulation Fellowship if they are applying for one of the main areas of accreditation (i.e., Assessment, Research, or Teaching/Education). Accreditation can not be sought solely in System Integration and Patient Safety or Simulation Fellowship, however.

Information regarding the required documentation for each area of accreditation, as well as the Core Standards, is on the SSH website. Programs that do not yet have two years of data supporting compliance with the required standards may apply for provisional accreditation in Teaching and Education. After two years of data showing compliance, the program may then apply for Full Accreditation. Full accreditation is granted for five years. During this time, a program must submit annual reports to the SSH to maintain accreditation. After the five-year period, the program will need to submit a Renewal Application to SSH. The annual application deadlines and associated fees for Provisional and Full Accreditation can be found on the SSH website as well.

The American College of Surgeons (ACS) Division of Education also designates accreditation to simulation programs dedicated to surgical education and training through simulation. These accredited programs are referred to as The American College of Surgeons Accredited Education Institutes (ACS-AEI).  The designation of ACS-AEI ensures standardization and best practice in simulation education for surgeons, surgical residents, medical students, and surgical team members.

Simulation programs must show compliance with ACS standards, similar to the accreditation process through SSH. Programs may apply as a Focused Education Institute or Comprehensive Education Institute. Both application processes require proof of compliance with four standards: Learners and Scope of Educational Programs; Curriculum Development, Delivery of Effective Education and Assessment; Administration, Management and Governance; Advancement of the Field. The requirements for a Comprehensive Education Institute, however, are more rigorous and with additional requirements.

Information regarding the requirements for accreditation, as well as deadlines for the application, are in the Education section of the American College of Surgeons webpage. Applications are accepted on biannual cycles. Accreditation is granted for five years. During this time, programs must provide annual compliance reports and apply for reaccreditation at the end of the five-year term.