**Genetic Counseling**

This is an autosomal recessive disease and therefore, parents of the affected individuals are heterozygotes for the disease (i.e., they are carriers of one abnormal LYST gene). Molecular genetic testing needs to be carried out to check the carrier status of the parents.

If the parents are heterozygotes, each sibling of an affected individual has a 25% chance of developing the disease, 50% chance of being a carrier, and 25% chance of not developing the disease nor being a carrier.

**Evaluation of At-risk Relatives:**

It is necessary to assess siblings of affected individuals early. This will help in undergoing an HSCT before complications such as accelerated phase develop.

- Molecular testing can be done to assess the genetic status if family-specific pathogen variants are known.

- If the variants are unknown, then an examination of peripheral blood can be done to detect the presence of inclusions in the white blood cells.

The best time for determining genetic risk as well as carrier status is before pregnancy. Genetic counseling including risks and complications should be offered to adults who are carriers or are at risk of being carriers or are already affected. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is also an option for those where the pathogenic LYST genes have been identified.

DNA banking possibilities also should be offered to affected individuals where the DNA that is extracted, typically the white blood cells are stored for future use. There is a possibility that testing and understanding of genes will improve in the future.