According to the European Society of Cardiology, American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Heart Association, and World Health Federation Expert consensus document on the third universal definition of myocardial infarction, acute myocardial infarction can be diagnosed in several ways, one of which depends on cardiac enzymes.

"Detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarker values (preferably cardiac troponin) with at least one value above the 99 percentile upper reference limit and with at least one of the following:

- Symptoms of ischemia

- New or presumed new significant ST segment-T wave changes or new left bundle branch block

- Development of pathological Q waves on ECG

- Imaging evidence of a new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality

- Identification of an intracoronary thrombus by angiography or autopsy."

The morbidity and mortality associated with acute myocardial infarction are well understood and discussed elsewhere. Given the known morbidity and mortality associated with acute myocardial infarction and the importance of early diagnosis and management, the above definition places a heavy burden on cardiac enzymes as their elevation alone, along with symptoms of ischemia, is enough to make the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.

The ideal cardiac enzyme or biomarker needs to be highly specific, highly sensitive, and easily detectable as early as possible in the disease process. Several biomarkers have been developed in the past and will be discussed in this article.

"Cardiac enzymes" is a broad term encompassing several intracellular myocyte components that can be found in serum and measured under certain circumstances such as myocardial ischemia, trauma, myocarditis. In the proper clinical setting, elevation in the level of enzymes present in serum is key in the diagnosis of myocardial infarction. While troponin is the most commonly used cardiac enzyme for diagnosis of myocardial infarction, others exist and may be helpful in some situations.