Australian and United States Navy IWR tables are similar in that they both require in-water recompression to 30 feet and approximately 60 to 90 minutes at 30 feet, with about an hour at 20 and 10 feet, respectively. Neither table provides a deeper excursion or significant modification of the treatment in the water by the diver or tender. Both tables have the tender breath air during the treatment protocol for safety reasons, thereby preventing oxygen-induced seizures at the same time in both the tender and stricken diver. Having the tender breath air also allows for simplified logistics, as all the onsite oxygen is available to the stricken diver.

Hyperbaric physicians will note the similarity to the United States Navy Treatment Table 5, which is typically used for mild (type 1) DCS and sometimes for altitude DCS. There is some evidence for the use of an abbreviated treatment table 5 in mild DCS, and this was noted at the 2011 DCS/AGE Committee meeting of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine Society, where treatment table options were discussed. It is noteworthy that this consideration was for dry chambers, not IWR. While there is insufficient evidence to consider changing practice at recompression chambers, there is some support for abbreviated IWR table use in extraordinary circumstances where proper recompression is not available. Under no circumstances, however, should recreational divers be recompressed in water to 60 feet on pure oxygen (as would be called for by a Treatment Table 5). The published United States Navy and Australian in-water recompression tables have documented successful treatments and should be considered the first choice for the average diver or dive supervisor capable of completing in-water recompression safely. These tables provide for a maximum depth of 30 feet. Physicians who are fellowship-trained in Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine and who are experienced divers may alter in-water recompression tables to suit unique needs just as they might for divers receiving treatment in a chamber, with consideration given to environmental factors and oxygen toxicity limits.

The use of other commercial tables and those published in diving magazines and even diving instruction booklets should be understood to be at the diver's own risk. As of this writing, there are no controlled studies of these often-arbitrary tables published by individual writers, and there are not likely to ever be properly controlled and peer-evaluated studies of these tables due to the infrequency of IWR and poor record keeping. Divers and treatment providers overseeing in-water recompression are advised to utilize standardized navy tables, either the United States or Australian. Navy-produced tables have the advantage of a large number of divers receiving treatment with accurate tracking over the years or decades.

Divers also are advised against trying to employ traditional chamber treatment tables to in-water recompression. Both the United States Navy Treatment Tables numbers 5 and 6, classically used for type 1 and type 2 DCS, involve breathing oxygen at 60 feet of depth. Breathing oxygen immersed at 60 feet carries a far greater risk of seizure and is not advised. In addition to the increased seizure risk due to increased depth, the oxygen volume requirements are much larger for these tables.

Even using the IWR tables results in a large required oxygen volume for the diver. For the United States Navy Type 1 IWR table, some 160 cubic feet of pure oxygen would be required for the average diver with a surface air consumption rate of 0.5 cubic feet per minute, which could be considered an average rate for a novice diver. Even an experienced diver might require a consumption rate this high (or higher) due to increased stress from the injury and uncertainty, thermal debt, and the use of some full-face masks. A diver requiring recompression on the United States Navy Type 2 IWR table would require about 180 cubic feet of oxygen, assuming the same surface consumption rate.

Divers undertaking IWR should do so only on pure oxygen. Recent animal studies have demonstrated bubble growth when on a nitrogen-based gas mixture, without the bubbles in the tissue ever resolving except when the diver is breathing pure oxygen.

**Summary Points**

- Use only pure oxygen for IWR unless alternate treatment strategies are approved by a hyperbaric physician specifically trained in undersea medicine.

- Have an adequate supply of oxygen before initiating IWR.

- Have proper equipment and training before IWR is needed in an emergency.

- Properly evaluate the diver and situation for suitability for IWR.

- Utilize tables with a clear history of success in treating divers.

- Never send a stricken diver into the water alone.