Five pairs of mixed spinal nerves emerge from either side of the lumbar spinal cord, carrying both motor and sensory nerve fibers—the spinal nerves branch after exiting the neural foramen into ventral and dorsal rami. The dorsal rami supply motor innervation to the erector spinae musculature and sensation to the skin over the back. The ventral rami supply motor and sensory fibers to the remainder of the prevertebral musculature and lower limbs.

The T12 to L4 ventral rami combine to form a network of nerves called the lumbar plexus. The lumbar plexus gives rise to the obturator (L2-L4) and femoral (L2-L4) nerves, respectively. The remaining nerves of the lumbar plexus include the iliohypogastric (T12-L1), ilioinguinal (L1), genitofemoral (L1-L2), and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve of the thigh (L2-L3)—the lumbosacral plexus form from the L4 to S4 ventral rami. The L4 and L5 roots join to form the lumbosacral trunk, which descends into the pelvis to join the sacral plexus. The lumbosacral plexus then gives rise to the sciatic nerve (L4-S3), which branches into the common peroneal and tibial nerves. The sacral plexus also includes the superior gluteal (L4-S1), inferior gluteal (L5-S2), posterior femoral cutaneous of the thigh (S1-S3), and pudendal nerve (S1-S4).

Each lumbar spinal nerve exits below its corresponding vertebra—for example, the L4 nerve exits below the L4 vertebra through the L4-L5 neural foramen. Most lumbar disc herniations occur centrally and do not compress the exiting nerve root at the level of the disc. The nerve root most commonly affected exits one level below the herniated disc. For example, an L4-L5 central disc herniation will most commonly compress the L5 nerve root in the lateral recess of the spinal canal. However, in the setting of a far lateral disc herniation, the L4 nerve root is compressed, albeit less commonly. This difference is due to the more central position of the traversing spinal nerves compared to the more lateral position of the exiting spinal nerves.

Each spinal nerve supplies an area of skin with afferent sensory fibers. This area of skin is referred to as a dermatome. Each lumbar spinal nerve also innervates a group of muscles with motor fibers, termed a myotome. Dermatomes and myotomes can be traced back to our embryological development. Dermatomes and myotomes are clinically relevant as they can be used to determine the lumbar spinal nerve(s) involved in the setting of pathology.

This section will focus on the sensory and major muscular innervations of the lumbar spinal nerves. L1 and L2 innervate the iliopsoas muscle and provide sensory innervation to the inguinal crease and medial thigh. L3 partially innervates the adductors, iliopsoas, and quadriceps musculature. L3 provides sensory innervation to the anterior-medial thigh. L4 contributes to the femoral and sciatic nerves, innervating the iliopsoas, adductors, quadriceps, and tibialis anterior. The L4 nerve provides sensory innervation to the anterior thigh and medial lower leg. The L3 and L4 nerves contribute to the patellar reflex arc. L5 innervates the gluteus medius, tensor fascia latae, medial hamstrings, tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus/brevis, peroneus longus, tibialis posterior, and the flexor digitorum longus. L5 provides sensory innervation to the lateral leg and dorsum of the foot. It is clinically important to note that each dermatome overlaps with adjacent dermatomes. Therefore, dense numbness is exceedingly rare in the setting of nerve root compression. Each myotome also overlaps, leading to nearly every muscle of the lower extremity receiving innervation from 2 or 3 lumbar spinal nerves.