When a diagnosis of testicular cancer is suspected based on physical examination and/or ultrasound findings, radical inguinal orchiectomy is performed, which removes the testicle, epididymis, and spermatic cord up to the level of the internal inguinal ring. In this procedure, these structures are delivered through an inguinal incision made along Langer's lines in the groin. If the mass is too large to pass through a standard 3 to 5 cm inguinal incision, the incision can be carried inferiorly to the anterior scrotum to allow for removal of the testis in its tunics along with the spermatic cord. Trans-scrotal orchiectomy or biopsy is contraindicated, as doing so alters the lymphatic drainage patterns and impacts further management.  Partial orchiectomy is contraindicated in the presence of normal contralateral testis and can be considered in small polar lesions in solitary testicles only after biopsy of the adjoining testicles are confirmed on frozen sectioning to be clear of GCNIS or malignancy. Such a procedure should be performed through an inguinal incision and should not be routinely considered.

Predictable lymph node drainage patterns contribute to high success rates of retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. A full RPLND removes all lymphatic tissue within a template whose superior border is the renal vessels and whose lateral borders are the ureters and with an inferior border of where the ureter crosses the iliac vessels. Lymphatic tissue is removed from the great vessels using the "split and roll" technique, whereby para-aortic, pre-aortic, interaortocaval, para-caval, and pre-caval node packets are removed. The ipsilateral gonadal vein is removed and the stump of the spermatic cord is removed.  The postganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers can be prospectively identified and spared in nerve-sparing RPLNDs.