Prognosis is variable and is dependent upon the histopathologic classification and staging of the tumor.

**Actinic Keratosis**

Although AK does not infer any impact on survival, the risk of transforming into a malignant entity is the most significant concern, given that it is a benign lesion. Signs of progression from an AK to malignancy include ulceration, rapid growth, size >1cm, and inflammation.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma**

Fifty percent of BCC lesions are found on the lower lid, 30% medial canthus, 15% upper lid, and 5% lateral canthus.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma & Keratoacanthoma**

Like in BCC, lesions of the lower lid account for the majority of SCC cases (60.8%), followed by lesions of the medial canthus (17.6%) and lateral canthus (11.8%), and upper lid (9.8%). SCC is typically more aggressive than BCC. The overall mortality prognosis is good as long as clear margins can be obtained, though significant morbidity remains. A 2002 study revealed only one death out of 51 patients with a mean follow-up of 31 months, with the only death occurring in a patient who declined treatment.

**Sebaceous Carcinoma**

Misdiagnosis plays an integral role in the poor prognosis associated with SC. In one study of patients with SC, nearly 60% of patients had an average diagnostic delay of 14.7 months. Chalazion and blepharitis represent the most common incorrect diagnosis for sebaceous carcinoma at 15.9 to 20% and 14.4 to 25%, respectively.

**Melanoma**

One retrospective review of 256 patients found that lesions involving the eyelids or caruncle had more than a twofold increase in mortality relative to malignant melanoma of the globe.

The most commonly used staging system, the TNM (tumor, node, metastasis), was introduced by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). In 2021, the largest analysis of cutaneous melanoma of the eyelid was published, showing the 5-year overall survival rate was 88.6% for melanoma in situ and 77.1% for invasive melanoma. Additionally, the authors found that age ≥75 years at diagnosis, T4 staging, lymph node involvement, and the nodular melanoma histologic subtype are harbingers of poor survival.

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma**

A diagnosis of MCC imparts a poor prognosis with a mortality ranging from 33% to 46%.