While drusen bodies are a common finding upon standard ophthalmic exams in the aging population, they are of most concern as early signs of AMD. AMD is one of the most prevalent eye diseases in the world affecting roughly 1% to 3% of the total population.

**Types of Drusen**

There are various types of drusen bodies, each of which is associated with a different prognostic value. The types of drusen are based on the size, consistency, and histological features present. Hard drusen, also termed “small drusen” are defined as small, round, well-defined deposits with a diameter measuring less than 63 microns. Hard drusen are common and are the only type of drusen considered as normal age-associated findings.

**Number of Drusen**

The smaller the number of drusen present, the lower the risk of progression to AMD. Just as an increase in the size of drusen increases the likelihood of progression to AMD, an increase in the number of drusen increases the likelihood of progression to AMD.

**Location of Drusen**

Drusen bodies located on the peripheral retina are less concerning than drusen bodies located within the macula or central region of the retina. Within the macula, an area called the fovea exists which is where the highest visual acuity originates. Hard drusen are typically widespread so they can be found within the peripheral or the central retina. The same can be said for cuticular drusen. Soft drusen tend to be located more within the central retina or macula which may contribute to the fact that soft drusen have a higher likelihood of progressing to AMD.