Historically amoebic infections were diagnosed by microscopy with the identification of trophozoites; however, this method was unable to distinguish between E. histolytica and E. dispar infections.  Now, there are many tools used for diagnosis with stool polymerase chain reaction (PCR) having the highest sensitivity in distinguishing E. histolytica from E. dispar.  Other diagnostic modalities available include stool microscopy, stool antigen detection, serology, stool molecular studies, and colonoscopy with a histologic examination.

Stool microscopy: This diagnostic method is advantageous, being widely available with minimal equipment needed and can be used to screen for other parasites.  Disadvantages include poor sensitivity, reported at <60%, with the inability to differentiate from other Entamoeba species and relies on the experience or skills of the observer.

Stool antigen detection: This method is simple with a quick turnaround time and has the advantage of being able to differentiate between E. histolytica and E. dispar.  There are a wide number of commercially available antigen detection kits using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), radioimmunoassay, or immunofluorescence that have varying sensitivities of up to 88%.

Serology: Has high sensitivity and specificity with quick turnaround time but is not helpful in distinguishing between an acute or previous infection.   Antibodies are not detectable in an active infection until at least a week into the infection and will remain detectable in individuals for years.

Stool molecular studies: Considered to be the gold standard with high sensitivity of 92% to 100% and specificity of 89% to 100%.  Testing is becoming more widely available but is considered to be more expensive, requiring appropriate equipment and kits and requiring a skilled technician.

Colonoscopy with histologic examination: Not used for routine diagnosis but can be used to look for other causes of symptoms.  Used to look for characteristic findings of amebic ulcers or erosions with the identification of trophozoites or cysts with biopsy specimens.