**History**

The history should begin with asking the patient about the time of symptom onset and progression of symptoms. Intracerebral hemorrhage could present during physical activity, emotional stress, or even at rest in individuals with risk factors. General symptoms that the patient (or accompanying bystanders) complain of at presentation include

- Headache due to meningeal irritation

- Vomiting (usually projectile in nature) and nausea due to increased intracranial pressure appears in 50% of patients.

- A decreased level of consciousness ranging from confusion to coma depending on the size of the hematoma; usually, only very large bleeds cause coma due to a mass effect causing compression of the brain stem.

- Seizures within the first 24 hours that occur in about 10% of patients

Also, screening for risk factors such as systemic hypertension and medications such as anticoagulant drugs/antiplatelet drugs is crucial. Important comorbid states to look for in these patients include liver disease and malignancies, as they are associated with coagulopathies. In patients with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, cognitive dysfunction might be additionally present.

**Physical**

Accurate measurement of vital signs, a baseline GCS score, and a complete physical exam with a structured neurological exam is required. With the worsening of cerebral edema and increased hematoma size, neurological symptoms progress within minutes to hours. The specific neurological deficits seen reflect the location of hemorrhage, such as:

- Putamen involvement presents with hemiparesis with depression of consciousness.

- Thalamic hemorrhages produce hemianesthesia more prominently than hemiparesis, along with an upward gaze.

- Pontine hemorrhages present with pinpoint pupils, quadriparesis, dysconjugate ocular mobility disorder, and coma.

- Lobar hemorrhages present with hemiparesis, hemisensory deficits, and speech impairment.

- Cerebellar hemorrhages present with vertigo, ataxia, and paralysis of conjugate gaze on one side.