If desired, individuals who menstruate or their caregivers may choose to pursue menstrual suppression for personal or medical reasons. Notably, a study revealed that as many as 59% of women in the United States expressed a desire to eliminate their monthly periods.

For average adults, reasons for suppression include decreasing bleeding, pain, and other perimenstrual symptoms, improving quality of life, managing certain medical conditions, lowering the burdens of menstrual hygiene, and decreasing the use of disposable hygiene products.

**Management of Menstrual Symptoms**

Menstrual-related symptoms such as heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea (excessive pain associated with menses), and premenstrual syndrome impact up to 2.5 million biologically female adults annually and may lead to absenteeism from school or work and decreased participation in social, athletic, professional, or recreational activities.****

Therefore, individuals may prefer to suppress menses to decrease the burdens of pain, bleeding, and other symptoms such as bloating, fatigue, and mood changes. Some individuals may also desire to control when and where their menses occur rather than experiencing regular monthly or irregular menses.

Several studies suggest that individuals may prefer to delay, suppress or completely stop their period for an improved quality of life, including up to 65% of female college students and up to 86% of female military personnel.

**Management of Other Medical Conditions**

Menstrual suppression may also be utilized for other health conditions, such as managing endometriosis, decreasing blood loss related to bleeding diathesis (particularly von Willebrand disease), and reducing the risk for or worsening of present anemia.

**Lowering the Burdens of Menstrual Hygiene**

Decreasing menstrual hygiene's contribution to global inequality and environmental degradation is also important to consider.

Approximately 800 million individuals menstruate on any given day, requiring them to have reliable access to menstrual hygiene products (pads, tampons, menstrual cups, or panties), clean water, and private sanitation facilities.

If access to menstrual suppression options can be achieved and the number of bleeding days decreased, it could decrease these burdens on populations suffering from period poverty. For example, in well-developed countries, an individual without a reliable income may have access to hormonal contraceptives through a government-sponsored health plan but may lack dedicated funds to purchase menstrual hygiene products.

Additionally, several populations may face unique challenges associated with menstrual hygiene, including deployed military members, people working in remote locations, those who struggle with housing insecurity, or incarcerated individuals.

There is also significant monetary cost and environmental waste associated with menstrual hygiene products. Decreasing bleeding days may assist in lowering this personal cost and reduce the global environmental impact of single-use synthetic materials used and disposed of during menses.

**Special Populations**

**Adolescents**

Adolescents are at high risk for menstrual dysfunction, especially in the first 1 to 2 years post-menarche.

Adolescents, with or without the involvement of a parent or caregiver, may opt for menstrual suppression for several reasons. Menstrual suppression may be useful in helping regulate the HPO axis and prevent highly irregular cycles and associated stress.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) does not recommend a routine pelvic exam before initiating menstrual suppression in individuals younger than 21 years if normal menstruation occurs.

**People with Developmental or Physical Disability**

Clinicians should discuss menses and menstrual management with adolescents and adults with developmental or physical disabilities and their caregivers, if applicable, ideally before menarche.

A 2021 retrospective cohort study of adolescents and young women with disabilities found that the primary reasons for seeking menstrual suppression were irregular menstrual bleeding, heavy menstrual bleeding, hygiene burden, inconvenience of menses, dysmenorrhea, and assistance in managing comorbid conditions such as behavioral issues and catamenial epilepsy.

Menstrual suppression should not be initiated before menarche to ensure the appropriate onset of menarche and pubertal development.

Medication reconciliation is also key in this population. Some medication classes frequently utilized in the setting of developmental or physical disabilities can have significant drug interactions with hormonal contraceptives (see Contraindications).

Other considerations include a person's mobility, ability to swallow pills, cognitive ability to understand menses, and menstrual hygiene. For example, when individuals have limited mobility, their risk of venous thromboembolic events (VTE) may be uncertain, they may have lower bone mineral density, and even small amounts of weight gain may impact their ability to transfer themselves from a wheelchair. For these reasons, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends careful individual assessment and joint decision-making to determine the most appropriate menstrual suppression method for adolescents with disabilities.

Lastly and importantly, clinicians should evaluate the risk of pregnancy and assess the risk of sexual abuse (by caregivers or others) in all adolescents and adults with developmental or physical disabilities before initiation of menstrual suppression.

**Transgender and Gender-Diverse Individuals**

In transgender and gender-diverse adolescents and adults, menses can be a significant source of distress; therefore, menstrual suppression may be an important intervention in gender-affirming care.Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes), which may begin before menarche in this select population.

Understanding the motivation for and desired outcome of menstrual suppression is important, as it will guide the treatment method. Often, the goal is to achieve complete amenorrhea to help reduce menstrual-related gender dysphoria, though individuals may also desire contraception or management of menstrual-related symptoms.

**Military Personnel and Athletes**

As of 2020, nearly 17% of US Army service members are biologically female, and as of 2016, all combat jobs are open to both male and female individuals.

Up to 86% of menstruating military personnel report a desire for amenorrhea during deployment for these reasons; however, as few as 7% utilize menstrual suppression methods, and only a third report being counseled by a healthcare provider regarding menstrual suppression options.

Competitive athletes may face similar challenges in managing menses, such as the need for high performance, elevated stress levels, frequent travel, and the inconvenience of menstrual symptoms during competition. Menstruating athletes, including adolescents, may choose to manipulate or suppress their menstrual cycle to maximize performance.

In these populations, clinicians must carefully consider the effects of continuous hormonal contraceptive use on bone health and the risk of bone stress injury due to the higher risk of low bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures (see Complications).

**Active Malignancy**

Individuals with active malignancy are at risk of thrombocytopenia from malignancy and chemotherapy, radiation, or stem cell or bone marrow transplantation.

These individuals will most likely require a progesterone-only method (progestin-only pills or LARC) or a GnRH agonist for suppression, as estrogen-containing products are generally contraindicated in the setting of an increased risk for thromboembolism (see Contraindications).

Notably, persons with a current or prior history of breast cancer should not utilize estrogen-containing contraceptives (see Contraindications).

GnRH agonists (primarily leuprolide acetate and triptorelin) are preferred for adolescent oncologic patients due to demonstrated amenorrhea rates as high as 96%.