**Types of Moisturizers**

Moisturizers divide into several categories, and their functions include preventing water loss through the skin, adding water to the skin, and reducing visible flakes.  In recent years, with a fuller understanding of the structure and function of the skin barrier, the science of moisturizer development has advanced significantly. As a result, modern moisturizers frequently combine ingredients with different mechanisms of action to achieve specific results.

Occlusive moisturizers prevent evaporation of water or reduce transepidermal water loss (TEWL) from the skin by forming a barrier. This barrier allows replenishment of the water content of the stratum corneum by the deeper layers of the epidermis and dermis.

Petrolatum is the classic example of an occlusive moisturizer, and it is the most effective. It reduces water loss through the epidermis by nearly 99%.

- Hydrocarbons: petrolatum, mineral oil, paraffin, squalene

- Silicones: dimethicone

- Vegetable oils: coconut oil, castor oil, olive oil, grape seed oil, soybean oil

- Animal Fats: Mink oil, emu oil, lanolin

- Wax Esters: Lanolin, beeswax

- Sterols: Cholesterol, ceramides

Humectants are compounds that attract and bind water. Some of these substances, like urea, are endogenously present and make up part of the NMF. Humectants can hydrate the skin if the humidity is more than 70%, but more commonly, they will draw water from the deeper epidermis and dermis. Without concomitant use of an occlusive moisturizer, some humectants can result in an increased transepidermal water loss and exacerbate skin dryness.

Alpha-hydroxy acids (AHAs) are an important group of humectant molecules and have more recently focused on their use as moisturizing agents and cosmetics. AHAs include glycolic and lactic acids. These agents impact the water content of the stratum corneum by several mechanisms. They are effective humectants. They promote desquamation by reducing corneocyte cohesion and also improve the barrier function by increasing levels of ceramides.

Urea is a component of NMF. The addition of urea to moisturizers helps with the absorption of water into the stratum corneum. It promotes the desquamation of corneocytes and increases penetration of other topically applied medications.

Glycerin is another commonly used humectant and is present in many skincare products. In addition to attracting and binding water, it has demonstrated beneficial effects in barrier repair.

An emulsifier is another classification of ingredients commonly found in moisturizers.  It is a molecule that allows for two immiscible substances to exist as a single phase. The molecules are typically long carbon chains with a polar group. Commonly used emulsifiers are fatty acids, like stearic acid.

**Formulations**

When a moisturizer contains humectants, the water content of the skin more rapidly increases, but as mentioned previously, this does not necessarily reduce trans-epidermal water loss. Similarly, when using an occlusive agent, the water content of the skin takes a long time to increase, as the water must be drawn from deeper levels of the skin before an improvement takes place. The term “cream” traditionally refers to a product containing more occlusive ingredients, whereas a “lotion” contains humectants primarily.

Modern moisturizers often contain both occlusives and humectants that contribute to efficacy. Understanding the physiology of the skin barrier and how a disease state or circumstance may contribute to dry skin, impaired barrier function, or flaking of the skin can help us choose the best ingredients for a patient. The specific balance and combination of ingredients will help achieve a variety of outcomes depending on the desire of the consumer.