Menopause treatment and management revolve around minimizing disruptive symptoms and preventing long-term complications.

**Hormonal Treatment**

Hormone therapy can treat vasomotor symptoms and prevent vaginal/urogenital atrophy, as well as preserve an advantageous lipoprotein profile and prevent bone loss. It can be given in various forms (i.e., tablets, creams, patches), in different modalities (i.e., continuous versus cyclic), and is available as systemic estrogen, estrogen-progestin, estrogen-bazedoxifene, progestin alone, or combined oral contraceptives. The use of unopposed estrogen may cause uterine hyperplasia and uterine cancer; therefore, should be avoided in women with a uterus. The cyclical administration of combination estrogen-progestin therapy is recommended for women with an intact uterus.  It significantly decreases the severity and frequency of hot flashes and improves urogenital atrophy and sleep disturbances. It is also useful in preventing osteoporosis and associated fractures. However, hormone therapy should only be used for the shortest duration of time and at its lowest effective dose, as it increases the relative risk of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, thromboembolism, stroke, and coronary heart disease. There is an increased breast cancer risk after 3 to 5 years with estrogen-progestin and 7 years with estrogen only. It is contraindicated in those with a history of breast cancer, endometrial cancer, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, liver disease, unexplained vaginal bleeding, and coronary heart disease. For atrophic vaginitis, in particular, systemic or vaginal estrogen can be utilized; however, localized estrogen therapy at very low doses is preferable when there are no other systemic symptoms. The use of localized estrogen therapy (via vaginal rings, creams, or tablets) has been shown to enhance blood flow and reverse vaginal atrophy. However, this also carries a small risk of venous thromboembolism.

**Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs)**

Selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as raloxifene, bazedoxifene, and ospemifene, have the ability to modulate estrogen action without stimulating endometrial growth or increasing the risk of cancer. SERMs have the same outcome as hormone therapy in preventing bone loss and promoting beneficial lipoprotein levels. Raloxifene acts as an estrogen agonist (pro-estrogen) on bone and lipids and like an estrogen antagonist (anti-estrogen) on the uterus and breast. Thus, it is effective in preventing/treating mild osteoporosis and decreasing serum LDL. Having a similar profile to raloxifene, bazedoxifene, when combined with estrogen, does not influence the endometrium (i.e., women with a uterus do not need to take progestin). Thus, when combined with estrogen, it is effective in treating vasomotor symptoms like hot flashes. Ospemifene is a newer SERM that is effective in treating urogenital symptoms, such as vaginal dryness.

**Non-Hormonal Treatment**

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), gabapentin, and clonidine. These treatments can be used for short durations (a few months) for menopause symptoms. SSRIs and SNRIs, like paroxetine and venlafaxine, are antidepressants that treat vasomotor symptoms, such as hot flashes and result in one fewer hot flashes a day. Paroxetine, in particular, is the only FDA-approved drug for this indication, and symptoms diminish within a week of initiating treatment. While neither is FDA-approved for the treatment of vasomotor symptoms, both gabapentin and clonidine have been shown to reduce hot flashes in menopausal women. Gabapentin reduces hot flashes by up to 2 hot flashes per day, and clonidine is most effective in mild hot flashes, as it is less effective than SSRIs/SNRIs and gabapentin.

**Osteoporosis-Specific**

For menopausal women experiencing osteoporosis alone, bisphosphonates, denosumab, and supplementation with calcium and vitamin D can be utilized. Bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclast action and resorption of bone. They have been shown to be safe and efficacious in treating osteoporosis. However, at high doses and over a prolonged period, there may be a risk of developing adynamic bone. For this reason, periodic discontinuation of this drug is recommended, as bone density is retained for quite a few years. Denosumab is an antibody to RANKL. It inhibits the osteoclasts and their activity, such that bone resorption is decreased and bone density is increased. In turn, it is reducing the risk of fractures in menopausal women with osteoporosis (via biannual subcutaneous treatment).

**Nonprescription Remedies**

A proper diet can ease symptoms and prevent some complications. Complementary and alternative treatments include phytoestrogens, vitamin E, and omega-3 fatty acids. Vitamin E and omega-3 fatty acids have been used to treat the vasomotor symptoms of menopause. They are generally safe; however, studies have shown that they are no better than placebo. Phytoestrogens like soy, red clover, and black cohosh have also been safely used to treat menopause symptoms. Though studies on black cohosh have shown mixed results when treating hot flashes, soy and red clover have been shown to be effective in treating osteoporosis and high cholesterol.