The clinical presentation of psoriatic arthritis is varied. The earliest classification of psoriatic arthritis by Moll and Wright included five subtypes:

- Oligoarticular arthritis is asymmetric and involves less than five small or large joints

- Polyarticular arthritis is usually symmetric and presents similar to rheumatoid arthritis but may involve the DIP joints, rheumatoid factor negative

- Distal arthritis is signified by prominent involvement of the DIP joints

- Arthritis mutilans is characterized by severe destructive joint disease with deformities, especially in the hands and feet

- Spondyloarthritis pattern with sacroiliitis and spondylitis (this may occur with or without peripheral joint disease)

The asymmetric oligoarticular pattern is the most common form of presentation of psoriatic arthritis, accounting for at least 60% of cases of psoriatic arthritis. However, this is not true of all patient populations. Over time the majority of patients have polyarticular arthritis. In an analysis of 220 patients with psoriatic arthritis, the patterns of arthritis were as follows: oligoarticular arthritis - 14%, polyarthritis - 40%, distal arthritis - 12%, arthritis mutilans - 16%, sacroiliitis, and spondylitis - 30% (this adds up to more than 100% because axial and peripheral joint involvement may coexist.

The Classification of Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR) study identified 63% of patients with polyarticular arthritis.

The classic definition referred to it as the most severe form, and its presentation was associated with osteolysis leading to digital telescoping, bone resorption, and sacroiliitis. GRAPPA initiative (Group for Research and Assessment of Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis) in 2012 was able to achieve a consensus on the features related to arthritis mutilans, which involves consideration of specific features of the disease, including digital telescoping, digital shortening, “pencil-in-cup deformities,” osteolysis, and involvement of DIP joints and other small joints of the hands.

The discrepancies seen in different studies can be explained by the heterogeneous patterns of the disease and the fact that many patients experience a transition from one pattern of arthritis to another over time; this is especially true for patients presenting with asymmetric oligoarthritis who often transition to symmetric polyarthritis. Other factors that may account for variations in patterns of psoriatic arthritis may be related to the fact that most of these studies are from referral centers for psoriatic arthritis and may have an overrepresentation of the more severe patterns of psoriatic arthritis, such as arthritis mutilans and distal arthritis. Axial involvement has generally been thought to occur mainly in patients who are HLA-B27 positive. However, this may be an oversimplification. AS with and without PsO has epidemiology similar to typical AS with a strong association with HLA-B27. Axial PsA (AxPsA) appears to be a distinct entity, and compared to AS; the prevalence is fairly equal among males and females, has an older age of onset, has a much lower association with HLA-B27 (20% vs. 80 to 90%), and is associated with HL-B*08 and HLA-B*38. Clinically, patients with AxPsA have different radiographic findings, more common C-spine involvement, improvement with TNFi and IL-17i, and possibly IL-23i.

The clinical features of psoriatic arthritis are described in terms of articular and extra-articular manifestations.

**Articular/Periarticular Manifestations of Psoriatic Arthritis**

- Peripheral arthritis presents in an oligoarticular vs. polyarticular pattern.

- Periarticular disease includes enthesitis (inflammation around the insertion of ligaments, tendons, or joint capsules), dactylitis (swelling of the entire digit, finger, or toe, “sausage digit”), and tenosynovitis.

- Axial disease involving sacroiliac joints, usually asymmetric, and spondylitis with discontinuous involvement with bulky non-marginal syndesmophytes.

**Extra-articular Manifestations of Psoriatic Arthritis**

- Psoriatic skin disease usually presents before the onset of arthritis but can occur simultaneously and even before the onset of joint disease. The severity of skin disease does not correlate well with the severity of the articular disease.

- Nail disease is characterized by onycholysis, pitting, and splinter hemorrhages. The severity of nail disease correlates with the severity of both skin and joint disease.

- Ocular disease in the form of uveitis, but unlike that associated with ankylosing spondylitis, it is often chronic, bilateral, and often involves posterior elements.