Studies have highlighted the importance of the prevention of infectious scleritis.Pseudomonas, both topical (gatifloxacin 0.3% and amikacin 2.5%) as well as systemic (gatifloxacin 400mg twice daily), maybe started to address a clinical suspicion of Pseudomonas.

If history is indicative of trauma with agricultural material, a topical and systemic antifungal should be used.

As broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage is generally used for the most common causative organisms, studies recommend tailoring the treatment to culture results. Scleritis due to Staphylococcus and Streptococcus may be treated with topical antibiotics such as fortified cefazolin (50 mg/mL) and topical fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin 0.3%/gatifloxacin 0.3%).

Tuberculosis therapy is recommended for patients with M.tuberculosis scleritis. However, those with other Mycobacterium do not respond well to antituberculosis medications and should be treated with topical amikacin (25 mg/mL) and a systemic medication such as doxycycline (200 mg) or clarithromycin (500 mg). It is also recommended to continue the medication four to six weeks after the resolution of symptoms. Topical natamycin 5% and systemic itraconazole (100 mg) or systemic ketoconazole (200 mg) twice daily are recommended for patients with a fungal scleritis. Nocardia shows good resolution with the use of systemic trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (160 mg/800 mg twice daily), but some studies have also shown sensitivity to topical amikacin.

Patients diagnosed with Toxoplasmosis gondii show good resolution with an oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (160 mg/800 mg twice daily) and azithromycin (500 mg); however, no topical application was reported.Nocardia and HSV.

Studies indicate that a variety of antimicrobial treatment regimens have been utilized (95% topical, 77% oral, 11% intravitreal). However, in only 18% of patients (n=56), was this sole treatment adequate, most who received this treatment required surgical intervention.

Cryotherapy, corneoscleral grafts, or removal of hardware (scleral buckle and glaucoma drainage device), in addition to antimicrobial medication, may be necessary.