Most of the pathologies encompassing the ulna stem from various fractures and fracture-dislocations. The radius and ulna form a ring structure of the forearm connected by ligaments and the interosseous membrane. Injury/fracture of one bone should increase clinical concern for injury of the other or an associated dislocation. These fractures can be differentiated based on the specific location involved as well as the configurations of the residual fragments. Often, a fracture in the ulna is concomitant with a radial fracture. Diagnosing a fracture of the ulna involves taking a proper history and physical first and foremost. With high clinical suspicion, the patient should have plain films taken of the area of the interest along with the associated joints above and below. The appropriate radiographic views must be also be included to develop a suitable treatment plan. The following are common fractures involving the ulna

- Nightstick fracture – a break in the middle shaft of the ulna excluding any other sites of fracture

- Monteggia fracture – a break in the proximal third of the ulna with a radial head dislocation

- Galeazzi Fracture - a break in the distal third of the radius with associated distal radioulnar joint dislocation

- Essex-Lopresti - a fracture of the radial head with dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint

- Hume fracture – a break in the olecranon along with a radial head anterior dislocation

- Distal ulna fracture – most commonly associated with a distal radial fracture