Pediatric blocks are generally placed under general anesthesia (GA), unlike in adults, where blocks are preferably placed when the patient is awake. This is because patient cooperation can be challenging with children, and communication and feedback of paresthesia after contact with a nerve or intraneural injection are sub-optimal at best. Identification of signs and symptoms of LA systemic toxicity is challenging even in awake children. On the other hand, the risk associated can be greater in terms of injury to structures, secondary to sudden movements. According to the data from the Pediatric Regional Anesthesia Network (PRAN), 93.7% of pediatric blocks are performed under GA.

USG use has significantly increased in the last decade to aid visualization of the nerve or plane for block placement, needle path, and the deposition of the LA. There has also been a decrease in the use of nerve stimulator-guided/landmark techniques for block placement. The anatomical variations in growing children make landmark-guided approaches less reliable, especially when the margin of safety is narrow. USG facilitates reduction in the doses of LA required to achieve adequate sensory and motor block required for the intra- and postoperative analgesia. With the increasing use of USG over the years, the incidence of neurological complications with peripheral nerve blocks in children has been decreasing. A good quality USG with appropriate presets for neurological (for nerve blocks) or musculoskeletal (for plane blocks) is recommended. The most useful transducer probes for pediatric regional anesthesia are linear arrays, which have a smaller footprint and a broad range of frequency (6 to 13 MHz) to image both superficial and deep structures. Curved array probes might be required for adolescents and obese patients for deep blocks.

Optimal positioning of the patient and ergonomic placement of the USG and the operator are necessary to facilitate successful block placement. A time-out should be performed to confirm the patient, confirm allergies, type of block, consent for the block, and confirm laterality. This is essential, especially when the patient is under GA. Sterile precautions include sterile skin preparation and draping, sterile ultrasound probe cover, hand washing, sterile gloves, and sterile equipment for the block. Chlorhexidine is the most commonly used agent for skin disinfection. Povidone-iodine can be used in patients with chlorhexidine allergy. Maximal doses of LA should be calculated beforehand, and the doses required should be drawn out, along with the appropriate additive medication. Blunt tip echogenic needles should be used for most peripheral nerve blocks. Sharp tip needles could facilitate the easy placement of plane blocks such as TAP blocks. Blunt, curved tip Tuohy needles of appropriate length are used for epidural placement. Tuohy, butterfly, or angiocath needles can be used for a caudal block. A small-bore (25G) 1 inch-long spinal needle can be used for infant spinal blocks.