Massive SBR can lead to short bowel syndrome (SBS), a condition characterized by malnutrition and malabsorption secondary to loss of functional small bowel and more rapid intestinal transit. In addition to weight loss and protein-calorie malnutrition, patients suffer from diarrhea, steatorrhea, electrolyte abnormalities, and deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins. This primarily occurs in patients that have suffered a very-long segment SBR or multiple sequential resections. SBS is highly morbid, with 1 in 3 patients perishing within the same hospitalization as a diagnosis. An additional 1 in 3 will die within the first year after diagnosis from malnutrition coupled with the inherent medical comorbidities attributable to treatment of the disease.

While the bowel’s absorptive capacity improves with healing, small bowel remnant length is the most important prognostic factor for patients with SBS. Most adults have between 600 and 800 cm of the small intestine, and small bowel absorptive function is generally not impaired until greater than half of the bowel is gone. In adults, patients with greater than 180 cm of remaining small bowel will likely have enough absorptive surface to avoid long-term parenteral nutrition. Likewise, an adult with less than 60 cm of the small bowel will likely be dependent on parenteral nutrition indefinitely. The overall clinical severity is also affected by other factors affecting the absorptive capacity of the small bowel. The presence of the ileocecal valve and terminal ileum is a strong, positive prognostic factor for weaning off parenteral nutrition. The underlying disease state necessitating resection may also impair the function of the remaining bowel. For example, improving the function of chronically inflamed or irradiated bowel may plateau quickly, leaving a patient with SBS despite a relatively long segment.

Along with necrotizing enterocolitis in premature infants, congenital abnormalities such as volvulus or malrotation pose the highest risk of acquiring SBS in neonatal populations. Children with greater than 60 cm of the bowel can usually be sustained with enteral nutrition alone. However, the prognosis for survival and adequate enteral nutrition is not accurately predicted based on overall bowel length due to variations in total bowel length based on gestation age. Overall survival for a child with SBS is around 70%. There tends to be marked increases in the risk of death and parenteral dependence as the percentage of predictive bowel length for gestational age approaches 10%, showing the amazing ability for survival even in the face of a near-total loss of small bowel.

The goals of SBS management start with preventing weight loss and micronutrient deficiency while treating the underlying illness care to prevent the loss of any additional small bowel. Patients are typically in a critically ill, catabolic state at the time of diagnosis. Parenteral nutrition, therefore, is a mainstay of early SBS management to limit malnutrition. Early return to enteral feeds once ileus has resolved is advised, even if a diagnosis of SBS is expected. Enteral feeding is thought to stimulate intestinal adaptation by both directly stimulating enterocytes and by inducing endocrine and paracrine effects signaling for hypertrophy of the remaining small bowel mucosa. Drugs such as loperamide, diphenoxylate and atropine, and opiates will slow gut function, increasing the potential absorptive time of enteral feeds. Reducing gastrointestinal secretion and controlling diarrhea are also important goals for maximizing absorption.

Surgical options to treat small bowel syndrome are used sparingly in the adult population and reserved for patients unable to sustain with enteral feeds. Children are more likely to be surgical candidates, but they are also more likely to thrive with enteral feeds. Regardless, numerous surgical options exist to either lengthen the small bowel or improve function.

Approximately 50% of patients with SBS will require additional intraabdominal surgery at some point after diagnosis for various intestinal problems. With any surgery on a patient with SBS, preserving the remaining small bowel should be the main concern of a surgeon.

More common in children, strictures can cause pseudo-obstruction, leading to bowel dilatation and bacterial overgrowth. These should be treated with stricturoplasty or resection of the redundant bowel. If a patient has dilated bowel (at least 3 to 4 cm), a STEP (serial transverse enteroplasty procedure).