To best assess the future care requirements of any laceration, the healthcare team must first review the patient's history as well as do a complete physical examination of the wound and nearby structures.

Pertinent history items include:

- Time of initial injury

- Location of laceration and extremity injuries have an increased risk of infection.

- Measurements of laceration, including length, width, and depth. As the depth and width of injuries increase, the risk of infection increases.

- Mechanisms of injury, such as crush, sharp object, and shear from fall. Crush injuries with localized tissue injury have an increased risk of infection and scarring.

- Age, because at the extremes of age, there is a risk of poor healing.

- Past medical history, specifically any history of diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure, obesity, malnutrition, or any use of immunosuppression drugs such as chemotherapy medications.

- Allergies, specifically to latex, anesthetics, or antibiotics.

- Immunization status, note the patient's tetanus vaccine history. Current guidelines for tetanus are:

- Adults with greater than or equal to three previous tetanus doses:

- Clean wounds: Tdap (tetanus, reduced diphtheria, pertussis) or Td (tetanus, reduced diphtheria) only if it has been over 10 years since their last vaccination.
- Dirty/complex wounds: Tdap or Td if more than 5 years since their last vaccination.


- Adults with under 3 previous tetanus doses:

- All wounds: Tdap or Td required; if dirty/complex, they will also require immunoglobulin treatment.


- Children:

- Under 7 years old: DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis) vaccine is the recommendation; if pertussis is contraindicated, give DT (diphtheria, tetanus) vaccine.
- 7 to 9 years old: Td vaccine recommended.
- Over 10 years old: Tdap is preferred in patients who have never received it and have no contraindications; if age or contraindications exist, use the Td vaccine.

Keys to a good physical exam of lacerations:

- Ensure appropriate lighting, gauze, and rinse materials are easily accessible before beginning the exam.

- Establish hemostasis: Hemostasis should be established to allow for visualization of underlying structures and foreign objects, utilizing direct pressure.

- Detailed neurologic exam: The clinician should perform a complete sensation exam at and below the level of injury before the use of any anesthesia to assess for any nerve injury. A quick method to evaluate for nerve injury is two-point discrimination using a standard paper clip, always comparing to the patient's noninjured side.

- Detailed musculoskeletal exam: Examine any joints involved in the laceration for injury, along with an active and passive range of motion exam above and below the joint to assess for tendon injury.

- Detailed Vascular exam: Assess capillary refill in the distal to the wound if on the extremities, and compare to noninjured side always. If accessible, Doppler ultrasound can be utilized to assess underlying vascular integrity, following from above the laceration to below.

- Foreign bodies, if observed, should be removed, as they can increase the patient's risk of infection or poor wound healing. If there is any concern about retained foreign bodies, imaging should be obtained.