**Open Thoracotomy Approach**

The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position with hyperextension of the chest cavity. Posterolateral thoracotomy is the classic approach. Rib-spreaders are placed for visualization. Single lung ventilation is typically employed. Dissection of the target anatomy is carried out, and resections are performed with appropriate staplers.

**Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Approach**

Typical segmentectomy [segment 6 bilaterally, lingulectomy (left S4 + S5), left upper segment (S1+2 + S3), left basilar segment (S8 + S9 + S10), right basilar segment (S7 + S8 + S9 + S10)] involves dissection in two planes. Standard VATS approach with the patient in lateral decubitus position with hyperextension of the thorax. Make a 3 to 4 cm incision at the 4 or 5 interspace anterior to the latissimus dorsi. Insert the thoracoscope and inspect the pleural cavity. More instruments can be inserted via this single incision, and adhesions should be divided.

For the segmentectomy, identify the pulmonary artery and follow the branching of the upper segments. This is divided by a vascular load stapler. Then the venous supply is identified. With the left upper segmentectomy is must be ensured that the venous drainage from the lingula is not compromised. Finally, the bronchus is identified and stapled off. Then a leak test should be performed. The plane of the parenchyma can then be dissected and the segment removed. Following lung reexpansion, a thoracostomy drain is typically left in place, and closure is performed.

Atypical segmentectomy [individual segmentectomies on the bilateral basilar segments] involve dissection in three planes and are more technically challenging. The appropriate surgical approach must be determined via preoperative imaging and accommodate individual surgeons' skills.

**Robotic-Assisted VATS Approach**

Positioning is similar to the VATS approach with port-placement determined by the targeted segment. Two common approaches differ on the number of ports, 3 versus 4.