Ischemic strokes present acutely, and establishing the time of symptom onset is critical. If the time of symptom onset is unknown, the time the patient was last known to be normal without new neurological symptoms is used. The time that is established is then utilized to decide whether giving intravenous thrombolytics is indicated or not.

A neurological exam should be performed for all patients suspected of stroke. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) is most commonly used to measure the severity of the stroke and has 11 categories and a score that ranges from 0 to 42. The 11 categories include the level of consciousness (LOC), which incorporates LOC questions evaluating best gaze, visual, facial palsy, motor arm, motor leg, limb ataxia, sensory, best language, dysarthria, and extinction and inattention. The stroke scale should be performed in the order listed. Each score is based on the patient’s action on the exam, and it is not a prediction of what the patient can do.

The vertebrobasilar arterial (VBA) system supplies blood to the brainstem, cerebellum, and peripheral labyrinths. Occlusion of the system, therefore, can result in either central or peripheral vertigo, depending on the specific artery affected. Occlusion can occur as a result of an embolism (e.g., cardioembolism or plaque from the vertebral arteries) and may result in an ischemic infarct. Central vertigo is more commonly associated with vertical nystagmus (rather than rotational) and is typically worse with attempted gaze fixation. Peripheral vertigo often improves with gaze fixation.  Additionally, dizziness associated with central vertigo is multidirectional and may change with altered gaze direction, while peripheral vertigo-associated nystagmus is unidirectional.