The etiology of gastric outlet obstruction can be broadly divided into two categories:

- Mechanical obstruction - from either benign or malignant causes

- Motility disorders

**Mechanical**

- **Benign**
- Peptic ulcer disease
- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use
- Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) related inflammation
- Polyps
- Ingestion of corrosive substances
- Gastric tuberculosis
- Anastomotic strictures
- Crohn disease
- Gastric bezoars
- Gastric volvulus
- Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
- Bouveret syndrome (impaction of gall stones in the pylorus or proximal duodenum)
- Annular pancreas
- Pancreatitis - Acute and chronic
- The above causes typically involve the distal stomach and duodenum. However, the distal small bowel can also be affected.

- 
**Malignant**

Mechanical GOO can occur with cancers in the pylorobulbar area, the antropyloric zone, and the descending duodenum. Distal gastric cancer is the most common malignancy, accounting for up to 35% of cases of GOO. The pancreatic adenocarcinoma with duodenal or gastric extension accounts for 15% to 25% of cases. Less common causes are neoplasms of the proximal duodenum and ampulla, gastric lymphoma, metastatic or primary duodenal malignancy, gastric carcinoid, and locally advanced gallbladder carcinoma or cholangiocarcinoma.

**Motility Disorders**

Gastroparesis is the most common motility disorder that causes GOO. In many cases of gastroparesis, the underlying cause remains elusive. Among the recognized cases, diabetes mellitus remains the leading cause. Some viral illnesses (e.g., Norwalk) and medications (opiates, anticholinergics) may lead to gastroparesis. Damage to the vagus nerve intraoperatively (fundoplication, bariatric procedures) can result in gastroparesis. Some solid organ and hematologic cancers can have complications through a paraneoplastic or infiltrative process (e.g., amyloidosis, carcinomatosis), which can induce gastroparesis and small bowel dysmotility.