Infections could be transmitted in the dental operatory through several routes: (1) direct contact with blood, oral fluids, or other infected materials, (2) indirect contact with contaminated objects, such as instruments, environmental surfaces, or equipment, (3) contact of conjunctival, nasal, or oral mucosa with droplets, such as spatter, containing microorganisms from an infected person and propelled by coughing, sneezing, or talking, or (4) inhalation of airborne microorganisms that can remain suspended in the air for long periods.

A study was undertaken by G Lynn Powell et al., which established a direct correlation between dental facilities and the identification of any organisms present. Sixty-seven percent of the impressions, dentures, crowns, and wax occlusion rims sampled showed the presence of microorganisms of varying pathogenicity. The identification of bacteria showed the presence of such organisms as Enterobacter cloacae, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella oxytoca plus many others.

It is widely recognized that used dental pumice is a major reservoir for bacterial contaminants in the prosthodontic laboratory. Miller et al., also demonstrated that during pumicing procedures, bacteria in pumice might be aerosolized and disseminated throughout the dental suite and transmitted to patients and personnel. Although it has been reported that most bacteria isolated from contaminated pumice have been native to the oral environment, studies by Wakefield and Williams et al., indicated that many of the contaminant microorganisms recovered from used pumice or from prostheses finished with used pumice were nonoral bacteria. Because of their various degrees of pathogenic potential, these organisms may be hazardous to dentists, patients, staff, and prosthodontic laboratory personnel. In a study by Henry N. Williams, the quantitation and identification of bacterial colony types recovered from pumice collected from four dental laboratories indicated that the predominant bacteria recovered were nonoral microorganisms, including members of the genera Bacillus, Acinetobacter, Micrococcus, Pseudomonas, Moraxella, and Alcaligenes. A study by Hiroshi E Gusa et al. reported the persistent presence of microorganisms on patient-derived dental impressions and gypsum casts and highlighted important human pathogens such as Candida, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.