The risk of hyperbaric oxygen therapy includes hypoglycemia in diabetic patients, especially if taking insulin and/or hypoglycemic agents, barotrauma to the ears, pneumothorax, and oxygen toxicity seizures and rarely pulmonary oxygen toxicity. Cancer patients who have a history of having had bleomycin chemotherapy are at increased risk of pulmonary fibrosis even though the chemotherapy was administered remotely from receiving the hyperbaric oxygen therapy. This has been a relative contraindication, but some physicians will treat the patient if the benefit outweighs the risk.

Because of the hyperbaric environment of the chamber with oxygen, there is always the risk of fire and care and following strict protocols to prevent devices that can initiate fires to be kept out of the chamber.  It is important to have a safety officer and staff trained in the prevention of and dealing with fire in any hyperbaric oxygen facility.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is the only treatment that is available to treat the underlying lack of normal microvasculature characteristic of soft tissue radionecrosis. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy supports capillary budding by increasing the vascular epidermal growth factor (VEGF) and supports more normal fibroblast activity which requires adequate oxygenation of the tissue. The synthesis of collagen which is essential for tissue regeneration is oxygen dependent and energy produced by mitochondria via oxidative phosphorylation forming ATP.  Hyperbaric oxygen also has effects on the improved function of neutrophils ability to destroy bacteria and makes the neutrophils less adherent to endothelial cells on the post venule side of the circulation, which is believed to help reduce tissue edema. Also, there is arterial vasoconstriction during the treatment which may, to a lesser degree, help reduce edema.