A child's caregiver generally prompts the exploration of potential SAD because the child is "inseparable," causing interference with a major life activity of either the caregiver or the child. Investigating the impact of the child's behavior on the major life activity (ie, school or home life) can be used to obtain information on where symptoms most often occur and their severity. Academic performance is the life activity most frequently impacted by childhood SAD. If SAD is not the primary concern of the caregiver, it is still essential to investigate the child's academic performance.

Obtaining a developmental and social history can clarify the diagnostic picture by providing context for the patient's risk factors for SAD. Inquiry into the child's living situation and relationship with his caregiver(s) can provide perspective if the patient experienced caregiver instability in early life and ultimately provide clues for the attachment style the child has developed with his current caregiver(s).

Obtaining a family psychiatric history may reveal a parent or caregiver with an anxiety disorder, which poses genetic loading and may be a source of behavioral modeling for the child to learn anxious behaviors. Developmental history can reveal whether or not the patient is currently at a developmentally appropriate stage for their age. If the patient is developmentally delayed, an in-utero and birth history should be obtained when possible. The patient's medical history can help differentiate between real physical pain and somatization from severe anxiety. Finally, when appropriate, interviewing the child alone may reveal first-hand the symptoms the child experiences.

When interviewing an adult with potential SAD, understanding who the adult patient has difficulty separating from is a good starting point. If the patient has difficulty separating from a romantic partner, obtaining a history of the patient's dating history can be revealing.

The mental status examination is completed in psychiatric evaluations and has a variable presentation in SAD, but the following areas should be carefully considered:

- Behavior: How does the patient's behavior change when united and separated from their caregiver? Does the patient have anxious behaviors, such as constant movement, shaking, and small tremors? Are there clinging behaviors, such as requiring physical contact with the caregiver?

- Speech: Is the patient's tone frightened when speaking about being separated from the caregiver? Does the patient ask for permission from the caregiver to speak?

- Affect: Is the patient always anxious or relieved when physically close to the caregiver?

- Thought content: Is catastrophization present (ie, thoughts of dying or the caretaker passing if separation is forced)?

- Impulse control: Impulse control is expected to be poor for individuals with SAD.

- Insight: Insight for children is likely to be poor, but adults with SAD may be able to understand that their behaviors are maladaptive, and this should be assessed individually.

The transient re-appearance of separation anxiety when children first attend school is crucial in predicting the normal remission of separation anxiety versus the development of SAD.

Due to the severity of separation anxiety, children may fall behind in coursework or have significant absence that impairs their ability to progress appropriately in school. Additionally, they may become isolated from school peers, and conflict may develop in the family if parents become frustrated by their child's condition.

Separation anxiety can additionally occur in the home setting. Common manifestations at home include a child being afraid to be in a room alone, refusing to sleep alone, and shadowing or clinging to the caregiver's side. When the child is separated from the caregiver, similar severe anxiety can occur, including crying and screaming. These symptoms can become a significant burden for the caregiver, who may feel suffocated by their child's extreme demands for attention and decreased privacy.

Another common SAD symptom is the pervasive worry that harm will come to the caregiver if separated, leading to severe distress and nightmares. Similarly, the child may worry about becoming lost, kidnapped, or having an accident if separated from their caregiver.