**Diagnosis of Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

Bilirubin levels can be assessed using a transcutaneous measurement device or blood samples for total serum bilirubin. Transcutaneous estimation of bilirubin reduces the frequency of blood tests, but its utility is limited in infants with dark skin and following phototherapy use.

Recommended workup for identifying a hemolytic disease as the cause of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia include maternal/neonatal blood type, Coombs test, complete blood cell (CBC), reticulocyte count, blood smear, and G6PD. Serum albumin should always be checked, especially if TSB level approaches near the exchange transfusion levels, as it is considered a surrogate marker for free bilirubin. Free bilirubin is the fraction responsible for bilirubin-induced toxicity.

Radiographic imaging is usually not required for most cases of UCH. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings have high sensitivity for bilirubin encephalopathy, with posteromedial borders of the globus pallidus being the most sensitive brain region for detecting signal changes. Infants with bilirubin encephalopathy demonstrate hyperintense signals on T1-weighted sequences in the acute stage that eventually becomes hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences as the disease evolves. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy(MRS) shows increased levels of glutamate and decreased levels of  N-acetyl-aspartate and choline.

**Diagnosis of Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

In patients with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, the serum aminotransferases should be ordered for evidence of hepatocellular injury, alkaline phosphatase, and GGT levels for evidence of obstruction in biliary channels,  prothrombin time/INR, and serum albumin to evaluate for hepatic synthetic function. Additional tests like TORCH titers, urine cultures, viral cultures, serologic titers, Newborn screening results, specific tests for inborn errors of metabolism,  alpha-1 antitrypsin phenotype, and specific genetics tests may be needed depending on the scenario.

Radiology is often necessary as part of the workup of neonatal cholestasis. Hepatic ultrasonography may help identify sludging in the biliary tree, gallstones, inspissated bile, and choledochal cysts. Triangular cord sign seen on hepatic ultrasound has high sensitivity and almost 100% specificity for biliary atresia.