Various healthcare providers involved in the management of cervical cancer include primary physicians, gynecologists, obstetricians, radiologists, oncologists, and nurses. Effective management of any disease requires excellent interpersonal communication and collaboration between team members for providing improved patient-centered care. There is also a potential role of Emergency room doctors in cervical cancer screening. A study found a high prevalence of cervical dysplasia amongst women screened with pap smears in the urban ED.

- Barriers of lack of knowledge and awareness

- Psychological barriers (embarrassment, shyness, pain while undergoing the screening procedures)

- Structural barriers ( time-consuming procedure, expensive procedure, lack of transportation, settings at the health center such as infrastructure, cleanliness, lack of trained staff, malfunctioned equipment, insufficient medical advice from the health care provider were a few barriers mentioned in a study)

- Sociocultural and religious boundaries

Managing and eradication these barriers do not only require an active team of health care providers, but the government had a significant role to play in providing resources and funds. Many of these barriers mentioned above are reported from LMICs, where lack of resources is not uncommon. Education regarding cervical cancer screening can be one of the most effective tools, especially in LMICs, where there are various false notions about screening and cervical cancer. Amongst the LMICs, where the patient load is exhaustive, clinicians are often unable to educate every patient thoroughly. In such settings, every member of the health care system must be it the primary provider, the radiologist, or the nurse take the responsibility of educating and explaining the patient regarding the disease and management. Effective communication between a patient and healthcare provider alone can alone be beneficial in removing the taboo and stigma that exists about cervical cancer screening.

- Most importantly, screening and management guidelines exist as a result of various conferences and exhaustive research (clinical trials, meta-analysis, systematic reviews) where health care providers come and work together towards common goals and share their ideas. Revision of guidelines is critical to incorporate better, practical, and more feasible methods. In situations where enough data isn't available, expert opinion from a specialist may be taken to help better guide management. All this is possible with effective communication and coordination of care amongst different health care providers.