HbA1c is a product of non-enzymatic glycation of hemoglobin. Red blood cells have a lifespan of approximately 90 to 120 days, hence HbA1c indicates the mean blood glucose concentration over the lifespan of the RBC. HbA1c is influenced by conditions affecting RBC survival. Conditions causing low RBC turnover like untreated iron, vitamin B12, or folic acid deficiency anemias, will result in falsely high HbA1c values. On the other hand, conditions causing high RBC turnover like hemolytic anemia, in patients treated for iron, vitamin B12, or folate deficiencies, as well as in patients treated with erythropoietin (like in chronic kidney disease), there will be falsely low HbA1c values.

Fructosamine (1-amino-1-deoxy fructose), is a stable ketoamine, formed by the reaction between glucose and the amino group of protein (predominantly albumin, but also including globulins and lipoprotein). The attachment of the aldehyde group of the carbohydrate with the N terminal amino acid of the protein forms the reversible Schiff base product, the aldimine intermediate. The Schiff base product may be converted back to glucose and protein, or undergo the Amadori rearrangement to form stable fructosamine. This process is known as non-enzymatic glycation and is also referred to as the Maillard reaction. The Maillard reaction causes the browning phenomenon that occurs in milk and other food products when heated. Glycated albumin refers to the formation of ketoamine specifically involving the major circulating protein albumin (3.5 g/dl to 5 g/dl). Glycated albumin is an example of a fructosamine (FA). Because albumin is the most abundant of the serum proteins, fructosamine is predominantly a measure of glycated albumin. The formation of fructosamine and glycated albumin are post-translational modifications that occur to proteins.

Non-immunoglobulin serum proteins have a much lower half-life, approximately 14-21 days.