When a patient presents with generalized hypertrichosis, the first step in evaluation is to determine whether it is a congenital or acquired problem. This can generally be determined by patient history.

If the hypertrichosis appears to be of congenital origin, the next step is to determine whether fine, lightly colored lanugo hairs predominate (suggesting a diagnosis of congenital hypertrichosis lanuginosa), or if pigmented/terminal hairs predominate. If there is a predominance of pigmented/terminal hairs, the patient should be evaluated for a family history of hypertrichosis, maternal drug or alcohol intake, and orofacial, skeletal, ocular, or neurologic abnormalities that may suggest a rare genetic syndrome such as X-linked hypertrichosis, congenital generalized hypertrichosis with or without gingival dysplasia, hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia, Zimmerman-Laband syndrome, Coffin-Siris syndrome, Schinzel-Giedion midface retraction syndrome, Gorlin-Chaudry Moss syndrome, adducted thumbs syndrome, Barbar-Say syndrome, Amaurosis congenita, or CAHMR (cataracts, hypertrichosis, and mental retardation) syndromes.

If the hypertrichosis appears to be acquired, once again the next step is to determine whether terminal hairs or lanugo hairs predominate. If terminal hairs predominate in the setting of the slow, progressive development of hypertrichosis, the patient should be screened for features suggestive of prepubertal hypertrichosis (Mediterranean or South Asian descent, familial hairiness, inverted tree pattern on the back). The patient should also be screened for symptoms of androgen excess such as the early development of axillary/pubic hair, virilization, acne, and increased androgen levels. These may suggest a diagnosis of hirsutism, as opposed to hypertrichosis. If terminal hairs predominate in the setting of rapid growth, a thorough evaluation of the patient’s drug intake, thyroid hormone levels, and nutritional status should take place. If a patient presents with the sudden appearance of acquired lanugo hairs, they should be screened for malignancy.