Given the potential for life-threatening complications associated with anaplasmosis, therapy must be instituted as soon as possible if a patient presents with signs and symptoms compatible with infection and in the right epidemiologic setting. Therapy for presumptive diagnosis should be initiated while waiting for laboratory confirmation.

Laboratory testing of peripheral blood usually shows leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Transaminases can be elevated in up to 70% of the cases. In patients who develop severe disease, laboratory abnormalities correlate with organ damage. Elevated creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine phosphokinase, and amylase can be seen with or without electrolyte imbalances and metabolic acidosis. Significant hypotension, disseminated intravascular coagulation, hepatic, renal failure, adrenal insufficiency and myocardial dysfunction can be observed. For those patients with central nervous system manifestations, CSF analysis shows lymphocytic pleocytosis and moderate protein elevation.

Diagnosis of human granulocytic anaplasmosis can be confirmed using several methods. These include serologic testing, identification of characteristic morulae in peripheral blood, detection of DNA by PCR, bacterial detection on the tissue by immunohistochemistry, or isolation by culture. Detection of DNA by PCR has a sensitivity of 67% to 90% and specificity of 60% to 85% and offers the advantage of rapid turn around time. A 4-fold increase in serologic titers is considered positive.

Immunohistochemical staining techniques can be used on bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, liver, and lung tissue specimens.