Niacin is available in two chemical forms. As nicotinic acid only, used for hyperlipoproteinemia or peripheral vascular disease. Another form is both nicotinic acid and nicotinamide (niacinamide), used for nutritional supplementation or pellagra.

- Oral extended-release tablets come in 250 mg, 500 mg, 750 mg, 1000 mg, and 3000 mg strengths. Dosing of 1 to 3 grams/day was found to reduce serum LDL cholesterol and increase serum HDL cholesterol.

- Immediate-release tablets are available in formulation ranging from 50 mg to 500 mg. Initial dosing should be as low as possible to decrease adverse effect reactions and slowly titrated, preferably no more than 500 mg over four weeks to the patient’s response and tolerance.

- Reverses in insulin resistance induced by lipid overload and rapid reduction of plasma FFA were observed with acute administration of niacin.

- At the time of niacin administration, patients should avoid alcohol as it may increase the risk of pruritus and flushing. In addition, niacin therapy is not recommended in patients who chronically misuse alcohol due to an increased risk of hepatotoxicity.

**Recommended Dosage for****Pellagra**

**Adults**

- Oral dosage (nicotinic acid or nicotinamide/niacinamide): Up to 500 mg/day orally, depending on the severity of niacin deficiency.

- Intravenous or Intramuscular Dosage: 50 to 100 mg intramuscular five times daily, or 25 to 100 mg given by slow intravenous infusion twice daily, depending on the severity of niacin deficiency. Maximum: 500 mg/daily.

**Children**

- Dosing is up to 300 mg/day given by slow intravenous infusion, depending on the severity of niacin deficiency.

**Recommended Dosage for Hypercholesterolemia, Mixed Dyslipidemia or H****ypertriglyceridemia, Type IV or V**

- Normal dosing is 1500 to 3000 mg/day orally, divided two or three times daily.

- Starting dose: 250 mg orally at bedtime, with a gradual increase of 250 mg/day every 4 to 7 days up to 2000 mg/day.

- After two months, the dosage may be increased to 250 to 500 mg/day every 2 to 4 weeks, with a maximum of 6000 mg/day.

- Note: 325 mg aspirin 30 minutes before a dose may reduce flushing; The medication should be given without food.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

- Niacin is FDA Pregnancy Category C. When used at high doses to treat conditions such as dyslipidemia, niacin may cause harm to an unborn fetus.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

- Harm may result in a nursing baby as niacin can pass into breast milk; therefore, nursing mothers should avoid the drug.