Central pain is often referred to as neuropathic pain, which has localized to the central nervous system.

As multiple systemic syndromes overlap, sensory amplification and pain increase. An estimated 2 to 4% of the population suffers from fibromyalgia, 1% from chronic fatigue, and 4% from somatoform disorders. In addition, there is considerable overlap between regional pain syndromes and psychiatric disorders.

Central pain syndrome is neuropathic pain in the central nervous system. It can occur in patients following a stroke or with multiple sclerosis. It is seen in various chronic rheumatological and musculoskeletal disorders as well. When any acute pain becomes chronic, it can undergo centralization, putting patients at risk for developing central pain syndrome.

Furthermore, though patients with chronic pain syndrome consider their pain to be peripheral, in reality, it is mostly centralized. The neural signal has become amplified, leading to hyperalgesia and allodynia. When a patient suffers from a peripheral pain state with nociceptive pain, such as rheumatoid arthritis, this pain becomes centralized with time. The patient's pain is then considered to be in a mixed state.

In reality, centralized pain is not mutually exclusive to other types of pain. There is an overlap between pain states. Any central pain state can have a component of peripheral pain, such as peripheral neuropathy. Moreover, there is a significant family predisposition for centralized pain syndrome.

There is an estimated 50% environmental component to developing centralized pain and a 50% genetic component. First-degree relatives are at eight times more risk of developing widespread pain than the average population. However, there is no significant difference based on the sex of the patient or family member. The genetic association is more prominent in families with a history of mood disorders.