Treatment of severe hyponatremia, in clinically unstable patients, includes hypertonic saline (3%) infusion in an ICU setting with frequent monitoring of sodium levels. In hemodynamically stable patients who don't require an ICU level of care, water deprivation is the next step once hypotonic polyuria is established. Care must be taken and one has to be aware of the fact that patients with underlying diabetes insipidus can get dehydrated if they are water restricted. Urine osmolality before and after deprivation is needed for evaluation.

Standardized proven treatment for primary polydipsia has not been established. Ideally, water restriction is the treatment, but compliance is of great concern with this strategy, given the compulsive water drinking behavior in psychogenic polydipsia. Better results by educating health-conscious people who have polydipsic behavior can be obtained, by consciously decreasing water intake. There has been a systematic review in 2006 done from the Cochrane database that found two clinical trials worthy of analysis. This review looked at randomized trials that included patients with psychiatric illness and psychogenic polydipsia, evaluated drug treatments, and looked at meaningful outcomes.

One trial used demeclocycline, and the other used naloxone. As per the systematic review, the results were not promising to inculcate into clinical practice. Studies that looked at various drug classes were included. Antidepressants, antipsychotics, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, mood stabilizers, angiotensin receptor blockers, tetracyclines, opiate antagonists, alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers and placebo were included. Behavioral treatments showed variable results.

Overall there is no proven pharmacological treatment or a behavioral method for the treatment of primary polydipsia. The evidence in support of either is low. Treatment must be provided on a case by case basis, depending on the patient, at the provider's discretion.