As mentioned earlier, different Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease forms extend over a clinical spectrum of varying severity. However, there are general clinical features that are found in all forms, including nystagmus, delayed milestones, and spasticity. According to a case series study conducted in Colombia on PMD male patients aged six months to 16 years, 57% had horizontal nystagmus, and 43% had rotatory nystagmus. Moreover, 71.4% had cerebellar signs, and 85.7% were spastic.

Seitelberger classified the PMD forms at the severe end of the spectrum into three types with type I or the connatal form being the most severe and type III or the classic form being relatively the mildest. Type II, or the transitional type, falls in between the others.

Patients with classic PMD, who present with the disease at around 1 year of age, become eventually spastic but retain the ability to ambulate partially and their cognition, though impaired, is preserved to a certain degree with the production of speech. On the other hand, connatal patients present with the disease as soon as they are born, cannot ambulate or speak, and their cognition is significantly impaired. They also typically present with laryngeal stridor and pharyngeal weakness, which some of them succumb to early in life.

Coming to the milder end of the spectrum of PMD, spastic paraplegia type 2 (SPG2) presents later than types I, II, and III PMD described above. It is classified into complicated and uncomplicated or pure. Complicated SPG2 presents with autonomic disturbances, including bladder spasticity, ataxia, spastic paraparesis, nystagmus, and some degree of cognitive impairment. It is associated with HEMS (hypomyelination of early myelinating structures). Uncomplicated SPG2, on the other hand, presents with bladder spasticity and spastic paraparesis. Both types of SPG2 patients have a normal life expectancy.

PLP1 null syndrome presents with the unique feature of peripheral neuropathy that distinguishes it from the rest of the PMD disorders. Patients have a normal life expectancy and tend to have mild spastic paraplegia and cognitive impairment. As time progresses, their motor functions continue to decline.