Uremic encephalopathy occurs in patients with acute or chronic renal failure once the estimated GFR (eGFR) declines and stays below 15 mL/min. It is essential to recognize the signs and symptoms early, as untreated uremic encephalopathy can progress to coma, while dialysis quickly reverses symptoms. Early symptoms of uremic encephalopathy include nausea, anorexia, restlessness, drowsiness, and slowing of concentration and cognitive functions. As uremic encephalopathy progresses, patients typically become more disoriented and confused and may exhibit bizarre behavior and emotional instability. Eventually, severe uremic encephalopathy will result in a stupor and coma. Physical examination may reveal altered mental status, signs of cranial nerve involvement (e.g., nystagmus), or papilledema. Patients may additionally display hyperreflexia, clonus or asterixis, and eventually, coma.

A patient with uremic encephalopathy should improve clinically following the initiation of dialysis. However, electroencephalographic (EEG) findings may not instantly enhance, such as slowing or losing alpha frequency waves, confusing signals, and slow background activity with intermittent bursts of theta and delta waves. Improvement may take several months, and one may never return entirely to normal. Treating uremic encephalopathy involves addressing many of the same parameters when treating any patient with ESRD, for example, correcting associated anemia, regulating calcium or phosphate imbalances, and monitoring the adequacy of dialysis.