Muscarinic receptors are predominately present on glandular cells, smooth muscle cells, and cardiac muscle cells. The parasympathetic nervous system releases ACh, which binds to and activates muscarinic receptors. Muscarinic receptor antagonists function by competitively blocking the binding of ACh to muscarinic receptors resulting in an anticholinergic response.

Muscarinic receptor antagonists function by acting as competitive inhibitors on the numerous muscarinic receptors. There are five different muscarinic receptors: M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5. The M1, M4, and M5 receptors are in the central nervous system (CNS), and the action of these agents on these receptors can manifest as cognitive impairment. The M2 receptors are found in cardiac tissue and are predominately in the atrioventricular (AV) and sinoatrial (SA) nodal cells, resulting in decreased heart rate and reduced atrial contractility. Therefore, muscarinic receptor antagonist binding to M2 receptors leads to an increase in heart rate. M3 receptors are on the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract, urinary tract, airway, and blood vessels. Muscarinic receptor antagonist binding to M3 receptors reduces intestinal peristalsis and bladder contraction, reduces salivary and gastric secretions, reduces bronchial secretions, and increases bronchodilation.

Some of these effects can be adverse events (see below), and in some cases, they are used to promote a therapeutic outcome, such as antisialagogue medications. Therefore, it is incumbent on the prescriber to understand the full spectrum of antimuscarinic effects and how they will fit into the patient's clinical picture.