The clinical disease has 2 stages. These are characterized by an early/first hemolymphatic stage and late /second meningoencephalitis stage with an invasion of the central nervous system (CNS).

The earliest manifestation of the disease is a cutaneous chancre at the site of inoculation. This however only occurs rarely in patients with T. brucei gambiense and infrequently (19%) with those infected by T. brucei rhodesiense. Systemic symptoms develop after that with intermittent fever, headache, pruritus, and lymphadenopathy.

Other organ systems can be involved. Similar to the trypanosome disease of T. cruzi the heart may be affected, albeit less frequently, with African trypanosomiasis. T. brucei gambiense presents as a prolonged QTc, repolarization abnormalities, or low voltage. These are usually not of clinical significance. T. brucei rhodesiense may cause severe pericarditis or myopericarditis.

The thyroid and adrenal cortex may be involved with either hyperfunction or hypofunction. Both are more pronounced with infections caused by T. brucei rhodesiense.

Notably, the disease in non-native individuals (i.e., travelers or tourists) may be different with a cutaneous chancre and the trypanosomal rash much more frequently observed. Additionally, internal involvement is much more pronounced as well.

The clinical endpoint from either subgroup of T. brucei results in coma and death if untreated. Death occurs more rapidly with infections from T. brucei rhodesiense often occurring within weeks to months, and later with T. brucei gambiense at an average time of 3 years from inoculation.

Chagas disease has acute, indeterminate, and chronic stages. Acutely infected patients often are asymptomatic or have a mild non-specific febrile illness. Symptoms may include fever, chills, gastrointestinal manifestations, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or a mixture of cutaneous manifestations. A chagoma is an indurated, erythematous, papule or nodule that occurs at the site of inoculation. This may occur weeks after initial infection. Romana’s sign is classically associated with acute Chagas disease and is characterized by eyelid and periocular edema secondary to parasite deposition into the conjunctiva. Schizotrypanides is a term used to describe a diffuse morbilliform eruption during acute infection and is seen in a minority of infected patients.

The indeterminate stage of Chagas disease reflects a host immune response and a decrease in parasite burden. This occurs over months after infection. At this time antibodies to T. cruzi are present and clinical disease is absent.

The most devastating stage of the disease is the chronic stage. Up to a third of patients with Chagas disease progress to this stage which exhibits cardiac conduction abnormalities, dilated congestive heart failure, or thromboembolic events. Heart failure often shows aneurysmal dilation of the left ventricle, and the most common conduction defect is a right bundle branch block with or without an anterior fascicular block. Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement occurs in a minority of infected patients, however, of those, the most common manifestation is megaesophagus from damage to autonomic ganglia with subsequent achalasia, dysphagia, weight loss, or recurrent aspiration. Finally, patients with the disease who become immunocompromised may experience reactivation. This may present as recurrence of fever and cutaneous erythematous nodules or plaques along with meningoencephalitis.