Excised ducts specimen from patients with MDE reveal dilated lactiferous ducts with accumulated secretions, and potentially blood, in the intraductal space. The duct wall shows reduced elastin and inflammatory infiltrates with macrophages and plasma cells around the duct. Granulation tissue may fill the duct lumen. There is a lack of epithelial hyperplasia or apocrine metaplasia, and this is an important feature that distinguishes MDE from periductal mastitis (Zuska disease). In severe cases of mammary duct ectasia, duct obstruction is caused by fibrosis and not by epithelial hyperplasia.  The presence of intraepithelial foamy histiocytes has to be carefully distinguished from Paget’s spread of ductal carcinoma, cytokeratin, and CD68 immunohistochemistry may be required to confirm this. Microabscesses are often seen in severely complicated cases around dilated ducts. Calcifications are also seen in severe cases, and the presence of these calcifications on mammograms can mimic underlying malignancy, prompting biopsy for histopathological confirmation.

Transmission electron microscopic (TEM) studies of samples from patients with MDE have revealed some specific ultra-structural changes, such as denudation of the epithelial cells with focal loss of microvilli, which impairs duct clearance of the secretions. Widening of the interepithelial junctions with focal disruption of the T bars, as well as periductal collagenization without inflammation, may also be present; this helps to differentiate MDE from PDM, where inflammation is always present.