The Gleason grade is primarily based on the architecture or arrangement of the malignant cells within the tumor as well as other factors such as the degree of differentiation. Since the prostate is a gland, the less glandular the microscopic appearance, the higher the Gleason grade, ranging from 1 to a maximum of 5. A Gleason grade of 1 would appear almost normal while a Gleason grade of 5 would not show any glandular features at all; just sheets of abnormal cells.

The Gleason Score is always a sum of two numbers. These two numbers represent the Gleason grade of the predominant pattern added to the grade of the next most common pattern. If only one Gleason grade is present, then this is doubled. It is usually written as an equation such as 3+4=7. In this example, the predominant grade is pattern 3, the secondary grade would be pattern 4, and the Gleason Score or sum would be 7. If the predominant pattern is grade 4, it would be written as 4+3=7 and would represent a higher overall Gleason Score and a more aggressive grade of malignancy even though the total or would still be the same at 7. If there were a third pattern of higher grade, this number would replace the secondary grade pattern number. A Gleason Score of less than 6 usually indicates indolent cancer that is less likely to be clinically significant. Scores of 8 or greater are generally associated with poorly differentiated tumors with a worse prognosis.

In 2014, the International Society of Urological Pathology consensus conference recommended some changes to the Gleason Scoring System. They recommended adding the percentage of Gleason pattern 4 as well as 5 new grades of prostate cancer based on the Gleason Score. These grades would include all Gleason Scores of 6 or less in Grade I, Gleason 3+4=7 in Grade II, Gleason 4+3=7 in Grade III, Gleason 4+4=8 in Grade IV, and all Gleason 9 and 10 in Grade V.

However, despite these advances and guidelines, there remains a considerable difference in Gleason grading, even between experienced pathologists.

Additional histological risk factors that are recognized as being independent predictors of prostate cancer aggressiveness but are not currently incorporated into the Gleason scoring system include:

- Presence of any Gleason Grade 5 tissue, even very minor

- Percentage of Gleason Grade 4 in the specimen

- Invasive Gleason Grade 4 cribriform pattern and/or intraductal carcinoma

Another issue involves the development of subpatterns of Gleason Grade 4. In many cases, it can be challenging to differentiate ill-formed and/or fused glands from the less aggressive Grade 3 pattern. This differentiation can be critical in determining which patients might be eligible for active surveillance or deferred therapy from those who should proceed directly with definitive, curative treatment.

Several prognostic nomograms are available that utilize the PSA level, Gleason Score, and clinical staging to assist in patient counseling by helping better classify risk aggressiveness, particularly in borderline cases. These include the Partin tables from Johns Hopkins University, the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) nomograms, and the Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment (CAPRA) score from the University of California at San Francisco.

Immunohistochemistry is another promising area of research that could suggest which Gleason grade 3 patients are more likely to progress or upgrade to more aggressive histology, which could be very helpful clinically in patients who are potential candidates for active surveillance. Early indications are that overexpression of Ki67 could indicate a higher risk of Gleason grade progression.

Substantial rates of pathological misclassification and unexpected upgrading at surgery suggest the need for improved use and development of prostatic biomarker technology as for many men PSA levels and Gleason scores alone are insufficient.

- ConfirmMDx evaluates the methylation status of three genes. It is intended to identify the likelihood of prostate cancer on a repeat biopsy when the original biopsy is negative. It is useful in men at risk for cancer who had an initial negative biopsy.

- Prolaris utilizes the RNA expression levels of 31 genes. It provides a 10-year risk of biochemical recurrence and cancer-specific mortality. It is intended to help decide on active surveillance vs definitive therapy in borderline cases of localized disease. It can also be used prognostically after radical prostatectomy.

- Decipher uses the RNA expression levels of 22 genes. It gives a 5-year risk of metastasis, a 10-year risk of prostate cancer-specific mortality, and the likelihood of finding high-grade cancer on radical prostatectomy. It is useful in men with localized prostate cancer. Like Prolaris, it can be used as a prognostic aid after radical prostatectomy surgery, particularly for those with clinical high-risk findings at surgery or with higher risk histology.

- OncotypeDx measures the RNA expression level of 12 genes. It provides an estimate of the likelihood of finding only organ-confined disease after radical prostatectomy. It is intended for men with very low and low risk localized prostate cancer.

- ProMark looks at the quantitative levels of eight specific protein markers. It is typically used to predict the likelihood of finding Gleason Grade Group III or higher histology after radical prostatectomy. It also predicts finding disease that is not organ-confined. It is most useful in men with Gleason Grade Group I or II on initial biopsy.

New genes related to prostate cancer are constantly being identified. A recent study identified 250 genes that had different expressions between normal and cancerous prostate cells. Of these, 161 had not previously been associated with prostate cancer, 39 demonstrated anti-tumoral activity, and 22 genes were newly identified as contributing to tumor growth, metastatic potential, and proliferation.