Due to the extensive nature of the autonomic nervous system, it can be affected by a wide range of conditions. Some of these include

- Inherited

- Amyloidosis
- Fabry disease
- Hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy
- Porphyrias

- Acquired

- 
              
- Diabetes mellitus
              
              
- Uremic neuropathy/chronic liver diseases
              
              
- Vitamin B12 deficiency
              
              
- Toxin/drug-induced: alcohol, amiodarone, chemotherapy
              
              
- Infections: Botulism, Chagas disease, HIV, leprosy, Lyme disease, tetanus
              
              
- Autoimmune: Guillain-Barre, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren, systemic lupus erythematosus
              
              
- Neurological: multiple system atrophy/Shy-Drager syndrome, Parkinson disease, Lewy body dementia
              
              
- Neoplasia: Brain tumors, paraneoplastic syndromes

Likewise, autonomic neuropathy can present in nearly any system. Orthostatic hypotension is the most common autonomic dysautonomia, but numerous other, less understood, findings may present

- Cardiovascular

- 
              
- Fixed heart rate
              
              
- Postural hypotension
              
              
- Resting tachycardia

- Gastrointestinal

- 
              
- Dysphagia
              
              
- Gastroparesis; nausea, vomiting, abdominal fullness
              
              
- Constipation

- Genitourinary

- 
              
- Bladder atony

- Pupillary

- 
              
- Absent/delayed light reflexes
              
              
- Decreased pupil size

- Sexual

- 
              
- Erectile dysfunction
              
              
- Retrograde ejaculation

- Sudomotor

- 
              
- Anhidrosis
              
              
- Gustatory sweating

- Vasomotor

- 
              
- Cold extremities (due to loss of vasomotor responses)
              
              
- Edema (due to loss of vasomotor tone and increased vascular permeability)

The most prevalent symptoms of orthostatic hypotension are lightheadedness, tunnel vision, and discomfort in the head, neck, or chest. It may present concomitantly with supine hypertension due to increased peripheral resistance, which induces natriuresis, exacerbating orthostatic hypotension. There are numerous other, more benign stimuli that may either lower blood pressure (standing, food, Valsalva, dehydration, exercise, hyperventilation, etc.) or raise blood pressure (lying supine, water ingestion, coffee, head-down tilt, hypoventilation, etc.).

Orthostatic hypotension evaluation is commonly done through orthostatic testing via repeated blood pressure and heart rate readings in supine and standing positions, but also through the use of the tilt-table test. However, the advantage of this latter test is minimal over the orthostatic test, with the main benefit being safety and convenience to the patient.

Patients with dysautonomia are prone to hypotension during anesthesia

The sympathetic nervous system is well known to play a role in nociception. There are suggestions that the ANS has a regulatory inhibitory effect on pain, the loss of which creates a positive feedback circuit leading to hyperexcitability of nociceptive nerve fibers. The fact that the effect of sympathetic blocks often persists beyond the duration of the anesthetic agents administered supports this hypothesis.

Most conditions related to the ENS are congenital in origin and present during early childhood.