There are two main fluoroscopic equipment types used, fixed and mobile. The fluoroscopic c-arm is a mobile unit consisting of an x-ray source at one end and the image detector at the other. It allows for greater flexibility and choice of location for the operator. However, it is most commonly used for orthopedic procedures. The permanent system uses a radiolucent exam table, with an under-table mounted tube and imaging detector mounted over the top of the table. This system is used most notably for tube insertion when the decision is made to use fluoroscopy. A water-soluble contrast media is used to outline the digestive tract as the tubing is propagated. In the case of difficult anatomy, a guidewire may be utilized to traverse in the direction of choice.

Several different types of nasogastric tubes exist and can be utilized depending on the purpose of the insertion. The Levin is a single-lumen nasogastric tube with a drainage side port near the gastric tip that is radiopaque for a clear view on imaging.

A Dobhoff tube may also be used for this purpose. This tube weights the end, which allows for the advancement of the tube across the pyloric sphincter, taking advantage of the antegrade movement of peristalsis instead of needing manual manipulation. The Salem Sump is a double-lumen tube used primarily for continuous suction, and there is a second tube that opens to the atmosphere to allow for suction.

The Miller-Abbott tube, also a double-lumen tube, has a balloon at the end of one tip and holes at the other. Once advanced into the stomach, the balloon is inflated. The balloon is then advanced through the intestine, and contents are suctioned out. This tube is used for intestinal obstructions. Finally, the Cantor tube is used for intestinal decompression. It contains a balloon at the end of the tip, where mercury is injected. The mercury-filled bag then elongates, allowing for advancement along the intestinal tract.