The term "lepidic" originates from Latin and alludes to a sense of the "scale-like" appearance of flat cells without papillary outgrowths. The lepidic growth pattern lacks alveolar thickening, evidence of inflammation, vascular, stromal, pleural invasion, or desmoplastic reaction.

**Histomorphological Overview of Current Tumors in Adenocarcinoma with Lepidic Growth**

**Atypical Adenomatous Hyperplasia (AAH)**

Less than 0.5 cm, localized areas of hyperplasia of type 2 pneumocytes and/or Clara cells replacing normal alveolar epithelium.

**Adenocarcinoma in Situ****(AIS)**

The closest to the previous non-mucinous BAC. Less than 3 cm, solitary nodules with pure lepidic growth with somewhat higher cellular atypia than AAH. They have small monomorphous nuclei with pinpoint nucleoli and occasional nuclear inclusions.

**Minimally Invasive Adenocarcinoma****(MIA)**

Less than 3 cm solitary lesions with lepidic growth pattern with less than 5 mm areas of invasive foci. The invasive component can be uni- or multifocal and can be of any histologic pattern other than lepidic (papillary, micropapillary, acinar, or solid). By definition, they do not have any evidence of vascular, stromal, or pleural invasion. It can be challenging to distinguish alveolar collapse from stromal invasion, and elastin stains can be of use.

**Lepidic Predominant Adenocarcinoma****(LPA)**

These are adenocarcinoma with areas of lepidic growth and greater than 5 mm invasive foci, or evidence of invasion of stroma with blood vessels, pleura, or lymphatic invasion or necrosis. A higher percentage of lepidic growth patterns were associated with a lower risk of recurrence. Multiple studies have demonstrated that the invasive component size and the histomorphologic subtype are better predictors of survival than total tumor size.

Cytological features include a flat sheet of homogenous neoplastic cells with mild nuclear enlargement and prominent nuclear grooves. In the case of minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, apart from the lepidic growth pattern, the invasive component is represented by papillary or acinar growth patterns in the center or periphery of the tumor mass.

Kuwata et al. looked at the microenvironmental changes in the transition of AIS to lepidic predominant invasive adenocarcinoma (LPA) of the lung. During the progression from AIS to LPA, expression of laminin 5 and ezrin in the invasive component was significantly increased. Tumor-promoting stromal cells were also expressed in higher proportions. High expression of ezrin is associated with lymphovascular invasion and poorer prognosis of LPA. It can thus be explored as a marker for the metastatic potential for these groups of neoplasms.

Features of high differentiation or lepidic pattern, irrespective of the invasive component, provide the treating physician a direction in terms of the search for therapeutic targets. EGFR mutations are more frequently associated with lepidic growth pattern and prior BACs. Even when adjusted for sex, smoking status, and EGFR amplification, exon 21 missense mutation has been found to be significantly more common in LPA. Ground glass volume percentage within a tumor was found to correlate significantly with exon 21 missense mutation. Whereas a nonmucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma is highly positive for TTF-1 and CK-7, mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma is focally and weakly positive for those markers. Mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma may show strong positivity for CK 20.