When RVF is suspected, a workup should be started to confirm the diagnosis, assess the extent of the fistula, and identify the underlying diagnosis. In addition to history and physical examination, workup should be complemented by imaging and endoscopy if needed.

Laboratory tests to assess the baseline hematocrit, biochemical and infectious parameters are usually obtained. Signs of the overall disease impact, complications, and severity can be estimated from these tests. Further tests may be needed according to the initial assessment.

Endoscopy, like colposcopy and/or proctosigmoidoscopy (rigid or preferably flexible), may reveal the site of the fistula with the underlying disease. Signs of the underlying diseases like Crohn’s, diverticular disease, or rectal cancer are likely to be identified with endoscopy. Colposcopy can help detect cervical or vaginal cancers.

Imaging is commonly used and useful to confirm the diagnosis and identify the underlying disease. CT scan provides accurate, objective, detailed information of the fistula, the underlying disease, and the related nearby area. Rectal and intravenous contrast will outline the fistulous tract and the related structures. The presence of rectal contrast in the vagina is a confirmation of the diagnosis even if the fistulous tract itself cannot be visualized.

Further assessment includes laboratory workup to evaluate the general patient condition, underlying disease, or complications of the fistula like infection or electrolyte imbalance. Tissue biopsy from suspected masses will help to confirm malignancy and its origin.