The diagnosis of acetabular fracture is possible just with a plain X-ray, but because many patients have multiple organ injuries, a CT scan is often necessary, which is more precise than a conventional X-ray.  Plain films, with an AP pelvis and Judet views, are often obtained first.  The Judet views include an obturator oblique and an iliac oblique view.  There are six radiographic landmarks identifiable on an AP view of the pelvis and help classify the fracture pattern.

- Iliopectineal line

- Ilioischial line

- Teardrop

- Roof of acetabulum

- Anterior wall

- Posterior wall

The iliopectineal line represents the anterior column and is made up of the pelvic brim and sciatic buttress and greater sciatic notch. The ilioischial line represents the posterior column, which is a tangency of the quadrilateral surface.  The teardrop represents a radiographic finding and is not a true anatomical structure. The lateral limb represents the inferior aspect of the anterior wall and the medial limb forms from the obturator canal and the anterior inferior portion of the quadrilateral surface.  The advent of CT scans has made the diagnosis and classification of acetabulum fractures much easier.  CT axial images are superior to plain radiographs in evaluating the following in acetabulum fractures: Extent and location of acetabular wall fractures, presence of intra-articular fragments, the orientation of fracture lines, the identification of additional fracture lines, rotation of fracture fragments, the status of posterior pelvic ring, and marginal impaction.  2D images are better used for evaluation of the fracture patterns, while 3D imaging may help less experienced surgeons.

**Classification**

By far the most used and most useful classification for acetabulum fractures is that of Letournel.

Elementary patterns:

- Posterior wall:  Most common type (25%) and are visible on the AP and obturator oblique views

- Posterior column: Fracture begins at the apex of the greater sciatic notch, goes through the articular surface and quadrilateral surface, crosses inferior pubic ramus. (3 to 5%).  The superior gluteal neurovascular bundle can become caught in the fracture site.  On the AP: ilioischial line, posterior rim and inferior ramus show as disrupted.  On the iliac oblique: fracture crosses the posterior border of the bone.

- Anterior wall: Fracture begins below the AIIS and ends at the ischiopubic notch.  On AP imaging, will show the anterior wall and iliopectineal disruption

- Anterior column: This fracture separates the anterior border of the innominate bone from the intact ilium.  It can be high, intermediate, low, or very low based on where the fracture exits the anterior aspect.  The iliopectineal line becomes disrupted on the obturator oblique.

- Transverse: Fracture of both the anterior and posterior columns.  See disruption of both the ilioischial and iliopectineal lines on AP view

Associated patterns:

- Posterior column and posterior wall:  Femoral head frequently dislocated on presentation.  Disruption of ilioischial line, posterior border of innominate bone, and posterior wall

- Transverse and posterior wall:  Represents approximately 20% of acetabulum fractures.  See large posterior wall fragment on obturator oblique view

- Anterior column/wall and posterior hemitransverse:  Fracture of the column more common than of the wall.  The primary fracture line is anterior, while the secondary fracture line through the articular surface to the posterior border.  Gullwing sign is seen on the AP radiograph and represents the impaction of the acetabular roof on the superior medial side (poor prognosis).

- T-type: Transverse fracture plus an inferior vertical fracture line (stem of T).  It can be associated with a posterior wall fracture, which has the worse prognosis of any subgroup.  Radiographs show a transverse fracture with a fracture of the inferior pubic rami.

- Both columns: This is the most commonly associated type.  Represents an acetabulum that has completely disconnected from the axial skeleton.  It can have secondary congruency, which is when the femoral head medializes but the articular fragments rotate and remain congruent to femoral head due to the attachment of the labrum.  Spug sign is pathognomonic, which is seen on the obturator oblique and represents the intact portion of the ilium.