The primary function of the dorsal column medial lemniscus (DCML) pathway is to convey sensory information regarding fine touch, two-point discrimination, conscious proprioception, and vibration sensations to the postcentral gyrus in the cerebral cortex from our skin and joints, excluding the head.

There are three orders of neurons involved in this pathway that orchestrate signal transmission from the skin and joints to the cerebral cortex. The cell body of the dorsal root ganglia, which is composed of pseudounipolar neurons, characterizes the first-order neuron of the pathway. The pseudounipolar neurons contain peripheral (distal) and central (proximal) axonal processes. The peripheral (distal) axons receive various signal inputs from the skin via the receptors associated with the DCML pathway. These receptors classify into two types: tactile mechanoreceptors and conscious proprioception.

Tactile mechanoreceptors include Meissner corpuscles, free nerve endings on hair follicles, and Pacinian corpuscles. Meissner corpuscles transmit information about fine touch and two-point discrimination. Free nerve endings on hair follicles also transmit information about fine touch. Pacinian corpuscles have pressure sense and vibration sense. Receptors of conscious proprioception include muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs. These sensory organs detect changes in muscle length and contraction and contribute to fine motor control and the relay of axial position information to the nervous system.

After receiving the sensory input from the periphery via the mechanoreceptor and conscious receptors, the central (proximal) axons of the dorsal root ganglia enter the spinal cord through the medial dorsal root entry zone. Once in the spinal cord, the central axonal process gives off small collateral branches that will terminate in the spinal gray matter to facilitate spinal reflexes. However, most of the central axonal process will leave the dorsal horn gray matter without synapsing and enter the dorsal funiculus to help constitute either the fasciculus gracilis or the fasciculus cuneatus. The fasciculus gracilis carries sensory information associated with the DCML pathway from the lower extremities and terminates and synapses at the nucleus gracilis in the caudal medulla. It is medial relative to the fasciculus cuneatus and travels the length of the spinal cord.

On the other hand, the fasciculus cuneatus carries sensory information associated with the DCML pathway from the upper extremities. Thus, it is located at spinal level T6 and above. Similarly to the fasciculus gracilis, the fasciculus cuneatus terminates and synapses at the nucleus cuneatus, which is in the caudal medulla. The nucleus cuneatus, which receives axons from the fasciculus cuneatus, is located laterally to the nucleus gracilis, which receives axons from the fasciculus gracilis. Both the nucleus cuneatus and nucleus gracilis represent the second-order neuron of the DCML pathway.

The internal arcuate fibers are axons that emerge ventrally from the dorsal column nuclei, course ventromedially through the medullary tegmentum, and ultimately cross the midline. This is where the DCML pathway decussates. The internal arcuate fibers on the contralateral side of the medulla will come together to form the medial lemniscus. The medial lemniscus travels through the brainstem with a preserved somatotopic arrangement where its ventral fibers arise from the nucleus gracilis and its dorsal fibers arise from the nucleus cuneatus.

The medial lemniscus terminates and synapses in the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus; the somatotopy is preserved. The VPL neurons are the third-order neurons of the pathway, and their axons will project laterally out of the thalamus and course somatotopically through the posterior limb of the internal capsule, terminating in the primary somatosensory cortex of the postcentral gyrus. The tracts of the DCML pathway, from the fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus to the primary somatosensory cortex, have a preserved somatotopic arrangement where the cervical axons are medial and sacral axons are lateral. This somatotopic arrangement resembles that of the motor cortical spinal tract and differs from that of the spinothalamic tract.