The management of temporal arteritis is with an interprofessional team that consists of an internist, neurologist, rheumatologist, ophthalmologist, nursing staff, pharmacist, and surgeon. Education is the essential step as patients need to know the complications of this disorder and the need for close monitoring related to both the condition and its treatment. All patients should be urged to follow up with an ophthalmologist to ensure that vision loss is not occurring. Anyone with weakness, loss of vision, difficulty with gait, dysphagia, or speech problems should immediately seek medical assistance. The pharmacist should educate the patient on corticosteroid compliance and the potential side effects. Nursing will often be the patient's first point of contact for questions and can also coordinate activities and information sharing between the various disciplines involved in care. All patients should understand that they may develop problems with other blood vessels in the future despite treatment.

**Outcomes**

For the majority of patients, who get prompt treatment, there is a complete recovery. Symptomatic improvement occurs in 2 to 4 days after treatment. To avoid the adverse effects of the corticosteroids, tapering is recommended after 4 to 6 weeks. Blindness from temporal arteritis is very rare today. However, the course of the disease does vary from patient to patient and may last 3 months to 5 years. The biggest problem with the treatment of temporal arteritis today is the morbidity associated with corticosteroids. Thus, nursing should be familiar with and monitor for these adverse events and report them to the team if present. Individuals likely to require prolonged treatment with steroids include females, older age, and those with a higher baseline ESR. The prognosis is poor for untreated individuals; these individuals may have blindness, develop a stroke, or an MI. Overall, about 1 to 3% of patients with temporal arteritis die from a stroke or an MI.