# Introduction

Social relations are broadly defined as any relationship or interaction between two or more individuals. Interest in social relationships and resulting support began a century ago when the French sociologist Emile Durkheim postulated that disruptions in social networks could influence psychological health.

# Issues of Concern

**Social Relations and Stress**

A widely accepted view of psychological stress defines it as the appraisal of an event as taxing or overwhelming one’s resources. This theory first proposed that appraisal of an event as threatening or exceeding one’s resources activates physiological stress response systems in the body, including the autonomic (fight or flight) system and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis.

The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis responds to central nervous systems signals that regulate the release of the glucocorticoid hormone cortisol from the adrenal gland. In a healthy individual, circulating cortisol levels double within 30 minutes to 45 minutes after awakening and then gradually decrease over the course of the day and subsequent night, reflective of the diurnal slope.

Social relationships that are perceived as emotionally supportive have demonstrated their potential to act as a buffer of the effects of stress. Social support makes the demands of a stressor feel more manageable, thereby buffering its impact.

While the size of an individual’s social network, or integration, may not be associated with diurnal cortisol secretion or acute stress responses, supportive relationships have been associated with more rhythmic or healthy-appearing diurnal cortisol expression profiles.

# Clinical Significance

The impact of the social world on physiology and health is a topic of intrigue to scientists in a variety of disciplines. Social interactions may directly affect biological functioning by providing a zeitgeber (i.e., time-giver) to set or reset our biological clocks.

Societal roles, for example, the social role of a mother or spouse, may provide one with a sense of social identity and thereby influence health behaviors, such as exercising or smoking cessation. The provision of information regarding the importance of treatment adherence may be another way in which our social structure exerts a direct impact.

Physiological stress response systems tend to become less efficient with age. Chronic or frequently repeated stress response activation stress may also bring about hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal dysregulation. This affects the responsivity of the axis, reducing the flexibility of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress response mechanism. Chronic dysregulation of these systems may hamper the body’s natural disease defenses. As a result, psychological stress may be implicated in disease onset, development, and course.

Individuals reporting better social support demonstrate preserved hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis efficiency, an association that may be even more pronounced among older males.

**Social Relationship Interventions**

Existing social relationships appear to exert a strong impact on the psyche and physiology. Understandably, attempts to increase these factors have garnered significant attention in recent decades. Social support interventions, by nature work, to "mobilize the social environment" to meet an individual's needs better.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As part of any patient evaluation, all interprofessional healthcare team members need to assess the state of social relationships in the patient's life. As outlined above, deleterious physical effects can manifest from stressful situations and relationships. The lack of social support to help navigate these situations can prove very debilitating to a patient's health. The interprofessional team needs to document these situations and share the data with the rest of the team so interventions can more effectively address the patient's issues and concerns, resulting in better outcomes. [Level 5]