# Continuing Education Activity

Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn is a red blood cell mismatch between mothers and their fetuses that can cause significant morbidity and mortality. Fortunately, fatal consequences from this disorder have become rare with the appropriate use of immunoprophylaxis. However, to avoid the fatal consequences of this disorder, prompt recognition and treatment are vital. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and prevention of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn by the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology and epidemiology of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn.
- Review the pathophysiology of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn.
- Outline the management of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN) is an immune-mediated red blood cell (RBC) disorder in which maternal antibodies attack fetal or newborn RBCs.

# Etiology

There are two main mechanisms by which maternal antibodies target fetal or newborn RBC antigens:

- ABO incompatibility

- Fetomaternal hemorrhage

ABO incompatibility is a congenital, inherent mismatch between maternal and fetal blood types.

# Epidemiology

Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn was first described by Dr. Louis K. Diamond in 1932 when he wrote about erythroblastosis fetalis in the newborn based on peripheral smears.

Rh incompatibility varies by race, ethnicity, and risk factors. The Rh-negative blood type is most predominant in white races (15%) compared to African Americans (5% to 8%) or Asians and Native Americans (1% to 2%). Among white women, an Rh-negative woman has an 85% chance of mating with an Rh-positive man.

As little as 0.1 mL of fetal blood entering maternal circulation is sufficient to cause alloimmunization.

# Pathophysiology

As mentioned, there are two mechanisms causing hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. First, the fetomaternal pair can have inherent ABO incompatibility, which occurs in 15 to 25% of pregnancies.

The second mechanism most commonly causing HDFN is through fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH), where maternal antibodies develop after exposure to fetal blood. When fetal RBCs enter the maternal blood circulation, maternal antibodies can develop to an antigen presented on the fetal RBC surface. The most common antigen involved in this mechanism is the Rhesus D antigen.

Antigens in fetal blood that are foreign to maternal blood are inherited from paternal genes. For example, an Rh-negative woman can have an Rh-positive fetus due to her partner being Rh-positive. Antibodies that develop due to FMH put subsequent pregnancies at risk for HDFN as the first antibodies to develop are of IgM type, which cannot cross the placenta. In subsequent encounters with the Rh-D antigen, maternal antibodies rapidly develop IgG antibodies, which do cross the placenta.

As infant RBCs are attacked and broken down, infants develop hemolytic anemia. The breakdown of heme leads to bilirubin, which is removed by the placenta in utero. At birth, the liver begins processing the bilirubin. Indirect bilirubin, or unconjugated bilirubin, is conjugated to direct bilirubin using the enzyme uridine diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase (UDP-glucuronosyltransferase). This conjugated bilirubin is excreted in bile, where it ultimately will be excreted in feces and urine.

In infants, especially preterm infants, liver processing is less efficient, which often leads to natural physiologic jaundice.

# History and Physical

An in-depth history can be essential in raising suspicion for hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Emphasis should be placed on identifying any events that may have led to fetomaternal hemorrhage. These include previous pregnancies with HDFN or hydrops fetalis, miscarriages, ectopic pregnancies, early pregnancy terminations, blood transfusions in the mother, chorionic villous sampling, amniocentesis, or documentation of bleeding in pregnancy.

Early in the first trimester, blood typing should be done on all pregnant women. Those with blood type O naturally express antibodies to A and B blood types; thus, they should be monitored for the development of HDFN, especially at delivery and directly postpartum. The antibodies expressed in mothers with O blood type are typically immunoglobulin G (IgG) and can cross the placenta. Conversely, mothers with blood type A have antibodies against blood type B, which are predominantly immunoglobulin M (IgM) and do not cross the placenta.

The main signs of hemolytic disease in the newborn (HDN) are anemia and hyperbilirubinemia, which may present as lethargy, jaundice, conjunctival icterus, pallor, hepatosplenomegaly, tachycardia or bradycardia, increased oxygen requirement, and/or apnea.

# Evaluation

Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn should be considered in the differential diagnosis of newborns with jaundice/hyperbilirubinemia and certainly in the case of neonatal anemia. Diagnosis of HDFN can be made by identifying the presence of maternal RBC antibodies (agglutination in an indirect antibody test) and/or a positive direct antibody test (DAT) in the infant's serum.

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), "if a mother has not had prenatal blood grouping or is Rh-negative, a direct antibody test (or Coombs' test), blood type, and an Rh (D) type on the infant's (cord) blood are strongly recommended."

# Treatment / Management

If hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn is identified or suspected in utero, a consult with maternal-fetal medicine should be placed as early as possible in the pregnancy. Affected pregnancies can be managed by monitoring antibody titers, and fetal middle cerebral artery velocities, intrauterine transfusions, and possibly early delivery, as infants with severe anemia may not tolerate term labor well.

Hemolytic disease of the newborn is managed by treating hyperbilirubinemia with phototherapy and exchange transfusions if needed. Routine universal screening with transcutaneous bilirubin (TcB) often occurs at 24 hours of life, but screening should be conducted as soon as hyperbilirubinemia is suspected. An elevated TcB should always be verified with a serum total bilirubin (TB). The hour-specific Bhutani nomogram is then used to risk stratify the amount of bilirubin in the infant's blood.

Phototherapy was introduced in the 1970s and has become the mainstay of hyperbilirubinemia management in newborns. Photo isomerization causes the transformation of bilirubin into a water-soluble isomer that can then be excreted by the kidneys and stool without the need for processing in the liver. The main determinants of phototherapy efficacy are the wavelength of light used, the intensity of that light, the total light dose (time exposed and surface area exposed), and the threshold at which phototherapy is initiated. The AAP recommends the use of intensive phototherapy in HDFN. The optimal light used for phototherapy has a wavelength of 460-490nm. The light should be at a close distance (about 20cm above the infant), and double phototherapy has proven to be more efficacious than single. There is limited data on the efficacy of continuous versus intermittent phototherapy for infants >2000g.

An exchange transfusion may be needed for severely anemic newborns, which involves replacing infant RBCs with antigen-negative RBCs, thereby preventing further hemolysis. 5mL/kg aliquots are removed and replaced over several minutes for a total of 25-50mL/kg exchange of RBCs. Exchange transfusions are recommended by the AAP if total bilirubin levels remain above the transfusion threshold despite intensive phototherapy or if signs of bilirubin encephalopathy are present. If an exchange transfusion is being considered, an albumin level should be measured. Albumin of 3.0 g/dL or less is considered an independent risk factor for hyperbilirubinemia and lowers the phototherapy threshold. Without sufficient albumin to bind bilirubin, the amount of free, unconjugated bilirubin increases, thereby increasing the risk for kernicterus.

Anemic infants may require blood transfusions with ABO-matched packed RBCs. If immediate transfusion is thought to be needed, O-type, Rh-negative blood that has been leukodepleted and irradiated should be available at delivery.

Other treatment modalities have been considered but are still controversial. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the infant may block Fc receptors on macrophages, thereby decreasing the breakdown of antibody-coated RBCs. IVIG is recommended by the AAP if total serum bilirubin continues to rise despite intensive phototherapy or is within 2-3 mg/dL of the exchange transfusion level. Administration of IVIG to mothers prior to delivery has not been shown to be efficacious and is not currently recommended. Other agents such as albumin, phenobarbital, metalloporphyrins, zinc, clofibrate, and prebiotics have been studied as possible treatment options for hyperbilirubinemia, but none are currently recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn should be included in the differential diagnosis of infants with early, severe, or prolonged jaundice and anemia. Other etiologies of jaundice and hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn include physiologic jaundice, prematurity, breast milk and breastfeeding jaundice, G6PD deficiency, thalassemia, sepsis, birth trauma, Gilbert syndrome, and hypothyroidism.

# Treatment Planning

The American Association of Blood Banks recommends repeat antibody screening prior to administration of Rh-D immunoprophylaxis (Rh-D IgG) at 28 weeks of gestation, postpartum, and in FMH events.

The standard dose of anti-RhD administered in the second and third trimesters and postpartum, if needed, is 300mcg. If needed in the first trimester, the recommended dose is 150 mcg. A one-time dose of 300 mcg anti-RhD should prevent isoimmunization when 15mL or less of fetal RBCs (or 30mL of whole blood) enters maternal circulation. A rosette test is a qualitative test to assess potential FMH. If positive, the rosette test should be followed by the Kleihauer-Betke test to quantify the amount of fetomaternal blood mixing to then determine if additional doses of Rh-D immunoprophylaxis are needed.

# Prognosis

The overall prognosis of HDFN is good if identified and treated promptly. While permanent neurologic dysfunction may result from delays in care, this is now a rare occurrence with the advancements in monitoring as well as prophylaxis against HDFN.

# Complications

Acute bilirubin encephalopathy from the buildup of bilirubin in an infant's brain may manifest as hypotonia or poor suck reflex, which then progresses to irritability and hypertonia with retrocollis and opisthotonos. Long-term consequences of chronic bilirubin encephalopathy may lead to cerebral palsy, auditory dysfunction, paralysis of upward gaze, and permanent intellectual dysfunction.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education regarding routine lab testing and Rh-D immunoprophylaxis in Rh-negative women is necessary to ensure possible FMH events are reported and appropriately treated in pregnant women. Additionally, parents of newborns can be educated on the signs and symptoms to be aware of hyperbilirubinemia to assist the interprofessional team in the early identification of possible HDFN cases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Enhancing interprofessional team outcomes for patients with hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn requires close collaboration between both OB/GYN and pediatric providers, nurses, pharmacists, and blood bank personnel. With HDFN, there are two patients to consider at all times - the mother and the fetus/newborn. When HDFN is identified in utero, the delivery team should be well-versed and prepared ahead of time to identify signs and symptoms of HDFN, as these infants may need timely transfusions at birth. Pharmacists and providers must identify if and when Rh-D immunoprophylaxis is indicated to prevent future HDFN cases throughout the pregnancy. Through the development of Rh-D immunoprophylaxis and newborn work-up protocols, the incidence of HDFN has dramatically dropped in the past 50 years. Still, it will take continued interprofessional collaboration to ensure the incidence of HDFN remains low.