The diagnosis of erythromelalgia is made with the help of classic signs and symptoms: redness, warmth, and burning pain, most commonly affecting the extremities precipitated by heat or exercise and relieved by cooling. As this syndrome occurs in episodes, the clinicians face diagnostic challenges with this disease. The clinicians may ask to take photographs of the involved region during flare-up episodes that might aid in the diagnosis of this condition.

It is important to differentiate between primary and secondary forms of erythromelalgia. The diagnosis of primary erythromelalgia is made by the presence of classic signs/symptoms and screening for mutations in the SCN9A gene. The secondary form of erythromelalgia is diagnosed by ruling out different diseases associated with this condition. A complete blood count with differential is done to look for the evidence of myeloproliferative disorder (elevated hematocrit greater than 50% with red blood cells or platelets) and cellulitis (elevated white blood cell count and neutrophils). Serologic tests for antinuclear antibody (ANA), HIV, rheumatoid factor (RF) are done to look for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), HIV, and rheumatoid arthritis, respectively. Blood uric acid is done to rule out gout. For a patient with a positive history of trauma or surgery, triple-phase technetium bone scanning is done.

A skin biopsy is usually not performed due to its lack of specificity. However, when performed, subtle decreased epidermal and perivascular nerve density has been observed.

Electromyography and nerve conduction velocity tests are generally abnormal in patients with erythromelalgia, and these tests provide evidence for the use of medications for neuropathy in patients with erythromelalgia.