In physiological and hyperdynamic circulatory states, the fall in systemic vascular resistance and increased cardiac output causes the water hammer pulse.

The pathophysiology in patients with aortic regurgitation is different. An increased stroke volume filling the relatively empty arterial vessels causes the rapid upstroke when feeling the water hammer pulse. This increased stroke volume is secondary to an increase in end-diastolic volume from the retrograde blood flow from the aorta into the left ventricle during ventricular diastole, or relaxation. The rapid downstroke is partly due to two causes. The first cause is the sudden fall in diastolic pressure in the aorta, which is due to regurgitation of blood from the aorta, or “aortic run-off,” into the left ventricle through the leaky valve. The second cause is the rapid emptying of the arterial system.

The decrease in diastolic pressure from the regurgitant flow also causes an increase in pulse pressure. Pulse pressure is the difference between the systolic and diastolic pressure. Compensation for the decrease in diastolic pressure occurs in two ways. First, due to the regurgitant fraction of blood flow, the heart undergoes chamber dilation and eccentric hypertrophy. These effects increase the stroke volume and therefore the systolic pressure. Secondly, the sympathetic nervous system releases catecholamines and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis works to increase cardiac output to try to maintain a normal mean arterial pressure. As aortic regurgitation continues to progress and worsen, the systolic pressure and pulse pressure continue to rise. Increasing these pressures accentuates the water hammer pulse. However, as the left ventricle continues to stretch, and with the resultant cardiac remodeling, systolic heart failure eventually develops. Systolic heart failure results in stroke volume decrease and forward blood flow.