Patients with trinucleotide repeat disorders are afflicted by this illness for a lifetime. Although the complications of these disorders range from mild to severe, counseling and explaining these shortcomings is important for the complete understanding and acceptance of this condition in both the patient and their family.

Regular psychiatric evaluation and psychological support should be offered to all patients with repeat disorders. Other than depression, that occurs due to the limiting nature of this condition, a variety of psychiatric anomalies are associated with most repeat disorders. Manic-depressive disorders are associated with Huntington's disease, dementia is associated with certain Spinocerebellar ataxia (e.g., SCA 2), Friedreich's ataxia is linked to MDD, and Fragile X syndrome patients can present with anxiety, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism, mood instability, and aggression.

**Genetic Counselling:**Along with an accurate diagnosis, patients with fragile X–related mental retardation, Huntington disease, a variety of inherited ataxias, and myotonic dystrophy should receive an opportunity for genetic counseling and family planning. These disorders are associated with the phenomenon of anticipation, which leads to an earlier and more severe manifestation of the illness in the progeny of the patient. Additionally, the penetrance of these disorders is variable, and in most cases, very high, making it important to educate and inform the patient about the risks in their progeny.