Microspherophakia is often a bilateral condition. The patients commonly present with complaints of low vision and defective accommodation. Rarely, the patient might complain of acute pain and redness with the presentation of acute angle closure.

Occasionally, the patient will complain of uniocular diplopia due to lens subluxation. Rarely the child may present with flashes and floaters, and neglected cases may result in amblyopia. Fundoscopy may reveal signs of pathological myopia like a myopic disc, myopic crescent, posterior staphyloma, and myopic macular degeneration. The other signs can be blue sclera, ectopic pupil, retinal detachment, tears, retinal holes, or lattice degeneration.

In a study by Muralidhar et al., it was reported that all patients had different grades of lenticular myopia with a mean refractive error of -11.07 dioptres. Almost 45% developed glaucoma, and half of these had high intraocular pressures at the presentation itself. The chances of developing high intraocular pressures and angle-closure glaucoma are increased if the lens is displaced anteriorly. Microspherophakia may often be present as an isolated finding or might be associated with syndromes.

There can be systemic as well as the local association. The systemic associations include Lowe syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Weill- Marchesani syndrome, Alport syndrome, microspherophakia-metaphyseal dysplasia, Cri du chat syndrome, Axenfield-Rieger syndrome, congenital rubella, Peter anomaly, hyperlysinaemia, Klinefelter syndrome, chondrodysplasia punctate, and metaphyseal dysplasia. The various local associations include aniridia, megalocornea, optic disc colobomata, and iridocorneal endothelial syndrome.