The 5-year survival rate is almost 40% in recent studies.

Two scoring systems have prognostic implications:

- **International Extra-nodal Lymphoma Study Group**(IELSG)- observed Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status higher than 1; age more than  60 years; elevated serum LDH; elevated CSF protein; and deep cortical lesions as variables prognosticating poor OS.

- **Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center's**(MSKCC) prognostic score includes age and Karnofsky performance status (KPS).

- Patients less than 50 years- median survival of around 9 years

- Patients more or equal to 50 years and KPS more than 70- median survival of around 3 years.

- Patients at least 50 years old with a KPS less than 70 median- survival of around 1 year.

The positive response to the initial steroid therapy is a good survival marker (117 months vs. 5.5 months in non-responders).

BCL-6 expression confers poor survival outcomes.versus 58.5%).

WBRT alone has shown a median survival of 12 to 18 months and 5-year survival of 18% to 35%.

Primary CNS lymphomas usually show rapid and durable responses to Methotrexate. Intravenous MTX alone has shown a CR of 52% and a median overall survival of 55.4 months.

- HD-MTX re-challenge

- High-dose chemotherapy alongside ASCT, or

- WBRT.

Patients with refractory, relapsed, or progressive PCNSL have a median survival of only 4.5 months.

Microscopic tumor seedlings residing behind an intact blood-brain barrier account for poor results seen following chemotherapy regimens such as cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone or dexamethasone (CHOP or CHOD).