The clinical presentation of pericardial effusion is along a spectrum from a clinically irrelevant, incidental finding to life-threatening cardiac tamponade. This wide variation is due in large part to the variable rate of accumulation of the pericardial fluid. Acute accumulation may cause impaired cardiac filling and decreased cardiac output with as little as 100 mL of fluid, while chronic and slow accumulation may lead to significant effusions of one to two liters that produce no significant hemodynamic effects.

- History: In patients with pericardial effusion due to pericarditis, patients often present with chest pain and dyspnea, with symptoms that improve while sitting upright and worsen while lying flat due to the inflamed pericardium contacting adjacent structures. Patients may also present with symptoms that are not specific for pericardial effusion, including dyspnea, edema, and fatigue. Other essential elements of history include questions regarding recent illnesses, malignancy, history of tuberculosis and vaccination status, auto-immune disorders, history of chronic kidney disease or renal failure, or history of congestive heart failure, hypothyroidism, or liver disease.

- Physical exam: Pericardial effusion leading to pericardial tamponade should be on the differential for patients in cardiac arrest or with vital sign abnormalities, including hypotension and tachycardia. The classic teaching of Beck's triad (hypotension, jugular venous distension, and muffled heart sounds) is only found in a minority of patients. Other physical exam findings unique to pericardial effusion include Ewart's sign (dullness to percussion at the base of the left inferior scapular border in conjunction with tubular breath sounds and egophony). The physical exam of patients with a concern for cardiac tamponade should also include evaluation for pulsus paradoxus, which refers to a relative drop in systolic blood pressure by more than 10 mmHg during inspiration due to the collapse of the left ventricle at the expense of right ventricle. This leads to the bowing of the interventricular septum and augmented compression of the left side of the heart with decreased filling volumes and subsequent decreased stroke volume and systolic blood pressure.

While both history and physical exam are critical components of the evaluation for pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade, the standard of care now includes additional modalities such as echocardiography to confirm the diagnosis.