The grid is kept at 33 cm from the eye. The illumination of the chart should be good. Light exposure directly over the eye (in the form of slit-lamp examination, indirect ophthalmoscopy, and others) should be avoided immediately before using the grid to avoid a photostress effect. The patient wears near correction if any. Pupils should not be dilated. The patient is asked to close one eye. With the open eye through the near glasses, the patient is instructed to look at the central dot of the grid. In patients with poor fixation, the eye should focus at the center of the grid so that all the 4 corners are simultaneously visible. While keeping the eye fixated over the center of the grid, the patient has to appreciate is the lines are parallel or seem distorted (metamorphopsia). Also, he/she should note if some of the small squares are missing or blurry. The patient should mark the grid with the area of abnormality so that it can be compared later for any progression, stabilization, or improvement. If the patient can not see the corners, diseases like glaucoma and retinitis pigmentosa should be ruled out. Amsler grid should be checked at least once weekly.

Alternative techniques to document metamorphopsia include:

- M chart

- Preferential hyperacuity perimeter PHP- Hyperacuity or Vernier acuity is a cortically mediated function to detect very subtle misalignments which may be as less as 3-6 seconds of arc. 
- Foresee Home (Notal Vision, Tel Aviv, Israel) is a type of PHP. It has been approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration, USA)  for 'use in the detection and characterization of central and paracentral metamorphopsia (visual distortion) in patients with age-related macular degeneration, as an aid in monitoring progression of disease factors causing metamorphopsia including but not limited to choroidal neovascularization (CNV). It is intended to be used at home for patients with stable fixation.' This device tests the central 14° of the visual field and total 500 data points are tested, 3-5 times each. However, it is not suitable for patients with cognitive decline (Alzheimer's disease) or if the patient can not establish a baseline in 2 attempts.
- Macular Computerized Psychophysical Test (MCPT) uses hyperacuity to detect metamorphopsia.
- PreView PHP (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA)- This device also uses the principles of PHP. In a study, it was concluded that it can 'detect recent-onset CNV resulting from AMD and can differentiate it from an intermediate stage of AMD with high sensitivity and specificity'.

- Shape discrimination hyperacuity (SDH)- Very minor sinusoidal deviation from circularity is detected by human eyes.

- Differential perimetry

- Three-dimensional computer-automated threshold Amsler grid test (3D CTAG)- This test has been described by Fink and Sadun from Doheny Eye Institute, California.

Other techniques/instruments which may be used to document scotoma include-

- Perimeter- Static (Humphrey field analyzer, the 10-2 protocol for central scotoma) or dynamic (Goldmann perimeter, tangent screen), or both static and kinetic (Octopus)

- Microperimetry- This machine checks the visual threshold of a specific area of the retina so that a correlation between structure and function is possible in a pictorial manner on an overlay of the fundus image. It also identifies any preferred retinal loci. The available machines are Nidek MP-3 (Nidek Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan), and Macular Integrity Assessment microperimeter (MAIA, CentreVue, Padova, Italy).