Due to various underlying diseases, peripheral edema poses a diagnostic dilemma to family physicians. As discussed above, the causes of edema may be due to various diagnoses, including heart, liver, renal, thyroid, and other vascular etiologies. Therefore, initial efforts in the work-up should focus on ruling out any major organ system failure as the underlying etiology. If the systemic disease is suspected, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists, including a cardiologist, gastroenterologist, nephrologist, and so forth, depending upon underlying disease suspicion.

The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's daily progress, especially when the patient is on diuretics, by monitoring daily weights, fluid input, and output. If the patient is on antibiotics or anticoagulants, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the correct dosage and has no underlying allergy to that specific medicine. Any team member who notes changes in the patient's condition or an adverse event should immediately communicate this to the rest of the team for corrective interventions. The current recommendations have been developed after an exhaustive review of current medical literature from peer-reviewed journals and book chapters to determine the appropriateness of diagnosis and treatment.

The outcomes of edema depend on the cause. Therefore, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is essential to prevent complications. [Level 5]