**Dosage Forms:**Isoniazid formulations are available as tablets (100 mg and 300 mg), syrup (50 mg / 5ml), or through IV or IM injection (100 mg / ml).

**Dose:**In adults, 5 mg/kg up to 300 mg daily as a single dose daily, or 15 mg/kg up to 900 mg per day in two to three divided doses per week is recommended.

One course of treatment for active TB infections with drug-susceptible strains consists of two months of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, followed by four and a half months of only isoniazid and rifampin. Although rifampin-based short courses are the current recommendation, latent tuberculosis infection can also be treated with isoniazid.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, isoniazid is metabolized in the liver, so the drug should be used with caution in these patients. It is also apparent that dose adjustment may be required for patients with acute or chronic liver disease to avoid adverse effects.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment needed for patients with renal impairment. Although there was a prolongation in half-life, it was recommended to administer a full dose of isoniazid in patients with impaired renal function. Patients should be managed conservatively or by hemodialysis.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. Isoniazid may cross the placental barrier. Although it may not cause teratogenic effects, it is recommended to monitor patients carefully. It is recommended to use isoniazid therapy to treat active tuberculosis during pregnancy if the benefit outweighed the potential risk to the fetus. Pyridoxine supplementation is a recommended intervention for these patients.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends not discouraging breastfeeding as the small amount of isoniazid in breast milk do not produce toxicity in the newborn. Pyridoxine supplementation is recommended for these patients.

- **Pediatric Patients:**10 to 15 mg per kg up to 300 mg daily as a single dose; or 20 to 40 mg per kg up to 900 mg per day in two to three divided doses per week is recommended.

- **Geriatric Patients:**There is no specific dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for geriatric patients.