Taste disorders are categorized as ageusia (total loss of taste), hypogeusia (decreased sense of taste), and hypergeusia (increased taste sensitivity).

Aguesia is rarely seen and is attributed to the redundant gustatory nerve supply of the tongue.

Taste dysfunction is common in disease and injury

Taste dysfunction in cancer patients is found to correlate with decreased oral intake and poorer prognosis; this may be because of the rapid growth of cancer cells along with the inflammation and tissue damage.

Disorders that affect the central or peripheral nervous system also alter the taste, as well as neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. Moreover, injury to the chorda tympani nerve during ear surgery may cause impairment of taste.

There are reports of taste along with smell hallucination in some patients with epilepsy and schizophrenia.

Taste sense generally declines with aging; the effects of aging differ among the various taste qualities, however, mostly it affects the salty and bitter tastes. Although it is very common to have taste abnormalities in elderly patients, it is underreported in this population.

**Dysgeusia**

Dysgeusia is a taste disorder characterized by a disruption in taste sensation or the presence of taste in the absence of stimuli. It is the most common taste abnormality reported by patients. Common etiologies of dysgeusia include local factors such as oral cavity infections, medications, systemic diseases, central or peripheral nervous system disorders.

**Patient Examination**

Examination of a patient with taste disorder includes the examination of the oral cavity and the ears. Patient's dental hygiene and flow of saliva should also be a consideration. The patient should be asked about any pain in the oral cavity, swelling, change in chewing behavior, ear infection, and associated diseases.

**Testing the Ability to Taste**

Testing the tasting ability can be done by offering liquid stimuli or taste strips to the anterior and posterior part of the tongue. Other tests include electrogustometry (which involves passing anodal current to the tongue to generate a taste perception) and gustatory evoked potentials. Imaging also could be used to rule in or rule out central nervous system damage. Swab tests and cultures can also be helpful in diagnosis if a bacterial or mycological infection is suspected.

**Treatment of Taste Disorders**

The main approach in treating disorders of the taste is to address the underlying disease causing this disturbance. Zinc sulfate, steroids, and vitamin A are the frequently used medications despite the conflicts in clinical research results. Therefore, researchers need to conduct further studies on the treatment of gustatory disorders.