There are different degrees of dysplasia. Based on the  Lower Anogenital Squamous Terminology (LAST) project, pathologists should call the specimen low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) or high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL). LSIL, classically referred to as CIN1 or mild dysplasia, does not require treatment and should be followed conservatively. Patients with LSIL should return in one year for co-testing. This involves a repeat Pap smear with HPV molecular testing as the majority of the lesions will regress on their own. HSIL, classically referred to as CIN2/3 or CIS, usually requires an excisional procedure for treatment. Ablative procedures can be offered, but the majority of clinicians perform excisional procedures to give the pathologist a better specimen to evaluate. Excisional procedures provide assurance that an underlying cancer is identified, and adequate treatment for the lesion is provided. A  loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) to remove the abnormal tissue with a thin electrified wire that cuts the specimen from the cervix can be performed in the office. A cold knife cone (CKC) typically is performed in the operating room, using a knife to resect a cone-shaped portion of cervical tissue. The advantage of a CKC is that the pathologist can identify the margins more clearly and because they are not obscured by the burn artifact created with the electrified wire. Following a complete excision and negative margins, patients require yearly follow-up with a pap smear.  If underlying cancer is discovered, treatment plans are expanded, and an oncologist is consulted. If an excisional procedure provides results in positive LEEP margin findings, the decision to re-excise or follow conservatively is based on the patient’s age and fertility status.