Fundus cameras are used for fundus photography. Fundus photography is useful for diagnosing, educating patients, counseling, monitoring, and forecasting many ophthalmic conditions, notably DR, ARMD, Retinal vascular disorders, ROP, and glaucoma (Figures).

The traditional tabletop fundus cameras with a 50-degree field of view can detect the pathology of the posterior pole of the eye. The wide field and ultra-widefield fundus cameras are helpful in the imaging of retinal pathology beyond the equator of the retina. The presence of predominantly peripheral lesions in DR can be detected with the help of UWFI and carries a higher risk of progression to PDR.

The contact ultra-widefield fundus camera for a neonatal eye examination (RetCam) has been used extensively for the diagnosis and follow-up of neonates at risk with and suffering from retinopathy of prematurity (ROP). This camera is portable and can be taken to remote places.

**Advances in Fundus Imaging and Future Perspectives**

Bog data, machine learning, and artificial intelligence are promising in improving healthcare.

Deep learning algorithms using fundus photographs have been used to predict cerebral white matter hyperintensity in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans.

AI for the screening of DR has shown a lot of promise. These findings underscore the prospective role of AI integrated fundus imaging in the screening, diagnosis, and management of different retinal diseases.

Combining OCT imaging with fundus photography has been shown to increase the efficacy of glaucoma screening.

Similarly, smartphone-based fundus imaging is on the rise and is most useful for teleophthalmology. However, in detecting ROP, though the smartphone-based cameras provide a moderate agreement for the detection of the presence or absence of plus disease, they failed to identify the stages and zones of the disease.