**Mechanism of Bonding**

GIC chemically (ionic) bonds to the tooth structure (enamel and dentin). GIC bonds better to enamel than dentin because of the higher inorganic content in enamel. The mechanism of adhesion of GIC to the inorganic structure of the tooth involves a chelation reaction between the carboxyl groups of the polyacrylic acid and the calcium in the hydroxyapatite crystals of the tooth.

**Fluoride Release**

Various forms of fluorides (CaF2, SrF2, LaF2, Na3AlF6, AlF3) were added to the powder of GIC during manufacture as a flux, and their antibacterial properties were observed later. In completely set cement, fluoride ions are not an important part of the matrix and are present in an unbound form. These ions are released into the saliva by diffusion.

Two mechanisms have been proposed to explain the fluoride release from GIC into an aqueous solution.****The first mechanism is a short-term process involving a rapid dissolution of fluorides from the outer surface into the solution.

The bulk of the GIC matrix plays a key role in the fluoride release capacity. The fluoride release is influenced by intrinsic factors such as the composition of the matrix, setting mechanism, and fluoride content, and extrinsic factors like the pH of saliva, plaque, and pellicle formation, liquid-to-powder ratio, mixing, setting and curing time, and the amount of exposed surface. Bleaching and tooth brushing do not significantly affect fluoride release.

**Anticariogenic Action**

The anti-cariogenic action of fluoride can be explained by various mechanisms: decreased demineralization, increased remineralization, enhancing the resistance of enamel to acid attack by conversion of hydroxyapatite to fluorapatite, and the inhibition of enolase enzyme, thus, interrupting microbial replication and metabolism. A sustained fluoride release from the restoration in the marginal gaps (between restoration and tooth) helps prevent secondary caries. This property of GIC makes it the material of choice for restorations in patients with high caries activity.

**Biological Activity**

GIC is both biocompatible and bioactive. Although the pH of freshly mixed GIC ranges between 0.9-1.6 still, the pulp response to GIC is considered mild.

**Mechanical Properties**

Glass ionomer cement has compressive strength equivalent to zinc phosphate cement, whereas its tensile strength is slightly higher than zinc phosphate cement. Type I GIC has lower compressive strength than Type II GIC. GIC is less stiff and has a lower modulus of elasticity comparable to dentin but lesser than zinc phosphate cement.

The powder-to-liquid ratio determines the mechanical properties of the set cement. More powder leads to an increase in the consistency of the cement, strength, and speed of the setting reaction. However, the powder-to-liquid ratio can be increased until a critical point. The volume of the physical matrix will be deficient in binding and holding the cement ingredients together; therefore, the mechanical properties will be compromised significantly. Thus, the powder-to-liquid ratio should strictly comply with the manufacturer's instructions. Using pre-graduated self-contained mixing capsules solves this problem.

**Physical Properties**

GIC coefficient of thermal expansion is similar to enamel and dentin. The thermal diffusivity of GIC is similar to dentin, providing thermal insulation to the pulp.

The solubility of GIC in water is higher than zinc phosphate and zinc polycarboxylate.

GICs are tooth-colored restorative materials, but they are not recommended to restore anterior teeth because of their opacity and lack of translucency.

**Advantages**

- Chemical bonding to the tooth structure

- Caries preventive action

- Thermal compatibility with tooth structure

- Mild pulp response

- Tooth-colored restorative material

**Disadvantages**

- Poor mechanical properties, e.g., low compressive strength, low abrasion resistance, and fracture resistance, make its use restricted to low stress-bearing areas

- Poor esthetics due to lack of translucency

- Moisture sensitive while setting

The longevity of glass ionomer cement restorations is affected by occlusal forces, porosities in set cement, desiccation or water absorption during initial setting, and use of the mixed cement after the loss of gloss. Furthermore, larger GIC particles decrease the rate of wear; the solubility of the cement depends on the amount of cement at the margins.

**Classification of GIC**

GIC is classified based on application as follows:

- **Type I -**Luting cement used for cementation of crowns and bridges

- **Type II -**Restorative cement used for aesthetic fillings

- **Type III –**GIC used as liners and bases

- **Type IV –**GIC used as pit and fissure sealants

- **Type V –**GIC used for orthodontic cementation

- **Type VI –**GIC is used for core build-up in highly mutilated teeth

- **Type VII –**Fluoride releasing light-cured GIC

- **Type VIII –**GIC for atraumatic restorative treatment (ART)

- **Type IX –**GIC used for Pediatric and geriatric restorations

The other classification of GIC is as follows:

**First Generation**

This material was developed because silicate cement was showing poor clinical performance. To overcome this problem, the alumina to silica ratio was increased. The first developed glass ionomer, known as ASPA I (aluminosilicate polyacrylic acid), had a sluggish setting, sensitive to moisture while sitting, and poor esthetics resulting in limited clinical utility. Wilson and Crisp added d-tartaric acid to the liquid, allowing the use of glasses containing lesser fluoride, which are more translucent. ASPA I was then named ASPA II and accounted for the first glass ionomer cement used for clinical applications.

**Second Generation**

In this type of cement, the polyacid was already added to the powder, and the setting is achieved by mixing the powder with water or a tartaric acid solution. This GIC is known as water-hardening cement. The main advantages of the second generation system are enhanced shelf life, decreased initial viscosity, and improved strength.

**Reinforced Cement**

The conventional GICs are suitable for restoring low stress-bearing areas like Class V and Class III cavities and sealing pits and fissures. However, they are not indicated in high stress-bearing situations such as Class II cavities because of their low tensile strength (7 to 12 MPa). To widen its range of applications, attempts were made to improve the strength of GIC by the following methods:

- Dispersed phase glasses: the use of dispersed phases of strengthening crystallites like aluminum oxide, titanium oxide, and zirconium oxide improved the strength.

- Fiber-reinforced glasses: the addition of alumina fibers, glass fiber, silica fiber, and carbon fiber to the glass ionomer powder increased flexural strength.

- Metal reinforced GIC: the mixture of amalgam powder and GIC, commonly known as 'miracle mix.'

- Cermet ionomer cement: these are manufactured by sintering the metal and glass powders together, which helps achieve a strong bond of the metal to the glass.

- Highly viscous conventional glass ionomer cement: this material is mainly useful for ART. The highly viscous GIC can be simply inserted in the cavity, similar to dental amalgam.

- Resin-modified glass ionomers cement: resin-modified glass ionomer cement was developed by adding resins and photoinitiators to the conventional glass ionomer.

- Amino acid modified glass ionomer cement: the substitution of copolymers of unsaturated carboxylic acids with acrylic acid copolymers such as N –methacryloyl – glutamic acid improved the fracture toughness of GIC

**Metal Modified GIC**

Metal particles in the silver alloy are added to the conventional GIC powder to improvise the mechanical properties of GIC and permeate its use in Class I cavities in molar teeth. The GIC can be reinforced with metal in two different ways:

**Silver Alloy Admixed GIC**

The powder of this modification of GIC is obtained by adding one part of spherical silver alloy particles to eight parts of conventional GIC powder. The liquid consists of polyacrylic acid. The powder and liquid are mixed at a ratio of 3:2 by weight approximately.

**Cermet Mixture**

McLean and Gasser introduced cermet in 1985. It is obtained by sintering the microfine silver alloy with glass particles at high temperatures and pressure. The pellet thus formed is ground to form finer powder particles.

**Properties of Metal Modified GIC**

The wear resistance is substantially improved in metal-modified GIC compared to conventional GIC. The wear resistance of cermet is greater than silver alloy admixed GIC. The compressive strength and fracture resistance are improved but not significantly. So, their use in high stress-bearing areas is restricted to primary dentition only.

Chemical bonding to the tooth structure is slightly lessened owing to the presence of silver in the composition. Both silver alloys admixed GIC and Cermet release fluoride in significant quantities. However, the fluoride release is comparatively less in cermet than silver alloy admixed GIC. Metal-modified GICs have improved handling properties and exhibit fewer porosities in set cement.

**Indications**

- Core build-up

- Class I cavities in primary dentition

**Resin-modified Glass Ionomer Cement**

Hybrid ionomer or resin-modified glass ionomer cement was developed by the addition of resins (bisphenol A-glycidyl dimethacrylate or urethane dimethacrylate) and photoinitiators to the conventional glass ionomer.

**Composition of**Resin-modified Glass Ionomer Cement****

- Powder: fluoroaluminosilicate glass, light, and chemical initiators

- Liquid: aqueous solution of polyacrylic acid, 10% 2-HEMA

**Setting Reaction**

The setting of hybrid ionomers is by a dual-cure mechanism: acid-base reaction and polymerization reaction. When mixing the liquid and powder, the polymerization reaction starts by employing chemical or light-mediated initiation. This set resin protects the ongoing acid-base setting reaction in the cement matrix from moisture contamination. This phenomenon is known as the "umbrella effect," reducing the early moisture sensitivity of GIC and providing greater initial strength.

**Structure of Set Cement**

The cement consists of core and matrix. The core constitutes unmixed powder particles, whereas the matrix is composed of polyacid and HEMA polymer linked with hydrogen bonding.

**Properties**

The hybrid ionomer bonds chemically to the tooth structure. However, the ionic activity is reduced due to the presence of resin. This results in a lesser bonding tendency.

The fluoride release is slightly lesser than conventional GIC.

Wear resistance, fracture toughness, flexural, and diametral tensile strength of hybrid ionomer are superior to conventional GIC, whereas compressive strength is lesser.

**Indications**

- Class V restorations due to reduced moisture sensitivity.

- Restoration of non-carious cervical lesions

- Class I and II restorations in primary teeth

- A liner or base under composite restorations (sandwich technique)

**Polyacid Modified Glass Ionomer/Compomer**

Compomer is formed by combining composite resin with glass ionomer. In this material, ion-leachable glass particles of GIC are added as fillers in the composite matrix. This combination integrates some of the properties of composite resins and glass ionomer cement. It is supplied as a single component material.

**Mechanism of Setting**

It sets by light-induced polymerization. The acid-base setting mechanism does not exist due to the absence of polyacid from the composition.

**Properties**

Mechanical properties such as wear resistance, strength, and fracture toughness are superior to conventional GIC but inferior to composite resins. Bonds micro-mechanically with tooth structure. No chemical bonding ability. Fluoride release is lesser than conventional GIC, but esthetics are superior to conventional GIC.

**Indications**

- Pit and fissure sealant

- Cementation of post and core

- Restoration of deciduous teeth

- Class III and V lesions