The following describes an open repair of bile duct injury:

- Incision and exposure: A variety of incisions may be placed to accomplish the bile duct repair. The most commonly performed is the right subcostal incision. It provides adequate exposure. A “hockey stick” incision is the midline extension of the subcostal incision. Alternately, an upper midline incision may be utilized. Dissection is carried through the abdominal wall, and the peritoneal cavity is entered. The self-retaining laparotomy retractor is then placed, and the surrounding adhesions are taken down. The adhesions are typically significant around the injured bile duct and must be lysed to completely mobilize and free up the quadrate lobe (segment IVb).

- Complete the cholecystectomy if not already done

- All visualized clips are removed, and the bile ducts are confirmed with the help of needle aspiration of bile. A cholangiogram is performed in the ducts proximal to the injury to visualize all segments of the liver and identify aberrant bile duct anatomy.

- A Kocher maneuver is performed (release the lateral attachments to the second portion of the duodenum which is then reflected medially to expose the posterior duodenum, pancreas, and retroperitoneum). This will facilitate exposure of the distal common bile duct stump which will be closed utilizing a continuous running permanent suture.

- Exposure of the left hepatic duct (LHD): The hilar plate (extension of Glisson’s capsule from the liver onto the hepatic ducts) is incised anteriorly to the LHD thus lowering and facilitating exposure of the duct.

- Exposure of the right hepatic duct (RHD): Glisson's capsule is incised at the base of segment IVb thus exposing the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts. This can be easily done by continuing the plane already created when the LHD was exposed. This can be continued toward segment V exposing the right anterior and posterior sectoral ducts. Right ductal anatomy can be identified in an easier fashion if a preoperative percutaneous transhepatic biliary stent was placed within the duct.

- Preparation of bile duct for anastomosis: Depending on the classification of injury and its proximity to the hilar plate, the repair technique is chosen. In cases where there is a distal transection greater than 2 cm away from the confluence (E1 injury), the remaining common duct may be debrided and used for the hepaticojejunostomy. For patients with more proximal injuries without separation of the right and left hepatic duct communication (E2-E3), the Hepp-Couinaud approach can be used. This involves incising the LHD horizontally with extension and sometimes across the confluence to the RHD in preparation for a hepaticojejunostomy.

- Creation and preparation of the Roux limb: The jejunum is divided with a linear stapler 30 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz. The Roux limb is brought through the transverse mesocolon to the right of the middle colic vessels and positioned next to the prepared proximal bile duct.

- Creation of the hepaticojejunostomy (there are multiple techniques)

- End-to-side anastomosis: Can be used for E1-E3 lesions. In E4 lesions the separated right and left hepatic ducts may be approximated into one “double-barrel” duct, and an end-to-side HJ can be performed. E5 lesions will typically require two separate end-to-side anastomoses of both the aberrant right hepatic duct and the main hepatic duct to the jejunum. The technique begins by placing two corner stitches on the right and left sides incorporating at least 3 mm of duct and mucosa of the jejunum. Blumgart published a technique involving placing sutures on the anterior bile duct wall and placing rubber shods on them to retract and expose the posterior aspect of the anastomosis.
- Side-to-side anastomosis: A transverse ductotomy is made in the LHD and may be extended into the RHD at the confluence. The open end of the injured main bile duct is then sutured closed with a nonabsorbable suture. A side-to-side anastomosis is then performed starting with the posterior wall in an interrupted or running fashion utilizing a 4-0 or 5-0 monofilament absorbable suture.
- Stenting of the HJ anastomosis is controversial. There has been weak evidence that it prevents HJ anastomotic leaks or strictures and is selectively used according to surgeon preference. Stenting may be done in several ways. An already present PTC biliary stent can be passed from the proximal bile ducts through the anastomosis into the jejunum. Another technique requires placing a Silastic stent through the anastomosis into the proximal bile ducts and then bringing it anteriorly through the hepatic parenchyma. A third option is to place a T tube through the anterior wall of the bile duct and having one limb traversing the HJ anastomosis. The long vertical portion is then brought out through the abdominal wall.
- The cornerstone of the technique is to achieve a tension-free anastomosis.

- Creation of entero-enterostomy: An end-to-side jejunojejunostomy is created with a single layer continuous hand-sewn technique, allowing for an approximately 40 cm bilio-enteric limb length.

- Intraabdominal drain placement and laparotomy closure