Pathophysiologic changes in CTK are a topic of interest, as the mechanisms that cause this rare syndrome remain incompletely established. However, some aspects of the underlying physiologic mechanisms are understood, and there have been many proposed theories.

One principal aspect of the disease is central corneal thinning or flattening, up to over 100 micrometers in one case.

The loss of stromal tissue is likely due to one of two possible mechanisms; either there could be apoptosis of keratocytes, enzymatic degradation of the stromal matrix, or a combination of the two. A lack of associated inflammation has made keratocyte death by apoptosis the predominant theory, and the striae and opacity that characterize the disease may be the gross visualization of this microscopic process.

Additional theories to account for the fluctuations in corneal curvature include the idea that keratinocyte injury and subsequent cytokine release cause changes in interstitial fluid pressure and corneal micro-edema. Fluid accumulating more prominently in the mid-periphery as opposed to the central cornea (due to its more rigid collagen matrix composition) causes changes in tissue tension. Thus the stromal bed flattens as a result of stretching.

An additional hypothesis proposes an immunologic process may also be present, as confocal imaging has shown potential immune complexes within the stroma.

A final theory revolves around a DLK based inflammatory model inciting CTK. It proposes that the release of collagenase and various proteases from damaged keratinocytes may cause the observed stromal thinning.