The tooth is divided into the crown and the root.

Cementum is the softer outer tissue surrounding the root that can be damaged by periodontal disease. Normally lying beneath the gingiva, the cementum is composed of calcium hydroxyapatite and allows for attachment to the periodontal ligament.

A layer of innervated, porous tissue called dentin lies beneath the enamel and cementum and constitutes the bulk of the tooth. Dentin is living tissue and is enriched by dentinal tubules that run from the pulp. Dentin is composed of hollow tubules that contain fibrils and contain sensory endings. Reparation of dentin occurs with the production of secondary dentin. Deep to the dentin is the dental pulp which is composed of innervated, vascular tissue. Pulp allows for the tooth's ability to feel temperature, touch, and pain via stimulation of dentin fibrils.

The periodontal ligament is composed of connective tissue fibers that anchor the tooth to the alveolar bone. In addition to their stabilizing role, they also serve as shock absorbers. The accessory canals supply blood vessels and nerves to the pulp and arise from the main root canal. The tip of each root contains a tiny opening called an apical foramen, where external blood vessels and nerves enter the root. The alveolar bone supports the root of the tooth and contains sockets that contain the embedded roots of teeth.

The primary teeth are grouped into four quadrants, each containing two incisors, a canine, and two molars. The two incisors constituting the central and lateral incisors.

**Maxillary Primary Teeth**

**Incisors –**The primary teeth incisors are essentially smaller morphological versions of permanent teeth incisors. The incisors are used for cutting food and are therefore sharp-edged in shape. They consist of the central incisors(tooth E, J) and the lateral incisors (tooth D, G). The central incisor is larger than the lateral incisor, and the maxillary central incisor is the largest of all the incisors. They also prominently figure into the aesthetic of the oral region. Incisors are generally single-rooted and also have one root canal. They have a flattened crown.  Concavoconvex in shape, their labial surface is convex, and their palatal surface is concave.

**Canines –**The primary teeth canines are also morphologically similar to permanent teeth canines.  The canines (tooth C, H) have a trapezoidal crown with one labial cusp. The labial surface is convex, and the palatal surface is concave. The canines have a single long root and a single root canal.  The canine roots are the longest root of all teeth. Furthermore, the upper canines have longer roots when compared to the mandibular canines. The canines serve to support the incisors. The canines have a characteristic pointed incisal edge and a large cone-shaped crown.

**Molars –**The molars are the largest of the primary teeth and provide significant function in mastication. The primary teeth molars have the same number of roots as the permanent molars. The crowns of the primary molars are more bulbous in morphology, and the roots are more divergent than those of permanent molars.  The buccal, lingual, mesial, and distal surfaces of the maxillary molars are all convex. The occlusal surface is rectangular.

**First Molars –**The maxillary first molars (tooth B, I) morphologically resemble both a molar and a premolar. Its occlusal surface consists of the mesiobuccal, distolingual, mesiolingual, and distobuccal cusps. The largest cusp is the mesiolingual cusp, and it also represents the sharpest cusp. The distolingual cusp is small and rounded in morphology. The buccal surface is smooth, and the three roots are long and widely spread. Of note, the primary 1st molar has a less pronounced mesiobuccal cusp when compared to the permanent 1st molar.

**Second Molars –**Morphologically, the primary maxillary second molars (tooth A, J) resemble the permanent maxillary first molar. Rhomboidal in shape, the maxillary second molar has four cusps, two on both the buccal and lingual aspects. A fifth cusp can be present and is called the tubercle of Carabelli. Two well-defined cusps can be seen on the buccal view, and the lingual surface has three cusps: the mesiolingual, distolingual, and the cusp of Carabelli.

**Mandibular Primary Teeth**

The dental morphology of the mandibular teeth mirrors that of the maxillary teeth.

**Incisors**- The incisors of the mandible are smaller than the incisors of the maxillary teeth and have one root that contains a single root canal. The central incisors constitute teeth P and O. The lateral incisors constitute teeth Q and N. The root of the incisors are slightly flattened. The crown is trapezoidal in the labial view and contains three tubercled incisal edges.

**Canines**– The canines constitute teeth R and M. Their crown is trapezoidal with a single labial cusp. A single root (the longest of the teeth) contains a single root canal.

**Mandibular molars**: The buccal, lingual, mesial, and distal surfaces of the mandibular molars are all convex. The occlusal surface is rectangular.

**First Molars –**The mandibular first molars (tooth S, L) have four cusps: two buccal and two lingual. These include the distobuccal, distolingual, mesiolingual, and mesiobuccal cusps. The occlusal surface is narrow secondary to mesiobuccal and mesiolingual cusp convergence. There are three pits.

**Second Molars –**The mandibular second molars(tooth T, K) morphologically resemble the first mandibular molar of the permanent teeth. Its buccal surface is divided into the mesiobuccal, distobuccal, and distal cusps. The lingual cusps include the distolingual and the mesiolingual cusps.

Numerous differences exist between the primary and permanent teeth, for example:

- Primary teeth are smaller

- Crowding is uncommon in primary teeth due to adequate space

- Primary teeth are whiter

- Pulp chambers of primary teeth are larger

- The enamel and dentin of primary teeth are thinner

- The area of contact of the primary molars are flat and broad

- The roots of the primary molar teeth are narrow and slender

- Pulp size relative to the crown is larger in primary teeth