The nurse practitioner, primary care provider or the emergency department physician is unlikely to encounter donovanosis in rouitine clinical practice in the United States and is therefore unlikely to be familiar with it. Physicians will need to have a high index of suspicion based on travel history, social history, and physical examination findings.

A broad differential diagnosis list is important when genital ulcers are present and sexually transmitted infection is suspected. Consider a pelvic exam on all women to evaluate for the presence of cervical lesions. All women of childbearing age should have a pregnancy test done in the emergency department. If donovanosis is suspected, it is important to recognize the extended course of treatment that may be required. It is reasonable to initiate treatment in the emergency department while arranging for proper follow-up testing and care.

Since donovanosis is so rare in the United States, patients should be referred to an infectious disease specialist or a clinician with experience in treating this condition. Definitive diagnosis in the emergency department is unlikely and can be pursued by a qualified specialist. It is important to prepare the patient for a prolonged treatment course and stress the importance of extended follow up to evaluate for reoccurrence. All patients presenting with possible donovanosis or any sexually transmitted infection should be considered for HIV testing.

The pharmacist should educate the patient that the treatment is often for many months and if compliance is not maintained, the risk of relapse is high.