The diagnosis of acute cystitis is usually made clinically in a patient with signs and symptoms consistent with a lower UTI in combination with laboratory evidence of pyuria and/or nitrites. Physical examination findings are often not necessary for the diagnosis of cystitis but may be more important for patients with pyelonephritis or vaginitis. Often in young, non-pregnant women with typical cystitis symptoms, especially in the absence of vaginal discharge or irritation, clinical suspicion may be sufficient in making the diagnosis and initiating treatment without laboratory confirmation.

Urinalysis, when indicated, is the most important laboratory test in diagnosing a UTI. A clean catch sample is usually sufficient, but if an uncontaminated specimen with few epithelial cells cannot otherwise be obtained, as in some morbidly obese women, a quick urethral catheterization should be considered. The risk of UTI from a single urethral catheterization in previously uninfected women is only about 1%.

The visual appearance of the urine is notoriously unreliable when diagnosing a UTI. Clear urine may be grossly infected, and cloudy urine may be sterile with the "cloudiness" caused by calcium phosphate debris or protein. One simple test is to add a few drops of glacial acetic acid to a test tube of the cloudy urine specimen. If this causes the "cloudiness" to disappear, the urine is most likely full of calcium phosphate debris.

Pyuria, which is the presence of at least 10 white blood cells (WBCs)/HPF or leukocytes in an unspun midstream urine specimen, is almost always present. The absence of pyuria is suggestive of an alternative diagnosis.

Urinary dipsticks may also be used in the diagnosis of UTI. They detect the presence of leukocyte esterase, an enzyme produced by leukocytes, and nitrites, which indicate the presence of Enterobacteriaceae. (Nitrates are broken down to nitrites only in the presence of bacteria, so a positive nitrite test indicates or is strongly suggestive of bacteriuria).Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, and Enterococcus typically fail to convert nitrates to nitrites.

It is reasonable to treat patients with UTI symptoms with antibiotics based on positive nitrites, but other diagnoses should be considered if the leukocyte esterase is negative.

A urine culture is beneficial for identifying etiologic pathogens and for determining antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. Greater than or equal to 100,000 CFU (colony forming units)/mL indicates clinically relevant bacteriuria, but the growth of greater than or equal to 1,000 CFU is considered significant in men and from samples obtained through straight catheterization of the bladder. Less than 100,000 CFU/mL does not rule out a urinary tract infection.

Urinalyses and urine cultures must be performed prior to antibiotic therapy in all men with acute cystitis symptoms and women with risk factors for complicated UTIs. They are also indicated in patients with atypical symptoms, those who do not respond to treatment, and where symptoms recur within 2 to 4 weeks.

Men who have recurrent episodes of cystitis should undergo an evaluation for prostatitis. In young men who are sexually active with a single episode of cystitis, urologic evaluation may not be indicated. Risk factors for a complicated UTI should prompt a urologic evaluation and workup.

Multiple drug-resistant organisms are becoming an increasingly difficult problem. They are defined as bacteria resistant to three or more different categories of antibiotics. Antibiotic drug resistance is a primary reason to obtain urine cultures in any potentially complicated or difficult infection and in all high-risk patients with urinary infections.

Patients with complicated cystitis who do not respond after 48 to 72 hours of appropriate antimicrobial treatment will require further evaluation through radiographic imaging of the upper urinary tract.