# Definition/Introduction

The sex of a fetus is due to the sperm provided by the biological father. Each oocyte, from the biological mother, has an X chromosome and does not influence the sex of the fetus. If the father provides another X chromosome the fetus will be female. There is an incredible amount of development that occurs in the uterus, but female development does not stop after birth.

Puberty begins in females from the ages of 8 to 10 years old. It is characterized by pubic hair development, breast enlargement, and menarche, which starts between the ages of 8 to 14, and 7 to 13 in African Americans.

After menarche, gonadotrophs can react to the effect of estradiol on LH and FSH.  Follicles are present in 86% of prepubescent girls and 99% of girls by menarche.

Thelarche, also known as breast development, is typically the first sign of female puberty. One breast may begin growing before the other, and this is considered normal. Thelarche begins 6 to 18 months before pubarche (the onset of pubic hair growth) and an average of 2 years before menarche (the first menstrual cycle). Estrogen is the primary stimulant for all of these changes, and it also causes the labia minora to grow, vaginal mucosa to mature, and alters fat distribution. Female development has an incredible phenotypic variation, and the average age of menarche is 12 years old.

As females develop, a universal means to classify where they are in puberty is known as Tanner stages. Stage one is prepubertal females. They will have no breast tissue or pubic hair. Stage two is when the breast bud begins to protrude with enlargement of the areola and the sparse presence of pubic hair.

# Issues of Concern

Sexual development can be concerning for those who do not develop correctly or feel different about their external genitalia. Intersex people are people born with chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomical atypical sex. These patients can have “ambiguous genitalia,” and many are subject to genital surgery shortly after birth. This alteration can later lead to malformation, pain, sexual dysfunction, scarring, urination difficulties, and depression. The intersex community rejects the original terminology of ‘hermaphrodite’ which originated from Greek mythology. They believe it to have a crude meaning.

Transgender people are those of matching, unambiguous chromosomal, gonadal and anatomic sex which is incongruent with their gender identity. Many patients possess a strong desire to live according to the identified gender will undergo gender reassignment surgery, medical treatment, and hormone therapy to change their appearance. Trans women are those who have experienced a male-to-female transition surgery, and trans men are patients who have undergone a female-to-male transition surgery.

# Clinical Significance

Infertility – One study estimates that one in every seven couples in the western world has infertility. Infertility occurs for many reasons or may occur spontaneously. During female development, if any step in the process does not form currently this can result in the inability to become pregnant or adequately carry a fetus.

Mullerian Duct Abnormalities (MDA) - These congenital malformations occur when the Mullerian duct does not fuse, canalize, or reabsorb correctly. A septate uterus is the most common MDA, followed by the bicornate uterus and arcuate uterus.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) – CAH is an autosomal recessive disorder due to enzyme deficiencies that impair the production of aldosterone, cortisol, and androgens by the adrenal glands. A 21 hydroxylase deficiency is the most common cause of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. CAH can present as the neonatal form with adrenal insufficiency salt wasting and ambiguous genitalia. It can also present as late-onset non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia (NCCAH), which is a less severe form in which there is 20 to 50 percent 21-hydroxylase enzyme activity compared to the classic form. Patients with non-classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia do not present with ambiguous genitalia and salt wasting. NCCAH which will result in adolescent female not developing secondary sex characteristics, with hypertension and hypokalemia. These symptoms are due to an increase in deoxycorticosterone (DOC) causing hypertension and hypokalemia and an absence of androgen production. Genetic analysis will reveal that these patients are genetically male (46, XY) but are unable to develop external genitalia due to the lack of testosterone and will appear female.

Ovarian cyst – Ovarian cysts can occur anytime throughout female development and aging. They are common, typically benign and asymptomatic. However, few ovarian cysts hold the ability to produce estrogen. If a pediatric patient has an estrogen-producing cyst, they will enter puberty early. Puberty beginning before eight years of age in females is known as precocious puberty. Most of these patients are observed with follow up every 4 to 6 weeks, and if necessary, a surgeon will excise the cyst. Most symptoms resolve over time, and these patients will not need surgery.

Female athlete triad – Menstruation is part of normal female development. Amenorrhea is the absence of monthly menses and has many causes. The female athlete triad is one cause and if not changed will have profound effects on the patient’s health and fertility. This triad encompasses energy deficiency, menstrual dysfunction, and low bone density. Due to vigorous workouts, strict diets or eating disorders these patients may be severely underweight. They are expending much more energy than they are consuming. This decrease in body mass index and energy results in amenorrhea and delayed puberty.

Precocious puberty – As defined above, precocious puberty is the early onset of puberty. It separates into central and peripheral precocious puberty. Central causes of precocious puberty are due to dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. The reason in females is mostly unknown but may be from cerebral malformations or tumors. GnRH agonists are the therapeutic choice to treat this condition.

McCune Albright syndrome (MAS) – MAS is a disease caused by a spontaneous, activating mutation of GNAS1 and the LH receptor gene.

Androgen insensitivity syndrome
(AIS) – AIS is due to the dysfunction of the androgen receptors throughout the body. It is a common disorder of sexual development. The phenotype of each patient is dependent on the degree of dysfunction.

Turner syndrome (TS) – This syndrome originates from the total or partial loss of the X-chromosome. Most cases have genetic mosaicism. These patients suffer from short stature, webbed neck, unusual physical appearance, intellectual disability, and ovarian failure. Height is the number one complaint when these patients present for care. Short stature in TS can be treated with growth hormone alone or in conjunction with oxandrolone. TS patients never undergo normal female pubertal development due to their gonadal failure, but hormone replacement can help. They can carry children but will need oocyte donation to become pregnant. One study found that most patients finish middle or high school.