Neural tube defects (NTDs) are the consequence of a disturbance in the neurulation process. During neurulation, a coordinated series of events gives rise to a neural plate, neural folds, plus the neural tube, which ultimately differentiates and evolves into the future brain and the spinal cord. Neural tube defects arise from the anterior and posterior neuropores as they are last to close. They can be open or closed, based on exposed or closed neural tissue.

Open NTDs are the result of defects in primary neurulation and involve any area of the central nervous system(CNS). Closed NTDs are due to defects in secondary neurulation and present in the spine.

Meningocele results from a failure to develop the caudal end of the neural tube resulting in a protrusion that contains cerebrospinal fluid, meninges, overlying skin, and does not have the spinal cord as its content. Anterior meningocele is usually presacral in location. Intrathoracic meningocele is a fluid-filled sac with the spinal meningeal wall's protrusion into the thoracic cavity through an enlarged intervertebral foramen. Lateral meningocele syndrome (LMS) is a clinical entity with multiple lateral spinal meningoceles (protrusions of arachnoid and dura through spinal foramina), distinctive facial features, hypotonia, joint hyperextensibility, cardiac, skeletal, and urogenital anomalies.

Neurologic manifestations of the meningoceles depend on their size and location, including back pain, neurogenic bladder, paresthesias, and paraparesis. Other neurologic findings can include syringomyelia, Chiari I malformation, and rarely, hydrocephalus. Neural tube defects are complex multifactorial defects involving both environmental and genetic factors.