Pyruvate generation from phosphoenolpyruvate is the last irreversible step of glycolysis. Once cells are committed to the gluconeogenesis pathway, sequential reverse reactions convert pyruvate to oxaloacetate and phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).

- The first step involves pyruvate carboxylase (PC), a ligase that adds a carboxyl group on pyruvate to create oxaloacetate. The enzyme consumes one ATP molecule, uses biotin (vitamin B7) as a cofactor, and uses a CO2 molecule as a carbon source. Biotin is bound to a lysine residue of PC. After ATP hydrolysis, an intermediate molecule PC-biotin-CO2 is formed, which carboxylates pyruvate to produce oxaloacetate. Apart from forming an intermediate for gluconeogenesis, this reaction provides oxaloacetic acid to the TCA cycle (anaplerotic reaction).

- The following exergonic reaction catalyzed by PEP carboxykinase (PEPCK), a lyase, uses GTP as a phosphate donor to phosphorylate oxaloacetate and form PEP. Glucocorticoids induce PEPCK gene expression; cortisol, after binding to its steroid receptor intracellularly, moves inside the cell nucleus. Then, the zinc finger domain in cortisol binds to the glucocorticoid response element (GRE) on DNA.

- The rest of the reactions are reversible and common with gluconeogenesis. Enolase, a lyase, cleaves carbon-oxygen bonds and catalyzes the conversion of PEP into 2-phosphoglycerate. Phosphoglycerate mutase, an isomerase, catalyzes the conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate  to 3-phosphoglycerate by transferring a phosphate from carbon-2 to carbon-3. Phosphoglycerate kinase using ATP as a phosphate donor and Mg+2 to stabilize with its positive charge, the phosphotransfer reaction converts 3-phosphoglycerate to 1,3- bisphosphoglycerate. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase catalyzes the reduction of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. NADH is oxidized as it donates its electrons for the reaction. As described earlier, glycerol phosphate from triglyceride catabolism is converted eventually into DHAP. Triosephosphate isomerase converts DHAP into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Aldolase A converts glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate into fructose-1,6 bisphosphate.

- The following irreversible step involves the conversion of fructose 1,6 bisphosphate into fructose-6 phosphate. This step is important as it is the rate-limiting step of gluconeogenesis. Fructose-1,6 bisphosphatase catalyzes the dephosphorylation of fructose-1,6 bisphosphate, requiring bivalent metal cations (Mg+2, Mn+2); this is a highly regulated step by global and local stimuli. Locally, increased ATP levels and increased citrate levels (the first intermediate of the TCA cycle) activate fructose-1,6 bisphosphatase. However, increased AMP and increased fructose-2,6 bisphosphate (F2,6BP) inactivate this enzyme. Glucagon binds to its receptor, a GPCR, and activates adenylate cyclase. The subsequent increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels leads to the activation of protein kinase A (PKA). PKA phosphorylates fructose 2,6 bisphosphatase (F2,6BPase) and phosphofructokinase-2 (PFK-2). Phosphorylated PFK-2 is inactive, while F2,6BPase is active and catalyzes the dephosphorylation of fructose 2,6 bisphosphate. Dephosphorylated F-2,6BP is inactive; hence, it does not negatively affect F1,6BPase.

- The last irreversible reaction involves glucose-6 phosphatase catalyzing the hydrolysis of glucose-6 phosphate into glucose. This enzyme is expressed primarily in the liver, kidneys, and intestinal epithelium, and the reaction happens in the endoplasmic reticulum of the cells. Muscle cells do not express glucose-6 phosphatase as they produce glucose to maintain their energy needs.