Although the benediction sign has existed in historical images dating back to the second and third centuries, the exact neurological cause of this pathology has been under debate. Some clinicians and anatomists have attributed this clinical sign with median neuropathy, while others have favored ulnar neuropathy as its etiology. However, the final hand postures, in either case, are almost similar, as discussed below.

Anatomically, the median nerve arises from the lateral and medial cords of the brachial plexus that originate from the nerve roots C5-T1. The median nerve does not have a branch in the arm. In the forearm, the median nerve mainly supplies to flexors of the forearm and the wrist. In hand, the median nerve supplies the lateral two lumbrical muscles supplying the second and third fingers and the thenar muscles. Lumbricals flex the metacarpophalangeal joints and extend the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints. The median nerve normally flexes the wrist, proximal interphalangeal joints, as well as the metacarpophalangeal and distal interphalangeal joints of the index and middle finger. Therefore, a lesion of the median nerve will affect the flexors of the second and third fingers resulting in the benediction sign when trying to make a fist.

The ulnar nerve is derived from the medial cord of the brachial plexus, incorporating nerve roots C8-T1. When it reaches the forearm, it gives rise to motor branches that innervate the flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial half of flexor digitorum profundus. In the hand, the ulnar nerve innervates medial two lumbricals supplying the fourth and fifth fingers, the interossei muscles, and the hypothenar muscles.

In summary, the difference between the Benediction signs produced by ulnar and median neuropathies are:

- In median neuropathy, the Benediction sign will be present when making a fist. The metacarpophalangeal joints and interphalangeal joints of the second and third fingers will be in an extended position due to the loss of action of their flexor muscles. In ulnar neuropathy, the Benediction sign will be present when opening the hand and extending the fingers. Due to the loss of function of the medial two lumbricals, the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fourth and fifth fingers will remain extended, while the interphalangeal joints will be in a flexed position.

- In median neuropathy, the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fourth and fifth fingers will appear flexed due to the normal medial two lumbricals supplied by the ulnar nerve. In ulnar neuropathy, the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fourth and fifth fingers will be in extension.

Careful examination of the position of the fingers and consideration to the intention of the Pope was taken into account, as an open hand during blessing was a customary means of indicating peaceful motives.