Renal scintigraphy is used for evaluation of renal perfusion, and function as well as renal anatomy. As CT and MRI imaging has advanced the role of renal scintigraphy has changed. Currently, it is usually limited to renal perfusion and function as anatomy evaluation is predominantly done by ultrasound, CT scan, and MRI.  Regarding anatomy, renal scintigraphy is currently used when there is an allergy to CT or MRI contrast material. The use of IV contrast in CT, as well as MR, is avoided in cases of abnormal renal function and altered GFR. Nuclear scanning agents can be used in such cases. Renal scintigraphy is also preferred in patients with claustrophobia who cannot undergo CT or MRI exams.

Renal scintigraphy has a role in the diagnosis of obstructive uropathy. It can be used to differentiate true obstruction from nonobstructive simulators causing urinary tract dilation.

A captopril study can diagnose compensated unilateral renal hypertension. DMSA cortical scintigraphy is useful in detecting renal scar or acute pyelonephritis specifically in children where there is higher sensitivity than routine ultrasound and lower radiation than CT scan. However, contrast-enhanced ultrasound is an emerging modality that has been used to identify post vesicoureteral reflux renal scarring.

Nuclear renal scanning is an excellent modality for the qualitative as well as quantitative assessment of renal transplant function. It is useful in post-transplant complication detection. The early detection of function in a renal transplant allows early management decisions including, when irreversible, removal of the transplant. Timely removal of a damaged transplanted kidney can save a patient from unnecessary immunosuppression administration.

Because radiation exposure from renal scintigraphy is very low as compared to a CT scan, it maintains a role in the evaluation of pediatric renal anatomy whether normal, anomalous, or pathologic.