# Continuing Education Activity

The diagnostic criteria for small-duct primary sclerosing cholangitis (SDPSC) included biochemical features of chronic cholestasis with unknown etiology, normal cholangiogram, liver histology compatible with PSC. SDPSC is more common in males with an average age of 38 years old. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of SDPSC and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide well-coordinated care and enhance patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis in the etiology of chronic cholestasis.
- Describe the pathophysiology of small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis.
- Summarize the prognosis of small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis compares to large duct primary sclerosing cholangitis.
- Explain the importance of SDPSC diagnosis and how it affects to improving care coordination among the interprofessional team when distinguishing SDPSC from large duct primary sclerosing cholangitis (LDPSC).

# Introduction

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is an uncommon cholestatic liver disease characterized by the inflammation and fibrosis of intra- and extra-hepatic biliary ducts. It has an incidence of 0.9 to 1.3 cases per 100000 in the United States.

# Etiology

The etiology of small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis (SDPSC), also referred to as 'pericholangitis,' is unknown. However, with consideration of SDPSC as a subtype of PSC, dietary exposure, infection, toxins, and autoimmunity can be the initial insults.

# Epidemiology

The male predominance observed in large duct pathology was confirmed in the small duct patients with inflammatory bowel disease, although not in the group of patients without IBD, where females predominated.

# Pathophysiology

Small duct PSC is considered as a subtype of PSC. Generally, PSC divides into four subgroups due to similarity:

- Classic PSC (intrahepatic and extrahepatic strictures on cholangiography)

- Intrahepatic PSC (intrahepatic strictures on cholangiography)

- Extrahepatic PSC (extrahepatic stricture on cholangiography)

- Small duct PSC (normal on cholangiography).

The role of immune-mediated mechanisms in the PSC patients has support from the association of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and non-HLA haplotypes, and the presence of autoantibodies in serology. bacteria or bacterial components and products passing the inflame bowel wall and enter the portal venous system, which results in concomitant initiation of an inflammatory reaction focused on portal fields.

# Histopathology

Except for extrahepatic PSC, LDPSC, SDPSC, and intrahepatic PSC have similar liver histology features, described as nonsuppurative cholangitis, periductal fibrosis, ductular reaction, and ductopenia. However, in extrahepatic PSC, the histology features are nondiagnostic or nonspecific features of cholestasis, particularly in early-stage disease.

# History and Physical

The specific diagnostic criteria in small duct PSC are still challenging, particularly whether the existence of IBD is a requirement for the diagnosis or not. The detail definition has varied from study to study. Generally, IBD is not a mandatory criterion for small duct PSC.

# Evaluation

**Laboratory tests******- In most patients, liver biochemical tests usually show elevation of the serum alkaline phosphatase. The serum aminotransferases are generally less than 300 international unit/L. The serum albumin concentration may be low in patients with active inflammatory bowel disease, although in early-stage PSC is often normal.

**Cholangiography**- It is helpful for the evaluation of affected biliary radicles greater than 100 micro millimeters. Various options such as Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), or percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) are available to obtain cholangiograms. However, being noninvasive and accurate makes MRCP as the preferred test of choice to distinguish SDPSC from LDPSC.

**Liver biopsy -**The most specific histologic finding in SDPSC is the "onion skin" pattern, which describes as fibrous obliteration and concentric replacement of connective tissue in small bile ducts.

**Liver ultrasound**- Ultrasound findings are commonly used to rule out a secondary cause of chronic cholestasis, such as pancreatic disease and gallbladder abnormalities.

# Treatment / Management

There are no reported data in the literature regarding specific treatment for SDPSC. Charatcharoenwitthaya et al. .evalute the effect of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in 42 patients with SDPSC and follow the liver disease progression (cirrhosis, liver transplantation) and liver biochemistries for 24.9 years. They reported UDCA therapy might not delay disease progression but improves the liver biochemistries.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Intrinsic or Extrinsic Compressive Causes (Either Benign or Malignant)**

- Cholangiocarcinoma

- Mirizzi syndrome

- Compressive lymphadenopathy

- Portal hypertensive biliopathy

- Diffuse intrahepatic malignancy

- Postoperative strictures

- Chronic pancreatitis

**Infectious Causes**

- AIDS cholangiopathy (e.g., Cryptosporidium parvum, cytomegalovirus)

- Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis (also known as oriental cholangio-hepatitis)

- Helminthic infection (e.g., Clonorchis, Opisthorchis, Ascaris)

**Ischemic Causes**

- Posttransplant non-anastomotic strictures

- Postintraarterial chemotherapy

- Postradiation therapy

**Immunologic Causes**

- IgG4-associated cholangiopathy

- Eosinophilic cholangitis

- Mast cell cholangiopathy

- Histiocytosis X

- Systemic vasculitis

- Hepatic allograft rejection

- Primary biliary cholangitis

**Congenital and/or Idiopathic Causes**

- Choledochal cysts (e.g., Caroli disease)

- Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis

# Prognosis

In contrast to patients with large duct PSC, Small duct PSC has had less research, and usually, the studies compare its prognosis with large duct PSC. Large duct PSC is associated with progression of fibrosis to cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, and liver transplantation. These patients have an elevated risk of malignancy, particularly cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and colorectal dysplasia and adenocarcinoma in the presence of IBD.

Small duct PSC, compared to large duct PSC, seems to be more benign. The results of the study by Bjornsson et al. presented the natural history of 33 patients with small duct PSC and 260 patients with large duct PSC over a mean follow-up of approximately nine years. In this study, only 4 (12%) of the 33 patients with small duct PSC died or required liver transplantation versus 122 (47%) of the 260 patients with large duct PSC.

A minority of patients with small duct PSC eventually develop cholangiographic evidence of large-duct PSC. In the Bjornsson et al. study, cholangiography was repeated in 19 (58%) of the 33 patients with SDPSC. Only four patients (12%) developed large-duct PSC, with typical intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic changes on cholangiography.

Cumulative follow-up data by Bjornsson et al. reported that nineteen (22.9%) of SDPSC progress to large duct PSC after a median of 7.4 years. In this study, no progression to cholangiocarcinoma was reported except one patient who first developed to large duct PSC. Also, they indicated small duct PSC has longer transplantation-free survival than large -duct PSC(13 years vs. ten years, respectively). SDPSC recured in two patients after liver transplantation.

Charatcharoenwitthaya et al. reported that patients with concomitant of SDPSC and IBD have a better prognosis compare to SDPSC without IBD. Also, they concluded IBD associated with SDPSC had a lower prevalence of pancolitis compared to IBD in patients with large-duct PSC.

# Complications

- Progression to LDPSC, then possibly increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma.

- Fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies (A, D, E, and K)

- Metabolic bone disease(osteopenia/osteoporosis rather than osteomalacia)

- Liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension

- Hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis

- Recurrence after liver transplant

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis (SDPSC) is a chronic cholestatic disorder described by inflammation and fibrosis of biliary calibers <100 micro millimeters.

Most patients do not have any symptoms and usually detect by abnormal liver tests. However, in symptomatic patients, abdominal pain, fatigue, pruritus, and weight loss are the most common complaints.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis (SDPSC) is a rare disease with an unclear prevalence due to limited studies. The rarity of SDPSC causes challenges in diagnosis. The diagnostic criteria for small-duct PSC included biochemical features of chronic cholestasis with unknown etiology, normal cholangiogram, liver histology compatible with PSC.So, health professionals should be aware of etiologies that can cause abnormal liver enzymes and try to rule out them by choosing the correct laboratory or imaging tests. After excluding known causes of chronic cholestasis, patients should evaluate by cholangiogram (MRCP preferred) and liver biopsy to distinguish SDPSC from LDPSC. The study by Bjornsson et al. revealed the difference in prognosis between SDPSC and LDPSC. They concluded SDPSC has longer transplantation-free survival than LDPSC (13 years vs. ten years, respectively). Also, in this study, cholangiocarcinoma did not occur in SDPSC patients except one patient who already progressed to LDPSC.SDPSC can recur even after liver transplantation.

In terms of improving outcomes and treatments, no data is available. Only one study evaluated the effect of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in SDPSC patients which did not show the delay in the progression of the disease, despite improvement in liver enzymes.