Non-cardiac reversible manifestations resolve spontaneously. Therefore, observation is advised of these clinical symptoms. Photoprotection is the key to management of cutaneous manifestations. Topical corticosteroids and antimalarial drugs are not indicated, and if there are residual telangiectasia laser therapy can be used. Anemia and thrombocytopenia that become symptomatic can be managed with blood and platelets transfusion, glucocorticoids or intravenous immunoglobulin have shown to be effective in certain cases.

Atrioventricular heart block has high morbidity and mortality rates and should be approached by an interprofessional team, and should address parental counseling, serial fetal echocardiograms, maternal screening, and management. Therapy with fluorinated steroid betamethasone/dexamethasone was used aiming for prevention of the development of AV heart block due to previous reports, but more recent studies have not confirmed this benefit. There have also been reports of the beneficial use of intravenous immunoglobulin regarding prevention and management of neonatal lupus, but results are still inconclusive. Studies that involved the use of hydroxychloroquine 400 mg daily starting between the 6 and 10 weeks of gestation have shown a decreased risk of developing neonatal cardiac lupus, especially in women with the previous history of an affected infant. Beta-receptor agonist improves the heart rate and stroke volume in utero but not a decreased risk of developing AV block.

A ventricular rate is less than 55 per minute, hydrops fetalis, cardiomegaly, atrioventricular valve regurgitation or low aortic flow velocity indicate poor fetal prognosis and outcome. There are limited treatment options for AV block in utero, and management is mainly to monitor closely and follow up. If signs of fetal distress developed early delivery is indicated with emergency pacing. Permanent pacemaker insertion is the crucial treatment option with the need of determining the right time for the procedure.