While not completely elucidated, current theories suggest brachioradial pruritus is a bifactorial process involving cervical nerve irritation and ultraviolet radiation (UVR) of the affected area.

A large majority of patients diagnosed with brachioradial pruritus will have a positive imaging study with evidence of one or more cervical spine abnormalities. Imaging with x-ray computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of patients with suspected or diagnosed brachioradial pruritus revealed cervical spine abnormalities such as degenerative joint disease (DJD), cervical nerve impingement due to disk herniation, osteoarthritis, foraminal stenosis, and others. DJD has been reported as the most common cervical spine abnormality in patients with brachioradial pruritus. Many authors suggest that cervical spine disease between C5 to C8 is causative. The dermatomes of the dorsolateral arms are C5 to C6, and a cervical spine abnormality with evidence of radiculopathy at these levels would be especially suggestive as a cause for brachioradial pruritus. Despite the high frequency of cervical spine abnormalities on imaging,  nearly all brachioradial pruritus patients imaged did not meet the criteria for cervical radiculopathy. Additionally, only a minority of patients diagnosed with brachioradial pruritus are imaged. This suggests that cervical radiculopathy not inclusive of radiologic criteria may be responsible for the high frequency of cervical spinal abnormalities in patients with brachioradial pruritus may simply be a confounding finding.

UVR is thought to be a contributing factor of brachioradial pruritus, and many patients report increased symptoms of brachioradial pruritus with sun exposure. The term brachioradial summer pruritus is also used in reference to the increased incidence of brachioradial pruritus during the warm summer months.  A subset of histamine sensitive C-fibers is responsible for the transmission of pruritus. Excessive UVR causes damage and a reduction of these C-fibers. Despite the reduction in cutaneous C-fiber number, increased pruritus is reported with UVR in patients with brachioradial pruritus. This pruritic response to a stimulus that does not normally cause pruritus is known as alloknesis. Many patients report relief of symptoms during the winter months and with sun protection, which supports the role of UVR as a trigger in brachioradial pruritus.

The absence of either radiographically evident cervical nerve irritation or UVR does not preclude the diagnosis of brachioradial pruritus.