Robotic TKR uses a preoperative CT scan to create a 3D reconstruction of the original knee. This patient model is then used to calculate the measurement of the femoral and tibial bone resection and select the exact size of the implant.

The aim of TKA is to restore the mechanical axis, restore the joint line, restore balance in flexion and extension gaps, and restore the Q angle for perfect patella tracking. To reach these goals, the preservation of the surrounding soft-tissue is crucial. Destruction of the collateral ligaments, PCL, or extensor mechanism may lead to delay in the recovery, decrease joint stability, and decrease prosthesis life. Robotic TKA limits saw action, which reduces iatrogenic bone and soft-tissue damage.

There are multiple factors that affect the successful outcome of total knee arthroplasties, such as the perfect position of the prosthesis, accurate balance of flexion-extension gaps, perfect tensioning of the ligament, and soft-tissue preservation. Most of these factors are surgeon-related, which varies based on the skills and experience of the performing surgeon. Thus, in conventional total knee arthroplasty, techniques involving bone resection and soft tissue balancing are associated with poor reproducibility and the lack of the advantage of finetuning implant positioning along with the risk of iatrogenic soft tissue injuries. Inaccurate prosthesis positioning or gap balancing may lead to reduced patient recovery and prolonged rehabilitation, less satisfactory outcomes, increased instability with the reduction in the implant lifespan.

Robotic total knee arthroplasty uses certain software to convert anatomical images into a virtual three-dimension reconstruction of joints. The anatomy is usually obtained by requesting pre-operative CT or intraoperative tibia and femur mapping. The surgeons use this model to plan the perfect bone cut, implant positioning, limb alignment, and bone coverage based on the patient’s anatomy. The intraoperative robotic device helps to minimize iatrogenic soft-tissue and bony injury.