# Introduction

In the U.S., aviation mishaps continue to plague the military, commercial, and general aviation communities. According to the United States Air Force (USAF) Safety Center public data, there were 22 class-A mishaps involving greater than 2 million dollars, loss of life, permanent disability, or loss of aircraft in 1,590,977 flight hours. In the fiscal year 2018, this accounted for one mishap approximately every 72317 flight hours. In commercial and general aviation, it was reported in 2002, up to 80% of mishaps, human factors were responsible.

The following year, the former Chief of Staff of the USAF stated that the Air Force’s goal was to get to a zero percent mishap rate eventually. Why do we investigate aircraft mishaps? Since the first known aircraft mishap with Orville Wright and Lt. Thomas Selfridge in 1908, our goal in investigating the circumstances of accidents has been to improve flight safety. Now, teams include a human performance specialist or medical officer to work in conjunction with a maintenance officer, an airframe pilot, a forensics expert, and a senior investigator to preserve and gather evidence, investigate injuries and fatalities, and determine why things happened the way they did to develop steps toward improving the safety of flight for the future of aviation. We must continue to look at each mishap investigation for evidence to improve survivability in the future as we strive toward the goals previously identified.

# Issues of Concern

Per the NTSB's public website, the response is tailored through “Go-Teams” of three to over a dozen members depending on location and severity of mishap investigation. NTSB Go Teams are on call 24/7 and include a human performance member who works to establish the human factors involved in the mishap they are responding to. The FAA Investigator-in-Charge (IIC)  collects information after an accident or incident and has 30 days to report findings through the Air Traffic Quality Assurance system (ATQA), to the Aviation Data Systems Branch, and finally to the FAA Accident/Incident Database System Source per the AVP-100 publication.  In the US Air Force (USAF), the response is staged. Local aviator teams, geographically closest to the mishap are convened as an Initial Safety Board (ISB) in the initial five days to determine what happened; the Safety Investigation Board for the following 30 days determines why the mishap occurred, and upon completion of the SIB report, an Accident Investigation Board (AIB) could be convened with 30 days to complete recommendations for who is responsible for the mishap.

Once a mishap occurs, the forensics specialist is typically the responding flight physician or flight surgeon (FS), ISB FS, or local emergency medical services (EMS). He or she must coordinate with law enforcement, fire, EMS, bioenvironmental crews, Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD), and/or local government to ensure scene safety. After an accident, several hazardous materials such as fuel, pressurized systems, and hydraulic containers may be under extreme pressure and heat.  They may also have damaged containment systems and pose a danger to the rescue crew

Military crews work with the flight surgeon, and civilian crews must work with local law enforcement (per 14 CFR section 91.17) to obtain drug and alcohol testing following the applicable military or FAA and DOT instruction.

Importantly, part of interviewing surviving crew and maintainers who serviced the aircraft in the recent past are the 72 hours, seven days, and 3-month histories.

An Initial Safety Board will be convened, which will generally take over where the initial responding flight physician or FS has left off and must complete data collection within five days of the event. This medical officer will finish photographing the area, continue to conduct interviews, now including air traffic control, involved aircraft maintainers, and next-of-kin. Reference AFI 91-204. The FAA equivalent to this would be convening of the Event Response Team (ERT), who would work with the Office of Aerospace Medicine Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI) to conduct the interviews mentioned above and investigations as laid out in FAA Order 8020.11D.

Jurisdiction over human remains is determined with help from the Office of the Armed Forces Medical Examiner (military) and/or the local office of the coroner or medical examiner. In exclusive federal jurisdiction, 10 USC 1471 gives Armed Forces Medical Examiner System, now the Office of the Armed Forces Medical Examiner (OAFME) jurisdiction. Otherwise, primary jurisdiction belongs to the local ME/Coroner. In concurrent jurisdiction, primary jurisdiction usually falls with the local authority, and secondary jurisdiction usually rests with OAFME. Generally, commercial and general aviation mishaps are investigated under the jurisdiction of the NTSB. Reference AFI 91-202, and the NTSB’s Major Investigations Manual from 2002.

The collection of remains may be completed by the local medical examiner in civilian investigations or the ISB Flight Surgeon, SIB Medical Officer, or with assistance from the AFMES in military investigations, depending on the location of the mishap. Higher speed mishaps subject the human body to high G forces, which could lead to fragmentation of human remains, which may complicate recovery. In this case, the remains should be marked individually, and procedures handled with close communication with the OAFME. This is not likely to occur with civilian aircraft except for accidents, including near-vertical impact with the ground at freefall speeds.

Autopsies and imaging are performed on all military members killed in aircraft mishaps and should be performed on all deceased civilian aviators.

Once remains are recovered and a proper autopsy is pending, the FS or human performance specialist continues to be responsible for gathering data on all possible contributing factors to the event. This can be simplified using the acronym CREEP, which stands for container, restraints, environment, energy absorption, and post-crash factors that may have contributed to the injuries or fatalities in the event.

The Formal Aviation Safety Report will be published by the Safety Investigation Board and uploaded into the appropriate overarching system, either a secure military system or published publicly on the NTSB website. Human factors considered contributory to the mishap are usually published in a tiered approach. The categories of those human factors are organizational influences, supervision, preconditions, and individual acts. The ideal report will identify not only the individual pilot or crew member’s situational responses but may also identify an unsafe condition, aircraft weakness, culture issue, or organizational policies or culture which lead up to the mishap. The identified factor(s) are addressed across the fleet, organization, or system to ensure that no other aircraft or crew member will encounter a similar situation without adequate training, equipment, or precautions to prevent the bad outcome.

# Clinical Significance

Despite improvements in nearly every aspect of flight from the engineering of aircraft, advancements in control systems, and improved aircrew training, there continue to be mishaps involving human factors that contribute to the loss of aircraft and life, indicating we have more to learn. Close coordination with authorities and sensitivity to families brings expedience to the investigation and preserves the dignity of the deceased, as well as of the surviving aircrew and families. The job of the human factors specialist, whether military or civilian, will continue to be pivotal in investigating these incidents and contributing to the effort to prevent future losses.