The diagnosis of stress cardiomyopathy should be suspected in adults (particularly postmenopausal women) who present with a suspected acute coronary, particularly when the clinical manifestations and electrocardiographic abnormalities are out of proportion to the degree of elevation in cardiac biomarkers. It is important to emphasize that Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a diagnosis of exclusion that can only be made after coronary angiography because of the indistinguishable features from acute coronary disease.

The most widely accepted criteria are the Mayo Clinic diagnostic criteria for the identification of stress cardiomyopathy. Outlined below are the key features; all are required to meet the diagnosis:

- Transient hypokinesis, akinesis, or dyskinesis in the left ventricular mid segments with or without apical involvement; regional wall motion abnormalities that extend beyond.

- A single epicardial vascular distribution; and frequently, but not always, a stressful trigger.

- The absence of obstructive coronary disease or angiographic evidence of acute plaque rupture.

- New ECG abnormalities (ST-segment elevation and/or T-wave inversion) or modest elevation in cardiac troponin.

- The absence of pheochromocytoma and myocarditis.

**Electrocardiographic findings**Patients with TC often exhibit a dynamic pattern of electrocardiographic (ECG) changes akin to the ECG staging in pericarditis.

**Laboratory findings**Cardiac biomarkers including troponins and CK-MB show mild elevation. According to the International Takotsubo Registry study, the median initial troponin was 7.7 times the upper limit of normal. Levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal pro-BNP are elevated in most patients with stress cardiomyopathy and exceeded those seen in a matched cohort of patients with acute coronary syndrome (median 5.89 versus 2.91 times the upper limit of normal).

**Transthoracic echocardiography**demonstrates the wall motion abnormalities classified as:

- Apical type (typical): there is a systolic apical ballooning of the left ventricle, with depressed mid and apical segments, and also hyperkinesis of the basal walls. This variant was found in approximately 80% of patients in the International Takotsubo Registry study.

- Atypical variants: Mid-ventricular type hypokinesis (14.6%), basal type hypokinesis (2.2%), focal type hypokinesis (most commonly the anterolateral segment) (1.5%), and global hypokinesis.

Most patients with stress cardiomyopathy have reduced overall left ventricular systolic function, and right ventricular dysfunction has also been reported.

**Cardiovascular magnetic****resonance imaging**may help diagnose and evaluate stress cardiomyopathy, particularly when the echocardiogram is suboptimal or there is coexisting coronary artery disease. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance may assist in the differential diagnosis, delineate the full extent of ventricular abnormalities, and identify associated complications. It may also demonstrate myocardial edema, necrosis, fibrosis, and occasionally late gadolinium enhancement.

**Radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging**is not indicated in most patients presenting with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy since most of the common presentation is acute coronary syndrome requiring cardiac catheterization. In a low to intermediate risk non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome, radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging may help.

**Cardiac catheterization**is an invasive procedure of choice when Takotsubo cardiomyopathy presents as ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome or troponin positive acute coronary syndrome. Coronary angiography will show normal coronary anatomy or mild to moderate coronary atherosclerosis.