The treatment recommendations usually rely on the clinical judgment and expertise of the providers who have treated patients with acquired hemophilia A (AHA). The reason being the unavailability of an international consensus for management.

The management of AHA, however, comprises of a two-pronged therapy approach in which both modalities go hand in hand. These are

- Hemostasis management.

- Eradication of Inhibitor.

**Hemostasis Management**

The requirement for hemostasis management is primarily dependent on the severity of bleeding, as well as its location. It should be noted that the autoantibody titer is not directly correlated to the bleeding severity. As mentioned earlier, although there might be some residual factor activity detectable, it does not play a vital role in the clinical picture of the patient.

- 
**Minor Bleeding**

In a patient that presents with mild bleeding and is not needing to undergo an emergent invasive procedure, with autoantibody titers of equal to or less than five BU, observation is sufficient. These titers have been reported to disappear in 25% of cases within a few months when these were secondary to pregnancy or antimicrobial therapy. In cases with minor bleeding that require treatment, the approach is usually limited to avoiding any invasive procedure as well as the discontinuation of medication that is associated with bleeding. In patients with residual factor VIII levels of more than 5 percent and autoantibody titers less than 2 BU, desmopressin (0.3–0.4 mg/kg) has been reported to be helpful with increasing the factor VIII levels. However, the rise in factor levels is transient but usually proves to be useful in minor bleeding cases. As compared to desmopressin, the human factor VIII is found to be superior in situations with low autoantibody titers, but the requirement of extraordinary amounts of FVIII, to saturate the neutralizing autoantibody, is a significant limitation.

- 
**Major Bleeding**

Patients who present with major bleeding (72%) require initiation of appropriate antihemorrhagic treatment in a timely fashion. Suppose the antibody titer is low (<5BU) treatments, including human factor VIII or desmopressin, may be considered as the first-line therapy if the hemostatic levels of FVIII can be achieved which is only possible with low titers of antibody. In cases with high titers, first-line treatment is the use of bypassing agents. The bypassing agents are named so because of their mechanism of action. They act by bypassing the need for factor VIII in the coagulation pathway in the production of thrombin. These agents include activated prothrombin complex concentrate (aPCC) and recombinant activated Factor VII (rFVIIa). The prothrombin complex concentrate, which is plasma-derived and contains exogenously activated vitamin K dependent factors (factors II, VII, IX, X).

Although both bypassing agents differ in their pharmacokinetics and biochemical properties, neither has shown to be more effective over the other in clinical settings. Some studies do suggest that rFVIIa should be preferred over aPCC. However, the cost aspect of rFVIIa is a downside to its widespread usage.

Treatment response is monitored clinically as no laboratory test has been approved for assessing the efficacy of the treatment. Global hemostatic assays have been used to determine thrombin generation, but, the results show no correlation with the patients' status clinically. Older patients and patients with comorbidities (cardiovascular diseases, cancers, and pregnancy) are at a higher risk of developing complications, including arterial and venous thromboses, with the use of increased doses of these agents.

In the case of mucosal bleeding, there is supporting evidence for the concomitant use of antifibrinolytic therapy.

Once treatment is successful, to prevent bleeding in the future, there are recommendations for prophylactic therapy by using low doses of bypassing agents.

**Inhibitor Eradication**

The treatment of AHA depends on correcting the pathophysiology that arises due to the presence of factor autoantibody. In the presence of the autoantibody, the patient is always at risk of life-threatening bleeding, and the complete eradication of the inhibitor is vital for improving survival in patients. Inhibitor eradication therapy should be initiated along with hemostatic therapy as the delay has been associated with poor patient outcomes. For this purpose, the first-line treatment includes prednisone (1 mg/kg/day). It can be used alone or cyclophosphamide (50 to 100 mg/day) can be added, although evidence suggests that the combined use is correlated with better patient outcomes.

The inhibitor eradication therapy is considered successful with undetectable titers of autoantibody (<0.6 BU) along with normal factor VIII levels (>50%). Indications for second-line immunosuppression include factor VIII levels not increasing, and autoantibody titers are not decreasing at 3 to 5 weeks with appropriate treatment and adequate patient compliance.