In Wernicke's aphasia language output is fluent with a normal rate and intonation. However, the content is often difficult to understand because of paraphrastic errors. Paraphasic errors come in two forms: semantic paraphasia errors where****one word is substituted for another and phenomic paraphrastic errors where one sound or syllable is substituted for another. An example of a semantic paraphasia error would be a patient saying "watch" instead of "clock."  An example of a phonemic paraphasic error would be a patient saying "dock" instead of "clock." In severe cases, these errors can result in neologisms (new words) or word salad which makes communication nearly unintelligible. Because of these deficits, patients may find it easier to substitute a generic word such as "thing" or "stuff" instead of saying the word they wish to say. Reading involves the comprehension of written words, and thus reading is also often impaired in Wernicke's aphasia. As with Broca's aphasia, repetition is also impaired.

Unlike Broca's aphasia, patients with Wernicke's aphasia speak with normal fluency and prosody and follow grammatical rules with normal sentence structure. Associated neurological symptoms depend on the size and location of the lesion and include visual field deficits, trouble with the calculation (acalculia), and writing (agraphia). As opposed to Broca's aphasia, patients with Wernicke's aphasia often do not have hemiparesis accompanying the language deficit. They also do not display the same degree of emotional outbursts and depression seen with Broca's aphasia.

Repetition and naming items isusually abnormal. In some cases, there is impairment in reading. even when they are able to write fluently, the choice of words and spelling is abnormal. An early clue to Wernicke aphasia is the abnormal spelling.

In general, patients with wernicke aphasia are not aware of their deficits; in the long run they do become frustrated that others are not able to understand what they are saying. Sometimes, the patient may become aware of the errors in language if it is presented to them in an audio format.

Wernicke aphasia usually involves the posterior one third of the superior temporal gyrus. If there is involvement of the middle/inferior temporal gyri or the inferior parietal lobule, recovery is unlikely. Recovery also depends on area and size of damage, patient age and status of the contralateral cortex.