Spirometry has proved to be a crucial tool in diagnosing lung disease, monitoring patients for their pulmonary function, and assessing their fitness for various procedures. With further research, solid evidence can arise for the role of spirometry in assisting patients in quitting smoking. The American College of Physicians guidelines does not recommend spirometry testing for patients undergoing nonthoracic surgery. There, of course, are exceptions if the patient has preoperative asthma or COPD.

Recent evidence also supports the use of spirometry in nonthoracic surgeries. A recent retrospective observational study found that lower preoperative spirometry FVC may predict postoperative pulmonary complications in high-risk patients undergoing abdominal surgery.

Lung volumes are essential to understand when evaluating a patient for surgery or evaluating a patient with preexisting lung disease. Tidal volume (TV) is the amount of air that can be exhaled or inhaled in one respiratory cycle. Normal tidal volume ranges from 6 to 8 ml/kg. Inspiratory reserve volume(IRV) is the forcible amount of air inhaled after normal TV. Expiratory reserve volume (ERV) is the amount of forcible air exhaled after exhalation of a normal TV. Residual Volume (RV) is the amount of air in the lungs after maximum exhalation. Both RV and functional residual volume (FRC) can not be measured by spirometry. RV can be indirectly calculated from the FRC and ERV.

Lung capacities are the summation of lung volumes. Total lung capacity (TLC) is the summation of TV, IRV, ERV, and RV. This represents the maximum volume the lungs can accommodate. Vital capacity (VC) is the summation of TV, IR, and ERV. It represents the total air exhaled after maximum inhalation. Functional residual capacity (FRC) is the residual volume plus expiratory reserve volume. It is the volume of air remaining in the lungs after normal exhalation.

These static lung volumes and capacities can diagnosis obstructive and restrictive lung patterns. Restrictive lung disease results in reduced lung compliance and a reduction in lung volumes and capacities. TLC is reduced greater than 80% or below the 5th percentile of the predicted value. Both FEV1 and FVC are reduced, but FVC is reduced more than FEV1. Therefore, the FEV1/FVC ratio is greater than 80%.

One of the most common causes of restrictive lung disease is obesity. Obese patients have a reduction in FRC, which becomes worse when moving from upright to a supine position. The weight of the chest wall pushes down on the lungs. The weight of the abdominal contents pushes against the diaphragm and base of the lungs worsening the restrictive pattern. Other restrictive lung processes are chest wall diseases(scoliosis, chest trauma), and neuromuscular disorders (Myasthenia Gravis, Guillain-Barré syndrome). Obstructive lung disease is a disproportionate reduction in the maximum airflow from the lungs compared to the maximum air that can be displaced from the lung.

Complete spirometry exams will identify FEV1, forced vital capacity (FVC), vital capacity (VC), residual lung volume (RV), maximum voluntary minute ventilation (MMV), and total lung capacity (TLC). One parametric that is highly indicative of postoperative complications is predicted postoperative FEV 1(ppo FEV 1).