Benzodiazepines are a class of drugs that act upon benzodiazepine receptors (BZ-R) in the central nervous system (CNS). The receptor is a protein comprised of five transmembrane subunits that form a chloride channel in the center, i.e., the GABA-A receptor. The five subunits comprised of two alpha subunits, two beta subunits, and one gamma subunit. The extracellular portions of the alpha and beta subunit proteins form a receptor site for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter. The extracellular portions of the alpha and gamma subunit proteins form a binding site for benzodiazepines. Activation of the BZ-R causes a conformational change to a central pore, which allows the entrance of chloride ions into the neuron. The influx of the chloride anion results in hyperpolarization of the neuron resulting in CNS depression.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption:  After oral administration, benzodiazepines are usually well absorbed from GIT except for clorazepate which is decarboxylated in gastric juice before absorption. After intramuscular injection, the absorption of diazepam or chlordiazepoxide is slow, and the absorption of lorazepam or midazolam is usually quick. After intravenous administration, benzodiazepines quickly distribute to the brain and the central nervous system. Midazolam is one of the most lipophilic benzodiazepines, due to which there is a quick crossing of the blood-brain barrier and rapid onset of clinical effects.

Distribution: The benzodiazepines and their active metabolites avidly bind to plasma proteins. Plasma protein binding for alprazolam is approximately 70%, 85% for clonazepam, and 99% for diazepam. The concentration of benzodiazepines in the CSF is approximately equal to the concentration of free drugs in plasma.   Diazepam is redistributed especially rapidly.

Metabolism: the first phase of metabolism involves the formation of N-desalkylated metabolites that are biologically active. Exceptions are triazolam, alprazolam and midazolam. The second phase of metabolism involves hydroxylation and usually yields an active derivative. The third phase of metabolism is the conjugation with glucuronic acid. Most benzodiazepines are metabolized extensively by hepatic CYP3A4 and CYP2C19. Lorazepam undergoes direct glucuronidation without cytochrome p450 metabolism. Consequently, lorazepam can be used in patients with hepatic dysfunction.

Excretion: Benzodiazepines and their metabolites are primarily excreted by the kidney. Diazepam produces the active metabolites oxazepam, temazepam, and desmethyldiazepam, which further increase the drug action duration. The elimination half-life of benzodiazepines is increased in the elderly and patients with renal dysfunction.