**Pre-Surgery**

Equipment needs to be checked for safety, and all patient data will need to be double-checked by clinical staff to minimize the risk of errors. Informed written consent is obtained from the patient, usually before the day of the procedure, so that there is adequate time to discuss any questions or concerns.

**Surgical Technique**

The basic elements of radial keratotomy are deceptively simple and comprise:

- Administration of appropriate anesthesia

- Accurate marking of the visual axis and incision lines taking into account any cyclotorsion, marking an appropriate size optical zone

- Measurement of the corneal thickness

- Accurate setting of the blade depth

- Making the corneal incisions,

- Administration of post-surgery antibiotic drops.

- Topical anesthesia is used for most patients, as this leaves the eye to remain mobile to mark the visual axis. The size of the optical zone is dependent on surgeon preference; in the PERK study, the clear central zone was determined by pre-operative spherical-equivalent cycloplegic refraction measuring 3 to 4 mm.

**Post-Surgery**

Post-operative eye drops were not routinely prescribed in the early years of radial keratotomy, which contributed to its popularity. Later topical steroids were used to accentuate the RK effect by modifying wound healing. If dry eye symptoms occur, they can be managed with topical ocular lubricants. The patient will be followed up with the surgeon, and studies have now confirmed that long-term refractive stability and vision quality is a challenge in post-RK patients.

**Alternative Corneal Incisional Surgery**

Astigmatic keratotomy (AK), also known as arcuate keratotomy, utilizes the placement of deep corneal incisions in the steep axis of astigmatism, resulting in flattening in the given meridian. A coupling effect occurs whereby steepening happens in the opposite and perpendicular meridian.coupling ratio and is usually 1.