# Definition/Introduction

Lasegue sign or straight leg raising test (SLRT) is a neurodynamic exam to assess nerve root irritation in the lumbosacral area.

**Historical Evolution**

Traditionally, Ernest-Charles Lasegue (1816-1883) is considered the first physician who verbally described this sign and emphasized its importance in patients with sciatica.Contribuition a l’etude Clinique de la Sciatique in 1881. Both Lasegue and Forst proposed that the sharp pain elicited by the test was due to compression of the sciatic nerve by muscular contraction.

**Anatomy Related to SLRT**

In the lumbar region, the nerve roots cross the intervertebral disc above the neural foraminae through which they exit.

**Causes of Pain While Performing SLRT**

- Stretching of the sciatic nerve

- Displacement of the medulla and conus medullaris

- Nerve compression leads to sensitization at the dorsal root ganglion and posterior horn, which in turn leads to the lowering of the pain threshold.

**Causes of Positive SLRT**

- Nerve root irritation - Intervertebral disc prolapse being the most common cause

- Intraspinal tumor

- Inflammatory radiculopathy

**Examination Techniques**

The original method of examination described by JJ Forst

Patient positioning is supine for this test. The involved lower limb is raised with the knee extended. This should evoke pain. The examiner then repeats the maneuver with the leg flexed at the knee and the thigh flexed on the pelvis. This should not evoke pain.

Currently, the following technique is popular in practice

The patient should be informed about the steps of the test, what to expect during the exam and to describe the pain distribution. The patient should be examined in a neutral supine position with the head slightly extended. During the exam, the hips and legs should stay neutral. No hips abduction or adduction is allowed as well as no leg internal or external rotation is permitted. The affected leg is then passively and slowly raised by the ankle with the knee fully extended. Upon eliciting pain, the examiner stops further leg elevation and records the range of motion along with the area of pain distribution.

It is noteworthy that ankle dorsiflexion during SLRT may exaggerate the pain; notwithstanding, it is not part of the Lasegue sign.

**Criteria for a true positive SLRT**

- Radicular leg pain should occur (radiating below the knee).

- Pain occurs when the leg is between 30 and 60 or 70 degrees from horizontal.

**What findings should not qualify as a positive SLRT?**

- Pain occurring in the low back alone.

- Pain occurring in the posterior thigh alone.

- Pain occurring at an angle less than 30 degrees - May indicate non-organicity or hip joint pathology.

- Pain occurring at an angle more than 70 degrees from the horizontal - More likely cause is tight hamstring or gluteal muscles.

- Pain occurs in a normal person at an angle of 80 to 90 degrees.

# Issues of Concern

**SLRT modifications and variants:**the accuracy of SLRT can be better if it is interpreted with other nerve root tension tests:

- **Crossed SLRT**

- **Reverse SLRT**

- **Braggard test**

- **Reverse flip test**: While raising the leg, the foot is held in a plantar-flexed position; this will lessen the pain. But if the patient is complaining of an increase in pain, it can suggest malingering.

- **Bowstring sign**

**Less frequently used nerve root irritation tests:**

For the sake of completion, other tests and signs of nerve root tension or irritation are discussed succinctly below:

- **Sitting SLRT (Bechterew test)**

- **Distracted SLRT**: the sitting SLRT is performed without the patient's awareness. The patient is distracted as if the surgeon is examining the foot or pulsation, and slowly, the examiner extends the knee. If the patient is experiencing true radiculopathy, the same pain will be reproduced. Otherwise, we can assume that the patient may be malingering.

- **Neri's sign**

- **The buckling sign**

- **Sicard sign**: passive dorsiflexion of ipsilateral great toe just at the angle of SLRT will produce more pain.

- **Kraus-Weber test**: the patient may be able to do a sit-up with the knees flexed but not extended.

- **Minor sign**: the patient may rise from a seated position by supporting himself/herself on the unaffected side, bending forward, and placing one hand on the affected side of the back.

- **Bonnet phenomenon**: the pain may be more severe or elicited sooner if the test is carried out with the thigh and leg in a position of adduction and internal rotation.

# Clinical Significance

**Interpretation of SLRT**

- Pain radiating down the buttock to the lateral thigh and medial calf - L4 nerve root irritation

- Pain radiating down the buttock to the posterior thigh and lateral calf - L5 nerve root irritation

- Pain radiating down the buttock to the posterior thigh and calf, and lateral foot - S1 nerve root irritation

**Interpretation of Positive Reverse SLRT**

- L2, L3, or L4 root irritation

- Femoral nerve irritation

**Sensitivity and Specificity of the Test**

The sensitivity of ipsilateral SLRT is 72 to 97%, and specificity is 11 to 66%, whereas the crossed SLRT  sensitivity is 23 to 42%  which is less than ipsilateral SLRT but more specific (85 to 100%).

**Tests to Confirm Non-organicity While Performing SLRT**

- Pain occurring at an angle less than 30 degrees

- A significant discrepancy between the supine and sitting SLRT

- Touch-me-not or Waddell sign - Widespread and excessive tenderness

- Back pain on pressing down on the top of the head

- Overreaction during testing

- Non-dermatomal and non-myotomal neurologic signs

- Pain during simulated spinal rotation: The patient’s hands remain to the sides with hips rotated. There will not be any spine rotation with this maneuver. But the patient will complain of pain.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

A female nurse or chaperone must be present with a female patient while performing SLRT by a male doctor. If the patient is wearing a sari or skirt, she may feel inhibition to raise the leg, which can lead to resistance in the movement and further misinterpretation of SLRT; this is reasonably avoidable with the presence of a chaperone.

The patient may be in severe pain, for which he or she may need proper counseling during the examination, and positioning should be done without hurting the patient further.

Proper communication between the doctor and nurse will help in eliciting SLRT properly without creating false positives.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

The nurse should provide comfort and explain the test to the patient. During the test, the nurse should observe the patient for pain or discomfort.