Managing erectile dysfunction with alprostadil as an intracavernosal injection or as an intraurethral suppository requires an interprofessional team of healthcare providers, including a nurse, pharmacist, and several physicians in different specialties. Apart from classical causes of erectile dysfunction such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, other common lifestyle factors such as obesity, limited or absence of physical exercise, lower urinary tract system infections are also linked to the development of erectile dysfunction requiring attention. Without proper management and patient education, the morbidity associated with the treatment itself can be dreadful. Patient education for the use of alprostadil as an intracavernosal injection form or as an intraurethral suppository is a must and is an essential aspect of the management. The patient should be monitored timely for the adverse effects of the drug, such as prolonged erection/priapism, penile fibrosis, urethritis, and penile fibrosis or stricture formation, and circulatory disturbances causing hypotension. Consult with a radiologist, urologist, to assess any penile pathology before starting alprostadil. Consult with a psychiatrist to evaluate for possible psychiatric issues that might cause erectile dysfunction. Consult a sex therapist for holistic management of erectile dysfunction. Consult a cardiologist as studies have shown an association of cardiovascular diseases with erectile dysfunction (ED), whereas ED can be a strong indicator of CAD (coronary artery disease), and the recommendation is for cardiovascular assessment of a noncardiac patient in a patient coming with the chief complaint of erectile dysfunction.

Pharmacists should be ready to counsel patients on the proper use of the intracavernous and suppository formulations since they require the patient to have solid administration technique skills. If the pharmacist has any concerns about the patient's ability to self-administer the drug, or there are drug interactions on the medication review, they should contact the prescribing physician promptly. Nurses can also give counsel, and determine adherence and regimen effectiveness on follow-up visits, and check for any adverse medication effects, reporting any concerns to the physician. Only with this type of interprofessional team approach can alprostadil therapy be most effective. [Level V]

Patients discussing reproductive health, particularly men, can be challenging, and it is essential to be empathetic and maintain a professional attitude while establishing a rapport. Creating a positive and respectful approach for patient and provider, allows there to be an open discussion for subject matters such as erectile dysfunction.