Enhanced interdisciplinary cooperation between all interprofessional healthcare team members is critical to developing safe and effective prescription drug delivery. Pharmacy leaders can develop policies and procedures within healthcare systems, ensuring the effective tracing of prescription drug data, as defined by the DSCSA.

Pharmacists are directly involved with patients in medication decision-making as well as the healthcare team in drug procurement. In addition, a pharmacist’s extensive training in medication safety and prescription drug laws make them well-equipped to improve the delivery of reliable medication. Therefore, pharmacist leadership is essential in the implementation of safeguard strategies within a healthcare setting.

Such leadership was reflected in 2008 when the International Pharmaceutical Federation gathered hospital pharmacists to develop strategies (known as Basel Statements) reflecting the vision of a pharmacist’s role in a hospital setting. In addition, the Basel Statements also emphasized the importance of creating a framework of prescription drug safety in a hospital setting.

Included within these statements is the critical role of the pharmacist in drug procurement which is as follows: “Hospital pharmacists should be involved in the complex process of procurement of medicines and health products, promoting equity and access. They should ensure transparent procurement processes are in place in line with best practice and national legislation, are free from conflict of interest, and are based on the principles of safety, quality, and efficacy.”

Familiarizing the interprofessional healthcare team with the PDMA and recent laws such as the DSCSA will ensure drug integrity and distributor accountability. Healthcare teams can enhance patient outcomes by maintaining a legitimate drug supply through verified distributors. In addition, prescribing clinicians must maintain a high level of suspicion by examining drug packaging and evaluating for any presence of tampering. Clinicians can also educate their patients on prescription drug safety and government strategies implemented to ensure safe and effective drugs. Interprofessional teams can also foster patient education focusing on drug safety and the dangers of purchasing unregulated drugs through illegal online pharmacies.