Treatment depends on age, gender, disease stage, lesion size, comorbidities, and medication. Still, since their influence on disease course and treatment response is unknown, clinical judgment guides the treatment approach. Other important factors are prognosis, life quality expectancy, and the patient's ability to cope with the disease.

No evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of BRONJ are currently available, but the treatment goal is to alleviate pain, control infection, and stabilize the progression of exposed bone.

**Conservative Therapy**

The mainstay of care is conservative therapy, and this may provide long-term symptomatic relief.

- Pain control and optimal oral hygiene, including diligent home care and regular dental visits.

- Managing infection and active dental disease: use of 0.12% chlorhexidine digluconate oral antimicrobial rinses and systemic antibiotic therapy.

- Teriparatide improves osseous wound healing in the oral cavity.

- Reduce the contact of the oral prosthesis with the exposed bone.

- Repeat the C-terminal telopeptide test (CTX) after six months of drug holiday. Some cases resolve with CTX value rising above 150 pg/ml. Many show clinical and radiographic signs of improvement as separation of necrotic bone from healthy bone occurs, followed by sequestration and debridement. Most of the oral BRONJ cases are resolved by CTX guided protocol. Regular follow-ups must be done to keep the CTX value above 150 pg/ml using incremental drug schedules and alternative drugs.

**Surgical Therapy**

Lack of symptomatic or radiographic improvement with various treatment modalities indicates permanent bone defect and need surgical intervention.

- The osteotomy of the affected area needs to be performed with resection margins extending into the adjacent healthy bone. Soft tissues should be closed with a tension-free closure and no underlying sharp edges that could lead to a mucosal breakdown.

- Microvascular composite tissue grafting and reconstruction procedures should be considered in patients with pathological fractures, disease extending to the sinus or inferior border of the mandible, or if osteotomy leads to discontinuity defect.

**Experimental Therapy**

The various treatment approaches include the use of hyperbaric oxygen

The most recent recommendations advocate a non-surgical treatment approach due to impaired wound healing. Still, few studies included radical resection to viable bone and hermetic wound closure, with soft tissue being the only curative approach.

**Treatment Approach Review**

- Conservative and supportive therapy for pain and infection control

- Surgical therapy for permanent bone defects and sequestration

- Experimental therapy consisting of hyperbaric oxygen, bone marrow stem cell intralesional transplantation, platelet-derived growth factor, low-level laser therapy.