A neurologist should be the lead in managing absence seizures. However, the long-term care and monitoring are done by an interprofessional team that includes the neurologist (child neurologist in the case of the pediatric population), primary care provider, nurse, and pharmacist.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on the importance of medication compliance. In addition, the pharmacist should ask about any adverse reaction at the time of dispensing the medication. The caregiver should be asked if the symptoms are controlled; if not, the pharmacist should communicate with the interprofessional team about the need for a change in the agent used or dosage.

The primary care practitioner, together with the neurologist, should follow up on the liver function tests, amylase, and complete blood count. In addition, birth control should be managed in women taking valproic acid. Finally, drug levels should be monitored periodically as these drugs have a narrow therapeutic index. This is where a pharmacy consult is crucial; the pharmacist can verify dosing, check for drug interactions, and counsel nurses, patients, clinicians, and families regarding potential adverse events. The interprofessional team care model represents the optimal approach to providing care and managing these patients. [Level 5]

A few patients with intractable absence epilepsy may be candidates for the ketogenic diet. If this is the case, a registered dietician with expertise in this diet should be consulted and periodically evaluate the patient.

Finally, mental health providers may be involved in the patient's care as many of these patients develop anxiety, depression, and stress.

Most patients need lifelong follow-up, and the interprofessional team must communicate with each other at any time when there is a change in drug dose, change in drug type, or development of adverse drug reactions.