# Continuing Education Activity

The most important step in the initial evaluation of any pregnant patient is establishing an accurate delivery date (due date). Accurate knowledge of the gestational age is important for numerous reasons. A patient's gestational age determines the appropriate intervals for prenatal care visits, as well as the timing of certain interventions. This activity describes the different methods to date a pregnancy.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the technique of performing a transvaginal ultrasound for pregnancy dating.
- Describe the indications for dating a pregnancy.
- Review the clinical significance of dating a pregnancy.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving pregnancy dating and improving patient outcomes.

# Introduction

The most important step in the initial evaluation of any pregnant patient is establishing an accurate delivery date (due date)

# Anatomy and Physiology

Pregnancy ultrasound involves an anatomic survey of uterus and adnexa

# Indications

For appropriate management of any pregnancy, practitioners must establish gestational age

# Contraindications

Ultrasound has been used in obstetrics for over 50 years and is safe when used appropriately

# Equipment

When using the patient's last menstrual period to establish pregnancy dating, Naegele's rule requires the use of a calendar

# Personnel

A physician typically selects the appropriate estimated delivery date for a pregnant patient. In certain circumstances, an ultrasound technician will be the first person to evaluate a pregnancy using ultrasound. Ultrasound reported estimated date of delivery, as well as other dating methods, should be compared by the treating clinician to choose the best clinical estimate of gestational age using the rules described below

# Preparation

Patient preparation before ultrasound varies depending on which approach is used. For transabdominal ultrasound, a full bladder is helpful but not required

Abdominal ultrasound approach may be performed in the supine position

# Technique or Treatment

One method of estimating the delivery date is by using the patient's last menstrual cycle

Fundal height measurement is a physical exam parameter that can be used to estimate gestational age

First-trimester ultrasound (ultrasound before 13 weeks and 6/7 days) is the most accurate method to establish or confirm gestation age in pregnancy

The performance of a first-trimester ultrasound is not always possible. Patients occasionally initiate prenatal care in the second trimester, or they may not present to a facility with ultrasound capability. In resource-poor areas, an initial ultrasound should be performed between 18 to 20 weeks

The accuracy of second-trimester ultrasound (between 14 0/7 weeks and 27 6/7 weeks) is widely variablesub-optimally dated Beyond 22 0/7 weeks until 27 6/7 weeks, if the last menstrual period-determined estimated date of delivery differs by more than 14 days, the ultrasound estimated date of delivery should be used

Third-trimester ultrasound (beyond 28 0/7 weeks) is the most inaccurate method for pregnancy dating with an accuracy of +/- 21-30 days

# Complications

Once the estimated date of delivery is established and confirmed with first or second-trimester ultrasound, it should be carefully documented in the medical record for use by other health care providers if needed. Changes to the estimated delivery date can have significant implications for pregnancy management, so before making a change to the patient's estimated date of delivery, the patient should be counseled on possible implications

# Clinical Significance

Establishing an accurate gestational age and estimated delivery date is the most important step in the management of any pregnancy

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Dating of pregnancy is done by the primary care provider, midwife, nurse practitioner, obstetrician and the obstetric nurse. Establishing an accurate gestational age and estimated delivery date is the most important step in the management of any pregnancy