The abdominal aorta divides into the common iliac arteries at the L4-L5 level. The common iliac arteries are situated anterior to the iliac veins. After the internal iliac artery (L5-S1 level), the common iliac artery continues as the external iliac artery. After giving off the inferior epigastric artery medially and deep iliac circumflex artery, the external iliac artery becomes the common femoral artery. The landmark of the external iliac to the common femoral junction is the inguinal ligament. After a short course, the common femoral artery divides into the superficial and deep profunda femoris artery.

The superficial femoral artery is the main arterial supply to the thigh. It then courses through the Hunter's (adductor) canal and becomes the popliteal artery as it emerges. The popliteal artery then bifurcates into the anterior tibial artery and tibioperoneal trunk at the proximal calf. The anterior tibial artery supplies the anterior compartment of the leg and terminates at the ankle as the dorsalis pedis artery. The tibioperoneal trunk bifurcates into the posterior tibial artery and common peroneal artery. The posterior tibial artery supplies the posterior calf and courses posterior to the medial malleolus, and forms the plantar arch of the foot. On the other hand, the peroneal artery supplies the musculature of the lateral calf and courses posterior to the fibula.

The ultrasound examination consists of B mode/color doppler imaging and spectral Doppler waveform evaluation with velocity measurements in the appropriate arterial segments. In the lower extremity, the common femoral artery, proximal superficial femoral artery(SFA), mid-SFA, distal SFA/popliteal artery above the knee, and popliteal artery below the knee should be evaluated in detail. If clinically appropriate, imaging of the iliac vessels, profunda femoris artery, tibioperoneal trunk, anterior tibial artery, posterior tibial artery, and dorsalis pedis artery should be performed.

B mode imaging which is performed initially, shows a 2-dimensional image of the arterial lumen and its wall, thereby allowing a rough assessment of the plaque characteristics if present.

Color doppler parameters are optimized to differentiate normal and abnormal flow profiles. The pulse repetition frequency (PRF) determines the extent of the color

The principle behind doppler sonography is that the signal frequencies that are reflected from moving objects as the red blood cells change in proportion to the velocity of the target. A major advance in vascular sonography has been the introduction of duplex scanners, where spectral analysis delineates the full spectrum of frequencies (or blood flow velocities) found in the arterial waveform during a single cardiac cycle.

Several characteristic features assist in differentiating arterial and venous structures in Duplex sonography. Rounded structures with visible, discrete, partially compressible walls are highly suggestive of arteries. Moreover, arteries are typically smaller than the accompanying veins.

A typical peripheral arterial waveform will show a sharply defined narrow tracing, which indicates that all the red blood cells are moving at a similar speed at any time of the cardiac cycle. The configuration of a typical waveform is typically triphasic, with the three components corresponding to the different phases of arterial flow.

Real-time ultrasonography generates images and evaluates the blood velocity with the reflected sound waves (echoes). The two major ultrasound modes commonly used in vascular imaging are the B (brightness) and the Doppler mode (continuous or pulsed wave). Other less frequently used modes are power Doppler, three-dimensional, and contrast-enhanced ultrasound). The B-mode provides a greyscale two-dimensional image, collecting the spectrum of bright dots. The brightness of dots is discriminated according to the different amplitudes of the echo signals. The strength of the echoes or reflected sound waves would identify the quality of the images generated by B-mode. Echo strength would be affected by the process of tissue transfer. The reflected sound waves would be either attenuated or scattered as the echo transfers through the tissue.

To provide good-quality images, both the angle of insonation and the frequency of the sound waves should be considered. Accordingly, high-frequency transducers at 90 degrees of insonation would provide the optimal images for shallow structures. Doppler mode combines the B-mode characteristics with the doppler to identify vascular structures. The sound frequency change caused by the red blood cell movement is reflected in the generated velocity, which has been enhanced in the color mode. The colors do not necessarily represent the arterial or venous flow. However, the flow toward or away from the transducer is displayed in red and blue, respectively.

The normal arterial velocity waveform includes three discrete phases( triphasic). Normal multiphasic or triphasic waveform with a narrow spectral width (range of velocities) throughout the pulse cycle implies that red blood cells' movements are in identical speed and direction with a laminar flow pattern.

The generated velocity waveforms correlate with the probe's location relative to the stenotic lesion. The proximal stenotic lesion results in more rounded systolic peaks, an absence of the reversed flow component, and a prolonged late diastolic phase. The lack of reversed flow component is not limited to the decreased peripheral vascular resistance and should be interpreted cautiously. It might be related to either compensatory post-stenotic vasodilation or even a normal finding in older patients.

Duplex signals pitch correlates with the velocity of blood changes. Therefore, high-pitched and thumping sounds are mainly heard in the stenosis and proximal to the stenotic lesion. As peripheral arteries stenoses or develop any flow disturbance, the intravascular flow no longer remains laminar and becomes turbulent. Instead of a well-defined tracing, the doppler waveform will show spectral broadening.

As the peripheral arterial disease progresses, normal triphasic flow changes to biphasic flow due to the loss of elastic recoil from the hardening of arteries in PAD.

The Doppler waveform also helps in identifying the location of arterial obstruction. Delayed systolic upstroke indicates a flow-limiting lesion proximal to the recording site—ischemia in the tissue bed distal to stenosis results in vasodilation and reduced resistance. In addition, the pressure drop across the stenosis leads to a decrease in distal pressure. This reduced resistance and pressure drop leads to increased diastolic flow all through the cardiac cycle distal to the stenosis. On the other hand, there is increased resistance proximal to high-grade stenosis or occlusion. Any antegrade diastolic flow or reflected wave, if present normally, may be absent or reduced. The severity of compromise in arterial caliber is reflected in a continual rise of peak systolic velocity (PSV) and end-diastolic velocity (EDV) to a threshold value suggesting a pre-occlusive lesion.

Optimal velocity measurement requires precise and valid Doppler shift records. The angle of the probe, relative to the flow direction or the angle of insonation, and the probe position relative to the stenotic lesion, should be considered. The angle of insonation should be kept between 30 and 70 degrees. However, it has been shown that the ideal angle of insonation is 60 degrees. Moreover, the ultrasound probe should be positioned at or distal to the suspicious lesion. The characteristics of the color flow imaging would guide the location of the lesion.

The degree of stenosis is identified according to the velocity ratio. To calculate the velocity ratio, the ratio of the peak systolic velocity at the site of the stenotic lesion to the uninvolved section of the vessel is evaluated. The ratio of 1.5 to 2 refers to a 30 to 49% stenosis, while the ratios of 2 to 4 and above 4 identify 50 to 75% and more than 75% stenosis, respectively. The accuracy of the limb Duplex arterial sonography depends on the scanned segment and involved levels. The relative accuracy of Duplex scanning to CT-angiography in grading peripheral arterial disease is greater than 80%. According to the other classification, the peripheral arterial lesion is considered significant when it causes above 50% stenosis in the presence of an atherosclerotic plaque. The following Duplex features are predictable:

- PSV of greater than 200 cm/s

- PSV ratio of greater than 2.4 (PSV in the stenotic site to the proximal non-stenotic area).

However, PSV of greater than 300 cm/s and a ratio of above 3.5 were classified as severe stenotic lesions.

To interpret the PAD severity, the following indexes are provided by duplex-acquired velocity spectra, including 1. acceleration time, 2. pulsatility index (PI), and maximum spectra velocity measured at PSV.