Ciprofloxacin is available orally, intravenously, and in topical formulations (ophthalmic and otic).

Ciprofloxacin is administered orally twice daily for 7 to 14 days or at least two days after signs and symptoms of the infection are over. The recommended oral dose regimen is 250 mg twice daily to treat mild to moderate and 500 mg twice daily for severe or complicated urinary tract infections. Therapy for mild to moderate respiratory tract or skin and soft-tissue infections require 500mg twice-daily dosing. Comparatively, a dosage of 750mg twice daily is recommended for severe or complicated infections. Ciprofloxacin should be given with food to minimize gastrointestinal upset.

An intravenous dosage of 200 to 400 mg twice daily is recommended for mild-to-moderate infections and up to 400 mg every 8 hours for severe, life-threatening infections.

**Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**In patients with liver cirrhosis, no significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of ciprofloxacin have been observed. However, ciprofloxacin's pharmacokinetics are not fully studied in patients with acute hepatic insufficiency. Additionally, ciprofloxacin has the potential to cause hepatotoxicity. Use with caution in patients with impaired hepatic function.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**As discussed in pharmacokinetics, ciprofloxacin is primarily eliminated by the renal route; dosage adjustment is required, especially in severe renal impairment.

- No dose adjustment is required for creatinine clearance > 50 mL/min/1.73m^2.

- For creatinine clearance between 30-49 mL/min/1.73m^2, 250–500 mg every 12 hours is recommended.

- For creatinine clearance between 5–29 mL/min/1.73m^2,  250–500 mg every 18 hours is recommended.

- For patients on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, 250–500 mg every 24 hours (after dialysis).

- For patients on CRRT having sepsis, 200 to 400 mg every 8 to 12 hours is recommended.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Conventionally, ciprofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones are contraindicated during pregnancy due to bone and cartilage damage concerns. However, available clinical data haven't identified any drug-associated risk of major congenital disabilities, adverse pregnancy-associated outcomes or miscarriage, or adverse pregnancy-associated outcomes.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Ciprofloxacin has conventionally not been recommended in nursing mothers because of concern regarding adverse effects on the developing joints. The calcium in milk might decrease the absorption of the small amounts of fluoroquinolones in milk, but clinical data is inadequate to support this assumption. The use of ciprofloxacin is justified in nursing mothers for required indications with monitoring of the infant for adverse drug reactions such as diarrhea or candidiasis. A possible strategy to avoid an infant's exposure to ciprofloxacin in breast milk is avoiding breastfeeding for 3 to 4 hours after the last dose of ciprofloxacin.