**Pathophysiologic Basis of Diseases**

Endothelin functions in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion. It virtually affects almost all organs of the body. The most important diseases to know, which have established associations with endothelin as a part of their pathophysiology are pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, post-menopausal hypertension, pre-eclampsia, ovarian cancer, and chronic kidney diseases.

**Pulmonary hypertension (PH)**

ET-1 is known to be a responsible contributor to the development of pulmonary hypertension (PH) by increasing the vascular tone and promoting vascular remodeling via its mitogenic activity.

The etiology of the PH also bifurcates in the mechanisms involved — thromboembolism induced PH results in an upregulation of ETB.

**Heart failure (HF)**

The relationship between heart failure and endothelin had been discovered earlier and has begun to show importance in assessing the prognosis of a patient with HF - especially ET-1(1-31).

Although there exists a linear relation with endothelin and HF, studies on receptor blockade have failed to show any improvement in patients.

**Post-menopausal hypertension (PMH)**

Menopause results in multiple changes in the body of a female that begins on average at the age of 52  and can last for up to 2-10 years. Along with these changes also occurs an increase in the prevalence of hypertension in this population. Research has noted that there is an elevation of ET-1 levels after menopause.

**Systemic Hypertension (HTN)**

Essential HTN has normal levels of ET-1; however, there is a local rise in the ET-1 levels in the vascular walls. ETA activation demonstrates an increase in blood pressure, and ETB activity ameliorates hypertension. Thus, the use of blockers of ET receptors has shown an overall reduction of blood pressure.

**Pre-eclampsia**

Pre-Eclampsia is a pregnancy-specific syndrome that also encompasses endothelial dysfunction along with elevated blood pressure and renal vascular resistance. As mentioned earlier, hypoxia is a triggering factor for ET-1 synthesis, and placental hypoxia is one of the causative factors for elevating the ET-1 levels in the blood leading the evolution of pre-eclampsia. ET-1 also causes increased expression of soluble fms-like-tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) that is also involved in the pathogenesis. There is a contribution of increased expression of ETA in the development of preeclampsia along with the dysfunction of the ETB receptor.

**Ovarian cancer**

The mitogenic effect of ET-1 is of significance for tumor growth in malignancies in ovarian, prostate, colorectal, bladder, and breast.

**Pathophysiologic activity in the Kidney:**

Renal endothelium produces endothelin, which regulates sodium and water excretion. In a condition of volume overload, the shear stress on the endothelium leads to the expression of ET-1 that acts on the thick ascending limb and collecting duct to reduce water and sodium reabsorption mediated with the action of intermediates like nitric oxide and other pathways.

**Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis (FSGS):**

Endothelin induces glomerular injury to the podocytes via activation of ETB, leading to proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis. The exact mechanism remains not clearly understood.

**Diabetic Nephropathy (DN):**

Hyperglycemia is an inducer for ET-1 production, which causes disassembly of the actin cytoskeleton in diabetic nephropathy. ET antagonists have proven to reduce proteinuria in patients having diabetic nephropathy and reversing the disassembly to an extent.

**Hypertensive Nephropathy:**

Hypertension leads to increased shear stress and ET-1 production as a cause or effect. Over time, the damage to the kidney ensues and leads to proteinuria. Using ET blockers have shown to be nephroprotective and demonstrated a gradual reduction in glomerulosclerosis and albuminuria along with an increased blood flow with an improved microvessel structure in the cortical kidney.