General treatment measures include ensuring a safe scene (remove from snake exposure), local wound care (although wounds are typically minimal), minimization of movement (relative immobilization in a functional position), avoiding activities that increase heart rate, and promoting patient (and family) relaxation (to decrease systemic propagation of venom). Tetanus prophylaxis is also considered standard in the treatment of snakebites. Pressure immobilization bandages

Due to the possibility of the delayed onset of life-threatening respiratory compromise, all patients with suspected coral snake envenomation warrant close observation for at least 24 hours at an appropriate level of care for close respiratory monitoring and frequent serial neurologic exams. Patients who demonstrate respiratory insufficiency warrant advanced airway management and treatment with coral snake antivenom and/or other pharmacologic measures, such as anticholinesterases (discussed below). Airway compromise may develop rapidly, so advanced airway medications and equipment should be prepared early and readily available.

The North American Coral Snake Antivenin (NACSA) is a horse-derived IgG antibody used for both M. fulvius and M. tener envenomation in both adults and children. Its use has not been reported in patients who are pregnant. The administration of coral snake antivenom is recommended at the first sign of neurologic deficit or respiratory insufficiency, as some data suggest decreased need for intubation or decreased duration of muscle paralysis and intubation. On the other hand, other data suggest no differences in intubation rates when NACSA is given prophylactically before symptom onset. So, should practitioners administer NACSA empirically to patients without neurologic deficits or respiratory compromise? This is a controversial decision, but given the additional risk of immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions (discussed below) and mixed clinical evidence results regarding prophylactic antivenom benefit, it is reasonable to procure antivenom early but withhold administration until the development of the first neurologic symptoms. In any case, the best course of action is to contact the Poison Control Center or a toxicologist for treatment guidance. Currently, there is a limited supply of the NACSA, as production ceased in 2006. The known remaining vials of this antivenom have passed the manufacturer’s expiration date (2008), but the FDA extended the expiration date through January 31, 2019, for NACSA Lot L67530.

As discussed earlier, NACSA is an equine-based IgG serum, and there is a risk of both immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions.

If the patient develops neurotoxicity or respiratory compromise and coral snake antivenom is not available, another pharmacologic treatment option is a trial dose of an anticholinesterase, such as neostigmine. Neostigmine acts by restoring neuromuscular transmission by increasing concentrations of acetylcholine in the neuromuscular junction when weakness is due to the post-synaptic blockade. Pretreatment with atropine or glycopyrrolate should be considered to prevent potential excessive cholinergic effects of neostigmine. Again, poison control and toxicologist consultation are recommended to guide treatment.