The evaluation of this form of immediate hypersensitivity reaction depends on the nature of the inciting factor and a combination of clinical presentations and investigative data to establish a proper diagnosis.

Surveying an antibody immune-mediated reaction represents the key feature considering the history and examination. One of the most common examples of type II hypersensitivity is the one following drug intake in patients with drug-induced lupus. In this type, anti-red blood cell or anti-dsDNA antibodies are produced as a result of a drug attaching to red blood cells resulting in drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

The evaluation includes the following: Complete blood cell count surveying hemoglobin (autoimmune hemolytic anemia), red blood cell count, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and platelets for cytopenias, and an assessment of immunoglobulins with a quantitative assay for IgG, IgM, and IgE depending on the type of hypersensitivity reaction. Animals, plants, food, and environmental pollutants can be used in skin prick tests, and a radioallergosorbent test (RAST for IgE) can be done.

The detection of autoantibodies can be assessed in systemic autoimmune diseases like SLE and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Autoantibodies can also be done against specific organs, e.g., autoantibody against islet cells in diabetes mellitus, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor antibody to differentiate it from other causes of thyrotoxicosis, and acetylcholine receptor antibody test (highly specific for myasthenia gravis).