Transmission of pathogens in a health care environment is complex and can occur through direct contact with the healthcare workers or the surrounding contaminated environment.

Risk factors for the development of CDI are well known. These include recent antibiotic use, gastric acid suppresants, nonselective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and some comorbidities.

Risk factors for SSI include both patient factors such as age, diabetes, obesity, nutritional status, colonization, co-existing infections, and operative factors such as duration of the procedure, skin antisepsis, surgical technique, antimicrobial prophylaxis.

Some of the proposed mechanisms of CAUTI are intraluminal colonization, retrograde intraluminal ascent, extraluminal peri urethral spread, and biofilms adherent to the urinary catheters. Pseudomonas species and Proteus species, can form tough biofilms around catheters. Sometimes, these pathogens produce enzymes that inactivate the antimicrobial agents, making it harder to treat these infections.

Mechanisms of infection in central line-associated bloodstream infections include colonization, biofilm formation, and extraluminal migration. The femoral site is associated with an increased risk of infections and should be avoided if possible.

Multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens are also a significant cause of infections in hospitals, particularly in the intensive care unit. Infections with MDR organisms are associated with an increase in the length of stay (LOS), mortality indicators, and increased costs of care.

MDR organisms are often suspected of HAP and VAP. The use of intravenous antibiotics within the past 90 days is an important risk factor for MDR infections. ****Other risk factors for MDR VAP include the presence of septic shock at the time of VAP onset and duration of hospitalization, Acute respiratory distress syndrome, and acute renal replacement therapy before the onset of VAP.****