Certain diseases and conditions can mimic ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and must be ruled out. These include, but are not limited to:

- Mechanical low back pain

- Lumbar spinal stenosis

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)

Each of these diagnoses has similarities with AS, but their differences should be ruled in or out for accurate diagnosis.

Mechanical back pain can be differentiated from AS by the onset of symptoms, as mechanical back pain can present at any age, while AS typically presents before age 40. Unlike AS, pain improves with rest, and morning stiffness is mild and short-lived. Mechanical back pain is also not associated with peripheral arthritis or extraskeletal manifestations, as AS is.

Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) is a narrowing of the spinal canal that exerts pressure on the spinal cord. Like AS, it may present with chronic back pain and morning stiffness. Unlike AS, however, LSS usually presents in patients older than 60 years, is not associated with peripheral arthritis or extraskeletal features, and response to NSAIDs is variable.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is another chronic inflammatory disorder of the joints that often presents with progressive back pain and morning stiffness in patients 40 or younger, similar to AS. However, peripheral arthritis is extremely common in RA, unlike in AS. In addition, rheumatoid nodules are pathognomonic for RA but are not usually present with AS.

Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a degenerative disorder characterized by ossification in the spine occurring primarily in the anterior longitudinal ligament, paravertebral tissues, and peripheral aspect of the annulus fibrosus. Similar to AS, the DISH may present with a history of postural changes and back pain. Unlike AS, which is an inflammatory disorder, the DISH does not have inflammatory characteristics such as morning stiffness or improvement with exercise but not with rest. DISH also shows no evidence of sacroiliitis on radiographs.