Clinical manifestations of B. cereus infection can be categorized as gastrointestinal disease syndromes or extra-gastrointestinal infections. Gastrointestinal syndromes are further divided into two types of illnesses, i.e., diarrheal syndrome and emetic syndrome.

**Gastrointestinal Syndromes**

For diarrheal-type illnesses, symptoms include profuse watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, and cramping. Nausea and vomiting are seldom seen. Symptom onset is usually within 6 to 15 hours of eating food left at room temperature for more than 2 hours. The toxin associated with this form of the illness is produced in the small intestine of the patient after ingestion of the bacilli or the spores. Pore-forming cytotoxins (hemolysin BL, nonhemolytic enterotoxin, and cytotoxin K) are secreted by the ingested vegetative cells. These toxins are heat-labile.

For emetic-type illnesses, symptoms include nausea and vomiting, similar to the presentation associated with Staphylococcus aureus food-borne illness. Diarrhea may be present in some individuals as well. Symptom onset is generally within 30 minutes to 6 hours of consuming rice or starchy foods left at room temperature, even after being reheated. This illness is due to the presence of cereulide, an ionophoric low-molecular-weight dodecadepsipeptide that is pH-stable and resistant to heat and proteases.

Symptoms for both types usually resolve within 24 hours after onset.

**Extra-gastrointestinal Syndromes**

The ubiquitous presence of B. cereus in the environment makes it a potential organism for infection when direct penetrating injuries or hematologic access is present. Risk factors for complicated and severe disease include immunosuppression, intravenous drug abuse, and the neonatal period. The association of intravenous drug use and extraintestinal B. cereus infections is related to the use of contaminated needles and drug specimens. Patients with an indwelling venous catheter or a traumatic/surgical wound are at increased risk of complicated infections by this organism.

Endophthalmitis is a vision-threatening eye infection resulting from microbial infection of the inner eye. This is the most common extraintestinal manifestation of this disease. The hallmark ophthalmic lesion is a corneal ring abscess, which may be accompanied by rapid progression of pain, proptosis, chemosis, retinal hemorrhage, and perivasculitis. Systemic manifestations include fever, leukocytosis, and generalized malaise. Ocular trauma with penetrating injury is the most common cause of this infection.

Bacteremia and endocarditis can also occur with this infection. True B. cereus bacteremia can occur with intravenous drug use, central venous access catheters, or mucosal injuries/compromise in patients with neutropenia. Patients with immunosuppression, particularly those with underlying hematologic malignancies, are at high risk for this type of infection with bacillus species. Patients with bacillus bacteremia often present with alteration of consciousness and have secondary nervous system involvement. Endocarditis with bacillus species is usually associated with intravenous drug use, central venous catheters, or the presence of intracardiac hardware such as prophetic valves and/or pacemakers.

Soft tissue and bone infections can occur with penetrating trauma or mucosal injury. These include gunshot wounds, open fractures, animal bites, and burn wounds, to name a few. Cellulitis and necrotizing soft tissue infection can also occur. B. cereus can also cause superimposed infection of chronic osteomyelitis sites.

Keratitis secondary to B. cereus infection can occur due to corneal abrasions, including those secondary to contact lens use.