Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy is treated with medications that inhibit excessive thyroid hormone synthesis. The antithyroid drugs (ATD) most commonly used in the U.S. are thioamides, propylthiouracil (PTU), and methimazole (MMI). Carbimazole is a prodrug of methimazole that is commonly used outside of North America, with similar efficacy and side effect profile.

Historically, PTU was commonly used for hyperthyroidism in all patients. However, it is associated with hepatoxicity that can lead to liver failure and subsequent need for transplantation. Therefore, methimazole is more commonly used now if tolerated. An exception to this is during early pregnancy due to methimazole and carbimazole's association with a rare embryopathy, which includes aplasia cutis, abdominal wall defects, esophageal atresia, choanal atresia, eye abnormalities, urinary tract abnormalities, and circulatory defects.

When treatment is initiated, dose-adjusted, or transitioned between drugs, thyroid function tests should be obtained to confirm a euthyroid state. Testing can be performed every two to four weeks as indicated to ensure the maintenance of euthyroid status.

Due to the natural immunosuppression during pregnancy, TRAb titers often decrease during the second half of pregnancy.

Side effects of thioamide therapy occur in up to 15% of women.

Potassium iodide (KI) is another medication that can be used to treat mild hyperthyroidism. However, there have been limited studies in pregnancy. Most use in pregnancy has been in Japan, which has shown effectiveness in treating mild hyperthyroidism with minimal adverse effects. Of note, Japan has a higher iodine intake than most of the world, so the effectiveness of KI cannot be extrapolated to other countries. Nevertheless, KI can be considered in women with mild hyperthyroidism who do not tolerate ATDs.

Surgery is optimally performed outside of pregnancy. In women who do not attain adequate control of hyperthyroidism with high doses of ATDs, who have an allergy to ATDs, or are poorly compliant with therapy, surgery can be considered. Surgery is also an option in patients who have a large goiter causing compression issues. Total or subtotal thyroidectomy can be performed in pregnancy, preferably in the second trimester, when the risk of fetal loss and complications is lowest.

If Grave disease has been previously treated outside of pregnancy with thyroidectomy or ablative therapy, there may be TRAbs that persist. These antibodies are IgG proteins and can cross the placenta and cause fetal hyperthyroidism.

Radioiodine ablation (RAI) is a procedure that can be used to destroy active thyroid tissue. However, RAI is absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy due to the ability of radioiodine to cross the placenta and subsequently ablate the fetal thyroid, leading to congenital hypothyroidism.

Beta-blockers such as propranolol can be used in pregnancy for symptomatic control until a euthyroid state is maintained.

**Fetal Surveillance**

In women with Grave disease, the fetal anatomy ultrasound provides an opportunity to screen for evidence of fetal thyroid anatomy and function. This survey should be completed between 18 to 22 weeks of gestation. Findings that may indicate thyroid dysfunction are an enlarged thyroid, intrauterine growth restriction, hydrops, advanced bone maturity, fetal tachycardia, goiter, oligohydramnios, or cardiac failure.

TRAb should be remeasured between 18 to 22 weeks and 30 to 34 weeks to evaluate the risk of fetal and neonatal hyperthyroidism, respectively.