There are many ways that parasympathetic dysfunction can manifest, given the scope of organs on which it acts. Some examples of clinically significant conditions involving the PNS include sexual dysfunction, priapism, gastrointestinal issues, Horner syndrome, urinary retention, and cholinergic toxicity.

Sexual dysfunction due to physical trauma to splanchnic nerves, as mentioned above, or due to spinal cord lesions or neuropathy. Disruption of sexual function can also negatively impact mental health.

Dysmotility and decreased secretions can result from parasympathetic disruption within the gut. In turn, this can disrupt nutrient processing and absorption.

Horner syndrome is a condition where parasympathetic output predominates due to disruption of sympathetic supply to the head. It can happen after a stroke or from systemic conditions like multiple sclerosis.  Symptoms include ipsilateral ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis.

Urinary retention can occur as a result of spinal cord injury or compression or pelvic splanchnic nerve damage.  Without the neurologic discernment of bladder volume, PNS stimulation of detrusor contraction and internal urethral sphincter relaxation may be incomplete or absent, leading to incomplete or absent voiding.

Cholinergic drugs and organophosphates can cause cholinergic toxicity due to excessive cholinergic receptor stimulation. Symptoms of cholinergic toxicity can be remembered by the mnemonic, SLUDGE, which stands for salivation, lacrimation, urinary frequency, diarrhea/diaphoresis, gastrointestinal pain, and emesis.