Dysfunction in voltage-gated sodium channels correlates with neurological and cardiac diseases, including epilepsy, myopathies, and cardiac arrhythmias (long QT, Brugada, sick sinus, and short QT syndromes, among others). The dysfunction can be genetic or acquired, including secondary to toxins. In particular, toxins from marine animals have a preference for blocking voltage-gated sodium channels, resulting in sensory abnormalities (because of dysfunction of sensory neurons) and muscle weakness (from the pathology of the motor neurons and muscle cells). One such toxin is the tetrodotoxin from the Tetraodontidae family, more commonly referred to as pufferfish that store the toxin in high concentrations in its liver.

Voltage-gated sodium channels are the target of multiple pharmacological compounds, including anesthetics like lidocaine, antiepileptics like phenytoin and lamotrigine, and antiarrhythmics like flecainide and mexiletine. The prevention of nerve conduction is the mechanism of drugs like lidocaine blocks the potentiation of pain signals, while antiepileptics such as phenytoin and lamotrigine lower the seizure threshold by similarly reducing neuron excitability.

Due to the extensive distribution of sodium channels in a wide array of organ systems, care is necessary when prescribing or administering sodium channel blockers. Lidocaine, for instance, is a potent local anesthetic used routinely for procedures and laceration repairs but does carry the risk for systemic release. High doses of lidocaine released into systemic circulation can be toxic to both the CNS and cardiovascular system causing seizures, AV heart block, arrhythmias, and more.