**Behavioral Management**

Behavioral countermeasures against motion sickness are among the most effective treatments.

Short-term maneuvers include

- Body postural changes: reducing head movements, restraining movement of the head, shoulders, hips, and knees

- Avoiding reading in moving vehicles

- Sitting in a forward facing seat, a front seat, or actively steering the vehicle

- Focusing on a stable horizon

- Controlled, mindful breathing

- Avoiding nicotine (if the patient is a smoker)

- Listening to pleasant music

- Avoiding travel in turbulent conditions or with poor visibility

Habituation is the most effective long-term countermeasure. It lacks the adverse effects of pharmacotherapy, such as drowsiness and blurred vision.  Unfortunately, this time-consuming approach may last many weeks, as evidenced by the military-run motion sickness desensitization programs created to treat pilots in which anti-motion sickness medications are contraindicated. These programs are designed for long-term success, with rates exceeding 85%. In the general population, with continuous exposure, the symptoms of motion sickness generally resolve within 24 to 72 hours.  However, if the intervals between exposure are greater than one week, long-term habituation may not be achieved.

Alternative treatments include the use of ginger, which acts as an antagonist at the 5-HT3 receptor that plays a role in vomiting.

**Pharmacologic Therapy**

Medications for the treatment of motion sickness are only partially effective and may have unwanted side effects.  They are most effective when used prophylactically or at the early onset of symptoms. Patients should be encouraged to first trial the medications first in a safe environment before using during work or travel. Medications can subdivide into categories: anticholinergic, antihistamine and sympathomimetic.

**Anticholinergic**

- Scopolamine – the most effective agent presently, acting as a nonselective antimuscarinic by inhibiting input to the vestibular nuclei.
- Intranasal scopolamine has been of particular interest in recent studies conducted by NASA and the Naval Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, to address the significant discomfort of space motion sickness in astronauts.  The nasal gel formulation of scopolamine has been found to have a more rapid absorption and the onset of action than its transdermal or oral counterparts, with a more predictable efficacy and favorable side effect profile.

**Antihistamines**

H1 receptor antagonists decrease the firing of afferent nerves of the semicircular canals that are triggered by the histaminergic system in the hypothalamus.

- Diphenhydramine– First generation antihistamine that also possesses anticholinergic properties.  It is available in oral (over the counter) and injectable preparations.  Sedation is common.  Other common side effects include dry mouth/eyes, blurred vision, and photosensitivity.  Confusion and urinary retention occur rarely.

- Cyclizine – First generation antihistamine available orally over the counter.  It has shown similar efficacy to diphenhydramine, but with slightly less sedation and more direct action on the stomach in treating gastrointestinal symptoms.

- Meclizine – First-generation antihistamines are available orally over the counter.  They are approved for patients 12 years and older but are highly sedating.

- Cinnarizine – A first-generation antihistamine with higher efficacy in treating motion sickness symptoms with the least amount of drowsiness.  This drug is not available in the USA or Canada due to its calcium channel blocking properties but is still widely used in Mexico and Europe.

- Promethazine – First generation antihistamine with anticholinergic properties.  It is prescription-only, available in oral, rectal, and intramuscular preparations.  Promethazine has also been studied in space motion sickness, where intramuscular injections are commonly used.  Studies suggest, however, its side effects may impair operational performance.

**Sympathomimetic**

- Dextroamphetamine has been shown to act synergistically with anticholinergics and antihistamines by stimulating the dopaminergic and noradrenergic pathways.

**Therapies Not Recommended**

- Dopamine antagonists such as metoclopramide have not consistently demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of motion sickness.  Although metoclopramide is an effective antiemetic and promotes gastric emptying, studies have not demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of motion sickness.

- Serotonin (5-HT3) receptor antagonists like ondansetron are potent antiemetics and inhibit gastric tachyarrhythmia but are not effective in preventing motion sickness symptoms.

**Medications For Pregnant Patients**

Pregnant women may have increased susceptibility to motion sickness. Medications used for morning sickness are felt to be safe for use in motion sickness, including meclizine and dimenhydrinate.  The FDA classifies these as category B in pregnancy.  Scopolamine and promethazine are Class C in pregnancy.