# Introduction

Early accounts of a distinctive Colorado brown stain were paramount to discovering the link between excessive fluoride ingestion and developing a hypoplastic dentition that would later be termed dental fluorosis.

The element fluorine is found most abundantly in its fluoride form in nature.

The most common route of fluoride ingestion is via drinking water.

The provision of systemic fluoride supplements, artificial water fluoridation, and the direct topical application of fluoride-containing dentifrices are preventative measures employed to reduce the risk of caries development.

# Etiology

Dental fluorosis is caused by the excessive ingestion of fluoride during tooth development. The severity of dental fluorosis is dose-dependent and influenced by the extent of time an individual is exposed to excessive fluoride within the critical window of development and genetic factors.

The critical window for dental fluorosis to develop in response to excessive fluoride intake ranges from birth to eight years of age.

Artificially fluoridated water has a target fluoride concentration of 1 ppm, which is thought to optimize the anti-cariogenic properties of fluoride while minimizing the risk of adverse effects, including dental fluorosis.

# Epidemiology

The worldwide prevalence of dental fluorosis is increasing.

It is important to note that although mild-moderate dental fluorosis is relatively common, clinically severe forms are rare in the US and Europe.

# Pathophysiology

Ameloblasts are responsible for enamel synthesis during amelogenesis, a tightly regulated process involving multiple phases in which hydroxyapatite crystals are produced.

Exposure to high plasma fluoride levels during amelogenesis results in the formation of porous hypomineralized enamel.

During the maturation phase, enamel matrix proteins, including amelogenin, are hydrolyzed by proteinases. This process is delayed in fluorosed enamel. Fluoride has also been shown to induce apoptosis in ameloblasts during enamel maturation which is thought to contribute to the enamel pitting found in severe cases of dental fluorosis.

# History and Physical

Patients with dental fluorosis will have a history of chronic excessive fluoride ingestion within the critical window of amelogenesis. This is between birth and eight years of age.

In mild and moderate cases, this is in the form of light enamel opacities.

# Evaluation

A diagnosis of dental fluorosis is contingent on a positive fluoride history within the critical window of tooth development and a visual intraoral examination.

There is active research into tools to supplement the diagnosis of fluorosis, such as the use of short-wavelength infrared light. Under this spectrum, dental fluorosis appears in high contrast, which can help identify more subtle cases of fluorosis.

# Treatment / Management

Where mild cases of dental fluorosis are concerned, involving subtle enamel changes, patients may be unaware or unconcerned with the appearance of their teeth. As such, no treatment may be necessary. Thus, treatment is patient-led where dental fluorosis is concerned, and patient concerns are cosmetic in most cases.

Vital dental bleaching can be a highly effective treatment modality in mild cases of dental fluorosis. The concentration of hydrogen peroxide utilized varies between countries depending on legislation pertaining to the maximum permitted concentrations of hydrogen peroxide permissible for dental whitening.

Generally, dental bleaching completed in a dental clinic will use a higher concentration than that provided to patients for at-home bleaching using bleaching trays. Lightening the healthy, unaffected tooth structure allows it to camouflage with lighter fluorosed hypomineralized enamel, providing a more aesthetic appearance.

Other minimally invasive techniques suitable for treating mild to moderate cases of dental fluorosis include enamel microabrasion and resin infiltration. Microabrasion involves mechanically removing the superficial layers of flurosed enamel, thus reducing the visibility of enamel discoloration.

The use of dental whitening and microabrasion together has been shown to provide a more aesthetic result and help overcome this limitation. Resin infiltration involves applying hydrochloric acid to etch the enamel, followed by low-viscosity resin, which infiltrates the enamel.

In cases where these methods are ineffective in improving the appearance of fluorosed teeth, the next minimally invasive step includes using resin-based dental composite bonding to mask the discoloration. This can be in the form of localized fillings or composite veneers. Composite veneers require less, if any, mechanical preparation of the natural tooth and are, therefore, more conservative of tooth structure than traditional veneers.

In cases with severe discoloration, veneers or conventional crowns may become necessary to achieve a cosmetically acceptable result for the patient. Crowns may be the only viable long-term restorative option in cases with insufficient or poor-quality enamel, as composite and veneer restorations rely on effective enamel-resin bonding for retention.

More invasive indirect restorative options such as veneers and crowns start patients on the restorative cycle leading to the need for lifelong maintenance, patients must be fully informed, and a judgment must be made based on the risks and benefits. Occasionally a combination of the techniques available is required to achieve an optimal aesthetic result.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of dental fluorosis are extensive. They include and are not limited to early carious lesions, molar-incisor hypomineralisation, developmental disorders of enamel and dentine, including amelogenesis imperfecta, Turner hypoplasia, tetracycline staining, and dental manifestations of celiac disease.

The key to recognizing dental fluorosis is a positive fluoride history within the critical window of amelogenesis, a symmetrical chronological distribution in the pattern of affected teeth, and an increased caries resistance.

# Treatment Planning

Treatment planning is an individualized patient-centered process focusing on prevention and minimally invasive treatment modalities where possible.

Prevention must be instigated from birth and lies primarily in the education of caregivers and government strategy and policy. These strategies include the control of fluoride levels in drinking water and educating caregivers about the etiology of fluorosis and the importance of receiving the optimum amount of fluoride.

The primary concern for most patients affected by dental fluorosis is aesthetics.

# Staging

Multiple indices have been formulated to facilitate the reliable and consistent staging of dental fluorosis.

All of these systems are currently in use and are associated with their own strengths and weaknesses.

Table 1. The Dean Modified Fluorosis Index

The Thylstrup Fejerskov index is an alternative staging system comprised of 10 categories with scores ranging from 0 to 9.

Table 2.The Thylstrup Fejerskov index

# Prognosis

In mild and moderate cases of dental fluorosis, the prognosis is very good, with concerns and treatment being patient-led with a focus on improving aesthetics and patients being otherwise asymptomatic.

In the rarer severe cases of dental fluorosis, the structure of the dentine and enamel becomes compromised.

To produce satisfactory results in more destructive techniques such as full coverage, conventional crowns may need to be considered. If this course is taken, patients must be informed of the lifelong maintenance such restorative work requires, including the need for repair, replacement, and even the eventual loss of teeth.

# Complications

In mild and moderate cases of dental fluorosis, the affected dentition is caries resistant.

This will impact the aesthetics, function, and longevity of an individual's dentition.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is important caregivers are informed about the etiology of dental fluorosis and how to avoid it, as dental fluorosis only has the potential to develop during amelogenesis.

Patients should also be informed of potentially less publicized sources of fluoride, including tea, artificially fluoridated milk, and fluoridated salt.

The control of fluoride levels within drinking water is vital.

Fluoride water concentrations of 0.7-1 ppm are optimal in terms of balancing the beneficial anti-cariogenic properties of fluoride while avoiding complications associated with its excessive ingestion.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Clinically dental fluorosis can be mistaken for a variety of dental conditions.

There is a limited window of opportunity for dental fluorosis to develop, starting around birth and ending at approximately eight years of age.

Dental professionals and medical professionals, particularly those in contact with expectant mothers and pediatric patients, have a responsibility to inform patients about the risks associated with excessive chronic fluoride intake and provide appropriate advice. A careful balance must be made between the beneficial anti-cariogenic properties of fluoride and the negative effects associated with excessive intake.

Most patients with mild to moderate dental fluorosis are suitable for management by dentists in primary care.