The management of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome mainly depends on the conventional and supportive care which includes broad-spectrum antibiotics for bacterial infections, antivirals/antifungals for viral and fungal infections respectively. Patients also require platelet transfusions to prevent bleeding. Topical steroids are used to treat eczema. A discussion of further treatment falls under the following subheads:

**Intravenous immune globulin therapy**:  Intravenous immunoglobin (IVIG) therapy is indicated in WAS and XLT patients with significant antibody deficiency. The dose is usually higher than that used for other primary immunodeficiencies due to an increased catabolic rate observed in WAS patients. Immune globulin may also be given subcutaneously. This route of administration requires caution in this patient population because of the bleeding tendency.

**Eltrombopag**:  An oral thrombopoietin receptor agonist approved for the treatment of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), may be useful in preventing bleeding in patients with WAS who are awaiting hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT).

**Immunosuppressive treatment:**Immunosuppressive treatment may be necessary for autoimmune manifestations. Autoimmune cytopenias often respond to the monoclonal antibody rituximab which is relatively safe for those patients already receiving therapy with IVIG.

**Splenectomy**:  Elective splenectomy has been advocated in selected patients to reverse the thrombocytopenia and arrest the bleeding tendency by increasing the number of circulating platelets. Patients who undergo splenectomy require lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis and are at increased risk of septicemia.

**Hematopoietic cell transplantation**:  HCT is the only available curative treatment, with excellent results for patients with human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched family or unrelated donors (URDs) or partially matched cord-blood donors.

**Gene therapy**:  Gene therapy is an alternative, potentially curative therapy under investigation for WAS.