Norovirus is associated with approximately one-fifth of all infectious diarrhea cases, with similar prevalence in both children and adults, and is estimated to cause over 200,000 deaths annually in developing countries.

In developing regions, an average of three episodes of diarrhea per child per year is reported in children less than 5 years old. However, certain other areas report six to eight episodes per year per child. In these circumstances, malnutrition plays an additional role in the development of diarrhea.

A common cause of chronic diarrhea includes inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn disease, and ulcerative colitis. In Europe, the incidence of ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease has increased overall from 6.0 per 100,000 person-years in ulcerative colitis and 1.0 per 100,000 person-years in Crohn disease in 1962 to 9.8 per 100,000 person-years and 6.3 per 100,000 person-years in 2010, respectively.

A study conducted by Lübbert et al observed the occurrence of Clostridium difficile related infection in Germany to be 83 cases/100,000 population in 2012. The chance of recurrence escalated with each relapse in these cases.

In the United States, before specific antirotavirus immunization was introduced in 2006 a cumulative occurrence of one hospitalization for the cases of diarrhea per 23-27 children by the age of 5 years was noted. Moreover, over 50,000 hospitalizations were noted. Basing it on these facts, rotavirus was found to be responsible for 4-5% of all childhood hospitalizations costing nearly 1 billion US dollars.