The diagnosis and management of BRP are very difficult and thus it is managed by an interprofessional team that includes a neurologist, hand surgeon, dermatologist, nurse practitioner, primary care provider, internist, psychiatrist, and specialty trained nurses. Communications between these professionals will improve the coordination of care. Specialty trained nurses in dermatology, pain management, and psychiatry may be involved.

The condition is more common in middle-aged white females with a seasonal predilection for warmer summer months. Cervical radiculopathy or neuropathy in the upper extremities in conjunction with ultraviolet radiation (UVR) are thought to be causative.There are hundreds of treatment for the disorder but none works reliably or is better than other treatments. Patients go through exhaustive workup to determine the cause, which is never found in most cases. Many patients develop severe anxiety, depression and become isolated. In these cases, a mental health consultant physician and specialty-trained nurse should be included in the team. The pharmacist and nurse should educate the patient in the management of pain and pruritus. In addition, the patient should be told to avoid exposure to the sun, wear long-sleeved garments and keep the skin moisturized. Finally, referral to a pain specialist may be in order if the pain is constant and can vary from moderate to severe.

The condition is benign but it can seriously affect the quality of life because of the constant itching.