Effective interprofessional teamwork is imperative in the trauma setting, an uncertain and complicated scenario, of resuscitating critically injured patients. From initial evaluation by EMS, to all those involved in the trauma bay, to post-operative an interprofessional care, including but not limited to surgeons, trauma nursing staff, operative staff, anesthesia, pharmacists, physical and occupational therapists, care management, consultants and nutritionists, there is a broad span of participants that contribute to overall patient outcome.

The presence or absence of a trauma team leader (TTL) at a Level I trauma center, demonstrated that TTL involvement during resuscitations correlated with improved adherence to trauma protocols, and increased efficiency (compared to no TTL involvement) to diagnostic imaging.

Efforts to further improve teamwork in trauma include simulation-based interprofessional team training with non-technical skills (NTS) focus. Again to further strength non-procedural, intangibles of teamwork. The various specialties will coordinate with the nursing staff irrespective of the procedural management of the case. Nursing will assist in surgery, prepare the patient, provide counsel and reassurance to the patient, and administer medications and provide postoperative care, reporting any concerns to the clinical staff. The creation, staffing, and maintenance of effective trauma teams require training strategies such as interprofessional simulation that target team training interaction. Specifically, training needs to focus on developing non-technical skills for resuscitation, and management of wounds and a stoma. There is ample evidence showing that interprofessional teamwork leads to better outcomes in most trauma patients.