**Diaphragmatic Hernia**

A diaphragmatic hernia is a congenital disability that occurs when one or more of a person's abdominal organs (stomach, spleen, liver, intestines) move upward into the chest through a defect in the diaphragm. It is usually congenital but can be acquired. Congenital hernias are considered a medical emergency and require prompt surgery.

**Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH)**

A CDH is an abnormal development of the diaphragm during fetal life. The herniation leads to the passage of one or other abdominal organ in the chest leading to the pulmonary hypoplasia which is usually unilateral. The most common subtype of congenital diaphragmatic hernias is Bochdalek Hernia. Other types include Morgagni a hernia, diaphragm eventration, and central tendon defects of the diaphragm.

**Acquired Diaphragmatic Hernia (ADH)**

An ADH happens due to penetrating or blunt injury. Falls and motor vehicle accidents are major causes of blunt injury while stabs and gunshot wounds lead to penetrating injuries. Penetrating injuries are the more common cause than the blunt injuries as a cause of the diaphragmatic rupture. Further, there can be accidental damage to the diaphragm from the surgical causes. Infrequently, a diaphragmatic hernia may result without any identifiable cause and remain undiagnosed for an undetermined amount of time, until the herniation of abdominal organs in the chest start to cause symptoms.

**Treatment**

Both acquired, and congenital diaphragmatic hernias usually require immediate surgery. Surgery requires the return of the abdominal organs from the chest cavity back into their original location in the abdominal cavity. The diaphragm should be repaired with staples or permanent sutures with or without a prosthetic patch.