Although IABP has a less significant impact on the hemodynamic improvement, its physiological effect of offloading the left ventricle during active ischemic heart disease, especially in hypotensive patients with reduced cardiac output, results in decreased myocardial oxygen demand, and thus, indirectly assist compromised left ventricle to enhance the cardiac output. New short-term mechanical circulatory support devices demonstrate significantly improved hemodynamic support as compared with IABP. However, studies observed no mortality benefit, and a higher rate of bleeding and incidence of an ischemic limb is noted with these new MCS devices compared with IABP. Although the use of IABP is declining over time; nevertheless, IABP is still the most widely used cardiac assist device encompassing a wide array of indications ranging from prophylactic use during high-risk percutaneous or surgical intervention to the cardiogenic shock needing hemodynamic stabilization. Despite its widespread use in various clinical conditions, except for the guidelines available for the utility of IABP in ST-segment elevation MI, there are no specific guidelines by the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association available to guide initiation of IABP in various other clinical conditions. Further studies are warranted to devise stringent criteria and protocol to assist physicians in decision-making related to the timing of initiation and weaning of IABP and to identify the patient group with cardiogenic shock who will benefit the most from IABP therapy.

Cardiogenic shock is a time-sensitive clinical condition that carries a high early mortality rate despite the implementation of advanced treatment strategies, including the early use of percutaneous coronary intervention, medical therapy, hemodynamic support with medications, and mechanical support devices.

Patients with cardiogenic shock requiring hemodynamic support are critically ill and necessitate intensive care by an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department, critical care intensivist, interventional cardiologist, advanced heart failure specialist, cardiothoracic surgeon depending upon the underlying clinical condition causing cardiogenic shock. These causes can include mitral valve regurgitation due to papillary muscle rupture or ventricular septum defect as a result of myocardial infarction necessitating surgical repair, telemetry units, 24-hour intensive care nurse certified to manage IABP, 24-hour certified nursing assistant to perform frequent monitoring of vitals and peripheral pulses, and the 24-hour pharmacist to assist in the selection of the appropriate dose of the medications and identify and manage the drug interactions. The decision to initiate an IABP support is usually at the discretion of the interventional cardiologist and the advanced heart failure specialist after taking into consideration the short term and long term prognosis, goals of the care, age, and other comorbidities of the patient that may have an impact on the clinical outcomes.

Although the SHOCK II study fails to demonstrate short-term and long-term mortality benefits with IABP therapy adjunctive to PCI in ST-elevation MI complicated by CS as compared to a medical therapy group, it may be secondary to extensive damage to the heart muscle tissue not able to sustain the cardiac function for an increased period of time despite IABP support. In such patients, IABP may be an option as temporizing hemodynamic support to bridge to the durable mechanical assistance device or heart transplantation. Therefore, early consultation with an interprofessional cardiogenic shock team, including an interventional cardiologist and advanced heart failure specialist, before or at the time of IABP insertion may prove beneficial to devise a plan of care about urgent revascularization. Such a plan can ensure the adequacy of the hemodynamic support and contemplate a long-term plan of care to improve survival outcomes. The interventional cardiologist's role is the decision-making about the initiation of mechanical support devices and placement of the IABP and or other percutaneous mechanical support devices and revascularization for acute myocardial infarction. Advanced heart failure cardiologist evaluation is essential to assess for the requirement of durable ventricular assist devices or heart transplantation, and, if needed, can coordinate for listing the patient for durable VAD and heart transplantation. Additionally, heart failure specialists can provide further recommendations about treatment options for patients with decompensated heart failure complicated by cardiogenic shock. Further, the cardiothoracic surgery team should be promptly involved in patient care if mechanical complications of myocardial infarction, i.e., severe mitral regurgitation due to papillary muscle rupture or ventricle septal rupture, is diagnosed and require urgent surgical repair. Furthermore, the role of intensivist is imperative in care as patients with cardiogenic shock secondary to myocardial infarction usually experience multi-organ failure, and require intensive care interventions to prevent and treat multi-organ dysfunction and manage the critically ill patients requiring mechanical ventilator support, and prevent and treat malnutrition, delirium, pressure ulcers, and thromboembolism.