The placenta plays a vital role in maternal-fetal physiology. The placenta has numerous responsibilities:

- **Implantation**:****The syncytiotrophoblast, which later grows as part of the placenta, facilitates implantation by directly invading the wall of the endometrium in the uterus.

- **Maternal recognition of pregnancy**: Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is synthesized and released from the syncytiotrophoblast to stimulate luteal progesterone production to maintain the pregnancy. Without hCG production, the absence of progesterone would trigger menses and, therefore, the sloughing of the endometrium with the implanted zygote.

- **Nutrient and gas exchange**: Terminal villi are the functional unit at which maternal-fetal exchange of nutrients and gases occur. Mother's blood provides oxygen, water with electrolytes, hormones, and other nutrients. In exchange, the fetus excretes carbon dioxide, water, urea, hormones, and other waste products. The maternal and fetal circulation do not mix. Instead, blood flow moderates the passive or active transport of nutrients and gases between vasculature.

- **Fetal protection from any immunologic attack**: The placenta holds the ability to metabolize numerous substances and protect against microbial infection. Macrophage in the stroma of the chorionic villi and syncytiotrophoblast play a critical role in the protection of the fetus. Additionally, many leukocytes reside in the decidua of the endometrium to support a successful pregnancy.

- **Prepare environment**: Many hormones are released from the placenta to uphold a pregnancy. The placental growth factor is released from the placenta to prepare the mother’s body for pregnancy in terms of cardiovascular adaption. Additionally, the placental growth factor promotes fetal development and maturity. Human chorionic somatomammotropin (HCS), also known as human placental lactogen (HPL) promotes breast development and alters the metabolism of the mother. It decreases maternal insulin sensitivity so that more glucose is available for the fetus.

Abnormalities in the placenta’s function can lead to poor pregnancy outcomes.