The management of drowning is with an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, neurologist, anesthesiologist, intensivist, nurses and EMS services.

Initial management of the patient includes delivering oxygen via nasal cannula, non-rebreather, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, or endotracheal tube. Oxygen should be titrated to maintain oxygen saturation between 92% - 96% and to avoid over oxygenation.  Nebulized albuterol may be given for bronchospasm. Cardiac support should be employed. Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) protocol should be followed if needed. Infusion of crystalloids, and at times vasopressors, may be needed for refractory hypotension.

The primary care provider and nurse practitioner play a vital role in prevention. It is estimated that more than 85% of drowning cases could be prevented with supervision, swimming instruction, technology, regulation, and public education. Parents should never leave infants unsupervised near any water. Children should always be told to wear life vests when in the water. In addition, it is vital that the parent or caregiver know how to perform CPR. Parents should be told to have a gate around the pool and the use of alcohol and recreational drugs around the area should be forbidden. Less than six percent of all persons who are rescued by lifeguards need medical attention in the hospital. Education is fundamental to preventing drowning accidents.

The prognosis of patients with drowning depends on how long the individual was hypoxic and the time for resuscitation. In most cases, survivors are left with residual neurological sequelae.