Due to their role in detoxifying potentially toxigenic xenobiotics and widespread nature throughout numerous organ systems, CYP enzymes are subject to a myriad of potential reactions and serve as a backbone in clinical research. The various effects of medications and other compounds on CYP enzymes are key in drug development to determine their safety and efficacy in the general public. Certain drugs are known inhibitors and inducers of specific CYP enzymes and require careful monitoring in patients taking multiple agents metabolized by the same subfamily. Two isozymes, CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, make up the bulk of drug metabolism, and drugs that interact with these enzymes should, therefore, merit closer evaluation and monitoring.

Most medications can still be administered despite this issue, barring any potential comorbidities, such as cirrhosis or viral hepatitis, that can alter the baseline activity of these enzymes. This is due to their intrinsic capacity to catalyze multiple substrates simultaneously at different sites. However, if patients develop any signs of significant dysfunction, it is essential to look at a detailed patient history, including medications and a review of associated adverse effects.  In cases of drug toxicity due to CYP inhibition, presenting symptoms would display signs of overdose. These instances can typically be treated by withholding the causative agent until plasma levels of the drug stabilize, or in more urgent scenarios, antidotes may work for rapid reversal. In cases of treatment failure due to CYP induction, treatment goals would not be adequately met and would warrant an adjustment in medication dosage or change in medication altogether.

Prodrugs represent a different issue. By definition, prodrugs are compounds that are not pharmacologically active and require metabolic conversion to their active metabolite or bioactivation. For example, codeine, a commonly prescribed medication known for its analgesic and cough suppressant properties, is a prodrug metabolized via CYP2D6 to its active byproduct, morphine. Poor metabolizers will exhibit little to no signs of benefit from treatment due to their inherited inability to induce bioactivation. However, ultrarapid metabolizers will accumulate much higher levels of morphine, potentially leading to respiratory depression and even death. Therefore, precautions are necessary regarding both a patient’s genotype variance and the pharmacologic properties of a specific drug.

With the advent and increasing popularity of herbal medicines and supplements, many people are now subjecting themselves to natural compounds that have not undergone rigorous scientific investigation to understand their side effect profile fully. Part of the worry behind people taking these supplements is that they have unknown effects both on the human body and in combination with prescription medications. For example, St. John’s Wort, an herbal remedy anecdotally believed to help treat depression and pseudodementia, is a known inducer of CYP3A4 and can lead to decreased plasma concentration of various prescription medicines. On the other hand, grapefruit juice is a known inhibitor of CYP3A4 and can have opposite effects. Nicotine is another compound that induces CYP1A2, and both nicotine and caffeine serve as substrates to CYP1A2, explaining a potential mechanism behind the phenomenon of increased tolerance to caffeine among smokers.