Various treatment modalities are available for the removal of seborrheic keratosis. Seborrheic keratosis is benign and typically does not warrant any treatment. However, a majority of patients still undergo some variation of therapy for these lesions. Usually, seborrheic keratoses removal is for cosmetic reasons or lesions that are consistently irritated and cause discomfort for the patient.

The most common and readily available treatment for seborrheic keratosis would be cryotherapy.

Another modality for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis would shave excisions. Typically, this treatment modality is for skin conditions primarily contained in the epidermis without the involvement of the dermis. These procedures require some type of local anesthesia, usually 1% lidocaine with or without epinephrine depending on the location of the lesion. A superficial excision is performed with a scalpel, special exfoliating blade, or double-edged razor blade to remove a thin slice of tissue containing the lesion. The specimen can then go to the lab for the exact pathology of the affected area. Another removal method for removal of seborrheic keratosis is electrodesiccation with or without curettage. This process is another method for removing superficial, epidermal lesions w/o invasion into the dermis. This technique usually requires the use of local anesthetic and can be performed in the office setting. This method uses the curette to scrape and remove the epidermal tissue followed by electrodesiccation with a hyfrecator or cautery unit; this is typically performed multiple times to ensure that there is adequate removal of the affected tissue. C&D (curettage and desiccation) provides efficient results and generally has a low rate of complications. Possible complications of C&D include infection, scarring, and hyperpigmentation.

Researchers are studying various types of topical agents are currently for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis. Topical gels and creams used for hyperkeratotic skin conditions (such as tazarotene, imiquimod cream, alpha-hydroxy acids, and urea ointment) as well as vitamin D analogs (tacalcitol, calcipotriol) have been used for treating these lesions. Although there have been some promising results with the reduction or resolution of the seborrheic keratosis lesions, the studies were small, and further research is needed to evaluate the efficacy of these topical medications. Other topical agents for the treatment of SK include a diclofenac gel and potassium dobesilate. Diclofenac is a topical NSAID, and potassium dobesilate is an inhibitor of the FGF signaling pathway, but these were also small studies, and their efficacy is not well established. The FDA recently approved a topical hydrogen peroxide solution for the treatment for seborrheic keratosis. In 2018, there was a randomized, double-blinded placebo control trial conducted using a topical 40% hydrogen peroxide solution.

Finally, laser therapy is another non-surgical option for patients in the treatment of seborrheic keratosis. There are two types of lasers utilized for the treatment of seborrheic keratosis, including ablative and non- ablative laser therapy. Ablative laser therapy includes (YAG and CO2 lasers), and non-ablative lasers (755 nm alexandrite laser) have been utilized for this purpose. Overall there have been multiple small studies, which have some efficacy in the treatment of seborrheic keratosis, however, further studies are needed.