The following are relevant studies for the management of intracerebral hemorrhage and its complications:

- The **FAST**trial was critical in establishing the efficacy of recombinant factor VIIa in controlling the expansion of the hematoma in intracerebral hemorrhage and the associated survival and functional benefits.

- However, the **SPOTLIGHT and STOP-IT**trials did not show radiographic or clinical improvement in patients with spot sign positive, representing hematoma expansion in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage treated at a median 3-hour from symptom onset.

- The **STITCH, I, and STITCH II trial**evaluated the benefit of early surgical intervention versus medical management in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage. The study concluded that early surgical intervention has a clinically relevant survival advantage in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage with no ventricular hemorrhage. It does not increase the rate of death or disability at six months in these patients.

- The **ATTACH II**trial evaluated the efficacy of rapidly lowering the systolic blood pressure in patients with acute hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage. The study found that intensive lowering of the systolic blood pressure to 110 to 139 mm Hg did not lower mortality compared to standard lowering of systolic blood pressure to 140 to 179 mm Hg.

- The **INTERACT II**trial aimed to analyze if the rapid lowering of blood pressure would improve outcomes in patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage. The target systolic blood pressure in the study arm with intensive lowering was below 140 mm Hg, and this compared to the standard reduction of systolic blood pressure to over 180 mm Hg. The trial concluded that intensive lowering blood pressure does not significantly reduce mortality or severe disability in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage.