As described, when the cell receives stress signals from other cells, extrinsic pathway comes into play.

**TNF PATH**

TNF-alpha is a cytokine produced by macrophages and is the major extrinsic mediator of apoptosis. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) binds to its receptor TNFR1, leading to the activation of caspases.

**Fas PATH**

The Fas receptor is a transmembrane protein of the TNF family which binds the Fas ligand (FasL). This interaction between Fas receptor and Fas L leads to the activation of caspase.

For example, apoptosis removes the activated T lymphocytes after the infection has been cleared. T cells produce a surface receptor FAS. FAS production increases during the infection, and after a few days, the activated T lymphocytes begin to produce FAS ligand. FAS binding to FAS ligand on the same or different cells triggers apoptosis through caspases activation.

**Genetic Mitochondrial Apoptosis Regulation and Cytochrome C Role**

When the cell is stressed from inside, the role of the Bcl-2 family of proteins that regulate the permeability of mitochondria in response to apoptotic signals come into play.

**Bcl-2 Family of Genes
**

Located on chromosome 18, these are anti-apoptotic genes in that they produce protein Bcl-2. Bcl-2 binds to and inhibits APAF-1, thus preventing the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria. Cytochrome c is present between inner and outer mitochondrial membranes. Once released it binds with APAF-1 and activates procaspase 9.

**TP53 Suppressor Gene
**

This gene encodes a protein that regulates the cell cycle and causes tumor suppression. If the DNA is damaged, for example, by ionizing radiation, chemotherapeutic agents, or hypoxia, TP53 arrests the cell in the G1 phase of cell cycle and prevents the proliferation of cells with damaged DNA and DNA repair. But if the DNA damage is too great, then it will promote apoptosis by activating BAX apoptosis genes. BAX genes products inactivate the BCL 2 anti-apoptosis gene.