PWS is a vascular birthmark of benign nature; therefore, reassuring the anxious parents may be the only management required. As the face is commonly affected, many find it cosmetically disfiguring, especially when associated with skin and soft tissue hypertrophy. Vascular-selective lasers are the mainstay of treatment, with the type of laser and laser parameters selected based on color and thickness of PWS, patient's skin type, prior treatment, and the response to it.

Lasers work on the principle of selective photothermolysis. The laser energy gets preferentially absorbed by hemoglobin (target chromophore), which results in heating and rupture of red blood cells and blood in the vasculature. Thus laser energy gets converted into thermal energy, which diffuses to endothelial cells causing selective damage to microvasculature through mechanical injury and photocoagulation.

Pulsed dye laser (PDL) is considered the gold standard in the treatment of PWS.

- Anatomic site- Poor response is seen in PWS located on acral and centrofacial sites.

- Size- More complete clearance is seen with smaller PWS.

- Color- Red PWS responds better than deep-purple colored.

- Thickening and nodularity- Longer wavelength lasers are more effective.

- Epidermal pigmentation- Energy gets absorbed by high melanin content in the epidermis leading to reduced light penetration into the dermis.

In addition to the above mentioned clinical attributes, neovasculogenesis occurring during the vascular remodeling phase post-procedure can also lead to unsatisfactory results.

Longer wavelength lasers can penetrate deeper to damage the ectatic vessels located in the reticular dermis, thus justifying the use of alexandrite laser (755nm) and neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser (1064nm) in the treatment of darker/thicker/nodular lesions.

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) can be used alone or combined with lasers. PDT selectively targets hypervascular dermal lesions without causing epidermal damage and has been found to be comparable in efficacy or even superior to laser treatment. The treatment involves the intravenous administration of photosensitizer followed by irradiation of the affected area with the light of appropriate wavelength, which in the presence of oxygen, produces reactive oxygen species that destroy the endothelial cells.

As angiogenesis during post-treatment vascular repair decreases the efficacy of laser therapy, angiogenesis inhibitors like imiquimod and rapamycin can be combined with lasers to improve the treatment response.

Ablative lasers like carbon dioxide laser can be used for the treatment of hypertrophy and nodularity.

Cosmetic camouflage, skin grafting, cryotherapy, dermabrasion, tattooing, and radiation were some of the treatment modalities that were used in the past with poor cosmesis.