Psychodynamic psychotherapies derive from psychoanalytic principles and theories. Primary schools of psychoanalytic theory currently considered to inform psychodynamic theory are Drive Psychology, Ego Psychology, Object Relations and Attachment Theories, Interpersonal Psychoanalysis, and Self Psychology.

**Drive Psychology**

Drive Psychology emerged from Freud's early theory around 1905, wherein human behavior is "driven" by unconscious aggression and sexuality.

The topographical model divided the human psyche into three parts - the conscious, preconscious, and unconscious - depending on the level of awareness of the ordinary conscious mind. The conscious mind is that part of the mind that every human is always aware of. The preconscious is part of the mind that is immediately out of awareness but can be brought into the conscious mind by the individual with relative ease.

Later in his elucidation of psychoanalytic theory and practice, Freud developed the so-called structural model, where he considered the distinction between the id, ego, and superego.

More specifically, the ego is considered the mediator between reality and the person's experience. The id is considered entirely unconscious and can only be brought into consciousness through analysis. Both the superego and ego have conscious, preconscious, and unconscious parts.

**Ego Psychology**

Ego Psychology focuses on treating and analyzing the ego, understanding ego defenses, and reality testing. Freud and his contemporaries initially considered the ego an impediment to treatment, as the ego prevented access to the id, which was considered the primary focus of treatment.

Later, Sigmund Freud published two additional works on the ego, followed by his daughter Anna Freud in 1936 and Heinz Hartmann in 1939. These works encouraged clinicians to identify and analyze ego structure and defenses as equally important to the id.

Anna Freud described these defense mechanisms as initially to protect the ego from underlying id drives, and later Heinz Hartmann proposed that instead, ego defenses protect the ego in the face of external adversity and experience.

**Object Relations Theory**

Object relations theory began as a movement in Britain and is considered to have emerged from the "controversial discussions."

Melanie Klein is thus considered a pivotal figure in the development of Object Relations theory, as she and her theory facilitated a significant theoretical and practical divergence from Freud within the field of psychoanalysis.

Several theorists contributed to this collection of theories, which all utilize the fundamental concept that humans develop primarily through interaction with other humans around them, especially those closest to the individual. These other humans are subsequently viewed and internalized as "objects." These internalized "objects," in turn, impact the individual's self-view and relationships with others throughout life.

Object relations theory was later developed, applied, and integrated with prior and emerging theories in the United States. These included theorists such as Otto Kernberg, Heinz Kohut, Glen Gabbard, and James Masterson.

**Attachment Theory**

An offshoot of object relations theory is attachment theory. Attachment theory was developed initially by John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth through their collective work; it is considered a part of object relations with empirical support through the research work of Mary Ainsworth. John Bowlby worked with emotionally disturbed children in the 1930s and published his seminal paper summarizing his findings in 1958 in a paper titled "The Nature of the Child's Tie to His Mother," followed by four additional papers in short succession. Mary Ainsworth's research with infants identified four attachment styles, published in her work, Patterns of Attachment (1978): Secure Attachment, Anxious-Avoidant Insecure Attachment, Anxious-Resistant Insecure Attachment, and Disorganized/Disoriented Attachment.

**Interpersonal Psychoanalysis**

In the 1920s and 1930s, Harry Stack Sullivan, who is considered the first psychoanalytic theorist in America, developed Interpersonal Psychoanalysis.

Harry Stack Sullivan is also considered to have brought together social science and psychiatry to create "social psychiatry" in collaboration with Adolf Meyer in the 1920s. Their work was supported by the National Insititute of Mental Health and the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry and emphasized a paradigm of a biopsychosocial approach to psychiatric treatment.

Harry Stack Sullivan also conducted research at Sheppard and Enoch Pratt Hospital focused on individuals with schizophrenia and severe borderline personality in 1923 on a specialized unit.

Self Psychology

Self-psychology was developed in Chicago by Heinz Kohut in the late 1960s to mid-1970s.The Analysis of the Self (1971), in which he discussed the theory. The central tenet of self-psychology is an emphasis on a new interpersonal experience within the therapeutic relationship, and the development of the self requires empathy, mirroring, idealizing, and twinship.

In the presence of these four, the self can then develop naturally through experiences in life, including disappointments and difficulties, and over time the healthy self will establish boundaries with others and differentiate. Deficits of the self can occur with insufficiencies in mirroring, idealizing, and twinship, and treatment focuses on supplementing these insufficiencies.