**Inhalation Sedation with Nitrous Oxide/Oxygen**

This technique is prominently used for children with anxiety toward dental procedures, thus making them uncooperative. Dental caries (decay) is one of the most common diseases, and if left untreated, it can lead to pain, local or systemic infection, and early loss of teeth. Utilizing this tool allows the patient to receive this essential dental treatment, preventing the abovementioned consequences. Providing therapy in a more comfortable environment lets patients overcome this barrier for future appointments. Having a cooperative patient enables dentists to provide safer and more effective treatment.

The procedure begins with inhaling 100% oxygen for 2 to 5 minutes. Nitrous oxide is introduced and gradually increased every second minute. The maximum that can be given is 70%, and many machines will not physically allow any more than this. A common operational concentration is 30 to 40%. Once the procedure is finished, 100% oxygen should be given for 5 minutes. The operator must visually monitor the patient to know when an appropriate level of sedation has been reached, and behavioral management is still essential to success.

**Intravenous Sedation with Midazolam**

Patients must attend their appointment with a designated escort available to take them patient home and be with them for the remainder of the day and overnight. The patient should be the escort's sole focus; therefore, if children are at home, they must be looked after by a different responsible adult.

When the patient enters the surgery, their blood pressure, pulse rate, and oxygen saturation will be re-checked. This monitoring will remain on the patient during the procedure and is particularly important encase of respiratory depression or over-sedation. Monitoring with equipment does not replace visual monitoring; therefore, it is imperative to use both. An intravenous cannula is then inserted; common sites are the dorsum of the hand or the anterior cubital fossa.

Midazolam is commonly stored in a 5-mg vial drawn up with a needle. The drug is titrated, ensuring it is given in a controlled manner so that the patient can be monitored closely to mitigate further the risk of respiratory depression, over-sedation, or other complications. An accepted titration method is the slow injection of 2 mg of midazolam, a 90-second pause. Then further 1 mg doses at 1-minute intervals until a safe and satisfactory level of sedation is achieved.

Once the treatment is complete, the patient should be monitored in recovery until they are deemed safe to leave. This decision should be based on their vital signs and a sedation-trained clinician's behavior assessment. Reminding the escort of their duty to look after the patient once they are discharged is imperative. The patient cannot drive, sign legal documents, or operate machinery for 24 hours.

If there are complications or changes to the treatment plan during intravenous sedation, arranging follow-up with the patient is good practice. Due to its amnesic effects, patients may not remember what they are told, even in recovery.

**Oral Sedation with Diazepam**

Typically, either 5 or 10 mg of diazepam is given one to two hours before the appointment. Patients must still attend with an escort and can't drive after the procedure. Vital signs should be recorded pre- and post-treatment, and clinicians should monitor the level of sedation to ensure the patient can still respond to verbal commands. This method is straightforward, less expensive, and requires less equipment than those above. Conversely, the drug's effect is less predictable, and it achieves a milder level of sedation compared to midazolam.