Pudendal neuralgia is initially a clinical, "bedside" diagnosis that is suggested by typical symptoms, sometimes referred to as the "Nantes" criteria, which include:

- Perineal pain that worsens on sitting but is relieved on lying, standing, or sitting on the toilet

- Pain does not wake the patient at night

- No specific sensory deficit on neurological examination

- Confirmation by positive neurophysiological testing and/or a successful diagnostic pudendal nerve block injection

Imaging techniques do not significantly help make a diagnosis. Abdominal and pelvic CT scans are helpful only for exclusion purposes and for image-guided nerve blocks, which are recommended.

**Neurophysiological tests**have been useful in the workup of pudendal neuropathy and neuralgia.

- Compressed nerves lose the ability to quickly transmit thermal and vibratory sensory changes.

- Warm sensory threshold detection testing is performed by placing a probe in the innervated area of concern, and the probe's temperature is slowly raised. Patients with neuropathy cannot detect gradual temperature changes and only react when the probe temperature is high enough to cause pain. Several devices (the NTE–2 and TSA 2 thermosensory testers and the MSA thermal stimulator) are commercially available, non-invasive, and easily used in a physician's office.

- Biothesiometry, which uses a probe with variable vibratory intensity, can be used similarly to identify vibratory sensory thresholds, but warm sensory threshold detection is easier and more commonly performed.

- The pudendal nerve terminal motor latency test (PNTML) has been used for diagnosis and monitoring treatment results.****It can be performed in the physician's office but is somewhat invasive, requiring a rectal or vaginal examination. A surface St. Mark electrode provides stimuli at the ischial spine, and the speed of travel or latency time is measured at the anal sphincter. Axonal damage and demyelination can both be identified. Postoperative normalization of the pudendal nerve terminal motor latency has been measured following decompression surgery in women with stress urinary incontinence.

- Intraoperative neurophysiologic testing is often performed during the decompression of the pudendal nerve. Other motor nerve tests include bulbocavernosus reflex and latency testing. Although electromyography (EMG) may complement the diagnosis, patients often find it a more painful and unpleasant experience compared to pudendal nerve terminal motor latency and warm sensory threshold detection testing.

- Perineal electroneuromyography can be useful but is not considered specific enough to be a recommended part of the routine diagnostic evaluation.

- Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) testing has been used to confirm pudendal neuropathy. SSEP is also a valuable tool to identify and limit pudendal nerve damage caused by compression of the perineum due to traction during hip surgeries.

- It should be noted that stimuli from the neurophysiologic testing often reproduce indicators of central sensitization (e.g., pain in a toe from a stimulus to the labium or contralateral inguinal pain during pudendal nerve terminal motor latency testing).

**Many experts have recommended pudendal nerve block injections as a diagnostic tool**, but there is a lack of high-quality studies to validate this technique.

The patient should be actively experiencing significant pain at the time of the diagnostic injection. The patient is asked to quantify and record their pain level immediately before, during, and for two hours after the injection. A skin pin-prick test may be used to ascertain skin sensitivity. An immediate reduction in pain of 50% or more is considered a positive test result. The use of image guidance, usually with CT or ultrasound, helps make the use of pudendal nerve blocks a much more reliable diagnostic tool.

Injections may also be given directly into Alcock's canal, but these are generally considered most useful to indicate if the patient is a potential candidate for surgical decompression.

Up to 20% of diagnostic pudendal nerve blocks may be of poor technical quality and fail to provide substantial pain relief even in confirmed cases.

Complications are rare but may include pain and infection at the injection site, bleeding, hematoma, direct pudendal nerve damage, and reactions if the injection is inadvertently given intravascularly.