The retina is a neurosensory structure in the posterior segment of the eye that sends visual information to the optic nerve.

The vitreous is a gel filling the vitreous cavity and is adherent to the retina at focal points throughout the posterior cortical vitreous. Vitreous liquefaction occurs over time and can lead to vitreous detachment. A vitreous detachment from the retinal surface can lead to retinal tears and breaks, which can precede rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. This gel has to be removed during PPV so that any blood or products obstructing the visual axis can be cleared, and the retina can, therefore, be accessed. This cavity is replaced by normal saline infusion during the procedure. The choroid is a vascularized structure that provides structural support to the retina and blood supply to the outer retinal layers.

The vascular supply of the retina is vital to know for PPV. This knowledge can help prevent iatrogenic complications such as ischemia or hemorrhage during the procedure. Most of the blood supply to the inner retina comes from the central retinal artery, which branches off the ophthalmic artery that, in turn, comes from the internal carotid artery. The central retinal artery gives rise to the superior and inferior vascular arcades. Through the temporal and nasal branches, these four arteries provide the major blood supply to the inner retinal layers. The ophthalmic artery also gives rise to the long and short posterior ciliary arteries. The long ciliary arteries supply medial and lateral horizontal parts of the choroid. The short ciliary arteries supply the posterior part of the optic disc at the level of the choroid. Terminal branches of the short ciliary arteries provide additional blood supply to Bruch’s membrane and outer retina. As stated before, most of the blood supply to the outer retinal layers comes from the choroid. The veins of the retina follow the blood supply and drain into the central retinal vein. The retina does not contain lymphatic vessels.

In PPV, vitreous cavity access is through the pars plana; this represents the flat part of the ciliary body and is between the ora serrata and pars plicata. The ora serrata is a junction between the ciliary body and the retina. The pars plicata is the most anterior portion of the ciliary body and produces aqueous humor. The pars plicata is at the base of the iris. The pars plana is a structure that is around 4 mm long and starts further away from the corneal limbus. This landmark is chosen for PPV due to the convenient access to the vitreous while causing minimal ocular trauma. Furthermore, the pars plana does not serve a sensory function and has no involvement in producing aqueous or vitreous humor, which is important since the eye needs to endogenously replace the vitreous humor removed during PPV.