There are many different types of mediastinal cancers. Their prognosis depends on their behavior, their proclivity to invade or disseminate, and their resistance to treatment.

**Anterior Mediastinum (bound by the pericardium posteriorly, pleural sacks laterally, and the sternum forward)**

**Thymic Carcinoma and Thymoma**

Thymic carcinomas are rare but highly aggressive, early-metastasizing cancers derived from thymic epithelial cells. They are also the most common cancers of the anterior mediastinum, comprising (collectively with thymomas) about 20% of all mediastinal cancers and 10% of all thymic tumors.

Thymomas, like carcinomas, are also thought to originate from thymic epithelial cells.

**Germ Cell Tumor**

The most common location for malignant germ cell tumors are the gonads; however, they can also arise in extragonadal regions. The mediastinum is the most commonly known location for extragonadal germ cell tumors. It has been speculated that they occur in these locations due to the abnormal migration of germ cells during embryogenesis. In adults, 10% to 15% of all mediastinal tumors are germ cell tumors, while approximately 25% of tumors are germ cell tumors in children. Thirty percent to 40% of these germ cell tumors are malignant and mainly found in men. When a mediastinal germ cell tumor is discovered, primary testicular or ovarian germ cell tumors should be excluded because the mediastinum could be a site of metastasis. Germ cell tumors include seminomas (termed dysgerminomas in women), embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac tumor, choriocarcinoma, immature teratoma, and mature teratomas. Other germ cell tumors of the mediastinum include mixed germ cell tumors, germ cell tumors with somatic type solid malignancy, and germ cell tumors with associated hematological malignancy.

Teratomas involve cells from the embryonal cells layers of the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.

Other symptoms may include hemoptysis, fever, and pleural effusion.

"Growing teratoma syndrome" (GTS) is a special situation that can occur anywhere within the torso but is particularly problematic within the mediastinum.

Unlike their germ cell cohort, benign teratomas have a negative (AFP/BHCG), negative PET scan, and are resistant to both chemotherapy and radiation. With the discovery of GTS, the chemotherapy should be stopped, and the only modality of treatment, complete surgical resection, should be given. GTS has been reported in the retroperitoneum (most common site), lung, forearm, mesentery, liver, pineal gland, and the inguinal/cervical/supraclavicular nodes. The 'benign' teratomatous element grows quickly, and if surgery is delayed, it can overrun and obstruct the surrounding viscera. During this situation, it is also essential to rule out other non-malignant sources of markers such as an elevated AFP in hepatic dysfunction or an elevated BHCG due to marijuana use, or an increased luteinizing hormone. Generally speaking, with surgery, the overall survival can be 90%; incomplete resection brings recurrence. Histologic analysis of the resected specimen shows a benign mature teratoma with a non-germ cell component. In the mediastinum, the treatment data appears relatively poorer. The 5-year overall survival rate is 30% to 45%, with a 4% operative mortality (due primarily to pulmonary problems). Following complete resection, GTS can recur in up to 4% of cases; with incomplete resection, the rate can be as high as 83%.

**Lymphoma**

Primary mediastinal lymphoma is a relatively uncommon tumor. It is generally observed in senior women and men. The most common types of primary lymphomas which present as a disease in the mediastinum are primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, Nodular Sclerosing Hodgkin's disease, marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), as well as other the more rare T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and other T-/B-/NK-cell entities. Secondary lymphomas of the mediastinum, which originate elsewhere in the body and metastasize to the mediastinum, are more common than primary mediastinal lymphomas.

Cervical or supraclavicular adenopathy may be present. Their discovery is most often serendipitous. Chemotherapy carries a good 90%, or more, 5-year survival. PET scanning is used in initial staging and to judge the efficacy of therapy as patients with good responses seen on the PET scan can negate a full course of chemotherapy or the addition of radiation.

**Middle Mediastinum (bounded by the pericardial and bilateral pleural sacks both anteriorly and posteriorly)**

**Parathyroid Adenoma**

Several tumors can metastasize to the middle mediastinum. Parathyroid adenoma is one. Primary hyperparathyroidism affects up to 0.5% of the population, with increasing incidence after age 50.

**Posterior Mediastinum (bounded by the pericardium anteriorly, diaphragm inferiorly, and the transverse thoracic plane superiorly)**

**Neurogenic Mediastinal Neoplasms**

These neurogenic tumors represent more than 60% of the masses found in the posterior mediastinum, are primarily found in children, and can reach a large size before becoming symptomatic. Approximately 30% of neurogenic neoplasms are malignant. They present with a large variety of both clinical and pathological features that are classified by the origin of the cell type. These are the most common cause of neurogenic mediastinal cancers and are classified as nerve sheath neoplasms (Schwannomas and neurofibromas) and ganglion cell neoplasms (neuroblastomas and ganglioneuroblastomas).

Schwannomas are nerve sheath tumors. They compose half of the mediastinal neurogenic tumors though only 9% of all Schwannomas occupy the mediastinum.