# Introduction

Genetic disorders traditionally fall into three main categories: single-gene defects, chromosomal abnormalities, and multifactorial conditions. A chromosomal abnormality, or chromosomal aberration, is a disorder characterized by a morphological or numerical alteration in single or multiple chromosomes, affecting autosomes, sex chromosomes, or both. The normal human karyotype contains approximately two meters of DNA organized into 46 chromosomes: 22 pairs of homologous autosomal chromosomes and a set of sex chromosomes that compromise two X chromosomes in females or an X and a Y chromosome in males. All the genetic necessary for growth and development derive from chromosomes (around 20 to 25 thousand genes). Chromosome abnormalities usually involve an error in cell division (mitosis or meiosis), which may occur in the prenatal, postnatal, or preimplantation periods. These alterations have significant clinical consequences, i.e., spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, neonatal death/hospitalization, malformations, intellectual disability, or an identifiable syndrome. Accurate identification of these chromosomal errors is essential for prevention strategies, genetic counseling, and appropriate treatment.

# Development

Cytogenetics refers to the study of chromosomes. Although it has been known that chromosomes form the physical basis for inheritance for well over a hundred years, the discipline of mammalian cytogenetics, as we know it today, started around the mid-1950s.

Chromosomal abnormalities generally fall into two basic categories: numerical or structural. Numerical disorders are considerably more common than structural ones; they involve any deviation from the normal diploid number for a given species. This category can further subdivide into a group in which individual chromosomes may be either missing or duplicated and a group in which whole haploid sets of chromosomes may be added or lost.

Chromosomal abnormalities may also classify as constitutional or acquired. Constitutional chromosomal abnormalities arise during gametogenesis or early embryogenesis and affect all or a major portion of an organism’s cells.

# Cellular

As previously stated, the normal human cell contains 46 chromosomes, except for enucleate cells (i.e., red blood cells), cell fragments (platelets), and haploid germline cells (eggs and sperm), which contain only 23 chromosomes.

Generally, an aneuploid chromosome set varies from the wild type by a small number of chromosomes (typically one). For example, trisomy (three copies of a specific homologous chromosome or 2N + 1) is the most frequent constitutional chromosomal abnormality in humans.

Regarding structural chromosomal abnormalities, there is one major mechanism of significant clinical importance called Robertsonian translocation. In this case, two acrocentric chromosomes break at the centromere, losing both of their short p arms and creating a new single chromosome containing one centromere and the q arms of both original chromosomes. Some individuals may have this kind of cytogenic aberration and appear phenotypically normal because only small amounts of genetic material are present in the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes. Thus, the two remaining long arms can compensate for this loss. However, in some cases, it can lead to genetic imbalances and the formation of zygotes with polyploidies (trisomies or monosomies) with significant phenotypical consequences (i.e., Down syndrome). The estimated carrier frequency for Robertsonian translocations in the general population is 1 in 1000.

# Molecular Level

Aneuploidy is most commonly the result of a failure to segregate chromosomes in cell division, meiosis I or II. This outcome includes non-disjunction, premature disjunction, or anaphase lag.

Several factors share links to human aneuploidies: mother’s age, the occurrence of a previous trisomy, aberrant recombination, and, although less strongly associated, apparently folic acid deficiency, obesity, smoking, and radiation may have some connection.

# Testing

In over a century in cytogenetics, there have been many new techniques developed for chromosome testing.

**Karyotyping**

Traditionally, karyotyping is considered the definitive method for detecting chromosomal abnormalities because of the accurate identification of fetal aneuploidies, structural rearrangements, and duplications and/or deletions of size greater than 5 Mb.

Unfortunately, this technique requires cells situated in the metaphase stage. Only 24% to 36% of embryos produce metaphase cells of sufficient quality for accurate quantification of chromosomes, and less than 25% of these cases are sufficient for complete cell analysis.

**Fluorescent in-situ Hybridization (FISH)**

This method uses fluorescent-labeled DNA probes to assess the presence, location, and copy number of the complementary DNA sequence of interest in an individual’s genome by hybridization.

Finally, remember that some chromosome abnormalities can be detected with cytogenetic diagnostics but are not associated with clinical defects.

# Clinical Significance

Approximately 0.4 to 0.9% of newborns have chromosomal abnormalities, and about half of them have an abnormal phenotype.

**Autosomal Trisomies**

**Trisomy 13 (Patau Syndrome)**

- Incidence: Approximately 1 in 5000 to 1 in 16000 live births (third most common autosomal trisomy)

- Karyotype: 47, XX or XY, +13

- Clinical features: Microcephaly, holoprosencephaly, microphthalmia, small or poorly developed eyes (anophthalmia or cyclopia), cleft lip and palate, polydactyly, rocker-bottom feet, congenital heart disease, cryptorchidism, brain or spinal cord abnormalities, weak muscle tone at birth, severe intellectual disability.

- Prognosis: miscarriage, stillbirth, or early death (median survival around one year of age).

**Trisomy 18 (Edwards Syndrome)**

- Incidence: Approximately 1/3000 to 1:5000  live births (second most common autosomal trisomy)

- Karyotype: 47, XX or XY, +18

- Clinical features: Low birth weight, microcephaly, micrognathia, low-set, malformed ears, clenched fists with overlapping fingers, congenital heart and renal abnormalities, rocker-bottom feet, severe intellectual disability, survival about one year.

- Prognosis: miscarriage, stillbirth, or early death (median survival around one year of age).

**Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome)**

- Incidence: Approximately 1:700 to 1/800 live births (most common autosomal trisomy)

- Karyotype: 47, XX or XY, +21

- Clinical features: Characteristic facial appearance, flat facies, prominent epicanthic folds, flat occiput, Brushfiel spot in irides, weak muscle tone at birth, single transverse palmar crease (simian crease), clinodactyly, congenital digestive and cardiac defects, intellectual disability, increased risk for leukemia, Alzheimer disease and hearing an vision problems

- Prognosis: Approximately 75% of conceptions die in embryonic or fetal life. Nevertheless, if birth occurs, the prognosis is relatively good (median survival is 47 years). It is the most common aneuploidy that is compatible with long-term survival.

- Note: Approximately 95% of patients with Down syndrome have trisomy 21. However, 4% of cases are due to Robertsonian translocation, and 1% is due to mosaicism.

**Sex Chromosome Aneuploidies**

**Klinefelter Syndrome**

- Incidence: 1/500 to  1:1000 male births

- Karyotype: Typically 47, XXY (greater than 90%). However, other karyotypes have been described: 48, XXXY and 49, XXXXY and 46, XY/47, XXY (mosaicism)

- Clinical features: Increased height, long extremities, low upper/lower segment ratio, gynecomastia, reduced facial and body hair (female hair distribution), delayed and incomplete puberty, small testes (testicular atrophy), infertility, developmental delay (learning disabilities, delayed speech and language development), increased risk for breast cancer.

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good. The life span is slightly reduced.

**Triple X Syndrome**

- Incidence: Approximately 1/1000 female births

- Karyotype: 47, XXX

- Clinical features: Presents with increased height and risk of learning disabilities, delayed development of speech, language, and motor skills, weak muscle tone, behavioral and emotional difficulties, seizures, kidney abnormalities

- Some cases may seem phenotypically normal.

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good.

**XYY Syndrome**

- Incidence: Approximately 1:1000 male births

- Karyotype: 47, XYY

- Clinical features: Increased height and risk of learning disabilities, delayed development of speech, language, and motor skills, weak muscle tone, hand tremors, seizures, asthma, scoliosis, behavioral and emotional difficulties

- As with triple X syndrome, some cases may seem phenotypically normal.

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good.

**Turner Syndrome**

- Most common sex chromosomal abnormality in females and the most common genetic cause of primary amenorrhea

- Incidence: Approximately 1 in 2000 to 1 in 2500 live female births

- Karyotype: 45, X accounts for 45% of cases because most zygotes cannot survive extrauterine life. Remaining cases have a mosaic karyotype (45, X/46, XX, 45, X/ 46XY or 45, X/47, XXX) or a structural abnormality [isochromosome, 46, Xi (Xq) or (Xp), or ring chromosome, 46, Xr (X)]

- Clinical features: Short stature, webbed neck, low posterior hairline, shield chest, amenorrhea, absence of puberty, the early loss of ovarian function (ovarian dysgenesis), infertility, skeletal abnormalities (i.e., cubitus valgus), lymphedema, congenital kidney and/or heart disease (i.e., horseshoe kidney, coarctation of the aorta).

- Prognosis: Variable. It depends on the severity of clinical manifestations and treatment but overall is fairly good.

Cytogenetic analysis of fetal cells required samples from amniotic fluid, chorionic villi, or fetal blood, which are sampled through invasive testing, such as amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling, and cordocentesis, respectively.