**Formation of a Hospital Committee**

Most hospitals have now developed a committee that oversees the use of medical abbreviations. The committee is in charge of implementing a list of prohibited abbreviations. The committee usually consists of a physician, nurse, pharmacist, and personnel from risk management and patient safety (Traynor, 2004). This committee is also tasked with the role of performing chart audits to ensure that healthcare workers are compliant. The committee should also set policies for those who do not comply. One of the means may include ceasing order writing privileges for repeat offenders. Finally, the committee should encourage all staff to report other healthcare staff who continue to write medical abbreviations (Cowell, 2007).

**Discussion******

The use of medication abbreviation has persisted in healthcare despite recommendations by the Joint Commission that such usage may adversely affect patient care. Most serious medication abbreviations are written while writing drug orders, and the junior staff is often left with the responsibility of understanding and deciphering the abbreviation. With the wide adoption of electronic technology, these medical abbreviations are often repeated in the medical chart and continue to pose a threat to patient safety. All healthcare institutions have now started to formulate guidelines restricting the use of medical abbreviations. While few studies have quantified the extent of medical abbreviation usage and its adverse effects, the Joint Commission feels that the problem is widespread and has the potential to cause severe patient harm. Thus, the Joint Commission has released a list of prohibited medical abbreviations for all healthcare institutions. One way to reduce the use of medical abbreviations will be through continuous reporting and education of healthcare workers. But on rare occasions, enforcement by limiting ordering privileges may be necessary. Although the risk of actual patient harm from using medical abbreviations is low, the aim is to achieve zero risk.

**Pearls of Wisdom**

To minimize the use of medical abbreviations, the following guidelines are recommended:

- Develop a regular campaign to erase the use of medical abbreviations in your institution completely

- Develop a committee to oversee and regulate the use of medical abbreviations

- Create a list of "do not use" abbreviations and post them on medical and surgical floors, patient charts, pharmacies, computer screens, intranet sites, hospital newsletters, and healthcare lounges.

- Initiate educational programs for all staff on the dangers of using abbreviations

- Reward healthcare staff who are compliant

- Minimize the use of abbreviations even at conferences, seminars, and lectures- practice what you preach

- Ensure that all drug names, dosages, and frequencies are spelled out

- Prohibit the use of medical abbreviations on all patient charts, discharge forms, consent forms, and prescriptions

- Encourage junior staff to communicate with senior staff who write the abbreviations before carrying out the order

- Encourage junior staff to report staff who regularly use abbreviations

- Perform regular audits to check for compliance

- Circulate Joint Commission guidelines on the use of medical abbreviation usage

- For repeat offenders, remove privileges to write to orders