Diagnosis is often clinically made, while imaging is helpful when the diagnosis is unclear or partial rupture is considered. Three criteria described for diagnosis:

- History of a single traumatic event. The patient will report a sudden, painful pop whilst the elbow is eccentrically loaded from flexion to extension. e.g., while doing a biceps curl.

- Grossly palpable and visible signs of retraction of the biceps muscle belly( reverse popeye deformity)

- Weakness of flexion of the elbow and supination of the forearm in cases of distal biceps rupture.

**Provocative Tests**

**Hook test:**The examiner uses his index finger to hook it around the lateral edge of the biceps tendon while the patient is actively flexing and supinating the elbow. If the examiner can hook his finger 1 cm underneath the tendon, the test is positive, and the tendon is intact. A false-positive test can present in a partial tear or when laceratus fibrosis or underlying brachialis tendon are misinterpreted as an intact biceps tendon.

**Ruland biceps squeeze test:**It is performed with the elbow supported in 60 to 80 degrees of flexion, and the forearm is pronated. Then the examiner squeezes the distal biceps muscle belly. The test is positive when there is no supination of the patient's forearm or wrist.

Partial ruptures may present with similar but subtle, symptoms and physical presentation is usually with pain, weakness, and no palpable defect, sometimes leading to delayed diagnosis. Ultrasound is an inexpensive, noninvasive tool to reveal the absence of the tendon, but it is highly technician-dependent. Radiographs generally cannot aid in diagnosis; occasionally can show a small fleck of bone from the radial tuberosity. Radiographs can be helpful to survey for other accompanying conditions, confirm the absence of another bony pathology, or sometimes reveal radial tuberosity hypertrophy or occasional avulsion fracture of the tuberosity. MRI is rarely necessary for diagnosis, but it is helpful to distinguish between the following:

- Complete versus partial tear

- Muscle substance versus tendon tear

- Degree of retraction