Children with a diagnosis of Landau-Kleffner syndrome require management with an interprofessional team. Therapeutic planning and interprofessional communication among the various professional figures play an essential role in improving outcomes. The professionals involved are multiple and include a pediatrician who has the task of care coordinator, a child neuropsychiatrist, and a neurophysiologist. Also, a speech therapist and a psychomotor therapist (in the case of younger children) will have to carry out specific habilitation and rehabilitation programs. The pharmacist should encourage medication compliance, check for drug interactions, and alert the prescriber to medications that may exacerbate the condition. Specialty-trained neuroscience nursing staff can assist in monitoring treatment, as well as counseling the patients and/or parents. Additionally, the social worker should ensure that the patient has adequate facilities in the home and access to support services. Strategies aimed at strengthening communication functions require continuous calibration according to the patient's needs; this requires dynamic coordination for enhancing team performance. These are but a few examples of how an interprofessional team can improve patient care in Landau-Kleffner syndrome. [Level 5]

**Perspectives**

In children with refractory epileptic encephalopathy, an investigation with cannabidiol (tetrahydrocannabinol provided as an oil-based suspension) is ongoing (Phase 1, open-label dose-escalation study). Another randomized trial is evaluating acetazolamide (orally 8-10 mg/kg for 4-8 weeks) versus diazepam (orally 0.5 mg/kg for four weeks) in patients with CSWS and LKS. An interesting pharmacological perspective is an association between corticosteroids and BDZs. In this direction, it would be appropriate to design ad hoc studies. Among non-pharmacological strategies, Pedro et al. published a case of a patient who, after 11 years of pharmacological and specialized education interventions had no significant improvement and was successfully treated through a multimodal approach focused on facilitating inter-hemispheric communication.