Preparation for platelet transfusion starts from the production of quality-approved platelet concentrates (PC) in the blood banks. PC can be prepared from whole blood or by apheresis. 6 whole blood unit-derived platelets equal one apheresis platelet, which contains 5X10^10 platelets per unit. The shelf life of a PC is five days, within which it must be used. The normal dose of platelet transfused is calculated as 10 to 15 ml/kg of the patient.

The blood bank receives a request for transfusion from the physician with a pretransfusion sample, which is verified by the staff at both ends, following which ABO and Rh blood grouping is confirmed. PC is issued as and when required, which is mentioned on the blood request form. Group-specific PC is recommended, although out of the group can also be issued. When an emergency request for platelet transfusion is made, such as in traumatic bleeding patients, the patient blood group may not be available. In such cases, “AB” group platelets are given if available, or else across the group, transfusion is considered. Serologic crossmatch is not required except in rare cases where PC has high RBC content.

Consent from the patient must be obtained before sending a request to the blood bank, and the intravenous line must be set before the PC is issued from the blood bank. Staff at the issue counter does the final checks for details such as patient ID, unit no, blood group, and abnormal appearance or clumps suggestive of infection in the PC bag before issuing the unit.

Special requirements such as leukoreduction to reduce HLA alloimmunization or to minimize CMV transmission and irradiation to prevent transfusion-associated graft vs. host disease (TAGvHD) might be needed in specific patient groups. This special request is mentioned on the blood request forms.