Multiple different treatment options have arisen for linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD) since its original discovery in the 1970s, but the most commonly used medication to treat the disorder is oral dapsone. Fortunately, the disease is exceptionally responsive to dapsone and improvement can be seen within 2 to 3 days of drug initiation. Relatively low doses of dapsone are required for successful disease management, with an average of 100 mg daily for adults, while children generally require 1 to 2 mg/kg per day. Patients on dapsone should be monitored closely for the development of hemolytic anemia, agranulocytosis, dapsone hypersensitivity syndrome, leukopenia, cholestatic jaundice, peripheral neuropathy, and nephrotic syndrome. Occasionally, patients may also require adjunctive administration of oral corticosteroids to gain initial control of the disease. Sulfapyridine remains another treatment option.

Interestingly, multiple antibiotic therapies, such as the tetracycline class, dicloxacillin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, have also proven to be beneficial in controlling the disease but no specific underlying infectious etiology has ever been discovered. In patients with drug-induced LABD secondary to vancomycin, patients may benefit from discontinuing the vancomycin and adding a new antibiotic such as doxycycline with the added benefit of relatively similar microbial coverage it may also serve as a potential treatment for the patient's LABD. Nicotinamide 1.5 grams per day may be beneficial as an adjunctive treatment.