While using clonazepam, several precautions and monitoring are necessary. Older adults and children are especially prone to the adverse effects of clonazepam due to impaired or immature liver function.

**Complete Blood Count, Renal, and Liver Function**

Clonazepam is hepatically metabolized and renally excreted; its level requires hepatic or renal impairment monitoring as it can lead to toxic drug accumulation in the body in either condition. It can also rarely cause thrombocytopenia, so platelet levels should be monitored.

**Worsening of Seizures**

Clonazepam can cause a worsening of seizures in persons having multiple types of seizure disorders. In such cases, its dosing requires adjustment or an increase in the dose.

**Abrupt Discontinuation and Tolerance**

Abrupt withdrawal of clonazepam should be avoided, particularly in those patients on long-term, high-dose therapy for a seizure disorder or other conditions, as it may result in status epilepticus and withdrawal symptoms. Withdrawal symptoms include anxiety, irritability, insomnia, tremors, headache, depression, sweating, confusion, hallucinations, and seizures. Long-term use also leads to developing tolerance, especially to its anticonvulsant properties, which can precipitate a seizure.

**Respiratory Compromise**

Patients with compromised respiratory function, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), obstructive sleep apnea, etc., should exercise extreme caution when taking clonazepam. Clonazepam significantly increases the risk of respiratory depression. The medication also causes hypersalivation, which may aggravate conditions in which patients have difficulty handling secretions.

**Impaired Cognitive and Motor Performance**

Due to its potential effect for inducing CNS depression, clonazepam may impair judgment, thinking, and motor skills. Patients should be advised against using heavy machinery, driving, or any other activity requiring higher motor skills. It should be carefully prescribed in patients with a neuromuscular disorder such as parkinsonism or myasthenia gravis, as it can exacerbate their condition. Care is also necessary when prescribing this drug to geriatric patients as it significantly increases the risk of falls due to poor motor control.

**Suicidal Behavior**

Clonazepam is associated with an increased risk of depression, suicidal behavior, and thinking. So the patients and their caregivers should be cautioned to look for any symptoms of worsening of depression, changes in mood or behavior, or suicidal ideation.

**Alcohol Use**

Patients should be strongly advised against the use of clonazepam and alcohol concomitantly since both are CNS depressants. Their cumulative effect can result in sedation, severe respiratory depression, low blood pressure, and death.

**Monitoring for misuse/abuse**

Clonazepam is a DEA-schedule IV drug. A prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) can identify potential misuse.