The administration of ipratropium is via inhalation, either orally or intranasally.

**Oral Inhalation**

The oral formulation can be aerosol inhalation or a solution for nebulization.

**Aerosol Inhalation**

If the patient experiences difficulty inhaling the drug after actuation, they can use a valved holding chamber (VHC) or a spacer. A patient can choose between a mouthpiece or a face mask along with the VHC or spacer based on patient convenience. Usually, it is more convenient for patients under the age of 4 to use a tight face mask, and VHC or spacer get the most from treatment. When using a face mask, the patient should be instructed to inhale 3 to 5 times per actuation. After administration patient is to be instructed to rinse the mouth with water to decrease the side effect of mouth dryness. Patients should be instructed not to use other persons' inhalers to prevent the transfer of any possible infections.

**Dosage**

Adults:

- 17 mcg per spray

- COPD: 2 sprays every 6 hours

- Asthma exacerbation, moderate to severe: 8 sprays every 20 mins as needed for up to 3 hours

- No renal impairment adjustment is necessary.

Pediatrics:

- NEB (0.02%): 0.25 mg every 20 mins up to 3 doses for moderate to severe asthma exacerbation: if less than 6 years old.

- NEB (0.02%): 0.25 to 0.5 mg every 20 mins as needed up to 3 hours for moderate to severe asthma exacerbation: age 6 to 12 years old.

- NEB (0.02%): 0.5 mg every 20 mins as needed up to 3 hours for moderate to severe asthma exacerbation: if age 13 years old or above.

**Solution for Nebulization**

Ipratropium can be mixed with albuterol formations in the same nebulizer within one hour of use. On the other hand, ipratropium should not be mixed with cromolyn solutions as both are incompatible.

**Intranasal Inhalation**

**Nasal Spray Solution**

- Prime the unit before using it for the first time.

- Point the sprayer away from patients or other persons/animals.

- Push the activator 6 to 7 pushes until a wide and fine spray is observed.

- After that, if the unit remains unused for over 24 hours, then prime the unit again by pushing the pump at least twice before use. If the unit remains unused for more than 7 days, then prime the unit again by pushing the pump seven times all over again.

- Patients should be instructed not to use other peoples' inhalers to prevent the transfer of any possible infections.

**Dosage**

- 0.03% solution: 21 mcg/spray

- 0.06% solution: 42 mcg/spray

- Rhinorrhea (allergic or nonallergic rhinitis): 2 sprays of 0.03% solution per nostril every 6 hours. Seasonal allergic rhinitis: 2 sprays of 0.06% per nostril every 6 hours or every 8 hours.

- Common cold: 2 sprays of 0.06% per nostril every 6 hours or every 8 hours

- No renal impairment adjustment is necessary.