As previously described, prostanoids have wide-ranging effects on smooth muscle tonicity within the vasculature, respiratory and GI tracts, reproductive organs, and even on the kidneys. Additionally, thromboxane has specific actions related to platelet function. Therefore, these extensive physiologic consequences impart incredible therapeutic utility upon NSAIDs but may also contribute to the adverse effects and toxicity of this drug class.

Most commonly, the risk of severe GI adverse effects, including ulceration, bleeding, or perforation is increased with NSAID consumption. Though these risks can occur at any time in patients of any age, these adverse events tend to present more commonly in the elderly. Other undesirable GI events may include nausea, dyspepsia, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, and diarrhea from erosion of the alimentary canal. It is well understood that prostanoids such as PGE2 and PGI2 constitutively contribute to GI mucous secretion. Additionally, these prostanoids promote vasodilation, allowing for enhanced blood flow and bicarbonate delivery to mucosal surfaces. Primary inhibition of COX-1 reduces these cytoprotective effects.

Serious cardiovascular adverse events may also be associated with the use of NSAIDs. Historically, much attention had been drawn to the increased incidence of myocardial infarction and stroke, particularly with the selective COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib, which was removed from the market in 2004. Since then, similar inquiries regarding the cardiovascular safety of the remaining selective COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, and non-selective NSAIDs have been investigated. A 2016 study, known as the PRECISION (Prospective Randomized Evaluation of Celecoxib Integrated Safety versus Ibuprofen or Naproxen) trial, provided strong evidence that celecoxib is not associated with a higher rate of cardiovascular events compared to non-selective drugs. However, widely recognized adverse effects include blood pressure elevation and potentiation or exacerbation of congestive heart failure, through inhibition of natural prostanoid-induced salt excretion and changes in renal arteriolar tone. Such risks tend to be dose and duration dependent. Ultimately, it is important to establish that the risk of unfavorable cardiovascular events associated with NSAID use is further increased with tobacco use, alcohol consumption, and generally unhealthy habits.

Less commonly, individuals who consume NSAID medication may experience renal adverse effects. As noted above, NSAIDs have been found to interfere with prostanoid-regulated mechanisms that affect afferent arterioles within nephrons, thereby reducing the glomerular filtration rate. With drug use, the loss of arteriolar dilation opposes prostanoid’s reno-protective effects and increases the risk of acute kidney injury due to decreased renal blood flow. Additional manifestations of NSAID-induced renal toxicity include renal papillary necrosis and interstitial nephritis. The renal papillae are known to be sensitive to the loss of renal blood flow. Ischemic injury from drug-associated vasoconstriction can result in gross hematuria. Interstitial nephritis may occur if individuals are hypersensitive to the analgesic class and due to acute inflammation within the kidney, classically present with eosinophilic pyuria and azotemia.

Aside from these independent toxicities, NSAIDs may also result in adverse effects when taken concurrently with numerous other drugs. As a result of their pharmacokinetics, NSAIDs may interact with other high plasma protein-bound drugs, displacing them and leading to an increase in the free serum concentration of these drugs. Drugs with narrow therapeutic windows, such as warfarin or phenytoin, can theoretically reach toxic levels when displaced in this manner. Additionally, NSAIDs may increase the toxicity of drugs that are dependent on renal clearance (such as lithium) or hepatic metabolism because some NSAIDs reduce renal perfusion and inhibit cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes or glucuronidation.

Other notable drug interactions occur during concurrent use of NSAIDs and antihypertensives, anticoagulants and antiplatelets, selective serotonin receptor inhibitors (SSRIs), and substances that injure GI mucosa. The effects of many antihypertensives are diminished due to the ability of NSAIDs to reduce natriuresis. Besides decreased efficacy, specific use of NSAIDs with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers may exacerbate potassium retention, known to have significant cardiac consequences. Simultaneous use of NSAIDs and anticoagulants or antiplatelets can result in an increased risk of bleeding due to reduced platelet aggregation. Bleeding risk is also similarly increased with concomitant use of SSRIs and NSAIDs, as serotonin is one of many substances taken up by and released from platelets to stimulate aggregation and hemostasis. Lastly, the risk of peptic ulcer disease or a GI bleed is markedly increased when NSAIDs are ingested in combination with alcohol or glucocorticoids which inhibit the activation of the arachidonic acid precursor phospholipase A2.