The primary function of LPS is to provide structural integrity and a permeability barrier to protect the bacterial cell from the entry of deleterious molecules such as toxins and bile salts during its inhabitation in the gastrointestinal tract. The presence of a large number of saturated fatty acid moieties leads to extensive interaction within the acyl chain, which results in low fluidity of the membrane bilayer. The high negativity of the membrane due to the presence of the phosphate group becomes stabilized by divalent cations such as Mg, which intercalate between LPS molecules. The final structure formed by polyionic interactions enhances LPS packing, finally making LPS a structural barrier to the bacterial cell.

Additionally, LPS is the primary component that imparts pathogenicity to the bacterial cell. Compared to the classical bacterial exotoxins, the endotoxins (LPS) are quite stable and are the primary biological response modifiers to induce specific symptoms and pathologies of the diseases. LPS exerts a potent and pleiotropic stimulus of host immune cells. The immune system recognizes the Lipid A component of LPS, which is released from the dividing cells in soluble form, from the lysed bacterial cells upon autolysis, or killing by complement activation or phagocytosis or by the effect of antibiotics. The primary response is through the identification and binding of the lipid A component to the TLR4 of the host cell. Since Lipid A is quite variable in its composition, different strains of bacteria mount different levels of the immune response. Lipid A produced by E. coli and Salmonella is highly immunogenic, while others, such as that of Yersinia pestis, modulate the extent of acylation of lipid A upon infection to produce LPS of low immunogenicity in vivo. Interestingly, synthesizing an LPS of low immunogenicity is a bacterial strategy to evade host immune response and increase intracellular survival.

The O-antigen part of the LPS imparts antigenicity to the bacterial cell leading to the production of antibodies. Nonetheless, the variability in the length of the O-antigen chain can prevent complement**-**mediated bacterial controls and killing.