While certain equipment and setup details are heavily dependent on surgeon preference, the procedure is well described and reproduced with standard equipment. The room should be set up like that for any standard endoscopic sinus or skull base procedure. Total Intravenous Anesthesia (TIVA) is appropriate if permitted by patient comorbidities and the anesthesia provider and can improve visualization.

While a variety of endoscopes should be available, the flap is typically elevated with visualization provided by a 0 or 30-degree endoscope. An endoscopic monopolar electrocautery instrument with a needle-tip at a 45-degree bend provides ergonomic and precise incisions with simultaneous hemostasis. A Cottle elevator, micro-scissor, ball-tip probe, curette, curved olive-tip suction, through-cutting forceps (both straight and angled), and Blakesley forceps (both straight and angled) should be readily available and are typically found on a standard Functional Endoscopic Sinus Surgery (FESS) tray. These instruments allow for atraumatic handling and refining of the flap as it is raised.

A variety of synthetic, autologous, and donor materials can be used for underlay and support the position of the flap. Artificial dura mater, autologous fat and fascia, and absorbable packing can be used variably to support the flap. Often xeroform gauze or a Foley balloon is placed to support the graft and ancillary materials in the post-surgical recovery period. Ultimately, many of the instruments and materials utilized are based on surgeon preference.