According to the third edition of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD-3), a diagnosis of RBD requires all of the following

- Repeated episodes of sleep-related vocalization and/or complex motor behaviors

- Behaviors are documented by polysomnography to occur during REM sleep or, based on the clinical history of dream enactment, are presumed to occur during REM sleep

- Presence of REM sleep without atonia (RSWA) on polysomnography

- An absence of epileptiform activity during REM sleep, unless RBD can be clearly distinguished from any concurrent REM sleep-related seizure disorder

- Sleep disturbance not better explained by another sleep disorder, medical or neurologic disorder, mental disorder, medication use, or substance use disorder

RBD is the only parasomnia which requires an in-facility polysomnogram to diagnose RBD.

The characteristic polysomnographic finding of RBD is REM sleep without atonia (RSWA). It is an elevation of motor tone during REM sleep as measured by electromyography (EMG) activity in the chin and/or limb leads.

Formal polysomnographic criteria for RSWA developed by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine require either of the following

- Sustained elevation of chin EMG activity during REM sleep (greater than 50% of the 30-second epoch duration compared with minimum amplitude in non-REM sleep)

- Excessive bursts of transient muscle activity in the chin or limb EMG during REM sleep, defined by the presence of 5 (50%) or more mini-epochs (30-second epoch is divided into 10 sequential 3-second mini-epochs), containing bursts of transient muscle activity. In RBD, excessive transient muscle activity bursts last 0.1 to 5.0 seconds and are at least 4 times as high in amplitude as the background EMD activity.

Optimally, both upper and lower extremity EMG should be used when evaluating for RBD. Alternate EMG derivations that make use of upper extremity EMG to improve sensitivity for detecting RSWA are reviewed separately.

The disorder needs to be differentiated from other parasomnias including both REM and non-REM sleep parasomnias including nightmares, night terrors, sleepwalking, and sleep talking. Periodic leg movements may present with limb movement while sleeping but generally occur during the non-REM stage of the sleep and have distinctive diagnostic criteria on polysomnography.

Epileptic disorders like sleep-related hyperosmolar epilepsy (frontal lobe epilepsy) may present with motor activity during sleep. However, compared with RBD, these patients are generally younger and unaware of their symptoms.