Clinical manifestations vary significantly according to the disease severity and the age at presentation.

N-ALD can manifest immediately after birth. However, some infants will be mildly affected. Hence diagnosis is usually delayed in these cases. Typical signs and symptoms in N-ALD include

- Seizures, hypotonia, hearing dysfunction

- Vision, cataracts, optic nerve dysplasia

- Jaundice, hepatomegaly

- Failure to thrive and facial dysmorphism (hypertelorism and flat midface)

X-ALD usually has three phenotypes, classified based on the age of presentation and the organs affected:

- Childhood cerebral ALD, typically affect children between the age of three to ten years. The hallmark feature that characterizes this form is developmental regression. More progressive sensory and severe neurological deficits, severe disability, coma, and death are generally followed by more progressive sensory and severe neurological deficits. A small percentage of adults may present in a similar pattern to the childhood cerebral ALD.

- Addison disease. The adrenal gland dysfunction characterizes this form. The manifestations associated with this subtype are the result of decreased production of:

-  Aldosterone (hyponatremia, fatigue, hypotension, dehydration)
-  Cortisol (hypoglycemia and generalized weakness)
-  Hyperpigmentation of the skin may also occur.

- Adrenomyeloneuropathy; the typical age of presentation is in the third decade of life. It presents a milder spectrum of ALD. Walking difficulties, unbalanced gait, and bowel/bladder sphincter dysfunction are typical manifestations.

Females who are carriers may develop milder symptoms (unbalanced gait, neuropathy, mild paresis). The adrenal glands and cerebrum are rarely involved.