The intrinsic component of the LES consists of smooth muscle that keeps the sphincter tightly contracted. Direct inhibitory signals allow the smooth muscles in the LES to relax, opening the sphincter and enabling the passage of a food bolus. As the LES does not possess dilator muscles, its opening relies solely on the relaxation of the smooth muscles.

At the intracellular level, LES relaxation occurs due to suppression of a resting chloride conductance by nitric oxide (NO) or activation of a potassium conductance resulting in smooth muscle hyperpolarization. Suppression of calcium influx occurs, leading to the cessation of myosin phosphorylation and muscle relaxation. Studies have shown that cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanine monophosphate (cGMP) mediate LES relaxation by activating protein kinases A and G, respectively. These signaling molecules can cause smooth muscle relaxation without causing membrane hyperpolarization. Protein kinases A and G can lower free intracellular calcium by sequestering it in the endoplasmic reticulum. Both vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and NO increase intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels. The LES relaxation induced by various physiologic stimuli is associated with an increase in the intracellular cGMP rather than the cAMP, which suggests that NO is the major nonadrenergic noncholinergic (NANC) inhibitory neurotransmitter of the LES smooth muscle.

The pressure in the LES depends on three factors: (1) the myogenic tone of the smooth muscles, (2) inhibitory nitrergic nerves, and (3) excitatory cholinergic nerves. The myogenic tone of smooth muscle is an intrinsic property of the cells in the LES and is responsible for its tonic contraction. The LES smooth muscle cells have more depolarized resting membrane potentials, resulting in spontaneous spike-like action potentials and the generation of a basal tone. Excitatory cholinergic nerves release ACh to promote smooth muscle contraction, which enhances the tonic, myogenic property of the LES and favors contraction. In contrast, the nitrergic pathway releases NO and favors inhibition, opposing the contractile properties of the LES. Overall, the combination of these forces favors contraction over relaxation. Thus, the LES remains contracted even when entirely denervated owing to its myogenic property.