**Cardiovascular Disease and Acute Inflammation**

Cardiovascular diseases, including atherosclerosis, are recognized as the most common cause of death worldwide. During the formation of atherosclerosis, the inflammatory mediators play a principal role in the initial cell recruitment until the rupture of the plaque. Cardiac stress, due to any reason, will first appear as inflammation.  In affected cardiac tissues, there are elevated levels of inflammatory chemokines and cytokines synthesis and release. In cardiac injury, the most immediate defense mechanism against any cardiac tissue damage is innate immunity. Coronary atherosclerosis is the most common cause of myocardial infarction that results in cardiac tissue loss. In myocardial infarction, as the cardiac cells die and become necrotic, the inflammatory cells would start to come to the site of the necrotic tissue to clear the dead cells and debris. Cell death is the inducer that triggers the acute inflammation process resulting in the release of endogenous signals recognized as a danger signal. Subsequently, the TLRs-mediated pathways trigger inflammatory responses by activating the NF-kB pathway. Next, the chemokines recruit the leukocytes to the areas of the infarct, and the cytokines allow the adhesion between leukocytes and endothelial cells. TGF-B and IL-10 promote cardiac repair by suppressing inflammation.

**Pancreas and Acute Inflammation**

Acute pancreatitis is an inflammatory disease of the pancreas caused by either pancreatic duct obstruction, gene mutation, or alcoholism. Acute pancreatitis is among the most common causes of hospitalization in the United States. Inflammation in acute pancreatitis occurs by activation of neutrophils and granulocytes, which secrete inflammatory cytokines. NF-kB, JAK-STAT, and MAPK pathways play an important role in cell activation during pancreatitis.

**Liver and Acute Inflammation**

The liver is the largest internal human body organ. As the inflammation is a protective mechanism by the body, it will protect the liver from infection and injury, but if this occurs extensively, this will cause hepatocytes injury, metabolic changes, ischemia-reperfusion trauma, and constant hepatic impairment. Acute inflammation of the liver can develop to damage the parenchyma of the liver, and if it persists, this will turn to chronic hepatitis. The inducer of liver inflammation involves both the non-infectious and infectious pathologies. The infectious agent includes the Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and Hepatitis C virus (HCV), while the non-infectious agent includes alcoholic or non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, drug-induced, or ischemic hepatitis.

**Kidney and Acute Inflammation**

The most common cause of acute kidney inflammation is an infection, ischemia/reperfusion, immune complex formation, or complement dysregulation. The most important promoters of kidney inflammation are the epithelial cells of the renal tubules that secrete cytokines in response to the inducers. These mediators activate the pathways NF-kB or MAPK.

**Intestinal tract and Acute Inflammation**

Acute inflammatory diseases of the intestinal tract can decrease patients' quality of life worldwide. Polygenic inflammatory bowel disease (IBDs) is characterized by an excessive inflammatory response to gut microbial flora. IBDs include Crohn disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). These two diseases are cytokine driven. Apart from that, other causes include non-infectious inflammation of the bowel. The system can recognize the microbial agent through the TLRs. These PAMPs that bind to the TLRs (mainly TLR4) activate the signaling pathways (NF-kB, MAPK) that cause the production of cytokines and chemokines to start the resistance to the infection.