The evaluation of most retinopathies relies on ophthalmoscopy (also called funduscopy) which can also evaluate the optic disc and the vitreous humor.  Eye dilation is necessary for accurate assessment of any retinopathy.  Ophthalmoscopy comes in few varieties, i.e., direct, indirect, slit-lamp and pantropic.  A direct ophthalmoscope is a small handheld device with its own source of illumination and is typically used most in a primary care setting.  In patients with mild hypertension, direct ophthalmoscopy has been found to have a significant inter- and intra-observer variability.

An indirect ophthalmoscope is also a handheld device but has a separate source of illumination from a headband and is almost universally performed by an ophthalmologist.  The indirect method provides a wider field of vision for the back of the eye than direct ophthalmoscopy. Pan ophthalmoscopy is a newer form of direct ophthalmoscopy that can be used without pupil dilation while providing a broad view of the fundus.  Slit-lamp ophthalmoscopy utilizes a fixed high-intensity light source and a handheld lens and is typically performed by an ophthalmologist.

In addition to diagnosing retinopathies, ophthalmoscopy may be useful in diagnosing Alzheimer disease.

Hypertensive retinopathies are best identified using a standardized examination of fundus photographs as compared to clinical ophthalmoscopy.

- Hypertension with mild narrowing of the retinal arteries and no symptoms present

- Hypertension with more pronounced arterial narrowing and generally no symptoms present

- Overt signs of retinal damage, e.g., retinal hemorrhage, cotton wool spots, “copper wiring” of arterioles and symptoms may be present

- Grade 3 criteria plus papilledema, i.e., swelling of the optic disc and symptoms are present - the symptoms can include vision loss, blurred or double vision, and headaches

The KWB system has come under criticism for not being able to clearly distinguish grade 1 from grade 2 and an alternative system; the Mitchel-Wong system has been proposed with combines the grade 1 and grade 2 of the KWB system into one grade.

As mentioned above, diabetic retinopathy falls into two primary classes, proliferative and non-proliferative.  The Scottish grading system is a more elaborate and detailed protocol for grading diabetic retinopathy, and it relies on a digital retinal photograph (27418727). A clinical classification system was developed for AMD that emphasizes drusen accumulation.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) has five stages.  Blood vessel growth can be mildly abnormal (stage 1), moderately abnormal (stage 2) or severely abnormal (stage 3 and above).  In stage 4 the retina is partially detached, and in stage 5 the retina is completely detached which defines the end stage of this disease.