The visual system consists of two primary parallel pathways: an optic pathway and a pupillary reflex pathway.

**Optic Pathway**

The optic pathway begins in the retina, which is a complex structure made up of ten different layers. Each layer serves a distinct function.

The photoreceptor layers consist of the rods and cones, which generate action potentials with the help of rhodopsin through photosensitive cycles.

The ganglion cell layer and nerve fiber layer serve as the foundation of the optic nerve; the former contains the cell bodies, and the latter contains the axons as they stream across the retina. It consists of two types of fibers, namely temporal and nasal fibers, which control the nasal and temporal parts of the visual field, respectively. These fibers join together at the optic disc and are redirected posteriorly out of the eye to form the orbital part of the optic nerve. The nerve is surrounded by the dura, which is in continuation of that of the brain, allowing free movement of CSF between the eye and the intracranial vault.

The axons exit the orbit through the orbital foramen, simultaneously with the ophthalmic artery and sympathetic fibers.

It then enters the optic canal, a bone-encased tunnel intended to protect the nerve. It exits into the middle cranial fossa to form the intracranial part of the optic nerve. This continues till the two optic nerves join together to form the optic chiasm directly behind and above the pituitary stalk. Here more than half of the nasal fibers from the left eye decussate to join the temporal fibers of the right eye and form the right optic tract and vice versa. This anomaly helps eye healthcare professionals in the assessment of the site of the lesion along the visual pathway, which produces well-described visual field defects, also known as hemianopias, posterior, or at the chiasm.

Beyond the chiasm, the pathway continues as two distinct tracts, each carrying the temporal fibers from the other eye.

The optic tract then passes posteriorly where most of the axons synapse in the layers of the lateral geniculate body (LGB) of the midbrain, which is a posterolateral extension of the thalamus; with a minority passing into the superior colliculus and Edinger-Westphal nuclei; these fibers allow for parasympathetic innervation of the pupil, i.e., pupillary constriction.

The majority of the fibers pass posteriorly to become the genico-calcarine tracts, which have both parietal and temporal loops in the form of the dorsal optic radiation and Meyer's loop and terminate into the cuneus gyrus and lingual gyrus of the primary visual cortex, respectively (Broadmann area number 17).

**Pupillary Light Reflex Pathway (parasympathetic innervation pathway)**

The parasympathetic system constricts the pupil to protect itself when light intensity increases to an uncomfortable level by decreasing the amount of light entering the eye.

The optic nerve directs the afferent limb of the reflex pathway. Light stimulates the retinal ganglionic cells. The impulses travel through the optic nerve (CN II), which projects bilaterally to the pretectal nucleus in the midbrain, and then projects to the Edinger-Westphal nucleus.

The efferent limb is directed by the oculomotor nerve (CN III). The Edinger-Westphal nucleus (preganglionic parasympathetic) relays to the ciliary ganglion (postganglionic sympathetic) via the oculomotor nerve (CN III), which then directs the pupillary sphincter muscle completing the miotic reflex arc of the pupil.

One interesting point to note here is that the pretectal nucleus supplies the Edinger-Westphal nucleus bilaterally; hence, shining light in one eye causes ipsilateral and contralateral constriction of the pupil. This is known as the consensual light reflex.

**The sympathetic Visual System**

The sympathetic system governs the fight-or-flight response. In the case of vision, mydriasis and elevation of eyelids are the two primary responses.

It originates in the hypothalamus, sending fibers into the cervical spinal cord to synapse in the upper thoracic spinal cord through the brainstem. Second-order neurons then pass out of the spinal cord, enter the thoracic ganglia and run superiorly until they reach the superior cervical ganglion, where they again synapse. Third-order neurons form a latticework around the internal carotid artery, form the long ciliary nerves on entering the skull, and eventually enter the eye to innervate the pupil dilator and Muller’s muscle, which helps the levator palpebrae superioris to elevate the eyelid.

**Conjugate Gaze**

Conjugate gaze is of equal importance to the visual system, as is the ability to see.

The abduction of the eye is performed by the lateral rectus, the primary adductor of the eye, which is innervated by the abducens nerve.

The adduction of the eye is brought about by the medial rectus muscle, innervated by the oculomotor muscle. Therefore, for right-sided horizontal gaze, both the right abducens nerve and the right lateral rectus muscle must be working to abduct the right eye, and the left oculomotor nerve and the left medial rectus muscle must be patent to adduct the left eye and vice versa.

This action is controlled in the frontal eye field areas of the frontal lobes. Axons from this region project down to the abducens nucleus of the brainstem, where they synapse and decussate to form the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), which then synapses with the oculomotor nucleus.