As mentioned earlier, clinicians diagnose most cases as an incidental finding on chest radiographs, which can demonstrate a round, circumscribed mass adjacent to the heart, statistically most common at the right cardiophrenic angle with a reported incidence of 51 to 70%. They occur less commonly at the left cardiophrenic angle, with a reported incidence of 22 to 38%. Finally, mediastinal locations not adjacent to the diaphragm are approximately 8 to 11%.

Laboratory tests and electrocardiography are generally inconclusive in assessment for pericardial cysts.

Computerized tomography (CT) scan without contrast has been reported as the modality of choice for delineating the pericardial anatomy and subsequent diagnosis, as it can aid in precise localization and characterization. Findings typically include a single non-enhancing, thin-walled, ovoid homogenous mass without solid component. A disadvantage occurs if protein content increases (such as with hemorrhage), leading to errors in reporting.

Some authors suggest that echocardiography is a superior modality for delineating pericardial borders and characterization of the cyst from adjacent structures.

Cardiac MRI is recommended to further evaluate the possible compressive effects of the pericardial cysts, though this exam is costly and time-consuming. Additional errors in reporting can be seen in this modality, as well, if cyst protein content is high, thus altering signal characteristics. Pericardial cysts cannot enhance in contrast imaging of either CT scan or MRI.