The many variables interacting in the difficulty of the rhinoplasty procedure have been previously stated. In addition to achieving aesthetic goals, the surgeon must keep a patent airway or improve it in the case of impairment.

Surgical team satisfaction with the postoperative results, although important, is not determinant for the success of the surgery as patient satisfaction is. Between the tools for measuring patient satisfaction and surgical outcomes, the Rhinoplasty Outcome Evaluation (ROE), designed by Alsarraf et al., is one of the most used. This validated questionnaire consists of six questions evaluating social, emotional, and psychological variables. Although the ROE focuses more on the aesthetic aspects,

An interprofessional care team is always necessary for every surgical procedure in order to obtain the best results. In preoperative visits, it is important to screen for unsuitable candidates for surgery. As previously discussed, patients with dysmorphophobia or unreal expectations are high-risk individuals that most likely won’t be satisfied with the postoperative results. A psychiatric evaluation can be beneficial at this stage for determining appropriate treatment.

In patients presenting with previous medical conditions, preoperative consults with specialists in those diseases are advised to discuss the suspension of some medications prior to the procedure and reinforce care standards.

When general anesthesia is required, a preoperative consult with an anesthesiologist will determine if the patient is fit for receiving anesthetic drugs.

Nurses also play a very important role. They can monitor the patients in the postoperative period in order to detect early complications, manage their pain, and educate them for home care when they are discharged.

Communication between team members, evidence-based medicine, and patient-based care must always exist in order to achieve good postoperative results, with both patient and surgical team satisfaction.