A Foley catheter placed intraoperatively remains in place for 2 to 4 weeks. Patients should undergo an examination under anesthesia (EUA) approximately 4 weeks after PSARVUP. The Foley catheter can be removed at the time of cystoscopy to ensure that the urethra can be accessed for intermittent catheterization as needed. If long-term urinary diversion is necessary, such as in the case of a patient with a long common channel, poor sacrum, and tethered cord, a vesicostomy or suprapubic cystostomy tube may be needed.

The anus should be examined to ensure adequate healing of the perineal body and the anoplasty. If both structures well healed, the anus can undergo sizing with a Hegar dilator, and a twice-daily dilation program started with the goal to increase the size of the dilator every week to a final measurement determined by the patient’s age. Upon reaching the desired size, the colostomy can be closed.

Patients with cloacal malformations require long-term assessment of renal function at regular intervals, as renal impairment is common.

A bowel regimen should be started at the time of colostomy closure to assist colonic emptying regularly and to avoid dilation of the rectosigmoid colon which will impair normal colonic function and make potty training difficult. If the patient is unable to potty train, a formal bowel management program may be needed to determine a laxative or enema regimen that can get the child clean and in normal underwear.

Gynecologic counseling should take place before puberty with consideration of the patient’s unique gynecologic anatomy. An adequate vagina that allows menstrual egress should be ensured prior to the start of menses. Preliminary to the onset of sexual activity, the patient should be examined to ensure the vagina is adequate for penetrative vaginal intercourse. Pregnancy is possible for patients with the cloaca, although Cesarean sections are the preferred method of delivery.