A small amount of riboflavin is present in foods as free riboflavin, a majority as its derivative flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), and a smaller amount as flavin mononucleotide (FMN). A small amount, however, is also produced by the intestinal bacteria.

For the absorption of dietary riboflavin, a prerequisite is converting FAD and FMN to free riboflavin, catalyzed by enzymes called phosphatases in the enterocyte.

It is often available in conjugation with other water-soluble multi-vitamins. It is also available as single-ingredient oral tablets of 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, and oral capsules of 400 mg strengths.

**Recommended Daily Allowance for Riboflavin**

- Adults (age 19 to 70 years): Women: 0.9 to 1.1 mg per day and Men: 1.1 to 1.3 mg per day. (These values have their basis on clinical evidence of deficiency in intake less than 0.6 mg per day). During pregnancy and lactation, the recommended daily allowance increases to 1.4 to 1.6 mg per day.

- Adolescents (Age 10 to 18 years): 0.9 to 1.3 mg per day.

- Children (Age 1 to 9 years): 0.5 to 0.6 mg per day.

- Infants (Age: 0 to 12 mo): 0.3 to 0.4 mg per day.

Apart from supplementation in deficiency, it is also prescribed in some clinical situations as follows:

**Migraine Prophylaxis**

Riboflavin may be effective for the prophylaxis of migraines (not FDA-approved) to minimize the frequency of attacks.

**Neonates Undergoing Phototherapy**

Management of hyperbilirubinemia in the neonatal period is often done with phototherapy. But it has been shown to degrade riboflavin and cause a deficiency in newborns. A prophylactic daily oral dose of riboflavin prevents the development of the deficiency.

**Antiretroviral induced Lactic Acidosis**

This rare syndrome results from a group of antiretroviral drugs used to treat HIV infection called nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI). Discontinuation of the drug, along with treatment with riboflavin, causes its reversal.

**Corneal Ectasia**

This condition consists of gradual corneal narrowing caused by an alteration in the collagen matrix in the stroma, resulting in protrusion of the cornea in an irregular pattern. Therapy aims at correcting the refractory error until 1990; however, now a radical approach targeting the pathophysiology of the disease by cross-linking the corneal fibers is undertaken where the superficial epithelium gets removed, 0.1% riboflavin is applied for 30 minutes.