**Overview**

When formulating a treatment plan for a patient with symptomatic posterior shoulder instability, goals should include reducing pain, improving function, and preventing recurrence. However, determining the optimal treatment can prove challenging as management is dictated by many factors, including the underlying etiology, as well as osseous and soft tissue pathology. Furthermore, little is known on the natural history of a single traumatic posterior instability episode or of untreated posterior instability.

**Posterior Shoulder Dislocation**

Posterior shoulder dislocations (PSD) are much less common than anterior shoulder dislocations and are usually associated with high-energy trauma or seizures.

In their systematic review of posterior shoulder dislocations, Paul et al. provide a treatment algorithm that takes into account the general health and activity of the patient as well as the size of the humeral head defect.

Operative management is reserved for those with continued posterior instability secondary to soft tissue lesions or humeral head defects.

For larger HH defects, treatment includes bone grafting procedures or arthroplasty. In their review of posterior shoulder dislocations, Robinson and Aderinto recommend disimpaction of the HH defect with autogenous bone grafting if the injury is less than 2 weeks old and nonanatomic procedures if the lesion is recognized after 2 weeks.

**Nonoperative Management of Posterior Shoulder Instability**

A conservative approach of at least 6 months is typically the first line of treatment for patients with posterior instability, with outcomes dependent on the underlying etiology.

Patients with posterior shoulder instability secondary to a traumatic event may have less success with nonoperative management.

**Operative Management of Posterior Shoulder Instability**

The primary indication of surgical intervention is recurrent symptomatic posterior shoulder instability recalcitrant to conservative treatment. Surgery may be indicated for those with instability secondary to a traumatic etiology and identifiable soft tissue or osseous defect. Surgery is also indicated for those who remain symptomatic after an adequate trial of physical therapy with avoidance of provocative activities.

**Open verse Arthroscopic Stabilization of Soft Tissue Defects**

Several different open soft tissue procedures have been described in the literature, including:

- Subscapularis transfer

- Reverse Putti-Platt procedure

- Staple capsulorrhaphy

- Various capsular shift techniques

While good results have been obtained with open procedures for anterior instability, open treatment of posterior instability has not been proved favorable with a 30% to 70% failure rate.

In the case of minimal bony pathology, the use of all arthroscopic treatment has surpassed open procedures for the management of posterior shoulder instability. Reasons for this include improved instrumentation and implants, less invasive nature and morbidity of arthroscopy, faster recovery, ability to view the entire labrum and to address concomitant pathology in the shoulder.

When treating the patient arthroscopically, the patient is positioned in either the beach chair or lateral position, depending on surgeon preference. Generally, lateral positioning is favored as this allows more effective access to the inferior and posterior quadrants of the shoulder.

The labrum can then be visualized from both the anterior and posterior portals. While viewing from the posterior portal, it is recommended to elevate and prepare the labrum from the midglenoid portal. Approaching the posterior labrum from this portal allows for a flat trajectory relative to the glenoid decreasing likelihood of chondral damage. Additionally, elevating the labrum from the posterior portal may increase the likelihood of further labral injury.

The number of anchors placed is dictated by the extent of the tear and surgeon preference. For isolated posterior capsulolabral pathology, the use of three to four suture anchors spaced roughly 5 mm apart on the glenoid is usually sufficient.

A capsular plication is a technique to reduce redundant capsular tissue arthroscopically by the use of suture fixation.

**Osseous Defects and Procedures
**

Patients with posterior shoulder instability may also have osseous defects, including HH impaction fractures and/or glenoid deficiency that require intervention in addition to soft tissue procedures. As previously discussed, HH defects are seen after a posterior shoulder dislocation, and if the lesion is large enough or if the patient continues to experience symptoms of instability, then intervention is required. Management of HH defects depends on the size of the lesion and includes both nonanatomic and anatomic procedures. Nonanatomic procedures include the transfer of the subscapularis into the defect on the HH as well as the Neer modification of this procedure. Anatomic reconstruction using either autograft or allograft to fill the HH defect has also been described.

Treatment for posterior instability attributable to glenoid defects such as fracture, dysplasia, or excessive retroversion may be organized into two broad categories, including posterior bone block procedure or posterior opening wedge osteotomy. Both of these procedures address posterior glenoid deficiency but may also be indicated in patients with recurrent posterior instability after soft-tissue procedures.

Posterior bone block procedures have been described in the treatment of posterior glenoid wall deficiency.

Posterior glenoid opening wedge osteotomy was first published in the literature by Scott in 1967 and has been described in the treatment of excessive posterior glenoid retroversion.

Debate exists on the amount of glenoid bone loss that necessitates a reconstructive procedure. Studies show that glenohumeral stability is compromised with glenoid articular bone loss of 20% to 25%.