Since acetazolamide decreases the clearance of ammonia, patients with impaired liver function or liver disease should not use acetazolamide.

Acetazolamide can induce electrolyte abnormalities. As such, those with hypokalemia or hyponatremia should not use it. Similarly, it can decrease kidney function, and clinicians should avoid using it with anyone with kidney disease or decreased kidney function.

Patients with hyperchloremic acidosis should not use acetazolamide.

Although acetazolamide does not cause prolongation of the QTc interval, those with prolonged QTc should use it cautiously and have their potassium concentrations monitored, given the drug's ability to cause hypokalemia.

Patients with an allergy to sulfonamides (e.g., sulfa allergy) should not use acetazolamide.

Acetazolamide is known to interact with several classes of medications. A patient on amphetamines will likely develop reduced amphetamine clearance because acetazolamide increases the urine pH. In contrast, it increases the excretion of lithium, and hence its efficacy may be reduced. Acetazolamide also decreases the excretion of phenytoin, primidone, and quinidine. Patients on these medications may develop toxicity if they also use acetazolamide concurrently.

Patients on salicylates can develop toxicity if they begin acetazolamide. In addition, patients on sodium bicarbonate therapy have an increased risk of nephrolithiasis if using acetazolamide simultaneously.

Patients using anti-folates, including methotrexate and trimethoprim, should not use acetazolamide. Also, patients on any other carbonic anhydrase inhibitor should avoid this medication. Patients with a previous history of developing a serious rash should avoid the usage of acetazolamide as it can induce Stevens-Johnson syndrome.