A detailed discussion of lower eyelid anatomy is available elsewhere, but the focus is on the important structures that apply when performing the transconjunctival blepharoplasty.

**Normal Lower Eyelid Position**

The lower eyelid position is at or just above the inferior limbus. The eyelid sits snug against the globe. This position results from normal anatomical and physiological factors: the medial and lateral canthal tendon integrity, normal orbicularis tone and attachments, normal pliable skin, and a normal tarsal plate. If there is a disruption of any of these structures, lower eyelid retraction, canthal dystopia, or ectropion may occur. Furthermore, even if these structures are normal, any excessive distracting, downward force can cause lower eyelid malposition. With scarring or shortage of the lower eyelid skin, an ectropion or retraction may occur. Middle lamellar scarring (involving the orbital septum and retractors) can result in lower eyelid retraction. Scarring or loss of part of the tarsus can result in an ectropion or entropion. Injury to the facial nerve or orbicularis muscle can result in lower lid ectropion and retraction, and disruption of the medial or lateral canthal tendons can similarly cause a lower eyelid malposition.

**Applied Anatomy**

The lower eyelid is supported medially by the medial canthal tendon and laterally by the lateral canthal tendon. At the tarsal plate level, the eyelid has a bi-lamellar structure with an anterior lamella of skin and orbicularis muscle with a suborbicularis fascial plane with minimal fat. The posterior lamella comprises the tarsus (which measures 1 mm in thickness and 5 to 6 mm in height) and conjunctiva. Below the level of the tarsal plate, the eyelid may be considered as having a tri-lamella structure with anterior lamella consisting of skin and orbicularis oculi muscle, the middle lamella comprising of the orbital septum, and to a degree, the lower eyelid retractors (called the capsulopalpebral fascia) with fat interposed between the septum and the retractors. At the orbital rim, the orbital septum fuses with the periosteum creating what is called the arcus marginalis.  The posterior lamella may be considered as consisting of, to a degree, the lower eyelid retractors and the conjunctiva. The lower eyelid retractors are analogous to the upper eyelid retractors (levator palpebrae superioris and its aponeurosis): the lower lid retractors arise from the inferior rectus muscle, envelope the inferior oblique muscle, and proceed to insert into the inferior border of the tarsal plate and orbital septum.  Like the levator palpebrae, the lower lid retractors are supplied by the oculomotor nerve. The equivalent of Muller's muscle (innervated by the sympathetic fibers originating from the carotid plexus) is a less defined muscle present just behind the capsulopalpebral fascia, often called the inferior tarsal smooth muscle. Similar to the Whitnall's ligament in the upper eyelid, Lockwood's ligament (the suspensory ligamentous sling supporting the globe) is attached laterally to the Whitnall's tubercle and inferolateral orbital rim and medially to the inferomedial orbital rim. Analogous to the upper eyelid post-levator aponeurosis fat pad, the lower eyelid has two additional thin layers of fat, the inter-lower eyelid retractor fat pad lying between the two layers of the lower eyelid retractors and the post-lower eyelid retractor fat pad lying between this and the conjunctiva. Whitnall’s tubercle is 3 to 4 mm inside the orbital rim and just above the horizontal axis. Into this tubercle, insert several structures: lateral canthal tendon, orbital septum, Lockwood’s ligament, Whitnall’s ligament, the deep head of orbicularis muscle, and the check ligaments of the lateral rectus muscle.

**Orbital Septum**

The orbital septum attaches at the orbital rim, except inferolaterally, where it inserts anteriorly, forming a recess (of Eisler). Therefore, the lateral orbital fat drapes over the inferolateral orbital rim into this recess, and this portion of the fat may be missed in the resection. The orbital septum attaches to the inferior border of the tarsal plate. The septum is thinnest over the medial fat pad. It has a thickening, which goes inferolaterally called the arcuate expansion, which separates the central and lateral fat pockets. The thought is that the purpose of this dense arcuate expansion is to retain the fat within the orbit.

**Orbital Fat**

The inferior oblique muscle separates the medial and central fat pads. However, there is usually an isthmus of fat over the inferior oblique belonging to one or both of these fat pads so during surgery, if one wants to see the inferior oblique muscle, one has to tease this fat off the inferior oblique muscle. The central and lateral fat pads are separated by the arcuate expansion, a thickening in the orbital septum.