There is no single standard FUO management protocol given the variety of possible etiologies. The most important thing is to investigate and rule out all possible diagnoses. Specific treatment should be started, once a diagnosis is made. Please note that empiric antibiotics are not indicated unless the patient with FUO is neutropenic. Antibiotics may delay the diagnosis of some occult infections. Empiric glucocorticoids are also not indicated unless there is strong clinical suspicion for a specific rheumatologic diagnosis. However, in patients whose condition is deteriorating empiric therapeutic trials of antibiotics, steroids, or antituberculous agents may be considered.

- Culture-negative endocarditis

- Cryptic disseminated TB (or, occasionally, other granulomatous infections)

- Temporal arteritis with suspected vision loss

Patients with FUO rarely need surgical treatment.

**Specific Examples of Treatment**

- In patients with hepatic granulomas, 50% respond to corticosteroid treatment while the other 50% resolve spontaneously.

- Patients with giant cell arteritis are treated with high doses of steroids, and if the patient is very ill or has a significant ocular compromise, intravenous steroids should be administered.

- In polymyalgia rheumatica, the treatment is steroid therapy.

- When drug fever is suspected, discontinue the implicated drug. The patient would be afebrile after two days of stopping the causative drug.

The naproxen test can be performed to differentiate infectious and neoplastic etiologies of FUO. The test is conducted over 3 to 4 days, during which patient temperatures are trended while a patient is given naproxen. If temperatures decrease substantially, malignant/neoplastic etiology is likely. However, if temperatures remain the same or only minimally decrease, the FUO is likely of infectious origin. The utility of the naproxen test is not well studied, and at this time, experts believe the test is not specific enough to be useful for the individual patient.

It is important to remember that up to 51% of cases remain undiagnosed. However, the prognosis for these patients is generally good, and it is highly probable that FUO will spontaneously resolve in weeks to months. In stable patients without a diagnosis, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs could be used for symptomatic management.