Ventilation imaging is used in conjunction with perfusion imaging to classify perfusion defects as matched (ventilation and perfusion imaging are concordant), mismatched (perfusion defect with a normal or relatively less abnormal ventilation defect), or reverse mismatched (ventilation defect with a normal or relatively less abnormal perfusion defect)

While there are multiple etiologies of ventilation-perfusion mismatch, the most common causes include acute and chronic pulmonary embolism, a tumor obstructing an artery, and radiation therapy.

The ventilation-perfusion reverse mismatch is more often attributed to emphysema, lung cysts, and lung infiltrates (pneumonia or cancer)

**Diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism**

Multiple criteria are established for diagnosing PE, including but not limited to the PIOPED criteria, the PIOPED II criteria, and the modified PIOPED II criteria.

The modified PIOPED II and PISAPED criteria are more commonly used and will be described further.

Based on modified PIOPED II criteria, the results are reported as high probability (PE present), very low probability, non-diagnostic, and normal, as summarized in the table below. Sostman et al. reported a sensitivity of 77.4% (95% CI: 69.7%, 85.0%) for a high probability (PE present) result. The specificity for the low probability or normal scan (PE absent) was 97.7% (95% CI: 96.4%, 98.9%). The percentage of a PE present or PE missing result was 73.5% (95% CI: 70.7%, 76.4%).

Non-segmental perfusion defect

Perfusion defect smaller than X-ray chest lesion

1 to 3 small segmental defects

One or less single-matched perfusion defect in the mid or upper lung

Solitary large pleural effusion

Stripe sign, i.e., peripheral perfusion in a perfusion defect



All other findings



Perfusion-only PISAPED criteria only utilize perfusion imaging and classify results as PE present, absent, or non-diagnostic. PISAPED criteria are classified based on the findings summarized in the table below.

One or more large mismatched wedge-shaped perfusion defects



Normal or near-normal perfusion

Non-wedge-shaped perfusion defect

Contour defect caused by the mediastinum, diaphragm, or an enlarged heart

**Pre and Post Lung Transplant**

During a pre-transplant evaluation, the perfusion defects are used for a quantified perfusion analysis which detects the more dysfunctional lung.

During post-transplant monitoring, a V/Q scan can monitor complications such as diagnosing venous thromboembolism and assessing the functional impact of bronchial stenosis, which is a common complication. V/Q scan may also be used to assess air trapping that may indicate early bronchiolitis obliterans seen in rejection.

**Preoperative planning for Lung Volume Reduction Surgery**

Lung volume reduction surgery is performed in select patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to improve symptoms by resectioning damaged lung tissue.

**Preoperative Planning for Lung Cancer**

Lung scintigraphy is also used to assess the postoperative lung function reserve after partial or total pneumonectomy.

**Diagnosis of Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension**

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary HTN (CTEPH) is a sequela of pulmonary venous thromboembolism with a reported incidence of up to 3.8% at a two-year follow-up.