WPV in the hospital, especially the ED, may be related to organizational, employee, and patient risk factors. The type of work done in the emergency department is implicitly high risk. Emergencies are unpredictable, potentially fatal, and necessitate unparalleled access to immediate treatment. Care is provided regardless of background, insurance status, or other discriminatory impediments. The 24-hour availability makes the ED the "front door" and possibly a bottleneck to definitive inpatient care.

Patient-centered factors that may affect the risk for WPV include the acuity and severity of the illness, intoxication or drugs, and cognitive impairment. The clinical expectation of the patient may differ from the results they receive. The delivery of bad news may not go well. Social influences such as socioeconomic status, health literacy, and education level strongly influence expectations and the risk of ED violence.

Lastly, employees themselves may unintentionally increase the incidence of WPV. The ED's stressful, fast-paced, and chaotic environment can cause healthcare providers to miss cues, move too quickly to sedation or restraints, and inadvertently heighten aggressive tendencies. Opportunities to de-escalate potentially violent patients may be overlooked or poorly performed.

Type III violence is more prevalent in institutions and departments with a history of abuse. Cultures of incivility fester in an "abuse begets abuse" mentality.

Many resident physicians find reporting ineffective and would rather tolerate abuse than confront it, fearing retaliation.