Entamoeba coli, similar to other Entamoeba specifies, has three distinct morphological forms: trophozoite, pre-cystic stage, and cystic stage.Entamoeba coli is rare but may be seen.Entamoeba coli can swallow other organisms, such as Giardia lamblia, which may compete for its food source.Sphaerita species fungus.

The pre-cyst form begins when the trophozoite starts to slightly change its shape, becoming more spherical and containing two nuclei. The cyst is typically 10 to 35 μm in diameter and is a colorless spherical shape.Entamoeba coli is the eight-core nuclei, which develops as the cyst begins to mature. In the octonucleate cystic form, the glycogen vacuole is reabsorbed. Occasionally, the nuclei may replicate until it has 16 nuclei in total. The mature cyst is rich in glycogen with a refractile wall.

Colonization of the host first begins with the ingestion of mature cysts through contaminated food and water sources, typically via fecal-oral contamination. The cyst is hard due to its strong cell wall and can survive up to weeks in an external environment, and this quality allows it to survive the stomach's acidic environment. Cysts release trophozoites in the small intestine forming daughter trophozoites that are minimally motile and migrate to the colon. Entamoeba species, like most of the protozoans, reproduce by binary fission to form two daughter cells. Trophozoites in the colon multiply by undergoing binary fission and slowly reduce in size to first transform into the pre-cyst phase and then to the cyst phase. These cysts undergo mitosis until it becomes octonucleated or occasionally developing 16 nuclei. Host feces release mature octonucleate cysts of Entamoeba coli. Trophozoites found in the stool outside the body are rapidly destroyed, and if ingested, would not survive exposure to the gastric environment.