Necrotizing is a life-threatening disorder with a very high mortality rate. Any delay in diagnosis or treatment usually results in a poor outcome. The disorder is best managed by a team of healthcare professionals that includes a urologist, a general surgeon, an infectious disease expert, an intensivist, a nephrologist, ICU nurses, and radiologist. The role of the nurse and pharmacist is also of critical importance. The nurse is often the first to recognize that the patient is critically ill or in pain. Nurses should be knowledgeable about necrotizing fasciitis and consult the surgeon as soon as possible. The pharmacist must check the culture results and ensure that the patient is on appropriate antibiotics.

The patient should be kept NPO, hydrated, and immediately covered with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The pharmacist should check cultures and ensure that the right antibiotics are used to cover the offending organism. The stoma nurse should be consulted because many of these patients also need a fecal diversion to prevent contamination of the perineum. These patients are best managed in the ICU until signs of toxicity diminish.

A wound care nurse is mandatory as most patients have large open wounds that require daily dressings for weeks or months. The wounds often need reconstructive surgery.

Only through a systemic approach with close collaboration can the mortality of this condition be lowered.

**Outcomes**

Necrotizing fasciitis is a serious disorder that carries a mortality rate of anywhere from 30 to 90%. The mortality ultimately depends on the patient's age, type of organism, the speed of diagnosis and treatment, and patient comorbidity. The worst prognosis is in patients with specific streptococcal strains. Other factors that adversely affect prognosis include loss of consciousness, respiratory distress, renal failure, and ARDs. Survival is best for patients who have immediate radical debridement, hydration, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Even after treatment, survivors of the disorder tend to have a shorter lifespan than age-matched controls.