# Continuing Education Activity

An ectopic pregnancy occurs when fetal tissue implants outside of the uterus or attaches to an abnormal or scarred portion of the uterus. Ectopic pregnancies carry high rates of morbidity and mortality if not recognized and treated promptly. Ectopic pregnancies may present with pain, vaginal bleeding, or more vague complaints such as nausea and vomiting. This activity will review the etiology of ectopic pregnancy and examine treatment approaches. This activity will outline the role of the interprofessional team in recognizing and treating patients with ectopic pregnancies.

**Objectives:**
- Provide a definition for ectopic pregnancy.
- Identify symptoms of ectopic pregnancy. 
- Describe the proper evaluation for ectopic pregnancy.
- Plan a discussion amongst interprofessional, interprofessional team members regarding the detection, evaluation, and management of ectopic pregnancies so that they can be detected quickly and appropriate management can be implemented immediately, enhancing patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Ectopic pregnancy is a known complication of pregnancy that can carry a high rate of morbidity and mortality when not recognized and treated promptly.  It is essential that providers maintain a high index of suspicion for an ectopic in their pregnant patients as they may present with pain, vaginal bleeding, or more vague complaints such as nausea and vomiting. Fertilization and embryo implantation involve an interplay of chemical, hormonal, and anatomical interactions and conditions to allow for a viable intrauterine pregnancy.  Much of this system is outside the scope of this article but the most relevant anatomical components to our discussion on the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, egg, and sperm.  Ovaries are the female reproductive organs located to both lateral aspects of the uterus in the lower pelvic region. Ovaries serve multiple functions, one of which is to release an egg each month for potential fertilization. The fallopian tubes are tubular structures that serve as a conduit to allow transport of the female egg from the ovaries to the uterus. When sperm is introduced, it will fertilize the egg forming an embryo. The embryo will then implant into endometrial tissue within the uterus. An ectopic pregnancy occurs when this fetal tissue implants somewhere outside of the uterus or attaching to an abnormal or scarred portion of the uterus.

# Etiology

Ectopic pregnancy, in essence, is the implantation of an embryo outside of the uterine cavity most commonly in the fallopian tube. Smooth muscle contraction and ciliary beat within the fallopian tubes to assist the transport of an oocyte and embryo. Damage to the fallopian tubes, usually secondary to inflammation, induces tubal dysfunction which can result in retention of an oocyte or embryo. There are several local factors, such as toxic, infectious, immunologic, and hormonal, that can induce inflammation.

Ectopic implantation can occur in the cervix, uterine cornea, myometrium, ovaries, abdominal cavity, etc.

# Epidemiology

The estimated rate of ectopic pregnancy in the general population is 1 to 2% and 2 to 5% among patients who utilized assisted reproductive technology

Risk factors associated with ectopic pregnancies include advanced maternal age, smoking, history of ectopic pregnancy, tubal damage or tubal surgery, prior pelvic infections, DES exposure, IUD use, and assisted reproductive technologies.

# Histopathology

The most common site for ectopic pregnancy adherence is in the ampullary region of the fallopian tube.

# History and Physical

Women presenting with an ectopic pregnancy will often complain of pelvic pain; however, not all ectopic pregnancies manifest with pain. Women of childbearing age who complain of pelvic pain/discomfort, abdominal pain/discomfort, nausea/vomiting, syncope, lightheadedness, vaginal bleeding, etc. should merit consideration for the possibility of pregnancy. Providers need to identify when the patient's last menstrual period occurred and whether they have monthly routine menstrual periods. If patients have missed their last period or have abnormal uterine bleeding, and are sexually active, then they may be pregnant and thus need further testing with a pregnancy test. Providers should identify any known risk factors for ectopic pregnancy in their patient's history, such as if a patient has had a prior confirmed ectopic pregnancy, known fallopian tube damage (history of pelvic inflammatory disease, tubal surgery, known obstruction), or achieved pregnancy through infertility treatment.

After obtaining a thorough history, an attentive physical exam is the next step. Evaluation of vital signs to assess for tachycardia and hypotension is pivotal in determining the patient’s hemodynamic stability. When examining the abdomen and suprapubic regions, attention should focus on the location of tenderness as well as any exacerbating factors. If voluntary/involuntary guarding of the abdominal musculature is elicited on palpation, this should raise concern for possible free fluid or other cause of peritoneal signs. Palpating a gravid uterus may suggest pregnancy, however, does not exclude other pathologies such as progressed ectopic pregnancy or heterotopic pregnancy. Patient’s presenting with vaginal bleeding would likely benefit from a pelvic exam to assess for infections as well as assess the cervical os. Bimanual pelvic exams additionally allow for palpation of bilateral adnexa to assess for any abnormal masses/structures or to elicit adnexal tenderness. A thorough history and physical exam will lend better certainty with testing obtained when evaluating for possible ectopic pregnancy.

# Evaluation

Transvaginal ultrasound imaging is pivotal in diagnosing suspected ectopic pregnancy. Serial exams with transvaginal imaging, serum hCG level measurements, or both are necessary to confirm the diagnosis. The first marker of an intrauterine pregnancy on ultrasound is a small sac eccentrically located within the decidua.

The best diagnostic confirmation of an ectopic pregnancy comes through identifying a fetal heartbeat outside of the uterine cavity on ultrasound imaging.  The absence of a discernable fetal heartbeat can be misleading; however, as a fetal heartbeat does not develop throughout all ectopic pregnancies.

# Treatment / Management

Administration of intramuscular methotrexate or performance of laparoscopic surgery is safe and effective treatment modalities in hemodynamically stable women with a non-ruptured ectopic pregnancy. The decision of which modality to pursue is guided by the patient’s clinical picture, their laboratory findings, and radiologic imaging as well as the patient’s well-informed choice after having reviewed the risks and benefits with each procedure. Patients with relatively low hCG levels would benefit from the single-dose methotrexate protocol. Patients with higher hCG levels may necessitate two-dose regimens. There is literature suggestive that methotrexate treatment does not have adverse effects on ovarian reserve or fertility.

Surgical management including salpingostomy or salpingectomy should be guided by clinical status, the extent of fallopian tube compromise, and desire for future fertility. In simplest form salpingectomy involves removing the fallopian tube partially or in full.

# Differential Diagnosis

One should begin to formulate a differential diagnosis when taking into account the patient’s history and physical exam findings.  Important differential diagnoses to consider with ectopic pregnancies are ovarian torsion, tuba-ovarian abscess, appendicitis, hemorrhagic corpus luteum, ovarian cyst rupture, threatened miscarriage, incomplete miscarriage, pelvic inflammatory disease, and ureteral calculi. The patient's history and hemodynamic status on clinical presentation will influence the order of these differentials, as well as the testing necessary to rule out said differentials.

# Prognosis

Patients with a relatively low beta hCG level will likely have a better prognosis regarding treatment success with single-dose methotrexate.

# Complications

Women who present early in pregnancy and have testing suggestive of an ectopic pregnancy would jeopardize the viability of an intrauterine pregnancy if given Methotrexate.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients who seek medical treatment for ectopic pregnancy may need to discuss with their obstetrician which foods, supplements, and drugs to avoid when taking methotrexate as there may be decreased efficacy due to adverse interactions with the drug. Methotrexate may increase immunosuppression when paired with other medications, among other potential adverse side effects. Patient’s that undergo surgical interventions will need to adhere to the recommendations by their surgeon as to limit the risk of infection as well as other post-operative complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

When faced with the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy, the health care team needs to work collectively and efficiently to diagnose accurately and treat the susceptible patient. Women typically will present to the ER with this ailment, accurate and timely identification starts from the initial encounter when triaged by the nursing or provider in triage staff. It is the provider's responsibility to include/consider ectopic pregnancy as a potential differential diagnosis in all sexually active women of childbearing age. A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed to compare and test the performance of current protocols used when managing women with a pregnancy of unknown location