Lamivudine is available in 150 mg scored tablets, 300 mg tablets, and 5 mg or 10 mg/ml oral solutions. It may be taken with or without food and should be stored at room temperature. The patient should take a missed dose when they remember, but doses should not be doubled up.

Doses should be adjusted accordingly for the patient's kidney function. Creatinine clearance greater than or equal to 50 mL/min should have a lamivudine dose of 150 mg twice per day or 300 mg once per day. Creatinine clearance of 30 to 49 mL/min should have a lamivudine dose of 150 mg once per day. If a patient's creatinine clearance is between 15 to 29 mL/min, they should receive 150 mg as a first dose, then 100 mg per day thereafter. Creatinine clearance of 5 to 14 mL/min equates to 150 mg as a first dose, then 50 mg per day thereafter. With a creatinine clearance of less than 5 mL/min, the patient would receive 50 mg as the first dose and then 25 mg per day.

Additional dosing is not necessary after either 4-hour routine hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis.

Pediatric patients should be able to swallow tablets safely and should use a separate dosing schedule. If the child cannot swallow the tablet, the oral solution dosage may need to increase because of the decrease in bioavailability.

Lower dose lamivudine is a once-daily 100 mg dose of lamivudine only indicated for HBV treatment without co-infection of HIV-1. Pre-administration testing and counseling are necessary, as well as subsequent testing while taking lower dose lamivudine.

Care is necessary if the patient is currently resistant to other previously prescribed antiviral medications. Chronic co-administration with sorbitol should be avoided to prevent a decrease in lamivudine concentration and a resultant decrease in lamivudine potency. Pharmacokinetic changes are minor with ZDV, ddI, cotrimoxazole, and interferon-alpha-2b, so no dose adjustment is recommended.

Resistance to lamivudine, as well as cross-resistance to other NRTIs, such as didanosine, abacavir, and emtricitabine, are seen in 10% of patients after treatment with lamivudine as a monotherapy or combined therapy after 48 weeks of treatment.