In 2016, the World Health Organization (WHO) published a revised classification of central nervous system (CNS) tumors using molecular parameters.

Medulloblastomas are the most common embryonal tumors and have their own genetic/molecular defined groups (SHH-activated TP53-mutant, SHH-activated TP53-wildtype, WNT-activated, non-SHH/WNT group three, and non-SHH/WNT group four) in addition to their histologically defined groups (classic, desmoplastic/nodular, medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity, and large cell/anaplastic). A combination of the genetic profile and the histology determines the prognosis of these tumors.

All other embryonal tumors are classified depending if they have an amplification of the C19MC region (19q13.42) on chromosome 19. If they have the amplification, they are called embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes, C19MC-altered (WHO 9478/3*). If they do not have the amplification, they are called embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes, NOS (WHO 9478/3). The other embryonal tumors are classified as medulloepithelioma (9501/3), CNS neuroblastoma (9500/3), CNS ganglioneuroblastoma (9490/3), and atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (ATRT) with alterations of INI1 or in rare occasions BRG1.

Immunohistochemical staining for INI1 or BRG1 expression is used to distinguish them. Those tumors that do not have alterations of either INI1 or BRG1 are classified as embryonal tumors with rhabdoid features (WHO 9508/3). Those embryonal tumors without amplification of the C19MC, no alterations of INI1 or BRG1, and no rosettes, are called embryonal tumor, NOS (WHO 9473/3). This last group is a wastebasket category for the tumors previously called PNET, which can not be classified under a genetic/molecular group.

Concurrent with the publication of the WHO 2016 classification, a group recognized four new categories for PNET.