During the gestational period, the thyroid gland descends from the foramen cecum at the posterior tongue and completes the descent to the expected location by the seventh week of gestation.

The gland is attached to the trachea by Berry’s ligament or the lateral suspensory ligament. Many important structures like parathyroid glands and recurrent laryngeal nerve lie near the thyroid gland.

The function of the thyroid gland depends on the availability of dietary iodine. Iodine is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and dispersed in the extracellular fluid. Most of the absorbed iodine gets concentrated in the thyroid cells with functioning sodium-iodide symporter (NIS).  The thyroid follicular cells absorb iodine through the NIS.

The predominant excretion of iodine is through the urinary route, although a fraction is excreted through feces and other body fluids like sweat and saliva. The fetal thyroid starts concentrating iodine at 12 weeks of gestation, which causes RAI treatment to be a contraindication in pregnancy.

A multistep transformation of thyroid follicular cells results in thyroid follicle carcinogenesis. In most thyroid cancers, mutations occur that cause selective growth advantage called driver mutations. There also occurs dysregulation of many protein kinase pathways. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation is pivotal for the initiation of PTC, and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT activation is crucial for FTC initiation.

The ability of the well-differentiated thyroid cancer cells to absorb iodine through the sodium-iodide symporter makes RAI an effective treatment for them.

Iodine-131 (I-131) destroys the cancer cells due to the beta emission. The predominant gamma emission of I-131 is the 364 KeV high-energy photons, which causes radiation exposure concerns to the public. Gamma radiation is also used in imaging biodistribution.