Patients have varying prognoses after ventral hernia repair. The circumstances surrounding the original operation have the highest predictive value of post-operative complications. Emergency operations for strangulation that require bowel resection are associated with higher morbidity and recurrence secondary to the face at a minimum the case has become cleanly contaminated, and synthetic mesh should not be used. Wound class is an important variable in determining the risk of morbidity from an operation and should be documented in the operative record. A clean wound (class I) is an incision where no inflammation is encountered, there was no break in sterile technique, and the respiratory, alimentary and genitourinary tracts were not entered. A clean-contaminated wound (class II) is an incision where the respiratory, alimentary, or genitourinary tract is entered under controlled conditions but with no contamination encountered. A contaminated wound (class III) is an incision where there could have been a major break in sterile technique, obvious spillage from the gastrointestinal tract, or an incision in which acute, nonpurulent inflammation is encountered. Open traumatic wounds that are more than 12 to 24 hours old also fall into this category. A dirty or infected would (class IV) is an incision where the viscera may have been perforated, acute inflammation with pus is encountered during the operation and for traumatic wounds where treatment is delayed, or there is fecal contamination/devitalized tissue present.