Cases of precocious pseudopuberty should be promptly referred to an endocrinologist to prevent complications. The goals of managing precocious pseudopuberty are to treat the underlying cause and block the production or response of excess sex hormones. Specific treatments depend on the cause:

- **Tumors**of the ovary, testis, or adrenal glands often require surgical excision. HCG secreting tumors may require additional treatment with chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

- **Functional follicular ovarian cysts**rarely require surgical intervention and may be managed conservatively as they usually regress spontaneously.

- **Primary hypothyroidism**is treated by providing thyroxine supplementation.

- **McCune Albright syndrome:**Aromatase inhibitors are the most studied medications to manage precocious puberty in McCune Albright syndrome. Theoretically, aromatase inhibitors suppress estrogen production and help in slowing growth maturation, lead to cessation of menses and reduce ovarian volumes. However, studies have shown mixed results. Testolactone has been shown to be temporarily effective in slowing growth rate and advancement of menses, while fadrozole and anastrozole have not been found to be efficacious.

- **Familial male-limited precocious puberty:**This disorder is treated with an androgen receptor antagonist and aromatase inhibitor to delay epiphyseal maturation. A GnRH analog is added in cases where central precocious puberty occurs.  A case series of 25 subjects with familial male-limited precocious puberty showed that spironolactone with testolactone or anastrozole and a GnRH agonist was effective in increasing adult height.