A standardized diagnostic protocol, including dysmorphology examination, complete family history and ascertainment of risk factors, and neuroimaging, would cover the spectrum of presenting features of these disorders.

The pathogenesis of holoprosencephaly is related to abnormal genes that are responsible for the normal development of the head and the face. Hence, clinically, the spectrum of the presentation can range from mild craniofacial defects, like single maxillary central incisor with normal neurological function, to severe cranio-facio-neurological defects like cyclopia or proboscis with an alobar variant. In moderate to severe cases, the craniofacial symptoms have proven to be an indicator of the severity of the intracranial lesion.

Severe facial phenotypes are associated with the alobar variant of holoprosencephaly and include-

- Pronounced microcephaly.

- Cyclopia: Single, centrally placed eye, synophthalmia, or anophthalmia. Proboscis may be single or absent and may or may not be accompanied by hypognathism.

- Cebocephaly: A combination of ocular hypotelorism and a single nostril nose.

- Ethmocephaly: Proboscis (a tube-like nasal appendage with a single nostril located above the ocular region) with ocular hypotelorism.

Less severe facial phenotypes are associated with the following intracranial manifestations including-

- Hypotelorism is associated with the lobar variant.

- Midface hypoplasia with a flat nasal bridge, cleft lip and/or palate, and agenesis of the columella are associated with the lobar variant.

- Ocular colobomas, along with other severe features, are related to the alobar variant while, when present alone, are a sign of lobar/middle interhemispheric variant.

- Single maxillary central incisor-microform variant.

Individuals with a mild variant of holoprosencephaly, usually have a relative with frank holoprosencephaly. These patients typically present with only the craniofacial anomalies without the accompanying neurological defect.