Severe hemophilia often manifests in the first months of life, whereas mild or moderate hemophilia will present later in childhood or adolescence often incidentally or following trauma. In two-thirds of cases, confirmation of the hemophilia diagnosis occurs shortly after the delivery of an affected son to a mother who carries the susceptible gene. In spontaneous mutation scenarios that occur in one-third of cases, hemophilia A diagnostic confirmation proceeds after bleeding symptoms occur spontaneously or after insignificant trauma. Characteristic hemophilia bleeding symptoms can manifest as spontaneous intracranial bleeding in neonates, excessive postoperative bleeding after circumcision, atraumatic painful hemarthrosis, inexplicable bruising when the infant begins crawling or walking, and inordinate musculocutaneous hemorrhage, either spontaneously or after intramuscular vaccination. Frequent falls or impacts from furniture while learning to ambulate can induce extensive soft tissue contusions and hemorrhage that can mimic the appearance of child abuse in the young hemophiliac. Hemarthrosis manifests as the most common hemorrhagic symptom in adolescents and adults. Recurrent hemarthrosis eventually causes erosion of joint cartilage and results in the painful Charcot joints of hemophilic arthropathy. Intracranial hemorrhage represents the most immediately life-threatening manifestation of hemophilia A with the potential for chronic neurological disability and long-term neurological sequelae.