Preoperative Evaluation: The preoperative evaluation should include a thorough history and physical exam. It is not uncommon for patients to have undiagnosed pulmonary hypertension on the day of surgery. Patients with mild pulmonary hypertension may complain of generalized fatigue, whereas patients with more severe disease complain of angina, near syncope, and syncopal episodes. Physical exam findings correlating with right ventricular dysfunction are distended neck veins, tricuspid regurgitation, S3 gallop, hepatomegaly, abdominal ascites, and peripheral edema. If the patient presents with dyspnea at rest, syncope, or hypoxemia on the day of surgery, it should be rescheduled if it is not emergent. Additionally, a right heart catheterization should be considered if the patient has known severe disease or new evidence of right heart dysfunction.

Preoperative labs and imaging are beneficial for knowing the current status of the patient’s disease and developing an anesthetic plan. A hemoglobin and hematocrit, comprehensive metabolic panel to assess renal and liver function, an electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and chest radiograph should be obtained and reviewed.

The anesthesiologist needs to be familiar with the procedure, especially those with increased risk to the patient. For example, insufflation during laparoscopic procedures can increase abdominal pressure high enough to impede lung compliance or decrease venous return. It may also precipitate a respiratory acidosis that requires increasing minute ventilation or sodium bicarbonate to correct.

Orthopedic procedures utilizing cement may produce profound hypotension requiring immediate action. They also have an increased risk for fat or cement emboli.

Intraoperative Monitoring: The American Society of Anesthesiologists recommends that a pulse oximeter, electrocardiography, blood pressure device, and temperature monitoring should be applied for all surgical cases. Additional and more invasive monitoring may be required for patients with multiple or advanced comorbidities. With pulmonary hypertension, an indwelling arterial catheter can be inserted to provide continuous systemic blood pressure monitoring as well as access for arterial blood gas samples. The arterial line allows for quick intervention and determining the appropriate ventilatory management.

A central venous catheter with a pulmonary artery catheter should be placed to monitor central venous and pulmonary artery pressures and targeted therapy for vasopressors, vasodilators, and fluids. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) can be used to evaluate the right ventricle. The mid-esophageal four-chamber view is ideal for measuring the dimensions of the right ventricle. A right ventricle that is volume overloaded will shift the septal wall to the left during diastole, causing the left ventricle to look like the letter “D.” If the right ventricle is pressure overloaded, it shifts the septal wall during systole.

Induction: General anesthesia is a common anesthetic approach for patients with pulmonary hypertension. Peripheral nerve blocks and/or epidurals are helpful for perioperative pain control. Uncontrolled pain can be a trigger for a pulmonary hypertension exacerbation. Spinal anesthesia should be avoided because of the rapid onset and profound sympatholytic effects.

Prior to induction, the patient should be pre-oxygenated with 100% oxygen to increase their functional residual capacity and avoid hypoxemia. Etomidate, a quick onset sedation agent, is ideal for induction because it minimally affects cardiac function and systemic vascular resistance and is generally well tolerated with pulmonary hypertension. Intravenous or nebulized treatments with prostanoids or nitric oxide can be given to minimize pulmonary hypertensive responses to intubation.

Adding a benzodiazepine and/or opioid during induction will help decrease a sympathetic response.

Ventilation: Once the airway is secured, the anesthesiologist may begin ventilator management and use volatile inhaled anesthetics to maintain anesthesia. It is preferred to begin with low tidal volumes, 6 ml/kg, and keep peak airway pressures under 30 mmHg.

Medications: Pharmacologic therapies for pulmonary hypertension continue to emerge. The vasodilator drugs that are widely used for treatment are prostanoids, endothelin receptor antagonists, nitric oxide, and phosphodiesterase inhibitors.

Prostanoids mimic prostacyclins and produce vasodilation and inhibit platelet aggregation. Epoprostenol, an intravenous medication, has been shown to reduce mortality. Endothelin is a vasoconstrictor; therefore, endothelin antagonists help with vasodilation. They also have anti-inflammatory effects and decrease the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle.

If the patient was recently diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension, then sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, is a possible preoperative treatment to prevent pulmonary hypertension exacerbations.