An understanding of the toxicities of neuroleptic agents necessitates a knowledge of the pharmacology behind their efficacy, as their toxicities are often an extension of their mechanisms of action. While differences in their molecular structures are pharmacologically important, the most clinically relevant difference between FGAs and SGAs are their side effect profiles. The FGAs are further subdivided into high- and low-potency agents, with the key pharmacologic difference being that high-potency agents have minimal effect at histaminic and muscarinic receptors. Currently, available high-potency FGAs are fluphenazine, haloperidol, loxapine, perphenazine, pimozide, thiothixene, and trifluoperazine; current available low-potency FGAs are chlorpromazine and thioridazine. The action of low-potency FGAs at histaminic and muscarinic receptors increases their risk of sedation, weight gain, and anticholinergic symptoms relative to their high-potency counterparts. Conversely, high-potency FGAs carry an increased risk of extrapyramidal symptoms, which are discussed in more detail below.

The SGAs were first introduced in the 1970s and currently include clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, aripiprazole, paliperidone, asenapine, iloperidone, and lurasidone. The most prominent difference in toxicities between FGAs and SGAs is the increased risk of EPS and tardive dyskinesia with the use of first-generation agents. Additionally, high-potency FGAs are the most commonly associated with EPS.

The most emergent toxic presentation associated with neuroleptic use is NMS. NMS may be caused by medications that act as dopaminergic antagonists or, less commonly, withdrawal from medications with dopaminergic effects, such as those used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. While most of the medications implicated with NMS are, indeed, neuroleptics, it should be noted that antiemetics, CNS stimulants, and other medications can precipitate NMS as well. High-potency FGAs are the medications most commonly associated with NMS, haloperidol, and fluphenazine carrying the highest risk. However, NMS has been reported with all neuroleptic agents, and risperidone is the most commonly implicated SGA in cases of NMS.