After applying a bandage or gauze with medical tape to the inoculation site, it is crucial to monitor and educate the patient on issues that can arise due to recent vaccinations. Make sure the patient is under watch for at least five-ten minutes following vaccination. It is common to have a low-grade fever and some mild fatigue following a vaccination. For soreness or redness in the area, a cold compress can be applied, or the patient can take ibuprofen. If the symptoms persist for longer than 48 hours, advise the patient to seek help from their primary care physician or go to an emergency room for further care.

**Anaphylaxis and Epinephrine Autoinjector**

One of the more problematic issues that arise from vaccinations is anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction when an individual is exposed to an irritant or foreign substance called an allergen. Typical indicators of anaphylaxis include global pruritis, the sudden global onset of urticaria (raised bumps of skin that are surrounded by erythema), swelling of the face, tongue, or throat, wheezing with associated shortness of breath, cough, sudden hypotension with a sudden loss of consciousness, or dizziness.

Remember that anaphylaxis is a treat first, then call for help type of medical emergency. Make sure to ask the patient who is suffering from anaphylaxis if they can inject themselves or need assistance to do the injection. The instructions for operating an epinephrine auto-injector are labeled on the side of the apparatus itself for ease of use. When using the device, there is usually a viewing window where the medication can be seen inside. If the solution is opaque or murky appearing, it is likely that the medication has been exposed to extreme temperatures and is therefore not viable. In this case, another epinephrine auto-injector must be procured. The expiration date is also located on the side of the apparatus itself; if the medication has expired, it will not help save the patient's life if implemented.

To use an epinephrine auto-injector, first firmly grasp the device around its middle. Do not place the hands over the top or the bottom of the device, which can accidentally trigger the device and inject the user. Pull off the blue activation cap at the top of the device. The orange tip holds the needle inside of it. Make sure to press the orange tip perpendicular to the mid anterolateral (outer mid) thigh of either leg and push firmly to activate the auto injecting device. An audible click should be heard when this occurs. Hold in place for at least 5 seconds. Remove the device from the injection site. At this point, the needle should have been automatically covered by its orange tip. Once this is confirmed, the device can be safely discarded.

The patient may feel tremulous and experience palpitations; this is an expected side effect of epinephrine. At this point, make sure to call emergency services and have the patient moved to a hospital setting where physicians can monitor them. Emergency services must observe the patient in case of a biphasic anaphylactic reaction, a secondary anaphylactic crisis that occurs after the initial onset.