Treatment of borderline personality disorder relies on psychotherapy. Three evidence-based therapies are effective for patients with borderline personality disorder. First, mentalizing-based therapy (MBT) helps patients manage emotion dysregulation by feeling understood, allowing them to be more curious and make fewer assumptions about the intentions of the people around them. A second therapy, dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), combines mindfulness practices with concrete interpersonal and emotion regulation skills. Third, transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP) focuses on using the patient-therapist relationship to develop the patient's awareness of problematic interpersonal dynamics. MBT and DBT each incorporate individual and group treatment over 12 to 18 months. For adolescents, family therapy may be an appropriate substitute for group therapy, though not always.

No medications are FDA-approved for the treatment of borderline personality disorder. Medications such as SSRIs, mood stabilizers, and antipsychotics have shown limited effectiveness in trials aiming at the control of symptoms such as anxiety, sleep disturbance, depression, or psychotic symptoms. Anxiety can be challenging to treat because patients may label their internal experiences with the word anxiety, even when they are not truly based on fear. Thus, "anxiety" may need to be accurately re-labeled, with treatment recommendations stemming from the patient's specific internal experience. The exception to the misleading use of the word anxiety is that patients with borderline personality disorder often have a fear of being alone; in other words, they have attachment-related anxiety. However, attachment-related anxiety is not necessarily similar in etiology or treatment to recognized anxiety disorders.

Self-injurious behavior, boundary issues, and frequent suicidal threats present therapeutic challenges specific to the treatment of patients with borderline personality disorder. High rates of comorbid substance abuse may also confound the treatment of borderline personality disorder patients. Patients with borderline personality disorder do not typically require hospitalization; however, inpatient care may be required in certain situations, such as:

- Imminent risk of high lethality behaviors due to overt suicidal ideation or impulsivity

- Severe social stressors causing intense negative thoughts or transient psychosis

- The rapid escalation in the severity of self-injurious behavior

- Decompensation of comorbid psychiatric diagnoses or severe substance abuse

The traditional belief that prolonged (longer than one week) inpatient hospitalization is counterproductive or even deleterious for patients with borderline personality disorder was not supported in a recent study. The data showed equal improvement among inpatients with and without borderline personality disorder over several weeks of hospitalization.

Given high comorbidity with ADHD, all patients with borderline personality disorder should be screened for this condition. When dealing with adolescents, parents, and teachers should be asked to fill out a standardized questionnaire (Conners, SNAP, Vanderbilt). For adults, no standard of care is established for self-report or observer-report of inattentive or hyperactive symptoms. A combination of 2 self-reports to guide clinical decision-making, the ADHD Symptom Rating Scale (World Health Organization) and the Wender-Utah ADHD Rating Scale (WURS-25), provide more than 80% sensitivity and specificity.