Initial management surrounds the stabilization of the patient. The initiation of prostaglandin soon after birth is imperative in cyanotic patients who have severe or critical pulmonary stenosis, or a very small VSD, with a ductal-dependent pulmonary blood supply. The patient who presents later on in infancy in heart failure with pulmonary over-circulation needs to be treated medically with diuretics.

Because there is only one functional ventricle (the left ventricle), all patients with TA undergo staged single ventricle palliation to provide adequate pulmonary and systemic blood flow and eventual separation of these circulatory systems. The choice of surgery for the first stage of palliation varies based on the anatomy of the great vessels, presence or absence of outflow tract obstruction and size of the VSD if present.

**Patients with pulmonary obstruction**

In patients with pulmonary obstruction, the first stage involves providing adequate pulmonary blood flow, via a systemic to pulmonary artery shunt, usually via a modified Blalock-Taussig (BT) shunt, also known as a Blalock-Taussig-Thomas (BTT) shunt. This provision is typically a connection utilizing a polytetrafluoroethylene tubular graft between the right subclavian and the right pulmonary artery.

**Patients without pulmonary obstruction**

In patients with unobstructed pulmonary blood flow (type Ic), the first stage may be the placement of a pulmonary artery (PA) band that may limit excessive blood flow to pulmonary vascular bed. In a small subset of patients, the VSD may be small enough to restrict the amount of pulmonary blood flow. These patients have a balanced circulation and, therefore, do not need pulmonary artery banding. Those patients go to the second stage of palliation, as described below.

**Patients with D-TGA and subaortic obstruction**

In patients with type II lesions who have a VSD that obstructs aortic blood flow, the first stage could be enlargement of the VSD or a Damus-Kaye-Stansel (anastomosis between the main pulmonary artery and ascending aorta) with a modified BT shunt.

**Second and third stages**

The second stage for type I and II lesions involves cavo-pulmonary anastomosis wherein the superior vena cava connects to the right pulmonary artery, the bidirectional Glenn or hemi-Fontan procedure. This change results in a passive flow of blood from the upper body into the pulmonary vessels. This surgery usually takes place at around six months.

The third stage is the Fontan procedure, first described in 1971 for TA.