All autoimmune diseases require an interprofessional approach for appropriate diagnosis and life-long management. Pemphigus vegetans is a unique variant of pemphigus that is often underrecognized and frequently misdiagnosed. Although it is the rarest form of pemphigus, it is potentially fatal if untreated. Healthcare teams need to work together to recognize and treat patients with this rare form of vesiculobullous autoimmune disease. Because management of these patients is with a variety of immunosuppressive agents, they not only need to be educated about the adverse effects but need life long monitoring. Because of the constant state of suppressed immunity, they also develop bacterial and viral infections. Thus, an infectious disease nurse should follow the patient and monitor for signs of an infection. Pharmacists should verify all dosing and perform medication reconciliation, reporting any concerns to the rest of the healthcare team. Corticosteroids may induce diabetes, so an endocrine consult is necessary. Also, these agents may cause bone thinning, and hence, osteoporosis should be screened to prevent fractures. Many patients develop chronic wounds that fail to heal. Therefore, a wound care nurse should educate the patient on wound care. Only through open communication between the team members can the morbidity and mortality of this severe disorder be reduced.

In summary, pemphigus vulgaris requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

Unfortunately, despite optimal treatment, the disorder still carries a mortality rate of nearly 10% a year.