The prevalence of infertility is variable, and epidemiologically, male infertility has been documented less in developing countries.

Globally, infertility affects approximately 13% to 15% of all couples, while one in five is unable to achieve pregnancy in the first year.

With regard to male infertility, the exact prevalence is still doubtful, as male infertility is not a reportable disease. Furthermore, payment for male infertility treatment is usually private, and hence they are not reflected in medical insurance statistics. Further, male infertility is often treated in outpatient settings, and such data is not typically added to large clinical databases.

Agarwal et al. estimated the overall pure male factor infertility could range between 2.5% and 12%.

Of greater concern is the widely reported general trending, over recent decades, of reductions in sperm counts globally.

While the exact causes are not known, contributing factors are thought to be increasing long-term exposure to environmental toxins as well as improved global medical care, which paradoxically allows more men with marginal health to participate in reproductive activities. There is also the possibility that the reported decrease in sperm counts might merely reflect differences in laboratory techniques, inconsistent lab criteria, and varying counting methods.

Infertile men appear to have an increased risk of developing cancer compared to the general population.  This risk is highest in azoospermic men.

COVID-19 appears to cause somewhat reduced fertility and even infertility in some recovered males, especially if the infection was severe. The virus appears to affect the testis by direct cellular infection, via a cytokine storm and through the side effects of the various antiviral and immunological therapies used in its treatment.