It is important to identify macrocephaly using a standard head measurement. To obtain this measurement, a measuring tape is wrapped around the head, aligning just above the eyebrows on the anterior aspect and then over the prominent aspect of the posterior portion of the head. This is also known as the occipital frontal circumference (OFC). This measurement is plotted on the 2006 WHO international growth charts for children aged less than 24 months using the patient's sex and age, from which percentiles are determined. To meet the criteria for macrocephaly, the patient's head circumference must lie at or above the 97th percentile.

To determine if the macrocephaly is related to another process or syndrome, a careful history should be taken with attention to birth measurements and growth trajectory, any other associated medical problems, a developmental history, and any family history of macrocephaly. For instance, it would be important to know if the patient has had any history of CNS trauma or infection. If there were meningitis or intraventricular hemorrhage in the neonatal state, hydrocephalus could develop as a result, and these patients should be followed closely.

Physical exam apart from head measurements palpation of the fontanelles should include an examination of general appearance and facial features, skin, and complete neurologic exam to identify any clues to underlying etiology or possible genetic syndrome. The ophthalmologic exam should also be performed as patients with increased intracranial pressure may have papilledema, though this may not be seen in infants with open fontanelles. Some other focussed physical examination for macrocephaly includes transillumination of the calvaria, evaluation for signs of skeletal dysplasia, and auscultation for a cranial bruit.