Management of pain in patients with an underlying cause (i.e., cancer) is an important clinical issue since such patients experience relentless pain that is usually not appropriately treated and results in poor life outcomes. Cancer patients in moderate to severe flare-ups of episodic pain in addition to their baseline opioid controlled pain require effective medications to control such episodes. OTFC is an optimal choice to manage these episodic flare-ups of pain in cancer patients due to its pharmacokinetics (short duration and rapid onset) and noninvasive and convenient route of delivery (oral transmucosal).

Physicians prescribing this medication should be familiar with its adverse effects, indications/contraindications, and be vigilant regarding the patient’s concomitant medication use (i.e., other CNS depressants, CYP 3A4 inhibitors/inducers) to prevent toxicity or suboptimal therapeutic outcomes. Physicians are encouraged to screen patients for opioid abuse or misuse before prescribing OTFC. Physicians should educate the patient about increased risks of overdose or death associated with the use of additional CNS depressants (i.e., opioids, benzodiazepines, alcohol) with OTFC. Opioid overdose is a serious medical situation due to the high risk of fatal respiratory depression. Ultimately, the optimal approach to managing opioid overdose situations is to prevent it from happening in the first place. A comprehensive approach to preventing overdose situations involves highly regulated prescribing and dispensing policies, follow-up and monitoring processes, and complete coordination among providers via electronic healthcare records.