Oligohydramnios is associated with many conditions/complications of pregnancy, and the differential breaks down into the following categories: maternal, fetal, placental, and idiopathic.

- Maternal causes: Oligohydramnios has correlations with any medical or obstetric condition leading to uteroplacental insufficiency (8% of all gestations). Possible causes include chronic hypertension, vascular disease, thrombophilia, and preeclampsia. It also correlates with certain drugs (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, NSAIDs, and cocaine use) and maternal diabetes.

- Fetal causes: Rupture of membranes is the most common cause. Preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) alone accounts for greater than 37% of oligohydramnios cases diagnosed in the second and third trimesters. Genitourinary tract abnormalities (renal agenesis, obstructive nephropathy) are associated with oligohydramnios and occur at an incidence of 3 to 7 per 1000 live births. Post-term pregnancies, fetal growth restriction (5% of the second trimester and 20.5% of third-trimester diagnoses), chromosomal abnormalities (10% of oligohydramnios cases in the second trimester), and fetal demise are also associated with oligohydramnios.

- Placental causes: Placental causes of oligohydramnios include abruption (8.6% of all oligohydramnios cases) and twin-twin transfusion syndrome (oligohydramnios-polyhydramnios sequence).

- Idiopathic/unexplained: The majority of oligohydramnios cases, 50.7% diagnosed in the third trimester, are of unexplained etiology and, typically, associated with better outcomes.