Treatment of bacterial keratitis and corneal ulcers consists first of topical antibiotics, most commonly with fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin or ofloxacin.

Treatment for HSV includes topical antivirals and adjuvant topical steroids. In the US the most common topical antiviral is trifluridine while in Europe topical acyclovir is the first line. (Level II) Other options include ganciclovir which also treats VZV and CMV keratitis. Oral acyclovir or valacyclovir are additional options. Oral valganciclovir is the treatment of choice for CMV stromal keratitis, but the patient requires close monitoring while on this medication due to significant side effects such as aplastic anemia.

Fungal ulcers tend to have worse outcomes than bacterial as there are far fewer treatment options. Currently, the primary treatment is natamycin, a topical polyene, first introduced in the 1960s. (Level II) Amphotericin B 0.3% to 0.5% is an alternative, but toxicity limits use. A newer generation triazole called voriconazole recently was found to be inferior to natamycin in the Mycotic Ulcer Treatment Trail (MUTT I).

Treatment of Acanthamoeba keratitis and corneal ulcers generally involves epithelial debridement and 3 to 4 months of antiamoebic therapy.

Treatment of peripheral ulcerative keratitis associated with autoimmune and collagen vascular diseases should be treated with systemic immunosuppressants and cytotoxic agents and requires co-management by both a rheumatologist and ophthalmologist.

An ophthalmologist should see all patients presenting with corneal ulcers within 12 to 24 hours. Emergent ophthalmologic consultation should be considered for a culture of the ulcer to guide antibiotic selection for suspected bacterial ulcers.