The skin is a laminated structure, comprising (from superficial to deep) the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis, which is also referred to as the subcutaneous or fatty tissue layer. The epidermis is further subdivided into (from superficial to deep) stratum corneum, stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale. Each layer has its unique structure and cellular composition, contributing to its characteristic function within the epidermis.

Wound healing is divided into acute and chronic phases. An acute injury to the skin initially induces a proinflammatory cascade comprising hemostasis followed by inflammation. This involves neutrophils and various cytokines and occurs over the first seven days after the injury. The inflammation then slowly begins to settle into the proliferative and re-epithelialization phases of wound healing. This commences with angiogenesis and reinnervation involving endothelial cells and fibroblasts, which leads to the cardinal element of wound healing: the formation of healthy granulation tissue.

As granulation tissue begins to form, a shift towards the final stage of wound healing occurs, known as the remodeling phase, to restore the epithelium of the skin. This phase can last for anywhere between 12 to 24 months and involves collagen deposition, mediated by growth factors such as fibroblast growth factor and epidermal growth factor, to form a cross-linked matrix.

Contrastingly, a chronic wound comprises a skin lesion that has failed to heal within the expected timescale of a normal wound. It is thought that stasis in the inflammatory phase of wound healing is the most common characteristic of these wounds and indicates a frank dysregulation of normal processes. Usually, there is a causative proponent, such as repetitive tissue stress, or an ongoing inflammatory trigger such as microbial infection.

The archetypal pathological process implicated in chronic wounds entails protease-induced extracellular matrix destruction, infiltration of proinflammatory cytokines, and attenuated growth factor signaling. This, in combination with excessive fibrous tissue deposition, such as collagen and fibronectin, ultimately creates a vicious cycle that propagates inflammation and prevents any progression to the proliferative phase. The cardinal microscopic findings in chronic wound tissue are macrophages, excessive granulation tissue, and fibrosis. Eventually, this leads to excessive scar formation and poor skin compliance.

NPWT aims to optimize the physiology involved in wound healing through various processes, many of which have thus far only been studied in an in-vitro laboratory setting. However, the known principal mechanisms are macro deformation, micro deformation, excess fluid removal, and equilibration of the wound microenvironment. It is useful to appreciate the mechanism of action of NPWT as a continuum of multiple contributory factors as opposed to standalone, hypothetical occurrences.

First, wound shrinkage is incurred by directly applying 125 mmHg of sub-atmospheric pressure to the foam. This mechanical process is called macro deformation, which can reportedly reduce wound space by approximately 80%. Second, suction through the pores in the foam invokes mechanical stress on the wound surface, which causes microscopic ripples to form along the wound edge due to increased tissue tension. This process is known as micro deformation and promotes normal cellular proliferation, migration, differentiation, and angiogenesis due to induced hypoxia causing the release of vascular endothelial growth factors. Third, the negative pressure directly transports excess inflammatory exudate away from the wound site, alleviating wound bed tissue compression and helping to restore microvascular circulation. Lastly, removing excess extracellular fluid helps establish a normal oncotic and osmotic pressure gradient through the extrication of excess proteins and electrolytes. Other adjunctive processes include increased endothelial and epithelial cell migration, as well as keratinocytes. In addition to the thermal insulation of the wound afforded by the sealed NPWT dressing, all these individual mechanisms exert positive effects on the wound tissue and encourage healthy tissue formation to propagate normal wound healing.