Folate deficiency can manifest in numerous ways. The measurement of deficient folate levels in the blood renders a definitive diagnosis, but other signs exist.

Low levels of folate lead to macrocytic megaloblastic anemia. A simple blood smear of an individual with a folate deficiency will reveal erythrocyte macrocytosis and hyper-segmented polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs).

Additionally, oral ulcers may appear without neurological symptoms [as opposed to a vitamin B12 deficiency, which causes subacute combined degeneration (SCD)].

A folate deficiency in pregnancy contributes heavily to fetal NTDs.

The interruption of DNA synthesis due to a folate deficiency will result in elevated homocysteine levels. Hyperhomocysteinemia is also present in vitamin B12 deficiency, but B12 lack also has elevated methylmalonic acid levels, and the neurological signs associated with SCD are absent in folate deficiency. Therefore, physicians must rule out a concurrent B12 deficiency before administering folic acid in apparent folate-deficiency anemia. The rationale behind this is that folic acid administration will address the anemia aspect of B12 deficiency, but methylmalonic acid levels will remain elevated and cause toxic neurological effects. Therefore, a simple measurement of B12 levels before folic acid administration is advisable to avoid potential SCD development.

Deficient folate levels have been detected in up to 16% of patients on antiepileptic drugs, including gabapentin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, valproate, and primidone.