The differential diagnoses confronted in the evaluation of the most common presenting symptoms and signs of endometrial cancer, which are abnormal vaginal bleeding and/or pelvic masses, range from benign localized lesions to systemic diseases and malignancies. Endometrial cancers confined to the uterus may present with minimal symptoms of AUB to advanced disease with pelvic-abdominal discomfort and pain, widespread lymphatic and peritoneal dissemination, ascites and rarely even extra-abdominal metastases.

The evaluation of AUB in women during their reproductive years should be alert to the complications of intrauterine and ectopic pregnancies and the gestational trophoblastic diseases. Both endogenous and exogenous hormone stimulation of the endometrium may cause irregular uterine bleeding during premenopausal years and postmenopausal bleeding (PMB). Systemic and endocrinologic causes of irregular and anovulatory bleeding, such as anorexia and obesity, polycystic ovarian disease, which often is associated with diabetes mellitus, hilar cell hypertrophy and hormone-secreting tumors of the ovary, thyroidopathies, adrenal hyperplasia and tumors, and pituitary tumors should be considered. Endocrinopathies associated with excess androgen secretions may be marked by signs of defeminization, hirsutism, and alopecia. Simple endometrial hyperplasia is commonly associated with periods of anovulation, oligomenorrhea and amenorrhea in the premenarcheal and premenopausal years. Exogenous sources of hormones, environmental and iatrogenic, particularly estrogen, progesterone and progestogens, and androgens, and treatment with tamoxifen must be ruled out. The association of endometrial cancer with exogenous hormones after menopause is most common in women on hormone replacement therapy with unopposed estrogen.  Submucosal leiomyomata (fibroids), sometimes accompanied by adenomyosis, especially in the late fourth and fifth decades, can result in irregular endometrial shedding with prolonged or irregular menstruation in premenopausal women, but should not cause PMB. Benign endometrial polyps may be the source of intermenstrual and irregular menstrual bleeding during the reproductive years and uterine bleeding after menopause, when these lesions are more frequently associated with endometrial cancer, particularly with late PMB and in women with family histories of this disease. Primary endometrial disorders due to inflammation or linked to intrinsic enzymatic, hormonal or vasculogenic factors have been associated with AUB.  Finally, congenital and acquired bleeding diatheses and exogenous anticoagulants must be ruled out.

Intended as an international system to standardize nomenclature and facilitate patient care and research, FIGO in 2011 published and recommended a classification of AUB during patients’ reproductive years using the acronym PALM-COEIN, which stands for Polyps, Adenomyosis, Leiomyoma, Malignancy, Coagulopathy, Ovulatory dysfunction, primary Endometrial disorders, Iatrogenic, Not classified.

Abnormal per vaginal discharge, especially if blood tinged, may be the only sign of endometrial complex and atypical hyperplasia, and cancer, and it should be noted and the cause pursued even during the reproductive years, especially during the fourth and fifth decades of life, and after menopause. Benign causes of these signs include inflammatory and benign, premalignant and malignant lesions of the vagina and the ectocervix and endocervix. So, all abnormal Pap smears should be explained and treated appropriately. Exophytic and other suspicious lesions should be positively diagnosed and properly treated and biopsied when tissue diagnosis is necessary. The finding of either benign or atypical glandular cells in postmenopausal Pap smears can herald cervical, endometrial and adnexal premalignant lesions and extra-genital cancers in a significant proportion of patients. As well as uterine, also vulvar-perineal bleeding, whether a complaint or elicited on review, may be the only sign some patients may have of local-regional, urological, colorectal, intestinal or metastatic cancer.

Endometrial cancers frequently arise in uteri of normal size unless there are coexisting fibro-muscular tumors (benign leiomyoma and sarcomas). Uterine size and leiomyoma are expected to regress in size after menopause and diminished endogenous estrogen stimulation from senescent ovaries. Uterine sarcoma should be suspect in patients with an enlarging or even non-regressing irregular “fibroid” uterus after menopause, especially if accompanied by PMB. Although dysfunctional cystic, polycystic, and tumorous ovaries may be enlarged on clinical examination, excessive hormonal activity from hyperplastic and tumorous ovaries of normal size may be sufficient to disrupt ovulation, resulting in AUB or endometrial stimulation, hyperplasia, and polyps.

Also included in the differential diagnoses of physically detected pelvic masses are metastatic cancer, hydrosalpinx and fallopian tube tumors; para-ovarian and broad ligament cysts and tumors, which are usually enlarging benign embryological ruminants; and leiomyomas and pseudocysts secondary to inflammatory, endometriotic, or postsurgical pelvic adhesions, retroperitoneal kidneys, dermoid tumors, tumorous nodes, and primary colorectal and other gastrointestinal cancers, urological tumors, and masses.