Lichen nitidus usually presents as asymptomatic, shiny, flat-topped, fleshy pink to dark brown papules. They are typically 1 to 2 mm in diameter. In patients with darker skin lesions can appear as light spots. Lesions commonly present on the neck, trunk, limbs, abdomen, and penile shaft. The involvement of mucous membranes, palms, soles, and nails are rare, but there are reports.

Rarely lichen nitidus will present only on the palms and soles and will usually present with lichen nitidus lesions in other locations.

If lesions present in the oral mucosa, they will be flat, greyish papules.

Nail involvement is rare but will present with longitudinal furrowing and ridging on the nail plate from inflammation of the nail matrix. Nail involvement usually presents with the generalized variant of lichen nitidus, and patients are more likely to have palmar involvement. If the nail fold is involved, nonspecific periungual inflammation or violaceous shiny papules can be seen

**Reported variants of lichen nitidus**:

- Confluent

- Hemorrhagic

- Linear

- Perforating

- Spinous follicular

- Vesicular

- Generalized

- Actinic

Purpuric lichen nitidus (hemorrhagic) is rare and will present with red-brown papules due to underlying hemorrhage within the lesions. Cases have been reported to develop in patients similar to pigmented purpuric dermatosis.

Actinic lichen nitidus usually presents as pinpoint lichenoid papules in photo distributed areas. It commonly presents in pediatrics and adults with Fitzpatrick skin types of IV to VI. Actinic lichen nitidus characteristically demonstrates annular plaques and can have similar histological features to lichen planus. It is thought to be a variant of a polymorphous light eruption.

Lichen nitidus in a linear distribution can mimic lichen spinulosus.