A thorough history and physical exam are critical in the evaluation of the patient with back pain in both adult and pediatric populations.

The historical characteristics of the pain that require elucidation are very similar for the two populations. The mechanism of injury is often a valuable clue in diagnosis. The intensity and the quality of pain or whether the pain radiates helps narrow the differential. The alleviating and provoking factors of back pain can provide insight. Furthermore, previous treatments are all critical for gathering a thorough history of present illness. It may also be helpful to assess the impact on the patients daily living the pain has caused, such as work/school absenteeism, as useful clues for functional impairment. Past medical and family history (including the history of cancers or inflammatory conditions) and social history (including periods of injection drug use, exercise regimens, periods of exposure to tuberculosis) can also change the most likely working diagnosis. The character of the pain can help differentiate neuropathic pain from nociceptive pain, while the duration of pain helps establish the acute or chronic nature of the pain. Chronic pain is often centralized and has a specific set of signs and symptoms that include allodynia and hyperalgesia. The mechanism of the backs elucidates the likelihood of a herniated disc or acute muscle spasm. The location of the pain may help to decipher between a compression fracture, sacroiliac (SI) joint injury, and degenerative arthritic changes. Exacerbating and relieving factors such as positional changes to pain severity, as well, the effectiveness of various medications can also help narrow the differential diagnosis. Radiation of pain is a useful tool to help assess radicular symptoms. The severity of pain also helps the provider clue in on the effect the illness or injury may have on the patient's quality of life. Furthermore, associated symptoms such as weakness, sensation changes, difficulty with ambulation, bowel or bladder changes, fever, chills, unexplained weight loss, and pain awakening the patient from sleep are all useful questions to rule out for severe pathology.

The physical exam is also performed similarly between the age groups as long as the patient is old enough to communicate and participate in the review. The physical exam should include inspection, palpation, the range of motion, strength testing, provocative maneuvers, and neurologic (limb strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflex) assessments. Several provocative exercises help demonstrate or decrease suspicion of different processes.

A straight leg raise (SLR) can be completed by raising the patient’s leg to 30 to 70 degrees

One leg hyperextension test/stork test: Have the patient stand on one leg and (while being supported by the provider) have them hyper-extend their back. Repeat this maneuver on both sides. Pain with hyperextension is positive for a pars interarticularis defect

Adam test: Have the patient bend over with feet together and arms extended with palms together. The practitioner should observe from the front. If a thoracic lump is present on one side or the other, it is an indication of scoliosis

There are numerous other examination techniques; however, they have mixed evidence for inter-practitioner reliability and poor sensitivities or specificities.

Red flags features on history or physical exam should raise the provider’s suspicion for a process that may require imaging for proper diagnosis. These differ slightly from adults to children based on the incidence of diseases in these age groups:

Adults Red Flags:

- Malignancy:

- History: History of metastatic cancer, unexplained weight loss
- Physical exam: Focal tenderness to palpation in the setting of risk factors

- Infection:

- History: Spinal procedure within the last 12 months, Intravenous drug use, Immunosuppression, prior lumbar spine surgery
- Physical exam: Fever, wound in the spinal region, localized pain, and tenderness

- Fracture:

- History: Significant trauma (relative to age), Prolonged corticosteroid use, osteoporosis, and age greater than 70 years 
- Physical exam: Contusions, abrasions, tenderness to palpation over spinous processes

- Neurologic:

- History: Progressive motor/sensory loss, new urinary retention or incontinence, new fecal incontinence
- Physical exam: Saddle anesthesia, anal sphincter atony, significant motor deficits of multiple myotomes

Pediatric red flags are the same as adults with a few notable differences:

- Malignancy:

- History: age less than four years, nighttime pain 
- Physical exam: Focal tenderness to palpation in the setting of risk factors

- Infectious:

- History: age less than four years, nighttime pain, history of tuberculosis exposure 
- Physical exam: Fever, wound in the spinal region, localized pain, and tenderness

- Inflammatory:

- History: age less than four years, morning stiffness for greater than 30min, improving with activity or hot showers 
- Physical exam: limited range of motion, localized pain, and tenderness

- Fracture:

- History: activities with repetitive lumber hyperextension (sports such as cheerleading, gymnastics, wrestling, or football linemen)
- Physical exam: Tenderness to palpation over spinous process, positive Stork test