Each step in the formation and transport of melanin may be impaired, resulting in a diverse group of diseases:

- **Melanoblast:**Waardenburg syndrome, a group of autosomal recessive (AR) and dominant (AD) diseases characterized by a white forelock, skin hypopigmentation, and premature graying of the hair, results from impaired melanoblast migration to their destination tissue (i.e., iris, hair). Various forms also include congenital deafness, heterochromia iridis, synophrys, and dystopia canthorum.

- **Melanocyte:**Vitiligo, a disease characterized by photosensitive and depigmented white patches surrounded by normally pigmented skin and ophthalmologic issues, results from auto-immune destruction of melanocytes.

- **Melanosome:**Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by partial oculocutaneous albinism, platelet dysfunction, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), and immunodeficiency, results from mutations in genes which likely regulate lysosomal trafficking. Griscelli syndrome, an autosomal recessive group of diseases, characterized by hair and skin hypopigmentation, results from mutations in the protein complex responsible for the transfer of mature melanosomes to keratinocytes. Various forms also include neurologic impairment, immunodeficiency, and HLH.

- **Tyrosinase:**Phenylketonuria, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by intellectual disability, epilepsy, fair, blonde hair and blue eyes, and other skin changes, results from a deficiency of the phenylalanine hydroxylase enzyme. The pigmentary changes are due to competitive inhibition of tyrosinase by phenylalanine buildup. Oculocutaneous albinism, a group of autosomal recessive diseases characterized by hypopigmentation and ocular problems, results from mutations of the tyrosinase (TYR) gene. Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, a disease characterized by progression through phases of meningoencephalitis, uveitis, alopecia with vitiligo-like depigmentation, and recurrent uveitis, results from autoimmune destruction of melanosome-bound antigens, possibly including the tyrosinase enzyme itself.

- **Dopaminergic neurons:**Parkinson disease, a neurodegenerative condition characterized by progressive postural and gait difficulties, results from drop-out of neuromelanin-producing dopaminergic neurons in the brain. Depigmentation of the substantia nigra pars compacta is a pathologic hallmark of the condition.