Chondrocyte regeneration has contributed to the development of reconstructive procedures. Direct defects on articular cartilage (AC) cause severe pain; such acute and chronic pain could only be minimized with long-term treatments just three decades ago. Those conditions can now be permanently eliminated using a surgical procedure called autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI).

Initially performed on soccer players by Swedish orthopedic surgeons in the early 90s, ACI attained US FDA authorization on August 22, 1997. The common pre-operational scenario includes a cracked hole on the joining surface of the articular cartilage. These defects may appear in patients aged 60 to younger patients (median age 31.3). Usually performed at the distal end of the femur, ACI has been successfully performed for kneecap deficiencies and other joint issues. In general, ACI divides into two phases: cell regeneration and open procedure. The patient’s MRI procedure first confirms a surgery-worth defect. A chondrocyte sample is taken via an arthroscopic procedure. New chondrocytes are produced via the enzymatic treatment of the collected sample for three to four months. After the production of over a million cells, the orthopedic surgeon proceeds to the second phase, open procedure. After an incision, the cultured chondrocytes are injected underneath a sewn patch, leading to chondral adhesion to the patient’s cartilage for natural regeneration. A weight-bearing restriction for a maximum of 8 weeks is common after the procedure.