Urinary incontinence (UI) is defined as ‘’the complaint of any involuntary leakage of urine’’ by the International Continence Society (ICS). The prevalence of UI among women ranged from 25% to 45% according to existing literature. The prevalence is higher in the elder. More than 40% of women aged 70 years and older were affected by UI based on the survey of Milsom et al. Pregnancy, labor, and vaginal delivery, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and antecedent gynecological surgeries are also the risk factors.

When the pelvic supportive systems become weak or loose, the pelvic organs tend to descent to an abnormal position through the vaginal canal, which called the pelvic organ prolapse (POP). The supportive system comprises a combined action of pelvic floor muscles and connective tissues. POP affects more than half of the women aged over 50 years, and the study based on western Australian females showed that the lifetime risk of POP needing surgery was 19%.

Pelvic floor muscles, especially the pubococcygeus and iliococcygeus muscles, play a significant role in involuntarily contraction during female orgasmic. When sexual arousal continues to increase toward the maximum point, the tension of the pelvic floor muscles will reach its maximum temporarily and then relax. The release of all tension, also called orgasm, is followed by pelvic floor muscle spasm. Women’s pelvic floor muscle strength is associated with the grip strength felt by the partner. Dr. Kegel accidentally found the improvement of orgasm and the increase in perception of genital sensations among patients after training.