The risk factors for the development of testicular cancer are generally associated with testicular dysgenesis syndrome. The list of risk factors for testicular cancer includes cryptorchidism, hypospadias, decreased spermatogenesis evidenced by subfertility or infertility, a positive familial history of testicular tumors in first-degree relatives, childhood inguinal hernias, pediatric atrophic testis, germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS), and a history of a contralateral testicular malignancy.

The single greatest risk factor is heredity, with the relative risk of finding testicular cancer 6 to 10 times higher in first-degree blood relatives (brothers and sons) of men with germ cell malignancies.

Germ cell neoplasia in situ or GCNIS, formerly called intratubular germ cell neoplasia, is generally considered the primary premalignant precursor lesion for almost all testicular germ cell tumors (90%), except for spermatocytic seminomas, yolk sac tumors, and mature teratomas. About 50% of the patients known to have GCNIS will develop testicular cancer at some point during the next 5 years.

GCNIS gets its origin from transformed primordial germ cells that develop in utero or early infancy, which lay dormant until puberty when stimulated by increased serum luteinizing hormone (LH) and/or testosterone levels.

The clustering of germ cell tumors further supports genetic factors in some families, the extreme difference in the incidence of testicular cancers between black and white Americans, and the finding of susceptibility loci on chromosomes 5, 6, and 12.

There appears to be some good evidence for an association between testicular cancer and long-term marijuana use for more than 10 years.

Estrogenic effects during pregnancy, such as from the use of diethylstilbestrol (DES) and increased levels of organochlorine pesticides (which bind estrogen receptors), have been proposed as possible etiological factors for testicular cancers. Still, studies looking at this connection are inconclusive.

Testicular microlithiasis is more commonly found in men with germ cell cancers than in the general population, but the incidence of microlithiasis is almost 1000 times more common than gonadal malignancies.