Healthcare workers, including clinicians, nurses, nutritionists, and the general public, must realize that obesity is a chronic disease with a complex pathophysiology. Understanding the set-point theory could shed light on the pathways and mechanisms involved in maintaining and altering homeostasis, highlighting the challenges of combating obesity as no single factor controls it.

A multifaceted, holistic approach is essential to fight the obesity epidemic. Promoting diet and lifestyle changes and creating an environment that fosters physical activity and healthy eating choices can be conducive to initiating and maintaining weight loss. Rather than relying on a one-size-fits-all approach, individualized strategies that consider the complex pathophysiology involved in obesity and set-point regulation are essential.

During the patient's weight loss journey, an interprofessional team needs to provide emotional and psychological support in addition to education on the importance of making a cognitive and conscious decision to sustain diet and lifestyle modifications long-term, recognizing that the setpoint mechanisms are primed to drive weight gain.

Political intervention is necessary to create a less obesogenic environment, reduce obesity stigma, and provide better healthcare access to lower socioeconomic backgrounds.

Further research is needed into the role of genetic interventions and neurohormonal pathways and then targeting their modifications. In addition, understanding the long-term effects of drugs and surgery on the set point and developing medications that target set-point molecular mechanisms is crucial. An integrated approach to combating obesity, incorporating all these strategies, is essential to create a healthier world. The interprofessional healthcare team must consider all alternatives to help battle the current obesity epidemic.