# Continuing Education Activity

Romosozumab is an injectable medication used in the treatment of osteoporosis in women. Romosozumab is an FDA-approved humanized monoclonal antibody sclerostin inhibitor used to treat osteoporosis in postmenopausal women at high risk of fracture, including patients with a history of osteoporotic fracture, multiple risk factors, or that have failed or are intolerant to other available osteoporosis therapies. Romosozumab is the first anabolic medication that increases bone formation and decreases bone resorption. This activity describes the indications, administration, and contraindications for romosozumab as a valuable agent in the management of osteoporosis. This activity will detail the mechanism of action of romosozumab at a molecular level and its adverse event profile and reviews important considerations pertinent for healthcare team members in the management of patients with osteoporosis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for romosozumab.
- Explain the mechanism of action of romosozumab.
- Describe the adverse effects, contraindications, and suggested monitoring of patients on romosozumab.
- Review interprofessional team strategies to improve patient outcomes when using romosozumab to manage osteoporosis.

# Indications

Osteoporosis affects over 10 million Americans causing over 2 million osteoporosis-related fractures.

Romosozumab’s effectiveness and safety in the treatment of osteoporosis and for increasing bone mass density have been evaluated in numerous studies. A phase two study assessing the safety and efficacy of romosozumab confirmed romosozumab’s safety and association with increased bone formation. It decreased bone resorption while demonstrating a significant increase of 11.3% in bone mineral density at the lumbar spine with the recommended 210 mg monthly dose.

The Fracture Study in Postmenopausal Women with Osteoporosis (FRAME) trial confirmed the ability of romosozumab to prevent vertebral fractures in postmenopausal women. At 12 months, 1.8% of patients in the placebo group had a new vertebral fracture versus 0.5% in the romosozumab treatment group.

The trial also revealed a continued reduction in new vertebral fractures at 24 months with the transition to denosumab after completing the 12-month regimen of romosozumab.

The STRUCTURE trial compared the effectiveness of romosozumab versus teriparatide in patients transitioning from ineffective bisphosphonate therapy. This trial revealed greater increases in bone mass density in the romosozumab treatment group than in the teriparatide group.

Several studies show promising results for using romosozumab in men with osteoporosis; however, as of 2022, its use in this population is not FDA-approved.

# Mechanism of Action

Sclerostin was first recognized as a possible therapeutic target for the treatment of osteoporosis by its role in a genetic condition termed sclerostin deficiency. In patients with sclerostin deficiency, high bone mass and resistance to fracture were recognized.

Sclerostin is an osteocyte-derived secreted glycoprotein that binds to low-density lipoprotein receptor proteins LRP5 and LRP6 (low-density lipoprotein receptor protein 5/6), preventing the activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway that normally stimulates osteoblasts.

This led to the development of romosozumab, a humanized monoclonal sclerostin-neutralizing antibody (Scl-Ab) that binds to and inhibits sclerostin.

This increases cortical and trabecular bone mass, which is beneficial in treating osteoporosis. Overall, blocking sclerostin results in dual effects 1) an increase in osteoblastic activity, thereby increasing bone formation, and 2) a decrease in osteoclastic activity, thereby decreasing bone resorption. Romosozumab is the first anabolic medication that increases bone formation and decreases bone resorption by inhibiting sclerostin.

With the use of romosozumab, procollagen type 1 N-telopeptide (P1NP) (a bone formation marker) increased 66% to 147% from baseline compared to placebo two weeks after initiation.

# Administration

Romosozumab is administered as a once-a-month subcutaneous injection for 12 months. The recommended monthly dose is 210 mg, regardless of body weight.

After 12 months of monthly injections, romosozumab should be discontinued as its effects wane. Studies have shown that after one year of discontinuing romosozumab, BMD levels return to baseline; therefore, it is recommended that after discontinuing romosozumab, the patient continues osteoporosis treatment with antiresorptive therapy to maintain and continue increased bone mass density.

Romosozumab should be stored at 36 to 46 degrees Fahrenheit.

If a missed or delayed dose occurs, romosozumab should be administered as soon as possible, with subsequent injections to be administered monthly from the new date.

**Pharmacokinetics**

A single dose of romosozumab (210 mg) has a maximum average serum concentration of 22.2 (5.8) mcg/mL, with a steady concentration state being achieved three months after monthly administration in postmenopausal women.

Absorption occurs on average within five days with an estimated volume distribution of 3.92 L at a steady state.

# Adverse Effects

A literature review performed by Miller et al.; determined the most commonly reported adverse events occurring in >5% of subjects during clinical trials with romosozumab were arthralgia and headache.

Several trials found increased cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events associated with using romosozumab.

While these two trials indicated differences in cardiovascular events, two other trials, the FRAME, and STRUCTURE, found no difference between the romosozumab and placebo groups regarding the rate of cardiovascular events. However, due to the increase in reported cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events in the ARCH and BRIDGE trials, it is recommended not to use romosozumab in patients who have had a myocardial infarction or stroke in the past year. Further, evaluating the benefits versus risks in patients with CV risk factors is recommended on a per-patient basis.

Other reported adverse events associated with using romosozumab were osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fracture.

Furthermore, there were two reported cases of atypical fracture of the femur in the ARCH trial and one reported case in the FRAME trial in the romosozumab treatment groups.

# Contraindications

Romosozumab is contraindicated in patients with hypocalcemia, a history of stroke or myocardial infarction in the past year, or a history of hypersensitivity to romosozumab or any component of its formulation. Romosozumab should immediately be discontinued should a myocardial infarction or stroke occur during treatment.

Romosozumab is also not recommended in patients who have completed romosozumab therapy for 12 months, as its effects wane. Furthermore, while ongoing studies, romosozumab is not currently FDA-approved for use in premenopausal patients.

# Monitoring

With the use of romosozumab, the development of hypocalcemia is a possible concern. Hypocalcemia should be corrected before initiation of treatment with romosozumab.

No dose adjustments are necessary for patients with renal impairment; however, patients with severe renal impairment or that are on dialysis are at increased risk for hypocalcemia and should be monitored closely.

# Toxicity

A review study assessing the carcinogenicity risk of romosozumab concluded that the administration of romosozumab would not pose a carcinogenic risk to humans based on the weight of evidence factors and results of a rat lifetime study on tumor incidence.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Romosozumab is a new pharmacologic agent for the treatment of osteoporosis in women with a high risk of bone fracture. With new medication, it is imperative to educate clinicians, patients, and other healthcare team members regarding its use, indications, and possible adverse events.

All members of the interprofessional healthcare team and the patient should be aware of and be able to recognize the current known adverse effects of romosozumab to enhance healthcare outcomes. Clinicians or their staff must educate the patient on possible medication adverse events such as the signs and symptoms of a cardiovascular event, hypocalcemia, hypersensitivity reactions, osteonecrosis of the jaw, and atypical femoral fracture.

Due to romosozumab’s association with hypocalcemia, a medication review should be performed by healthcare team members to identify any medications that could exacerbate hypocalcemia before giving the injections. Healthcare team members need to perform serum calcium levels should they be indicated. Patients should be advised to take calcium and vitamin D supplementation as well.

The lack of long-term trials and data warrants continued monitoring of patients taking romosozumab and continued medical education for professionals and patients to recognize any new data and evidence regarding long-term treatment outcomes and potential adverse events. Pharmacists should be consulted to ensure proper dosing and to check for potential drug interactions, particularly drugs that affect calcium levels.

It is also essential for the healthcare team to recognize barriers to using romosozumab. Obstacles associated with its use include the high cost, the necessity for monthly appointments to receive the injection from their healthcare provider, and adverse effects specific to the individual. Healthcare team members must identify these potential barriers to ensure the patient receives the most optimal individualized treatment.