- The manubrium (manubrium sterni) is quadrangular shaped with four borders. The suprasternal notch (jugular notch) is at the superior segment of the manubrium sterni. On either side, the left and right clavicular notches are present. The clavicular notches of the sternum articulate with the medial end of each clavicle to form the sternoclavicular joints. The manubrium sterni also articulates with the costal cartilages of the 1st pair of ribs.

- The body of the sternum (mesosternum) is the longest part of the sternum. It is flat with depressed ridges along the sides where the costal cartilages of the 3rd to 7th pairs of ribs articulate inferior to the sternal angle.

- The xiphoid process (xiphisternum/xiphoid) is triangular shaped and forms the distal-most part of the sternum. The size and shape of the xiphoid process are highly variable. It is mostly cartilaginous until the age of 40 and becomes completely calcified by the age of 60. However, these age-related changes in the adult xiphoid process are also highly variable.

- The sternal angle is the projection formed by the junction between the manubrium sterni and the body of the sternum. These two parts of the sternum lie in slightly different planes causing the angulation. This angle corresponds anteriorly to the intervertebral disc between the 4th and 5th thoracic vertebrae. This angle is also known as the angle of Louis.

- The sternum's primary function is to protect the underlying mediastinum and its contents from injury.