Diagnosis largely has its basis in identifying a collection of symptoms previously described that alert the practitioner to the possibility of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Following that suspicion, an initial evaluation of a patient’s complaints should be tailored to the specific system identified to determine if they are indeed consistent with EDS. The initial workup after diagnosis of EDS should focus on determining the extent to which the underlying pathology affects the body. A recommended approach from Malfait et al. for classic-type EDS includes a thorough examination of the skin followed by applying the Beighton criteria. In infants and children, motor development should be assessed. A baseline echocardiogram for children under age 10 is also recommended. If easy bruising is a concern, evaluation of clotting factors should be considered to determine if another concomitant bleeding disorder is present.

Skin hyperextensibility is evaluated and differentiated from other etiologies such as cutis laxa by assuring that easily stretched skin immediately returns to its original shape and form following manual manipulation.

If and when EDS is suspected, CT, MRI, and echocardiography can be utilized to evaluate for common cardiovascular concerns such as mitral valve prolapse and aortic dilatation. MRI may show white matter lesions in line with the diagnosis of EDS.

Bloodwork is generally not helpful for diagnosing EDS, though some specialized laboratory studies may be positive. It is worth noting that patients who present with easy bruising and bleeding will have normal coagulation studies and bleeding times unless another underlying disorder exists. Although rare reports of hemophilia A have been observed in the vascular type EDS.

Ultimately, referral to a geneticist who can perform diagnostic genetic testing is recommended for specific subtype-level diagnosis. Additionally, tissue biopsy with electron microscopic analysis to evaluate for classic abnormalities in the appearance of collagen can be performed. However, this technique is seldom utilized.

Special consideration is necessary for EDS patients in the setting of trauma, given the increased risk for joint dislocation and vessel and organ rupture. Connective tissue disorders such as EDS merit consideration in young patients with physical exam findings out of proportion to reported trauma. Of course, non-accidental trauma must also be a consideration and ruled out.