**Interpretation Steps**

Acid-base interpretation is crucial to identify and correct disturbances in acid-base equilibrium that have profound consequences on patient health. The following steps use lab values and equations to determine if a patient has metabolic acidosis and any additional acid-base disturbances.

Step 1: pH, determine if the acid-base status is acidemia or alkalemia

Blood pH is maintained within a narrow range for optimization of physiological functions. Acid-base equilibrium is achieved within a pH range of 7.35 to 7.45. Blood pH distinguishes between acidemia (pH less than 7.35) and alkalemia (pH greater than 7.45)

Step 2: CO2, determine if the disturbance is metabolic or respiratory

The pCO2 determines whether an acidosis is respiratory or metabolic in origin. For a respiratory acidosis, the pCO2 is greater than 40 to 45 due to decreased ventilation. Metabolic acidosis is due to alterations in bicarbonate, so the pCO2 is less than 40 since it is not the cause of the primary acid-base disturbance. In metabolic acidosis, the distinguishing lab value is a decreased bicarbonate (normal range 21 to 28 mEq/L).

Step 3: Determine if there is anion gap or non-anion gap metabolic acidosis

- AG= Na – (Cl + HCO3)

The normal anion gap is 12. Therefore, values greater than 12 define an anion gap metabolic acidosis.

Step 4: CO2, assess if respiratory compensation is appropriate

Respiratory compensation is the physiologic mechanism to help normalize a metabolic acidosis, however, compensation never completely corrects an acidemia. It is important to determine if there is adequate respiratory compensation or if there is another underlying respiratory acid-base disturbance. Winter's formula is the equation used to determine the expected CO2 for adequate compensation.

- Winter’s formula: Expected CO2 = (Bicarbonate x 1.5) + 8 +/- 2

If the patient’s pCO2 is within the predicted range, then there is no additional respiratory disturbance. If the pCO2 is greater than expected, this indicates an additional respiratory acidosis. If the pCO2 is less than expected, there is an additional respiratory alkalosis occurring.

Step 5: Evaluate for additional metabolic disturbances

A delta gap must be determined if an anion gap is present.

- Delta gap = Delta AG – Delta HCO3 = (AG-12) – (24-bicarbonate)

If the gap is less than -6, then a NAGMA is present.

If the gap is greater than 6, then an underlying metabolic alkalosis is present.

If the gap is between -6 and 6 then only an anion gap acidosis exists.