Streptokinase is a thrombolytic agent that is highly effective in its ability to lyse fibrin clots and restore blood flow to ischemic tissue. The healthcare provider team requires education on dosing, administration, and potential complications of this thrombolytic. This team may consist of paramedics, emergency room physicians, emergency room nurses, cardiologists, pharmacists, and other nurses. Due to streptokinase’s need to be administered over 30 to 60 minutes, providers need to have staff on hand who can allocate time and resources to ensure the medication is administered safely. This staffing includes nurses who will administer and monitor the drug, pharmacists who will have involvement in dosing and help decide if it is the appropriate therapeutic choice. Clinicians need to be able to confidently deliver the appropriate dose for each of the clinical indications noted.

Percutaneous coronary intervention and other minimally invasive clot-busting techniques are generally preferable to thrombolytic therapy. Intravenous thrombolytic therapy still plays a crucial role in rural areas and developing countries where procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention are not readily available. Overall, streptokinase is a safe and efficacious means of lysing fibrin clots and may restore blood flow to vital organs to prevent end-organ damage due to ischemia. There are several thrombolytic therapies on the market today. Streptokinase should merit consideration when clinically indicated.