Leaders of high-performance teams rely on the critical skill of Situational awareness (SA). Three cognitive levels of SA include the perception of available information, the comprehension/interpretation of the perceived information, and anticipation of future events based on this comprehension/interpretation. When used in the simulated setting, the Situation Present Assessment Method (SPAM) process is a validated and reliable method used to assess SA through the evaluation of latency periods. After warning the participant of a pending "query," the latency between this warning and its acknowledgment is considered a measure of cognitive workload. The latency between the query and the answer, however, is considered a proxy measure of SA.  By carefully crafting the timing and the content of the queries, each level of SA can undergo assessment.

The ability to facilitate effective communication is another crucial leadership skill.  Of ten human factor foci considered most relevant for patient safety, the WHO identified "communication failure" as a significant and recurrent contributor to adverse events. They assert that there is a clear relationship between communication skills, teamwork, and simulation-based medical education.

Additional communication-related topics ripe for clarification include "outer-loop" communications. This includes how team members decide what items are "relevant" to the team leader, or when the appropriate timing for team leader updates would be**.******In one study utilizing inter-professional simulation to evaluate the response to neurologic emergencies, investigators identify concepts of clear communication. Approaches such as "stating the obvious," "announcing what you are doing," and "repeating information back" to ensure its accuracy were highlighted.  Further, while the development of a "flat-hierarchy" was considered conducive to all team members being "heard," assertive communication was a requisite expectation of each team member's role to best support error prevention and other patient safety principles.