XLA results from mutation of the Bruton's tyrosine kinase gene (Btk) located on the long arm (q) of the X chromosome (Xq21.3-Xq22), affecting males almost exclusively. Hundreds of different mutations have been reported to cause XLA, including missense, frameshift, deletion, insertion, premature stop codon, and point mutations. The molecular location of these mutations encompasses base pairs 101349447 to 101390796 on the X chromosome. However, no single mutation correlates with more than 3% of the known cases.

The gene for Btk codes for a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase protein, BTK, which acts as a signal transducer driving the final stages of B cell maturation. The inheritance of disease-causing mutation of the Btk gene interferes with BTK protein expression, resulting in the arrest of differentiation at the pre-B-cell stage in the bone marrow, causing a profound lack of mature B lymphocytes in the peripheral circulation and a corresponding absence or severe reduction in all immunoglobulin isotypes from the serum.

While the majority of agammaglobulinemia cases result from X-linked inheritance of Btk gene mutations, approximately 10% of the cases are the result of autosomal gene mutations. The resulting condition is known as autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia(ARA) and describes the clinical phenotype seen in females with congenital agammaglobulinemia, which is comparable to XLA in males. The molecular defects responsible for ARA include mutations to the following genes: mu heavy chain (UGHN); gamma 5 (IGLL1); Igalpha (CD79A); Igbeta (CD79B); and BLNK. The wild-type proteins encoded by these genes have been shown to operate in collaboration with BTK, to promote the transition from pro-B-cells to pre-B-cells in the bone marrow, during B cell maturation.