Given that group A streptococci have multiple typical associated infections, each infection type is typified by its own unique characteristics found during the initial history and physical.

For those experiencing pharyngitis secondary to GAS, the most common presenting features in the history are fever and sore throat, typically sudden in onset. Additionally, many patients complain of some combination of headache, nausea/vomiting, and abdominal pain. Also frequently found in history is close contact with an individual known to have a case of GAS. This is because frequently, there is a high prevalence in the community when new cases of GAS are detected. Associated physical exam findings of GAS pharyngitis include generalized inflammation of the tonsils and pharynx with variable exudate. Also frequently found on the exam are tender cervical lymph nodes (lymphadenitis), red and swollen uvula, palatal petechiae, and sometimes a scarlatiniform rash. Conjunctivitis, cough, coryza, or diarrhea are very infrequently found, and the presence of these points much more toward a viral cause of symptoms.

Impetigo is a clinical diagnosis typically found in school-aged children. These children typically appear well on their initial presentation without acute signs of distress. They will present with cutaneous lesions that appear as discrete to confluent ‘honey-crusted’ lesions that typically appear on the face and/or extremities. Typically, no vital sign abnormalities are associated with the clinical presentation, and the patient will have no associated physical exam findings apart from the characteristic lesions.

The more invasive GAS infection resulting in necrotizing fasciitis produces more severe symptoms found on the history and physical. Typically, these infections initially appear somewhat benign with an area of slightly reddened/inflamed soft tissue, which can mimic simple cellulitis. However, one key finding early on is a disproportionately high amount of pain with the observed lesion. Following this, there is usually a rapid migration/spread of the erythema, often greater than 1cm/hour, despite treatment with IV antibiotics. Subsequently, blisters and bullae can form, which typically drain either serosanguineous or hemorrhagic fluid. The skin, at this point, will often turn necrotic and begin sloughing. Many times, crepitus will be found as subcutaneous gas is produced. Once further along in the clinical course, the pain will lessen significantly as the infection destroys the cutaneous nerves. Throughout the course of necrotizing fasciitis, patients will experience fever and chills and, in more severe cases, will demonstrate hypotension and tachycardia typical of sepsis.

Another serious and life-threatening condition caused by GAS is toxic shock syndrome. Toxic shock syndrome is caused by invasive infection by GAS, resulting in bacterial enterotoxins being released and systemic symptoms. These invasive infections can result from primary infection by GAS in many sites, especially deep wound infections. These patients clinically present with symptoms of severe sepsis with tachycardia, hypotension, poor tissue profusion, and signs of end-organ dysfunction.