**Guideline and Quick Summary of Nocturia Treatments**

Although nocturnal polyuria is the most common etiological finding in patients with bothersome nocturia, mixed causes are very common, usually requiring combination therapy.

Unfortunately, in most cases, there is no specific cure for nocturia. Establishing a reasonable patient expectation for partial resolution is important as complete eradication of significant nocturia is uncommon, but most patients will be quite satisfied with a 50% reduction in their nocturnal voids.

Initial evaluation includes a history and physical (checking for hypertension, heart failure, and peripheral edema, among other things), a blood test to rule out diabetes and check serum sodium, a post-void residual urine volume, and a 24-hour voiding diary. The importance of a properly done voiding diary cannot be overemphasized as it guides diagnostic differentiation (nocturnal polyuria vs. global polyuria versus bladder overactivity) and optimal treatment selection, which usually involves a combination of therapies.

Simple behavioral and lifestyle measures should be tried first, for example, limiting fluid intake in the evening, increasing daytime physical activity, minimizing bedroom distractions to enhance sleep, using a bedside commode or urinal, performing regular Kegel and similar pelvic floor exercises, decreasing caffeine ingestion, avoiding high salt intake late in the day and elevating the lower extremities for several hours before bed.

Adjusting the timing of administration of short-acting diuretics to mid-afternoon will tend to reduce nocturia, as will identifying and treating any sleep-related disorders such as sleep apnea. In some cases, the addition of a short-acting diuretic is helpful since it will specifically reduce sequestered tissue fluid with the intention that the diuretic effect should have worn off by bedtime, and any extra fluid would then return to the tissue spaces overnight rather than be converted into urine.

Behavioral and lifestyle measures should be tried first. A 3-month trial is usually suggested before resorting to other treatments.  For example, ask patients how they take their medications; with just a sip or two of water, or do they drink a whole glass?

Alpha-blockers can be useful in male patients with benign prostatic hypertrophy and other lower urinary tract symptoms besides nocturia.

Bladder relaxing medications such as anticholinergics can help patients with detrusor overactivity.  Such patients are likely to have daytime urgency and bladder irritative symptoms in addition to their nocturia.

Use estrogen vaginal cream in post-menopausal women with nocturia when safe and appropriate.

Anti-diuretic hormone analogs, such as desmopressin, have been shown to be the single, most effective, and recommended medications for the treatment of nocturnal polyuria and nocturia but should be used cautiously, particularly in the elderly, due to their tendency to cause potentially dangerous hyponatremia in patients at risk. Serum sodium levels should be checked after the first week of therapy, at one month, and then periodically in patients older than 65. Do not use anti-diuretic hormone agonists in patients on diuretics or in congestive heart failure. Women are more sensitive to desmopressin than men and should be started on a lower dose.

If bothersome symptoms remain despite all of the above treatments, it may be reasonable to consider bladder onabotulinum toxin A injections, posterior tibial nerve stimulation, or bladder pacemaker placement.