The fundamental difference between zero and first-order kinetics is their elimination rate compared to total plasma concentration. Zero-order kinetics undergo constant elimination regardless of the plasma concentration, following a linear elimination phase as the system becomes saturated. A simple analogy would be an athlete signing an autograph on a picture. Regardless of the total amount of photographs that must be signed, the athlete can only sign one autograph every 15 seconds. The rate-limiting factor of this analogy and zero-order kinetics is time.

First-order kinetics proportionally increases elimination as the plasma concentration increases, following an exponential elimination phase as the system never achieves saturation. Furthermore, when attempting to obtain a therapeutic level of plasma concentration or regarding drug toxicity, one must utilize their knowledge of a particular drug elimination kinetic. To utilize the same analogy, now the entire team can sign the photographs. The more photographs there are to sign, the more athletes can sign. The rate-limiting factor of this analogy and in first-order kinetics is the initial concentration.

In the case of the autographs, if the amount of needed autographed photos exceeds the number of available athletes, the first-order elimination then becomes zero-order. As described above, the system of first-order kinetic elimination can become saturated, which will force a zero-order kinetic model to take place. Importantly, once the concentration falls below a certain level, a first-order kinetic elimination will once again be seen as the system is no longer saturation.