Phytonadione is available for oral, intravenous (IV), subcutaneous (SQ), and intramuscular (IM) administration. IM is not a recommendation due to the risk of developing a hematoma.  Supplemental vitamin K can last up to two weeks and may impact therapeutic anticoagulation when given.

Injectable phytonadione is available as a glass ampule. Caution is necessary to avoid the insertion of glass particles into the human body regardless of the route of administration by using a filter before administration. Some products may contain benzyl alcohol. Unpreserved phytonadione is recommended in nursing mothers to prevent benzyl alcohol exposure in breastmilk.

Dose Form Strengths: 100 mcg; 5mg

Pregnancy Rating: C

Lactation Risk: Safe

Renal dosing not defined

Hepatic dose adjustment may be required

Normal dosing in adults:

- Oral, SQ, and IV: 1 to 10 mg, may repeat in 12 hours.

- Total Parental Nutrition (TPN) or Peripheral Parental Nutrition (PPN): 150 mcg daily.

Prophylaxis and treatment of vitamin K-deficiency bleeding in newborns:

- SQ or IM: 0.5 to 1 mg single dose within one hour of birth.

Dosing for intracranial hemorrhage associated with vitamin K antagonist anticoagulants:

- IV 10 mg as soon as possible; the IV infusion rate should not exceed 1 mg/minute.

In a single-center retrospective cohort study by Luc et al., they assessed the effectiveness of phytonadione to reverse warfarin in patients with obesity defined as a body mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m^2. The definition of warfarin reversal of warfarin is correcting an international normalized ratio (INR) to ≤ 2.0 within 72 hours after phytonadione administration. There was no significant difference in the route of administration or dose between the patients with obesity and the patients without obesity. The researchers found that warfarin reversal is not affected in patients with obesity.

A Canadian article published by Dr. Afanasjeva in 2017 evaluated the safety and efficacy of IV phytonadione orally to reduce cost and in the situation that the tablet formulation of oral phytonadione is unavailable. They reiterated the importance of using a filtered needle to avoid glass particles administered to patients. Also, they found that the unpleasant taste of oral phytonadione was reportedly less when mixed with orange juice. Afanasjeva concluded that giving IV phytonadione can offer an inexpensive alternative to phytonadione tablets, especially when the tablet formulation is in shortage.

A randomized, controlled trial by Cowther et al. in 2002 investigated the use of phytonadione administration in patients with an INR of 4.5 to 10 and on warfarin therapy. It was a multicenter, randomized, open-label, controlled study that evaluated the use of phytonadione in asymptomatic patients with an INR between 4.5 and 10. Patients were randomly assigned either oral or subcutaneous phytonadione with a dose of 1 mg. The study enrolled fifty-one patients, with 25 in the subcutaneous phytonadione group and 26 in the oral phytonadione group. One day after either oral or subcutaneous phytonadione, six patients (24%) received subcutaneous phytonadione with an INR of 1.8 to 3.2 compared to 15 patients (58%) who received oral phytonadione; P = 0.015. Only two patients (8%) who had received subcutaneous phytonadione were found to have an INR that was higher than the day prior. However, there were five deaths in the oral phytonadione compared to none in the subcutaneous phytonadione group. One died of unknown causes, three died of cancer, and one died of progressive lung disease. Cowther et al. concluded that subcutaneous phytonadione does not produce rapid, reliable reductions in INR and that oral phytonadione is effective for warfarin-induced coagulopathy.