Low-grade intimal injuries or arterial occlusions in selected patients with no signs of limb ischemia can be managed with observation with serial CTAs or ultrasounds and anticoagulation with anticoagulation or antiplatelet agents.

The subclavian vessels can be challenging to repair due to their location. It is imperative to understand the anatomical differences between the right and left subclavian vessels to have the optimal surgical approach. Basic vascular surgery principles of expedient proximal and distal control are crucial to avoid massive blood loss. In an unstable patient, the subclavian artery can be ligated, or a temporary shunt can be placed. If necessary, these patients can then be returned to the operating room for definitive repair once the patient has been appropriately resuscitated with a normal coagulation profile, correction of acidosis, and rewarmed. However, this practice should be avoided in patients with a history of radiation therapy to the shoulder or in patients with extensive soft tissue injury. These patients are at risk for serious morbidities, such as limb loss. The carotid-to-subclavian bypass should be avoided due to increased perioperative stroke risk.

All patients with suspected subclavian artery trauma should be placed supine on the operating room table. The patient’s chest and neck should be prepped along with the groin if a saphenous vein needs to be harvested for vascular repair. There are several different operative incisions, including median sternotomy, limited sternotomy, thoracotomy, supraclavicular, infraclavicular, or trap door incisions. The optimal incision must be tailored to the location of the injury. The advantages and disadvantages of these approaches will be discussed further.

The proximal right subclavian artery is optimally approached via median sternotomy.

The proximal left subclavian artery is optimally approached from a left posterolateral thoracotomy. However, this approach is time-consuming for a trauma patient and should not be used if the patient has suspected abdominal trauma as it would require the patient to be moved for exploratory laparotomy. In the emergent setting, the optimal approach to the proximal left subclavian artery is via an anterolateral thoracotomy in the third or fourth intercostal space. A supraclavicular approach or median sternotomy can help to gain access to the proximal left subclavian artery.

The sternocleidomastoid and scalene muscles must be ligated when exposing the subclavian artery above the clavicle. If necessary, the clavicle can be resected to help obtain adequate exposure of the subclavian vessels. This approach will also expose the common carotid arteries, the vertebral arteries, innominate vessels, and the superior vena cava. This procedure, however, results in significant morbidity from chest wall deformities, wound complications, and pain. Thus, removal of the clavicle should be avoided if possible.

The most common indications for the open approach are vessel transactions or greater than 50% vessel lacerations.

Endovascular options for subclavian artery trauma are being reported more frequently in recent years.