Palatal SCC pathogenesis is associated with an accumulation of genetic mutations and epigenetic anomalies in signaling pathways that promote uncontrolled cellular proliferation and cancer development. The genetic mutations associated with oral SCC are most often attributed to cigarette smoke, alcohol, and human papillomavirus.

The majority of AdCC tumors contain a recurrent t(6;9) translocation, which fuses the MYB Proto-Oncogene transcription factor (MYB) on chromosome 6q to the Nuclear Factor IB (NFIB) gene on chromosome 9p, resulting in an overexpression of MYB-NFIB fusion oncogene.

Approximately 50% to 70% of MEC have specific chromosomal translocation t(11;19)(q21:p13) leading to mucoepidermoid carcinoma translocated protein 1 (MECT1) and mastermind-like protein 2 (MAML2) gene fusion. Low or intermediate-grade MEC tumors are more likely to display this translocation compared with high-grade tumors.

Acinic cell carcinoma is theorized to evolve from either serous acinic cell differentiation or pluripotent intercalated duct cells.

Mucosal melanoma arises from precursor melanocytes which develop from the neural crest cells.GNAQ/11) mutations found in 9.5% of patients and overexpression of tyrosin-protein kinase Kit (c-KIT) in over 80% of cases.

Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) is a transforming virus found in several malignancies that can alter the genes of its infected cells. It is theorized that HHV8 along with immunosuppressive cytokines induce the deterioration of the immune system and proliferation of Kaposi’s sarcoma.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) can develop from several de novo mutations and rearrangements of immunoglobulin chain genes such as B-Cell CLL/Lymphoma 2 (BLC2), B-Cell CLL/Lymphoma 6 (BLC6), tumor protein 53 (TP53), myc proto-oncogene protein (MYC), proto-oncogene C-Rel (REL), enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), Notch Receptor 2 (NOTCH2), and 9p21/Cyclin Dependent Kinase Inhibitor 2A (9p21/CDKN2A). Extranodal marginal zone lymphomas (EMZL) involving the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) can arise from somatic translocation mutations in the immunoglobulin genes due to chronic infection or autoimmune disease. The most common abnormalities include t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and t(1;14)(p22;q32) which upregulate the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) pathway, immunoglobulin heavy locus-forkhead box P1 (IGH-FOXP1) fusion, tumor necrosis factor, alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIp3) deletion, and myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (MYD88) mutation.