Higher rates of diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma are due to an incidental diagnosis. A thorough history, physical examination, including a testicular exam, is needed. Imaging studies, including ultrasound (US) or computed tomography (CT), are indicated. The US is a good test for the evaluation of simple and complex cysts. Bosniak classification guides us in managing renal cysts. CT with intravenous contrast is a better study than the US. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is better for evaluating the extent of the disease when there is a contraindication to use the contrast or the inconclusive US or CT scan. The choice of test for metastatic RCC is MRI or a positron emission tomography (PET-CT). CT urography is better in evaluating the collecting system.

Bosniak classification of renal cysts:

- Category I- Non-enhancing cyst - A benign cyst is characterized by a smooth border without any calcification or echoes in the cyst (anechoic). It has a thin wall without any septations or calcification or solid component. No risk of malignancy and no follow-up is needed.

- Category II- Less than 3 cm benign cyst with few thin septations or fine calcification. No, follow up needed.

- Category IIF- Greater than 3 cm benign cyst with few thin septations or fine calcification. "F" refers to follow-up with imaging in 6 months.

- Category III- Cysts with irregular walls or thick septations with cystic masses. Enhancement is seen. About 60% of the cysts have the risk of malignant transformation.

- Category IV and category III and solid mass or nodules or necrotic contents. Malignancy risk is around 90%.