Acute management of GI bleeding typically involves an assessment of the appropriate setting for treatment followed by resuscitation and supportive therapy while investigating the underlying cause and attempting to correct it.

**Risk Stratification**

Specific risk calculators attempt to help identify patients who would benefit from ICU level of care; most stratify based on mortality risk. The AIMS65 score and the Rockall score calculate the mortality rate of upper GI bleeds. There are two separate Rockall scores; One is calculated before endoscopy and identifies pre-endoscopy mortality, whereas the second score is calculated post-endoscopy and calculates overall mortality and re-bleeding risks. The Oakland score is a risk calculator that attempts to help calculate the probability of a safe discharge in lower GI bleeds.

**Setting**

- ICU

- Patients with hemodynamic instability, continuous bleeding, or those with a significant risk of morbidity/mortality should undergo monitoring in an intensive care unit to facilitate more frequent observation of vital signs and more emergent therapeutic intervention.

- General Medical Ward

- Most other patients can undergo monitoring on a general medical floor. However, they would likely benefit from continuous telemetry monitoring for earlier recognition of hemodynamic compromise.

- Outpatient

- Most patients with GI bleeding will require hospitalization. However, some young, healthy patients with self-limited and asymptomatic bleeding may be safely discharged and evaluated on an outpatient basis.

**Treatments**

- Nothing by mouth

- Provide supplemental oxygen if the patient is hypoxic (typically via nasal cannula, but patients with ongoing hematemesis or altered mental status may require intubation). Avoid non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) due to the risk of aspiration with ongoing vomiting.

- Adequate IV access - at least two large-bore peripheral IVs (18 gauge or larger) or a centrally placed cordis

- IV fluid resuscitation (with normal saline or lactated Ringer solution)

- Blood grouping and cross match

- Transfusions

- RBC transfusion

- Typically started if hemoglobin is less than 7 g/dL, including in patients with coronary heart disease


- Platelet transfusion

- started if the platelet count is less than 50,000/microL


- Prothrombin complex concentrate

- Transfuse if INR is more than 2

- Medications

- PPIs

- Used empirically for upper GI bleeds and can be continued or discontinued upon identification of the bleeding source


- Prokinetic agents

- Given to improve visualization at the time of endoscopy


- Vasoactive medications

- Somatostatin and its analog octreotide can be used to treat variceal bleeding by inhibiting vasodilatory hormone release


- Antibiotics

- Considered prophylactically in patients with cirrhosis to prevent translocation, especially from endoscopy


- Anticoagulant/antiplatelet agents

- Should be stopped if possible in acute bleeds
- Consider the reversal of agents on a case-by-case basis dependent on the severity of bleeding and risks of reversal

- Other

- Consider NGT lavage if necessary to remove fresh blood or clots to facilitate endoscopy
- Placement of a Blakemore or Minnesota tube should be considered in patients with hemodynamic instability/massive GI bleeds in the setting of known varices, which should be done only once the airway is secured. This procedure carries a significant complication risk (including arrhythmias, gastric or esophageal perforation) and should only be done by an experienced provider as a temporizing measure.
- Surgery should be consulted promptly in patients with massive bleeding or hemodynamic instability who have bleeding that is not amenable to any other treatment.
- In case of diverticular bleeding colonoscopy with bipolar probe coagulation, epinephrine injection, or metallic clips are used.
- If angiodysplasia is the cause of lower GI bleed, thermal therapy (eg, electrocoagulation, argon plasma coagulation) is done.