Any surgical intervention comes with some risk of complications. The most devastating complications can be those of the heart. The GRI, along with its updated version RCRI, was developed to help assess the perioperative risk of surgical intervention. These tools are used today to facilitate the decision-making of surgeons to optimize patient outcomes. The RCRI should be used to calculate the risk of perioperative cardiac risk in anyone 45 years or older (or 18 to 44 years old with significant cardiovascular disease) undergoing elective non-cardiac surgery or urgent/semi-urgent (non-emergent) non-cardiac surgery. In patients with elevated risk (RCRI greater than or equal to 1, age 65 and over, or age 45 to 64 with significant cardiovascular disease), it helps direct further preoperative risk stratification (e.g., with B-type natriuretic peptide, BNP) and determines appropriate postoperative cardiac monitoring (EKG, troponins).

Clinicians, including nurse practitioners, should discuss the results of the risk assessment tool with their patients to determine the appropriate form of action with the lowest risk and most significant benefit for the patient. Results from risk assessment, indeed, can be used in preoperative counseling and discussions of informed consent. Moreover, these tools can be useful in combination with past medical history, family history, and past surgical outcomes to determine an appropriate form of action for the treatment of their patients. If the perioperative risk for MACE is less than 1%, the patient can generally undergo the intervention without further cardiac evaluation.