Ponseti technique for correcting clubfoot deformity was developed in the 1940s and remained the gold standard for treatment.

Plaster of Paris is typically the substance used for casting as it is relatively cheap and easily moldable in comparison to other casting materials such as fiberglass. Casts need to extend above the knee, with approximately 110 degrees of flexion at the knee to prevent the cast from slipping.

Correction of the deformity needs to occur in a stepwise manner to sequentially correct the three-dimensional deformity. Following gentle manipulation, the first casting stage involves correcting the cavus by elevating the first metatarsal, which will adjust the alignment of the forefoot with the hindfoot.

Once the cavus has undergone sufficient correction, the next stage is the abduction of the forefoot around the talus. The head of the talus requires clinical identification via palpation to do this safely. Abduction of up to 60 degrees relative to the tibia may be possible with sequential casting. Through abduction of the forefoot, the hindfoot varus will also get corrected. Varus should not have correction attempted through direct pressure on the hindfoot. Pronation should also be avoided during the casting process as it may prevent the abduction of the calcaneus and recreate a cavus deformity.

Once full abduction has been achieved, the foot can then be brought up into dorsiflexion. If dorsiflexion remains less than 10 degrees, then percutaneous Achilles tenotomy is indicated. Approximately 80% of patients will require a percutaneous tenotomy.

Bracing is the second phase of treatment, which maintains the correction achieved. Ponseti protocol recommends abduction bracing with boot and bar, and this should commence immediately after the final cast. The patient should wear the brace should be worn 24 hours per day for the first three months, reducing to 12 hours at night with 2 to 4 hours during the day up to 4 years of age. The boot positioning should be shoulder-width apart, and the affected foot in 70 degrees of external rotation.

Compliance with bracing is crucial, and appropriate counseling and support are essential. With poor compliance, there are recurrence rates of up to 80% reported, in comparison to 6% in those who are compliant.

Surgical intervention may be required those with residual deformities or recurrent relapses. Tibialis anterior transfer is indicated if the child is over 30 months old and develops dynamic supination. Tibialis anterior may overpower the weakened personals, and its transfer to the lateral cuneiform aims to balance the foot. Its transfer is necessary in approximately 20% of cases.