Infantile colic is managed by a number of healthcare professionals including the family practitioner, pediatrician, pediatric gastroenterologist, emergency department physician, nurse practitioner, and obstetrician. Infantile colic is a distressing challenge for parents and is a reason for 10% to 20% of pediatrician visits during the early weeks of an infant's life. Colic is estimated at affecting 20% of infants worldwide. The condition typically presents in the second or third week of life, peaks around 6 weeks, and usually resolves between 12-16 weeks. Inconsolable crying, irritability, and screaming without an obvious cause characterize colic. Today, the Rome IV criteria are often used to make the definition of infantile colic more consistent for research purposes. The criteria are as follows:

- Episodes of fussing or crying that start and stop without obvious causes

- Episodes lasting 3 or more hours daily, 3 or more days a week for 1 or more weeks

- Episodes without evidence for failure to thrive

While benign and self-limiting, the condition is frustrating for parents and has been linked to maternal postpartum depression and shaken baby syndrome. Since treatments for colic are controversial and inconsistent, the role of the clinician as a counselor and educator to parents is critical.

The pediatrician, pediatric gastroenterologist, nurse practitioner, and primary care provider should minimize parental anxiety by discussing colic and ensuring that it is a benign disorder. Infants should be brought back frequently to assess growth as well as screen the caregiver for depression. Parents should also be educated to put the infant back in the crib by the interprofessional team so as to avoid shaking or hurting the infant with unproven remedies. Finally, the pharmacist should warn parents against the use of dicyclomine and other related agents as the risks outweigh any potential benefit.

The outcome for most infants with colic is excellent.