There is a large variation in symptoms manifested among patients and their time of onset. The main features include progressive dementia (mainly affects attention and executive function, memory loss is not common but can occur later in the disease process), fluctuation cognitive function (with variation in attention and episodes of drowsiness), visual hallucinations (detailed and recurrent), delusions, syncope and features of parkinsonism like muscular rigidity, tremors, and bradykinesia.

Other less common features include REM sleep behavior disorder, autonomic dysfunction, unexplained falls, depression, and sensitivity to antipsychotic medication.

**Diagnostic Criteria**

- Probable LBD: progressive dementia + 2 main features.

- Possible LBD: progressive dementia + 1 main feature.

**Types**

- Dementia with Lewy Bodies: dementia occurring first or within one year of movement disorder.

- Parkinson Disease Dementia: dementia occurring in a patient who receives a diagnosed of Parkinson's disease and then develops dementia symptoms after one year or more of the diagnosis.

The Mini-Mental Status Exam will reveal impairment in cognition in patients with LBD. However, because of fluctuations in patient symptoms, the results of the test may vary. Often the patient may have some features of Parkinson disease but the symptoms are often mild. One feature of LBD is the presence of orthostatic hypotension, which is often seen early in the disease. Other features that should be screened include hypersomnia, hyposmia, apathy, and anxiety.