Alcohol intoxication results in CNS depression by enhancing the effect of GABA, an inhibitory neurotransmitter, on its receptors. It also inhibits the actions of 'glutamate' on the NMDA receptors, resulting in an incautious and dull state of mind. Intoxication by ethanol also gives rise to slurred speech, stupor, and gait abnormalities and may even result in a coma. Clinicians should correct thiamine deficiency, which can accompany chronic alcohol misuse, by supplementing B1. Electrolyte imbalance should be appropriately corrected through infusions. Extensive sympathetic counseling is essential for alcohol abuse. Some drugs focused on promoting alcohol cessation include 'naltrexone' (via antagonism of mu-opioid receptors), disulfiram (via creating negative conditioning through pathways mentioned above), topiramate, and gabapentin.

Alcohol withdrawal is another common morbidity that arises as a sequela to alcohol use disorder (AUD). It results from the abrupt cessation of alcohol consumption after binge drinking or long-term dependence. The signs and symptoms usually arise within 6 to 24 hours of stopping alcohol consumption. It may range from milder symptoms like anxiety, headache, palpitations to severe symptoms like withdrawal seizures and delirium tremens. The treatment should focus on providing supportive therapy for all the complaints. Any associated comorbidities should have a 'banana bag' therapy of essential vitamins. The severe symptoms require the use of benzodiazepines.