To manage refractive options for patients with aphakia, ophthalmic care providers require at least a phoropter, though auto-refractors and retinoscopes can be useful to measure refractive error more objectively, particularly in pediatric populations. A keratometer or corneal typographer, which provides corneal size, curvature, and shape information, is necessary for contact lens fittings.

Eyeglass prescriptions are fulfilled through optical, where specific measurements should be collected. Although online eyeglass companies exist, eyeglasses for aphakia have high prescriptions and leave little room for error. Thus, working closely with a knowledgeable optician helps reduce error and provides a resource to troubleshoot if the patient has trouble adapting to the prescription.

Many, but not all, contact lenses are designed through placed diagnostic lenses on an individual's eye to assess the fit and contact lens over-refraction. In more challenging cases, contact lens parameters can be predetermined through empirical calculations. Contact lenses for aphakia are usually specialized or customized for an individual; special agreements or accounts between the eye care provider and the manufacturer are required to fulfill these lens orders.

Sometimes cases require additional surgeries. When a patient is undergoing a secondary IOL placement, the patient is referred to a surgeon. Surgeons need specific measurements to calculate IOL power. The IOL is placed in a surgical center or hospital operating room under sterile conditions. These procedures require a team within the operating room to ensure the patient safely receives the correct IOL and recovers as expected.