The American College of Radiology recommends imaging of the thoracolumbar spine if any of the following are present:

- Back pain or midline tenderness

- Local signs of thoracolumbar injury

- Abnormal neurological signs

- Cervical spine fracture

- Glasgow coma score less than 15

- Major distracting injury

- Alcohol or drug intoxication

For patients, 16 years of age or older with suspected thoracic or lumbar spine trauma, the most appropriate initial imaging study in the ACR Appropriateness Criteria is computed tomography (CT), and CT is superior to radiography for detection of fracture in this population. CT is also the imaging study of choice to assess for concurrent intra-abdominal injuries. If a trauma patient undergoes CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, the included images of the spine are sufficient, and a separate dedicated spine CT is unnecessary. Obtaining coronal and sagittal reformations is critical to identifying a Chance fracture due to the horizontal orientation of the injury.

Common CT findings of a Chance fracture include a horizontal fracture through the spinous process, pedicles, and vertebral body, with possible compression of the anterior vertebral body and buckling of the posterior vertebral body. There may also be a distraction of the spinous processes and facet joints at the affected level.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is superior to CT for the detection of soft tissue injuries, including injuries of the ligaments, spinal cord, cauda equina, and intervertebral discs. MRI should be performed in patients with clinical exam findings concerning spinal cord injury/compression or ligamentous injury.

MRI findings of a Chance fracture may include a bright T2 signal (edema) surrounding low signal fracture lines, discontinuity of interspinous ligaments, injury to the intervertebral disc, spinal cord edema, and epidural hematoma.

The American College of Radiology lists radiography of the thoracolumbar spine as the most appropriate initial imaging for children less than 16 years of age with suspected thoracolumbar spine trauma. However, the ACR acknowledges in this document that initial use of CT or MRI of the thoracic and lumbar spine in this setting is controversial, but may be appropriate. In some cases, this distinction may be less important.  For instance, if the patient less than 16 years of age undergoes CT imaging for suspected abdominal injuries, the CT imaging of the spine would be available to the interpreting radiologist.