# Continuing Education Activity

Carpal tunnel injections are performed because of the extremely high prevalence of carpal tunnel syndrome in the general population. Carpal tunnel syndrome is the most common peripheral nerve entrapment syndrome, and therapies, both conservative and more invasive, are routinely performed. This activity reviews common injection techniques for carpal tunnel syndrome, evaluates the risk factors for the development of the condition, and describes the common presentation of symptomatology. It also reviews the role of the interprofessional team in this procedure.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the technique of carpal tunnel injections. 
- Review of the pain distribution seen in carpal tunnel based on the anatomy of the median nerve.
- Outline the major risk factors for the development of carpal tunnel syndrome. 
- Summarize the appropriate treatment strategy for patients with symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome.

# Introduction

Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a common ailment affecting the general patient population. It is the most common cause of peripheral nerve compression, with an incidence of 99 in 100,000 people. CTS is most commonly seen in patients over 40 years of age and has a greater prevalence in females. Females comprise approximately 65% to 75% of all reported cases

The exact etiology of CTS is not completely known, but the condition is largely assumed to be idiopathic or multifactorial. Some of the suspected risk factors for CTS include diabetes mellitus type 1 or 2, hypothyroidism, menopause, obesity, arthritis, and age.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The carpal tunnel is located in the volar aspect of the wrist between the carpal bones and flexor retinaculum.

# Indications

Most patients are indicated for a carpal tunnel injection after failure of conservative therapies, including wrist immobilization, physical therapy, and oral analgesic medications. Carpal tunnel injections may also be considered preoperatively to confirm the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome when EMG/NCV results are equivacal.

# Contraindications

Some of the contraindications to carpal tunnel injections include patient refusal, infection over the injection site, and edema at the injection site. Patients on anticoagulation may undergo carpal tunnel injections, but with careful evaluation for bleeding.

# Technique or Treatment

Many patients turn to injections for their CTS when conservative therapies fail. Corticosteroid solutions are the predominant injectate used. Controversy exists over the safest injection site. A comparative study of several locations found that injecting within the flexor carpi radialis tendon proximal to the carpal tunnel might be the safest.

The patient may be seated or supine during the injection. The affected wrist is supinated in slight dorsiflexion using a rolled-up towel and taping the fingers down. An ultrasound linear array probe can be used to scan the wrist for any anatomical variants such as volar ganglion cysts, flexor tendon tenosynovitis, and tumors.

Using sterile technique, the needle is introduced most commonly on the ulnar aspect of the carpal tunnel. The initial trajectory is shallow and superficial to the ulnar artery and nerve penetrating the flexor retinaculum.

Studies have shown that 75% of corticosteroid injections were accurately placed solely using landmarks, while 8.7% penetrated and damaged the median nerve.

Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) injections have recently risen as a new modality for long-lasting pain relief. PRP contains concentrated platelets and growth factors that have been shown to alleviate CTS symptomatology. PRP promotes axonal regeneration, thereby restoring the function of the median nerve. A systemic review of five studies, including three randomized controlled trials, one case-control, and one case report showed the efficacy of PRP for patients with mild CTS

# Complications

- Bleeding

- Elevated blood glucose levels

- Infection

- Median nerve injury

- Pain

- Paresthesias

# Clinical Significance

The symptomatology of patients with CTS often develops insidiously over the course of months, years, or even decades. One of the most common symptoms is a “pins and needles” sensation in the first three fingers (thumb, index, and middle fingers) and nocturnal pain in the hand.

Tinel’s and Phalen’s tests are in office maneuvers doctors may ask patients to perform to apply stress to the median nerve at the wrist.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Carpal tunnel syndrome poses a unique challenge to doctors in many specialties. As the most common peripheral nerve entrapment syndrome, it is extremely prevalent throughout the population. Wrist and hand pain, in general, can have a myriad of etiologies, including DeQuervain tenosynovitis, trigger finger, gout, carpal tunnel syndrome. Wrist and hand pain can even be referred from the neck in cervical radiculopathy or even from a cardiac condition like myocardial infarction.

Usually, a primary care practitioner is the first person a patient sees with carpal tunnel syndrome. This provider may start conservative therapies, but for more advanced treatment options, proper coordination with a pain management doctor, rheumatologist, or orthopedist is needed. Radiologists play a vital role as well to rule out potential fractures or dislocations at the wrist after trauma. In the office setting, many pain physicians will need a team of nurse practitioners to help during the procedure to maintain sterility and help with ultrasound guidance throughout the injection.

Proper coordination of care through different medical professionals gives patients with carpal tunnel syndrome the best chance at resolving their symptomatology.