Bartholin gland cysts, abscesses, and masses may significantly affect a woman’s life. Pain and swelling can prevent sitting, walking, and intercourse. The diagnosis of Bartholin cysts and abscesses is often clinical. Atypical masses may require further imaging (such as magnetic resonance), tissue biopsy, or complete excision.

**Bartholin Gland Cyst**

Bartholin gland cysts account for approximately 2% of all gynecological visits every year.

Asymptomatic cysts in healthy patients may receive conservative treatment.

**Bartholin Gland Abscess**

Bartholin gland abscesses may result from either an infected cyst or a primary gland infection. They typically present with severe pain and swelling, making sitting, walking, and sexual intercourse difficult. Other presenting signs and symptoms may include:

- An acute, painful, unilateral vulvar swelling

- Erythema and edema surrounding a fluctuating vulvar mass

- Sudden symptom relief following spontaneous mass discharge/rupture

- Pyrexia is not a common feature in healthy patients

A study by Kessous et al. has described the most common microbial pathogens associated with Bartholin abscesses. Escherichia Coli was the most commonly found pathogen (43.6%), followed by Staphylococcus aureus (6.4%), group B Streptococci (4.8%), and Enterococcus spp (4.8%). Less than 10% of cases were polymicrobial in origin. E. Coli-positive cultures were more common in recurrent infections (56.8%) than in primary infections (37%).

There are numerous options available for the treatment of symptomatic Bartholin cysts or abscesses. The most common interventions include incision, drainage with Word catheter placement, and abscess marsupialization. A systematic review by BJG Illingworth et al. found that current randomized trial evidence does not support the use of any single surgical method.

Bartholin cysts and abscesses can very rarely lead to complex and poorly understood complications such as a rectovaginal fistula or a recto-Bartholin’s duct fistula.

**Bartholin Gland Benign Tumor**

Benign solid lesions of the Bartholin gland rarely appear in the literature. Histopathology of excised glands includes nodular hyperplasia and adenomas.

**Bartholin Gland Carcinoma**

Primary carcinoma of the Bartholin gland is rare, accounting for 1 to 5 percent of all vulvar malignancies.

A retrospective cohort study concluded that Bartholin mass excision in postmenopausal women is not justified as a first-line treatment since the incidence of cancer is so low (0.114 per 100,000 woman-years). These patients may benefit from mass drainage and selective biopsy.

Adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas are the two most common histological types of primary Bartholin gland carcinoma. Other more rare types are transitional, adenoid-cystic, and undifferentiated carcinomas. Human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 has previously been detected via polymerase chain reaction in squamous cell carcinomas.