Given the heterogeneity in tumor location, grade, and stage at diagnosis, treatment modalities include simple observation, surgical resection, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, stem cell transplantation, and immunotherapy. Patients with low-risk NB have localized tumors, some (infants) with a high propensity for spontaneous tumor regression.

For larger, localized tumors, in patients' past infancy, surgical resection is pursued. For patients younger than 18 months of age, the observational approach is currently under international investigation by COG (NCT02176967) and SIOPEN (NCT01728155) cooperative groups. For children who present with symptoms, limited chemotherapy is given without surgical palliation or radiation therapy.

The intermediate-risk group presents with localized metastasis, i.e., to the lymph node or bone marrow (in infants). They are usually managed with chemotherapy alone and possible surgical resection if able.

The high-risk group has the worst prognosis and presents with widespread metastatic disease to the bone marrow, bone, lungs, and liver. They receive induction chemotherapy to reduce tumor burden at both the primary and metastatic locations, followed by maximal surgical resection, followed by myeloablative chemotherapy and stem-cell transplantation. After that, patients are managed on a combination of maintenance chemotherapy and immunotherapy.

Surgery plays a vital role in the treatment of neuroblastoma. For localized disease, one can obtain a cure with surgery. Sometimes surgery is needed to establish a diagnosis. Second look surgery after chemotherapy is often done for debulking purposes.