Cardiac amyloidosis occurs due to the extracellular deposition of a toxic component called amyloid. The amyloid refers to an amalgam of abnormally folded proteins and other matrix-forming components such as proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans, collagen, and laminin. The abnormally folded proteins derive from two sources: amyloid light (AL) chain proteins and amyloid transthyretin (ATTR).

Microscopically, the amyloid fibrils are seen as non-branching structures measuring 7-10 nm in diameter. Deposition of these fibrils in the extracellular space leads to the stiffening of the myocardium and depressed cardiac function. This deposition primarily affects diastolic function until late in the disease when left ventricle systolic function also gets affected.

Following are the various etiological types of cardiac amyloidosis:

- Primary amyloidosis (also known as amyloid light chain amyloidosis) – AL amyloidosis - is caused by the deposition of AL fibrils produced by abnormal plasma cells in patients with plasma cell dyscrasia such as multiple myeloma.

- Secondary amyloidosis – AA amyloidosis – is caused by the deposition of serum amyloid A, which is an inflammatory protein produced in conditions with chronic inflammation.

- Senile systemic amyloidosis (also called wild transthyretin) – ATTRw – is caused by age-related amyloid deposition, which is made from normal TTR (transport-thyroxine-and-retinol) protein. This is the most common type of cardiac amyloidosis.

- Familial amyloidosis – ATTRm -  is caused by mutant TTR.

- Isolated atrial amyloidosis – is caused by the deposition of amyloid made from the atrial natriuretic peptide.