The bite of a brown recluse spider bite is a clinical diagnosis. A diagnosis of a spider bite can be made definitively only if the patient has a lesion that is consistent with a spider bite, or the spider was seen biting the patient, and the spider is caught and identified by an entomologist.

If the clinician makes a working diagnosis of a brown recluse spider bite, lab testing is unnecessary except if there are systemic complaints, especially in children.

- CBC

- BMP

- Serum calcium and phosphate

- LFT

- CK/myoglobin

- Reticulocyte count

- Haptoglobin

- LDH

- PT/ INR

- D Dimer

- Fibrinogen

Often a bite from a presumed arachnid can be mistaken as a bite from the brown recluse spider. Most patients aren't able to find the spider. A helpful mnemonic to use is **NOT RECLUSE,**

- **N**(numerous) - only one lesion is usually present in a brown recluse spider bite.

- **O**(occurrence) - A bite usually occurs when disturbing the spider. As the name suggests, they tend to avoid people, hiding in dark spaces like in a box or the attic.

- **T**(timing) - Most bites occur between April and October.

- **R**(red center) - characteristic bites will have a pale central area secondary to the capillary bed destruction causing ischemia.

- **E**(elevated) - Usually the bites are flat. If the area is elevated >1 cm, then this is most likely not a brown recluse spider bite.

- **C**(chronic)- bites from a brown recluse spider most commonly heal within 3 months.

- **L**(large) - Rarely are these bites >10 cm.

- **U**(Ulcerates too early) - If the bite is from a brown recluse spider, they do not ulcerate until 7-14 days.

- **S**(swollen) - often brown recluse spider bites do not exhibit significant swelling unless they occur on the face or the feet

- **E**(exudative) - brown recluse spider bites do not cause exudative lesions