**Diagnostic Methods**

**Chest Radiography**

Coronary calcification is not easily detected on routine chest radiography. Although chest radiography is inexpensive, it has very poor sensitivity in detecting coronary artery calcification. Chest radiography is not recommended for coronary artery calcification detection.

**Computed Tomography**

The detection of coronary artery calcification via CT scan was made possible in the 1980s after the development of the electron-beam CT (EBCT) scanner. This was due to the significantly superior speed of the CT scanner. The superior speed enabled heart motion to be paused long enough to detect calcification in the coronary arteries. Furthermore, the development of the multi-detector CT scan has allowed even faster acquisition of images.

The evaluation of coronary artery calcium scoring via CT offers a fast, reproducible, and relatively cheap modality to determine the extent and presence of coronary calcification. Patients, prior to the test, do not need any specific preparation or intravenous access. Scans are typically obtained with prospective electrocardiogram triggering during diastole. After imaging is acquired, the extent of calcification is quantified using the Agatston score. The Agatston score is obtained by multiplying the area of calcification by the corresponding density.

Currently, the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association gives class IIa indication for asymptomatic patients with intermediate-risk (10% to 20%) 10-year risk of cardiac events based on the Framingham risk score, as well as for asymptomatic individuals 40 years and older with diabetes mellitus for coronary artery calcium scanning. CAC measurement is generally not recommended for patients at low (less than 10%) or high (greater than 20%) 10-year risk of cardiac events based on the Framingham risk score.

The following definitions have been used to quantify coronary artery calcium score and coronary plaque burden

- 0: No identifiable disease

- 1 to 99: Mild disease

- 100 to 399: Moderate disease

- Greater than 400: Severe Disease

It is to be noted that although the presence of CAC can help predict the presence of coronary artery stenosis, it is generally a better marker for the extent of coronary atherosclerosis present rather than the degree of stenosis. In early atherosclerosis, there is a compensatory enlargement of the arteries to accommodate the plaque. Therefore, although extensive plaque burden may be present, there may not be any clinically relevant stenosis. Severe coronary calcification (Agatston score greater than 1000) is associated with advanced obstructive coronary disease.

The effective radiation exposure with EBCT is approximately 0.7 to 1.0 mSv in men and 0.9 to 1.3 mSv in women. MDCT has a slightly higher radiation dose of 1.0 to 1.5 mSv in men and 1.1 to 1.9 mSv in women. To place this in context, the average annual background radiation in the United States is 3.0 to 3.6 mSv.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

MRI has a very limited role due to difficulties in detecting small quantities of calcification. Currently, there is no indication for MRI in the detection of coronary artery calcification.