Patients with aphasia usually are evaluated with computed tomography (CT) without contrast initially if a CVA is suspected, and subsequently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to identify the precise location of the lesion. Then they are evaluated by speech/language pathologists to assess and help identify areas of a language deficit. Several formal exams are used to identify aphasia, such as the Boston diagnostic aphasia exam and Western aphasia battery. Boston diagnostic aphasia exam provides a severity rating from slight to severe. The Western aphasia battery helps assess if the patient is aphasic and if so, determines the type and severity. Furthermore, it provides a baseline and should be repeated to trend improvements, all the while identifying strengths and weaknesses.

For the evaluation of aphasia, three parts of language assessments are used to distinguish the different types of aphasia syndromes. This includes fluency of speech, comprehension, and repetition. Fluency of speech entails a typical speech rate, intact syntactic ability, and effortless speech output. Comprehension is the patient's ability to understand written and spoken words. Finally, repetition is the patient's ability to repeat written or spoken words.

**Fluent Aphasia Syndromes**

- Wernicke- fluent, impaired comprehension, unable to repeat

- Transcortical sensory- fluent, impaired comprehension, able to repeat

- Conduction- fluent, intact comprehension, unable to repeat

- Anomic- fluent, intact comprehension, able to repeat

**Non-fluent Aphasia Syndromes**

- Broca- non-fluent, intact comprehension, unable to repeat

- Transcortical motor- non-fluent, intact comprehension, able to repeat

- Mixed transcortical- non-fluent, impaired comprehension, able to repeat

- Global- non-fluent, impaired comprehension, unable to repeat

A cognitive neuropsychological approach attempts to identify the key language skills that are not functioning properly. These are called modules. A patient may have difficulty with just one module or a number of modules.