**Pathophysiology**

An isolated pathologic lesion causing posterior instability is rare. Most often, the condition is multifactorial, involving several anatomic and pathologic identities. Bony abnormalities that have been implicated include increased humeral retroversion, glenoid retroversion, and glenoid hypoplasia.

- Excessive capsular laxity

- Loss of integrity to the rotator interval (coracohumeral ligament and superior glenohumeral ligament)

- Injury to the superior glenohumeral ligament

- Large capsular recess

- Disruptions of the glenolabral socket

Several studies have also highlighted the importance of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) in maintaining the posterior stability of the shoulder.

Episodes of posterior instability commonly occur with the arm in mid-range of motion when the glenohumeral ligaments are not tensioned. Therefore, other pathomechanics must be involved other than the disruption of the capsuloligamentous structures. During mid-range of motion, Antonio and Harryman describe 3 mechanisms as the primary stabilizing forces of the glenohumeral joint:

- Geometric conformity of the articular surfaces

- Labral contribution to the glenoid fossa depth

- Compression of the humeral head into the glenoid by muscular forces

Disruption in any of these stabilizing mechanisms contributes to the development of posterior instability.

Controversy exists in regard to the role of the rotator interval in preventing posterior instability as cadaveric studies have yielded conflicting results. In cadaveric specimens, Harryman et al. demonstrated increased posterior and inferior translation as well as frank dislocation after selective sectioning of the rotator interval.

As one of the primary static stabilizers of the shoulder, labral injury has been associated with posterior instability. A pure detachment of the posterior labrum is described as a reverse Bankart lesion. When associated with a fragment of bone resulting from a glenoid fracture, the pathology is termed a reverse bony Bankart lesion. An incomplete and concealed avulsion of the posteroinferior labrum is known as a Kim lesion, and failure to identify and address this lesion may result in persistent posterior instability.