Posterior cortical atrophy needs to be differentiated from the typical Alzheimer disease. Patients with posterior cortical atrophy tend to be younger with early and marked involvement of visuospatial tasks, reading, and writing with relative preservation of memory.

History should also be directed at ruling out other alternative etiologies such as Lewy body disease, corticobasal syndrome, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Features that suggest dementia with Lewy bodies include REM sleep behavior disorder, fluctuation of mental status, visual hallucinations, parkinsonism, and neuroleptic sensitivity. Clinical features favoring corticobasal syndrome include asymmetrical parkinsonism, myoclonus, muscle stiffness/dystonia, sensory deficits, motor apraxia, eyelid opening apraxia, and a feeling that a limb does not belong to the patient ("alien" limb phenomenon). Symptoms secondary to involvement of the pyramidal tract, such as spasticity, hyperreflexia, and weakness, are likely to be present in corticobasal degeneration.

Diagnosing Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (Heidenhain variant)****may be more challenging as the presentation can be variable. The disease follows a rapid course leading to death typically within a year. Patients may present with visual impairment secondary to involvement of the visual cortex, features of Balint syndrome (optic ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, and simultagnosia), or Gerstmann syndrome (agraphia, acalculia, finger agnosia, and left-right disorientation). These may also be accompanied by ataxia, myoclonus, and atypical sensory phenomenon. Cortical blindness (Anton syndrome) is not a feature of posterior cortical atrophy and is generally seen in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. The most striking feature of CJD in MRI is the presence of a "cortical ribbon sign" in the parieto-occipital region.

**Salient Differences from the Common Differential of the Entity**

- PCA has more significant atrophy within the visual association cortex, contrary to the hippocampal atrophy observed in amnestic AD. Patients often have a good insight into their symptoms, contrary to anosognosia observed among patients with AD.

- Lewi body dementia has visual hallucinations and parkinsonian features. FDG-PET scan shows an extension to involve the orbitofrontal and temporal cortex. Dopamine transporter SPECT shows low uptake within the basal ganglia.

- Heidenhain variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease characteristically has a fulminant course and presents with Anton's syndrome. The CSF analysis is positive for 14-3-3 protein.

- Asymmetric parkinsonism,  eyelid opening apraxia, and alien limb syndrome are hallmarks of Corticobasal degeneration.