Candesartan is an oral angiotensin II receptor blocker. It is available as a pro-drug, candesartan cilexetil, which undergoes hydrolysis in the gastrointestinal tract during absorption to its active form. Candesartan is marketed under a variety of brand names.

The FDA approved candesartan in June 1998 for the management of hypertension in adults. Clinical trials showed a once-daily 8 mg dose of candesartan to be as effective as a 50 mg dose of losartan, another angiotensin II receptor blocker, or a 10 to 20 mg dose of enalapril, an ACE inhibitor, in lowering blood pressure. The FDA also approved the use of candesartan to treat hypertension in adolescents and children aged one and older in October of 2009.

In February of 2005, the FDA approved the use of candesartan in adults with heart failure in New York Heart Association classes 2 to 4. The placebo-controlled CHARM studies have shown the efficacy of candesartan in these specific subpopulations:

- Patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less who have not previously tolerated ACE inhibitors

- Patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less currently taking ACE inhibitors

- Patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of greater than 40%

The CHARM studies demonstrated a reduction in cardiovascular mortality and hospitalizations due to congestive heart failure, with either candesartan monotherapy or in combination with an ACE inhibitor.

Candesartan is also used off-label for the treatment of conditions including cerebrovascular accident or stroke, diabetic nephropathy, left ventricular hypertrophy, and migraines.

Candesartan is often prescribed as monotherapy for the management of hypertension and heart failure. However, a combination formulation exists with low-dose hydrochlorothiazide, a thiazide diuretic. This combination helps to achieve an additional antihypertensive effect.