Factors that can affect prolactin release and subsequent milk production include breast stimulation, sleep, stress, and pregnancy. Medications that act as stimulants include neuroleptic drugs, thyroid-releasing hormone, metoclopramide, estrogens, phenothiazines, norepinephrine, histamine, and acetylcholine. Medications that are suppressors include L-dopa, ergot preparations, clomiphene citrate, pyridoxine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and prostaglandins E and F.

Many physiologic variables can affect breastfeeding and, therefore, the intake of colostrum. This can be divided into maternal factors and infant factors. Maternal factors include the size and shape of the nipples, breast development during puberty and pregnancy, mammoplasty (reduction or augmentation); other breast surgery; fibrocystic changes; breast cancer, obesity, and concurrent medical problems in the mother. Factors in the infant that can affect breastfeeding include gestational age at birth; ankyloglossia (tongue-tie); cleft lip or palate; other physical malformations; infections; oral-motor dysfunction (abnormal suck); and various diseases, such as congenital heart disease, cystic fibrosis, inborn errors of metabolism, intestinal malabsorption syndrome, neurological disorders, renal disease, and thyroid disease.

Nipple size and shape are probably the most common factor affecting the first days of breastfeeding when the infant receives colostrum. A more erect nipple encourages the newborn to latch and suck. Flat or inverted nipples can make it more difficult for the mother and infant to learn how to breastfeed. Nipple shields can be used but have shown limited success. Another common factor is the infant's wakefulness and ability to suck. The best way to promote breastfeeding is skin-to-skin time with the mother within 5 minutes of birth and lasting for at least 1 hour. This helps the infant physiologically adjust to extrauterine life and helps them to find the nipple by smell and tactile stimulation. This skin-to-skin time also helps establish normal skin flora on the newborn to protect them from pathologic bacteria. Successful breastfeeding within an hour of birth sets the stage for improved breastfeeding experiences in the coming days.