There are numerous treatment modalities available for the treatment of ISR, and treatment often involves more than one technique.  The optimal therapy is individualized for each case of ISR and often based on the etiology of ISR and patient and lesion characteristics.  Intravascular imaging allows for the identification of the mechanism of ISR and appropriate tailoring of treatment.

**Medical therapy:**Secondary prophylaxis with aspirin and statins in persons who have had PCI for coronary artery disease should follow current guideline recommendations. However, large clinical trials have not shown any medication with demonstrated efficacy in halting the progression of established ISR. Evidence for drug therapy in treating ISR is limited. Antiplatelet agents are used as per current guideline recommendations but are ineffective for specifically treating ISR. Despite the initial promise, larger trials looking at the use of abciximab to prevent ISR recurrence did not suggest a clinical benefit. Limited evidence also suggests that oral sirolimus, when given before reintervention, may prevent repeat ISR. However, the lack of long-term outcomes and the drug side-effect profile have shown sirolimus to be a poor option for the treatment of ISR.

**POBA:**Plain old balloon angioplasty (POBA) historically has been one of the primary treatment modalities used in the management of ISR. POBA frequently results in an acceptable acute angiographic outcome. POBA is a particularly attractive option in focal areas of restenosis and when there is a documented evidence of stent/native artery size mismatch on intravascular imaging.  Nevertheless, POBA is not without risk, and stent edge-related injuries and complications are always a concern whenever a stenotic site undergoes dilation. Balloon slippage is another element of POBA, which may not only prolong the procedure but can also lead to edge dissection and suboptimal outcomes. Incremental balloon upsizing as well as the use of short, low profile balloons, can help avoid balloon slippage and edge-related complications. Although the acute angiographic results may show significant improvement, tissue re-intrusion can occur within minutes of the final balloon inflation; this is one of the factors that contribute to ISR recurrence in up to50% of patients treated with POBA.

**Vascular Brachytherapy (VBT):**Brachytherapy involves temporary intracoronary deposition of a radioactive isotope within the diseased segment. The goal of treatment is to suppress new tissue growth within areas of established ISR. This approach has demonstrated greater efficacy in halting ISR progression, as well as improving clinical outcomes than debulking techniques or POBA. The complexity of the procedure and issues with radioprotection/radiation dosing limited this technique to a few expert centers. Based on the findings of both the SISR (Sirolimus-Eluting Stents vs Vascular Brachytherapy for In-Stent Restenosis Within Bare-Metal Stents) and TAXUS V ISR (Paclitaxel-Eluting Stents vs Vascular Brachytherapy for In-Stent Restenosis Within Bare-Metal Stents) trials, DES was superior in decreasing restenosis rates and need for revascularization as compared to brachytherapy extending out to 5 years. Due in large part to the results of these two studies, vascular brachytherapy has been essentially abandoned for the management of BMS-ISR.

**Cutting and scoring balloons:**These balloons work by incising neointimal tissue, thereby allowing for better balloon anchoring during angioplasty. The cutting or scoring action also helps to prep the lesion before balloon angioplasty to allow for better tissue extrusion. However, the largest randomized trial to date to compare cutting balloon angioplasty to POBA in the treatment of ISR, Restenosis Cutting Balloon Evaluation (RESCUT) Trial, failed to show improvement in angiographic stenosis or the rate of clinical events during its seven-month follow-up. Cutting balloon angioplasty correlated with a need to use fewer balloons, less additional stenting, and a lower rate of balloon slippage. The ISAR-DESIRE IV trial (Intracoronary Stenting and Angiographic Results: Optimizing Treatment of Drug-Eluting Stent In-Stent Restenosis 4) subsequently evaluated the use of scoring balloons before paclitaxel-coated balloon angioplasty for treatment of DES-ISR. The trial showed superior angiographic outcomes at six months in the scoring balloon arm but was underpowered to show any significant difference in clinical outcomes. At this time, there are no large randomized trials to show improvement in clinical outcomes with the use of either cutting or scoring balloons in the treatment of ISR. Their use may be a consideration in those situations where balloon migration is of particular concern as well as with the presence of significant tissue.

**Rotational atherectomy and laser techniques:**The development of debulking technologies such as rotational/directional atherectomy and excimer laser have allowed for a novel treatment approach to ISR through physical removal of neointimal tissue or neoatherosclerotic plaque. The technique involves the initial removal of excess stenotic tissue by the debulking device, followed by low-pressure balloon post-dilation. However, a  subsequent multicenter randomized trial comparing POBA to rotational atherectomy revealed lower restenosis rates, improved safety profile, and superior clinical outcomes in the POBA arm. As a result of this study, debulking technology is not considered to be a routine part of ISR management. Instead, it is now a pretreatment option for heavily calcified lesions, which would otherwise compromise balloon expansion.

**Repeat stenting with BMS:**Although stenting may improve the short-term angiographic appearance of ISR, two newly overlapping layers of stents (sandwich technique) with BMS may predispose to subsequent lumen loss. Patients with large vessel ISR (greater than 3 mm) and patients with stent edge disease had better angiographic and clinical outcomes when they received repeat BMS placement as opposed to POBA. To date, no large randomized trials have been performed to evaluate the role of BMS placement in DES-ISR, and BMS should not be used as a primary option.

**Repeat Stenting with DES:**Use of DES has thus become an attractive option in the treatment of neointimal hyperplasia seen in BMS-ISR. Indeed, several large scale studies, including ISAR-DESIRE (Intracoronary Stenting and Angiographic Results: Drug-Eluting Stents for In-Stent Restenosis) and RIBS-II (Balloon Angioplasty vs Elective Sirolimus-Eluting Stenting), have shown that the use of DES significantly decreased restenosis rates, reduced neointimal proliferation as seen on IVUS imaging, and improved clinical outcomes compared to balloon angioplasty. Some schools of thought have also suggested that using a stent with a different drug (hetero-DES approach) may help overcome the issue of drug resistance. The use of repeat stenting remains a common treatment strategy in the management of DES-ISR. However, current data suggest that 10 to 20% of these patients will go on to develop a recurrence of ISR. Innovative approaches, including the use of drug-coated balloons (DCB) and bioresorbable vascular scaffolds (BVS), continue to be developed to avoid the drawback of multiple layers of stent struts; referred to as “onion skinning effect.”

**Drug-coated balloons (DCB):**The desire to deliver an anti-proliferative drug to the area of ISR without leaving behind an additional layer of the stent has led to the development of DCB. Although the data does not currently support the use of DCB over BMS or DES for newly diagnosed obstructive atherosclerotic coronary artery disease, the use of DCBs may have an important role in the management of both bare metal and drug-eluting ISR. Importantly, the overall non-inferior outcomes with DCB use as compared with DES placement supports the use of DCB for treatment of BMS-ISR, particularly in situations where it is preferable to avoid additional stent layering, or there are concerns for bleeding. The use of DCB for the management of DES-ISR has also been a topic of research. Similar to other treatment modalities, evidence suggests that DCB therapy is likely more effective for BMS-ISR than DES-ISR, highlighting the therapeutic challenges presented by DES-ISR.

As with BMS-ISR, initial data supporting the use of DCB in DES-ISR came from a small single-center study.

**Bioresorbable Vascular scaffolds (BVS):**The use of bioabsorbable scaffolds allows for the delivery of an anti-proliferative drug to the area of ISR similar to that seen in DCB angioplasty. Unlike DCB, however, the scaffold also prevents early lumen loss associated with tissue retraction seen in balloon angioplasty. Furthermore, unlike the traditional DES architecture, the bioabsorbable nature of the scaffold avoids permanent deposition of an additional layer of stent strut, potentially reducing the risk of restenosis. These characteristics make BVS an attractive option in the management of ISR. The minimal lumen diameter after BVS was comparable to that obtained with DCB (1.88 +/- 0.6 mm; p = NS) but smaller than that achieved after Everolimus-Eluting Stent (EES) (2.16 +/- 0.7 mm; p < 0.001). Similarly, target lesion revascularization rates after BVS were similar to those seen with DCB (10.4%) but higher than with EES (3.2%; p < 0.001). BVS obtained late angiographic and clinical results similar to DCB but inferior to EES.

**Comparing all treatment modalities:**Treatment options for ISR are in constant evolution, and despite the large volume of published data on the various treatment modalities for ISR, it is difficult to determine which method is the gold standard as most studies compare one or at most two established modalities to the novel approach. Two recent large network meta-analyses have tried to clarify which strategy has the best evidence behind it.

Siontis et al. identified 27 trials with a total of 5923 patients.

Giacoppo et al. included 24 trials for a total of 4880 patients.