The disease is self-limited; however, if the infection is local, topical thiabendazole 10% solution or 15% ointment may be tried first. The cream is applied 2 to 3 times daily for 5 to 10 days. Small studies have shown improvement of pruritus may occur as early as 48 hours after beginning treatment, and cure rates as high as 98% within ten days have been achieved. The largest advantage of topical therapy is a lack of systemic absorption and side effects. Still, the use is limited by multiple applications daily, and utility is less valuable with multiple lesions.

Local disease has historically been treated with cryotherapy. However, freezing the leading edge of the skin with either liquid nitrogen, solid carbon dioxide, or ethylene chloride spray has been shown to be largely ineffective and should be avoided.

For multiple lesions or severe infestation, albendazole and ivermectin are first-line systemic therapies. Oral albendazole, 400 mg daily for 3 to 5 days, is very effective with cure rates nearing 100%. Some studies show that a 7-day course of albendazole may decrease the rates of recurrent disease. Oral ivermectin is also effective, and its advantage is a patient only has to take a one-time dose of 12 mg by mouth. Cure rates near 100% with ivermectin administration.

Mebendazole is another antihelminthic agent; however, it has poor bioavailability, absorption, and, subsequently, poor efficacy and should not be used as a first-line medication. Also ineffective include topical steroids, oral steroids, and antibiotics. While systemic corticosteroids may reduce itching, the side-effect profile limits usefulness.

In addition to pharmacologic therapy, banning dogs from beaches may decrease the deposition of larvae into the soil. Notably, towels do not consistently protect against transmission, but wearing protective footwear can be effective.