Serum prostate-specific antigen is still a somewhat controversial screening exam for healthy, asymptomatic males, as elevated serum PSA is found in a litany of benign prostatic conditions. Infection, trauma, inflammation, and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) can elevate serum PSA levels, which reduces the specificity of the biomarker for use in predicting prostate cancer. Research has demonstrated that up to 86% of individuals with BPH may have an elevated serum PSA.

The decision to screen an asymptomatic male utilizing serum PSA should involve shared decision-making. This is simply a discussion regarding the risks and benefits, such as a falsely elevated PSA value that may lead to an unnecessary biopsy of a benign condition or the discovery of indolent prostate cancer that can lead to the treatment of a condition that would have remained totally asymptomatic and clinically inactive.

The United States Preventative Task Force recommends selectively offering serum PSA screening on an individual basis according to professional judgment and patient preference in males between the ages of 55 and 69 (grade C).

Many professional associations and societies have developed their own guidelines. These are well summarized in our companion StatPearls reference article on "Prostate Cancer Screening."

Due to the very high variability of PSA testing results, two separate specimens are recommended before conducting further investigations in patients with abnormal PSA elevations. Some physicians will give patients two to six weeks of antibiotics before repeating the PSA level if the initial test is elevated. This is intended to reduce prostatic inflammation or low-grade prostatitis that might elevate the PSA level.