The cervix is evaluated on dilation characteristics, station, consistency, effacement, and position using the Bishop scoring system. This score is performed in the late third trimester and at IOL. A favorable cervix with a score of eight or more is likely to result in a vaginal delivery. However, if the score is three or less at the start of the IOL, then the chance of successful vaginal delivery is low.

Before starting IOL, all pregnant women should have consented to the process and understand all benefits, maternal and fetal risks, and alternatives to IOL. Some of the risks of IOL are similar to that of spontaneous labor, including the need to perform a cesarean section, an operative vaginal delivery, chorioamnionitis, non-reassuring fetal heart rate tracing, and postpartum hemorrhage. Reviewing indications for cesarean section and operative vaginal delivery should be discussed prior to offering IOL. One indication for a cesarean section is a failure of IOL, where cervical dilation has not progressed or continued, despite the use of medications with or without amniotomy. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends administrating oxytocin for 12 to 18 hours after the performance of amniotomy before proceeding with a cesarean section for a failed IOL.

During the consent process and while preparing women for IOL, it is encouraged to review the different methods of inducing labor. As indicated above, mechanical and pharmacological methods can be used as a single agent or in combination. A 2016 published randomized control trial addressed this concept. When evaluating women with a singleton pregnancy in the vertex presentation with a Bishop score of less than six, those who received a combination of induction methods, such as a mechanical IOL using Foley catheter combined with misoprostol or a Foley with syntocinion, had a faster median time to delivery compared to those who received only misoprostol or a Foley catheter alone. However, when adjusting for further variables, a Foley with syntocinon was not better than a single induction method.

Additional studies and Cochrane reviews compare amniotomy alone to mechanical and pharmacological induction methods. It shows that mechanical induction with a balloon is probably as effective as labor induction with vaginal PGE2. However, a balloon seems to have a more favorable safety profile for the baby. More research on this comparison does not seem warranted. A balloon catheter may be slightly less effective than oral misoprostol, but It remains unclear if there is a difference in safety outcomes for the baby. When compared to low-dose vaginal misoprostol, a balloon catheter may be less effective but probably has a better safety profile for the baby. Future research could focus more on safety aspects for the baby and maternal satisfaction.

As noted above, cesarean section rates and indications for performing CS should be reviewed with all pregnant women before consenting to IOL. There is a strong emphasis on cesarean section rates in the United States in the medical literature and social media. The New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) recently published the ARRIVE trial that compared cesarean section rates and perinatal outcomes in nulliparous women undergoing elective IOL at 39 weeks of gestation to expectant management. Results demonstrated a significantly lower cesarean section rate in the induction group and that there were no statistically lower adverse perinatal outcomes.

Women being induced for a specific indication, such as fetal growth restriction, may inquire about neonatal risks of IOL. The same 2013 retrospective study from California further analyzed neonatal outcomes and found no difference in fetal death, neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission, or respiratory distress across gestational age or parity.