The majority of infectious diseases are bacterial in origin. With the discovery of laboratory methods to grow these microorganisms using an appropriate growth medium known as “culture,” determining the sensitivity and resistance of specific pathogens to a wide range of antimicrobial agents becomes necessary so that healthcare providers can immediately institute proper treatment regimens to their patients.

Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) is a laboratory procedure performed by medical technologists (clinical laboratory scientists) to identify which antimicrobial regimen is specifically effective for individual patients. On a larger scale, it aids in the evaluation of treatment services provided by hospitals, clinics, and national programs for the control and prevention of infectious diseases.  Recently, researchers have had to implement continuous surveillance activities for resistance patterns due to the mutations in bacterial DNA.

Clinical laboratories currently employ several methods depending on the laboratory test menu that they provide. These approaches include the disk diffusion and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) methods.  Commercial systems also became available across health centers and hospital facilities, utilizing both phenotypic and genotypic characterization of bacterial resistance.  While routine antimicrobial susceptibility testing for gram-positive (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus) and gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa) are commonly available in peripheral laboratories, drug susceptibility testing (DST) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis are usually carried out within more complex facilities like reference laboratories.  Despite the differences in the techniques for susceptibility tests, all laboratories must be critical on each step of the sampling and testing process so that test results are obtainable with consistently high levels of accuracy and reliability.