Due to the complexity and length of the procedure, contraindications for this procedure are usually based on the blood supply to the flap and the overall health of the patient. The most important factor to a reconstructive surgeon is the blood supply since it sets the limit for the amount of tissue available. Patients must be assessed for upper abdominal scars because postoperative scars can interfere with blood supply of the flap. The transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flap relies on one specific blood supply which if incised previously would make the procedure extremely risky for the patient. Ipsilateral subcostal and paramedian incisions or a chevron incision are specific contraindications because there is disruption of the blood supply to both rectus pedicles. Vertical midline scars should only disrupt flow to the contralateral side. Transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flaps used after abdominoplasty procedures are risky because the perforators to skin and subcutaneous tissue from the pedicle have been surgically divided. Previous abdominal liposuction may also disrupt major perforators putting the skin and subcutaneous tissue at risk of necrosis as well. Another issue with vertically or horizontally scars across the transverse rectus abdominis (TRAM) flap is they reduce the breast mound, which is important for large breasted patients. The scar is not aesthetically pleasing and should not be included in the flap. Hartrampf believes medical conditions including severe cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, uncontrolled hypertension, morbid obesity, and insulin dependent diabetes are contraindications to a successful reconstruction as well. Smoking, moderate obesity, autoimmune disease, and non-insulin dependent diabetes increase the complication risk.