# Continuing Education Activity

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy (SNE) is primarily a disease of childhood that affects the central nervous system. This is a rare condition that is passed on through nuclear, X-linked, and mtDNA inheritance patterns. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy.
- Explain management options for patients with subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the care of patients with subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy (SNE), also known as Leigh syndrome, is a genetically heterogeneous disease that primarily affects the central nervous system. Originally characterized in 1951, the syndrome is characterized by focal and bilaterally symmetrical, necrotic lesions involving the thalamus, brainstem, and posterior columns of the spinal cord.

# Etiology

ATP is the primary energy currency in human cells. The production of this energy currency is mandated by the flux of hydrogen ions down a concentration gradient. This gradient is maintained by mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes during the process of oxidative phosphorylation.

# Epidemiology

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy is primarily a disease of infancy, typically first becoming clinically evident between three and 12 months of age. SNE occurring later in life have been seen, but adult-onset cases are rare.

# History and Physical

The history and physical exam findings of patients with subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy manifest primarily in neuromuscular fashion. Developmental delay or regression is the most common finding in over 50% of patients. Affected individuals demonstrate motor delay, progressive cognitive decline, dystonia, ataxia, and brainstem dysfunction. Epileptic seizures and respiratory dysfunction are found in approximately 33% and 34% of cases, respectively.

# Evaluation

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy demonstrates a wide array of laboratory, molecular, and radiographic findings. While there are no established diagnostic criteria, affected individuals often share key features. A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that the lactate levels in the blood and CSF of affected patients are elevated in up to 72% of patients. On a molecular level, 80% of SNE cases lack a complete mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme complex with DNA mutations of the mitochondria (32%) and cell nucleus (38%).

# Treatment / Management

Currently, there is no cure for subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy. Treatment strategies depend on the mode of inheritance and include both correcting underlying metabolic disturbances and supportive care. Supportive care targets mainly acidosis, seizures, and dystonias. Acute exacerbations of acidosis can be treated with either sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate.

# Differential Diagnosis

Many diseases can mimic subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy. It is, therefore, important to build a broad differential diagnosis during work-up. Several diseases affecting the mitochondria can mimic both nuclear DNA and mt-DNA variants, including mitochondrial depletion syndrome, mitochondrial translation defect, and MEGDEL syndrome.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy is poor. The median age at death is just over 2 years, with the main cause of death is respiratory complications. Respiratory and heart failure have been shown to cause mortality in 50% of affected individuals by the age of three.

# Complications

Most complications from subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy are related to the central and peripheral nervous system and include deafness, retinitis pigmentosa, developmental delay, and dysphagia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Due to the high mortality and rarity of SNE, mothers, and fathers of affected individuals must be screened for any genetic abnormalities. In addition, the risk of having additional children should be discussed with each family. Once the disease has manifested, it is imperative to diagnose the disease subtype, since this can affect both the course and efficacy of treatment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy is a multifactorial disease, affecting many different organ systems in the body. Information sharing of evidence-based medical research and collaborative care has proven both pragmatic and cost-effective at improving patient outcomes.[Level 1]

The potential for such a phenomenon to negatively impact patient care cannot be ignored. Providers must reach out to other specialties of medicine when feelings of incomplete knowledge on a disease or organ system arise.