The clinical features of miliary TB are usually nonspecific, protean, and remain obscure until late in the disease course. They are typically sub-acute or chronic and very rarely can present acutely. The patient's symptoms usually range from nonspecific constitutional symptoms in the form of fever, generalized weakness, weight loss, lassitude, and cough to organ-specific dysfunction secondary to tubercular involvement. The most common extrapulmonary sites include the lymphatic system, bones and joints, liver, central nervous system (CNS), and adrenal glands. Physical findings include hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy.

Clinically, two main variants of miliary TB are reported depending on the demographic profile along with clinical features, viz: classical acute miliary TB and cryptic miliary TB.

**Acute Miliary TB**

Acute miliary TB is seen under 40 years of age. Most of the patients present with constitutional symptoms or can have signs and symptoms related to one organ owing to the systemic nature of the disease. Evening rise of temperature and night sweats of 1-2 weeks duration are classically described, although a patient can have early morning fever spikes. Dry cough with scanty sputum and dyspnea are other common symptoms, and sometimes patients can have hemoptysis. ARDS is a rare fatal presentation of military TB.

Choroid tubercles, if seen on fundus examination, provide a valuable clue to the diagnosis. Choroid tubercles are bilateral, pale, gray-white, or yellowish lesions usually less than one-quarter of the size of the optic disc and are located within 2 cm of the optic nerve. When present, choroidal tubercles are considered pathognomonic of miliary TB. They occur more commonly in children.

Skin involvement may occur in the form of erythematous macules and papules (tuberculosis miliaria cutis).

Neurological involvement occurs in the form of headache secondary to tubercular meningitis (TBM) with or without tuberculoma formation and motor or sensory abnormality because of thoracic transverse myelopathy.

Musculoskeletal involvement accounts for 10% of cases of extrapulmonary TB. Its most common site is vertebral involvement in the form of tubercular spondylitis (Pott spine), followed by septic arthritis. It can also occur in the form of osteomyelitis, tenosynovitis, bursitis, and pyomyositis. Pott spine presents clinically as constitutional symptoms, back pain, tenderness, paraplegia or paraparesis, and kyphotic or scoliotic deformities.

Abdominal TB occurs following hematogenous spread from pulmonary focus or by local spread from the gastrointestinal tract or abdomen as the primary source. Abdominal TB can occur as hepatic, intestinal, or peritoneal involvement.

Miliary TB can present as overt adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease) at the time of initial presentation or during anti-tubercular treatment.

Clinically significant cardiac and renal involvement is uncommon; however, it can cause myocarditis, congestive heart failure, endocarditis, mycotic aneurysms, and acute kidney injury either directly or as a syndromic constellation of multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS).

Even though the clinical presentation of miliary TB in children is similar to that of adults, they do have important differences. Miliary TB develops less frequently in children who have received the BCG vaccination. In children with miliary TB, chills, night sweats, hemoptysis, and productive cough have been reported less frequently, while peripheral lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are more common compared to adults. TBM is more frequently seen in children with miliary TB (20%–40%) compared to adults (15% to 30%).

The clinical presentation of TB in HIV patients depends on their CD4+ count. Patients having CD4+ count >200 cells/mm have their disease progression similar to immunocompetent individuals. When the CD4+ count is < 200 cells/mm or profound immunosuppression due to any cause, atypical manifestations of miliary TB occur in the form of cutaneous involvement, intrathoracic lymphadenopathy, and tuberculin anergy.

**Cryptic Miliary TB**

It occurs primarily in patients over 60 years of age. The clinical presentation involves the absence of fever, progressive weight loss, and general debility as the dominant clinical feature mimicking a metastatic carcinoma, along with mild hepatosplenomegaly. The patients have a normal chest radiograph and negative skin tuberculin test, causing a delay in diagnosis.