The procedure can be divided into two phases which can be carried out synchronously or sequentially. The principles of abdominoperineal resection described below apply to all techniques regardless of whether the procedure is performed via an open, laparoscopic, or robotic approach.

**Part One - Abdominal Operation**

Access to the abdomen is achieved through a lower midline incision in open surgery or the use of up to 6 laparoscopic ports for laparoscopic or robotic techniques.

- An initial survey of the abdomen is performed to look for any signs of metastasis and identify the location of the tumor.

- The distal sigmoid colon is mobilized in either a medial to lateral or lateral to medial approach. Mobilization of the colon in a medial to lateral fashion allows early ligation of the vascular pedicle. The main advantages are reduced bleeding and maximal time for demarcation between ischaemic and perfused health colon. Gentle traction is applied to the sigmoid colon, and the mesentery is incised behind the superior rectal artery overlying the sacral promontory. The avascular areolar plane is developed behind the superior rectal artery by repetitive sweeping actions.

- As the avascular areolar tissue is swept down, a window is created, and the critical retroperitoneal structures (ureter and gonadal vessels) are identified and preserved.

- The superior rectal artery is dissected to its origin from the inferior mesenteric artery. At this point, either a low (ligation of the superior rectal artery) or high tie (ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery) can be performed.

- Once the vascular pedicle has been controlled, the left colon can be brought medially and released from its lateral attachments by dividing along the 'white line of Toldts,' representing the junction between the posterior and visceral peritoneum. The marginal vessels are ligated, and the mesocolon is divided.

- Total mesorectal excision (TME) is performed by entering the avascular alveolar plane between the presacral and mesorectal fascia at the level of the sacral promontory, paying careful attention to avoid the iliohypogastric nerves and medial sacral artery.

- Dissection is continued posteriorly, laterally, and anteriorly. Judicious use of electrocautery is needed when dissecting in the posterior plane to avoid injury to the parasympathetic fibers. Extra care is also taken to prevent coning of the specimen during circumferential dissection.

- Mobilization of the rectum anteriorly is terminated just below the level of the seminal vesicles (in males) or cervix (in women) and at the upper border of the coccyx posteriorly. The mesorectum is not dissected off the levator muscles at this point.

- The colon is transected using a linear cutting stapler at least 5cm proximal to the rectal tumor but with enough mobility and length to prevent tension at the stoma site.

- A trephine is made at the stoma site by removing a 2 cm disc of skin and dissecting it down to the peritoneum. The proximal colon is extruded through the trephine incision, and a colostomy is formed by suturing the edge of the colon to the trephine incision.

- The abdominal fascia and the skin incision are closed, often before the colostomy is formed.

**Part Two - Perineal Operation (extralevator abdominoperineal excision)**

This part of the procedure can be carried out in a prone jack-knife or lithotomy position. The perineal area is exposed by taping apart the buttocks.

- The anus is sutured with a purse-string suture to prevent any fecal leakage.

- A teardrop skin incision is made around the anus extending down to the lower edge of the sacrum and exposing the fat of the ischiorectal fossae. Dissection is typically extended outside the external anal sphincter, using a lone star retractor to provide optimal exposure and access.

- Dissection is continued posteriorly, dividing the anococcygeal raphe and reaching the coccyx. In some instances, the coccyx is resected to allow better visualization or obtain the necessary resection margin.

- Laterally the levator muscles are identified and dissected up to their point of insertion on the pelvic sidewalls to enter the abdominal cavity.

- The inferior haemorrhoidal and pudendal vessels are ligated.

- The mesorectum is separated from the anterior presacral fascia to enter the same plane as the abdominal part of the operation.

- Anterior dissection is performed by retracting the rectum posteriorly and making a transverse incision to expose the transverse perineal muscles.

- The pubococcygeus and puborecto-urethralis muscles and underlying fascia are divided to expose the rectal wall.

- The disconnected sigmoid colon and rectum are brought through the perineal incision and sent for histological analysis.

- The pelvic floor is closed in two layers with interrupted absorbable 2-0 sutures. A drain is often left in situ to avoid pelvic collection.

- The skin is closed with an absorbable subcuticular suture.

- Some defects are too large to close primarily. They may require reconstruction with biological mesh or a myocutaneous flap, typically a pedicled gluteus maximus, gracilis, or rectus abdominis flap.