Pediatric foot deformities may share similar characteristics, and their clinical pictures may resemble other foot entities. Therefore, it is essential to distinguish among different pediatric foot deformities.

**Clubfoot:**Clubfoot has a characteristic appearance and is difficult to be confused with other foot deformities. However, other congenital foot deformities, such as congenital vertical talus or calcaneovalgus, should be excluded. It is essential to differentiate clubfoot from other correctable conditions or deformities.

**Planovalgus:**Differential diagnosis is limited. Pes planovalgus should be differentiated from the prominent arch fat pad and tarsal coalition.

**Cavovarus:**Cavovarus foot should be differentiated from equinovarus foot.

**Congenital vertical talus:**CVT should be differentiated from congenital oblique talus. The lateral radiograph will depict no parallel longitudinal axes of the talus and first metatarsal in both conditions. In congenital oblique talus, however, with forced plantarflexion, the talonavicular joint is reduced, so the parallel longitudinal axes of the talus and first metatarsal become parallel, meaning that it is a flexible deformity. Other differentials include tarsal coalition and pes planovalgus.

**Congenital oblique talus:**Differential diagnoses include congenital vertical talus (forced plantarflexion does not cause reduction of the talonavicular joint) and pes planovalgus.

**Metatarsus adductus:**Due to the distinct in-toeing gait, the metatarsus adductus can be confused with internal tibial torsion and increased femoral anteversion.

**Skew foot:**Skewfoot may be differentiated from simple or complex metatarsus adductus, equinovarus, and pes planus.