Granulosa theca cell cancers include ovarian tumors, which consist of granulosa cells, theca cells, and fibroblasts in variable combinations. Granulosa cells in the sex cords produce sex steroids and several peptides needed for folliculogenesis and ovulation. They also give rise to granulosa theca cell tumors (GCT), which form about 5 percent of ovarian neoplasms and are the commonest sex cord-stromal tumors of the ovary (70 percent). There are two distinct types of GCT -adult and juvenile forms- based on characteristic clinicopathologic features. The adult type is the commonest variety and manifests in peri- or post-menopausal women, while the juvenile type constitutes only 5 percent of cases and occurs in prepubertal girls and young women.

Theca cells are present in the ovarian stroma and play an essential role in fertility by producing the androgen substrate required for ovarian estrogen biosynthesis. Thecomas are uncommon and comprise less than 7 percent of sex cord-stromal tumors. They are usually benign and have an excellent prognosis. Malignant thecoma is rare and most often contains an element of granulosa cells, too, and hence the article focuses on GCTs unless otherwise specified. Finally, GCTs are distinct from epithelial ovarian cancers in that they are detected in the early stage, often in young females, and usually manifest with abdominal distension, pain, or rarely with features of hyperestrogenism/virilization.

The extra ovarian spread is to the omentum and peritoneum and occasionally to the lungs, liver, or brain via hematogenous spread. Lymph node metastases are uncommon. These tumors are treated by surgery alone and have a good prognosis. However, they tend to have an indolent progression that is prone to late recurrence that is seen in as many as up to 25 percent despite having curative surgery.