Leptin deficiency or resistance is associated with dysregulation of cytokine production, increased susceptibility to infections, autoimmune disorders, malnutrition, and inflammatory responses.

**Pathophysiology and Clinical Relevance**

Hypoleptinemia

Complete leptin deficiency results in the clinical phenotypes of severe obesity, impaired satiety, intensive hyperphagia, constant food-seeking behavior, recurrent bacterial infections, hyperinsulinemia, liver steatosis, dyslipidemia, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. LEP or the LR gene and are known as congenital leptin deficiencies (CLD). Acquired hypoleptinemias share some of these same phenotypes and are usually due to conditions that cause a low body weight. Examples of acquired conditions are lipodystrophy syndromes and hypothalamic amenorrhea.

Hyperleptinemia

Hyperleptinemia is associated with leptin resistance - specifically resistance to the anorectic and body weight-reducing effects of leptin. Hyperleptinemia and leptin resistance are components of common obesity. Evidence for this association is a direct correlation between serum leptin concentrations and body fat percentage where obese individuals had higher leptin serum levels and adipocyte LEP mRNA content compared with normal-weight individuals. Also, leptin serum levels and adipocyte LEP mRNA content fall with weight reduction. The mechanism of resistance appears related to defects in leptin transport across the blood-brain barrier or intracellular signaling mechanisms downstream of the LR. Other diseases associated with hyperleptinemia include nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome, neurodegenerative disorders, depression, and food addiction.

Therapeutics

Recombinant forms of leptin are under investigation in the treatment of both hypoleptinemia and hyperleptinemia-related syndrome. Initially studied to reverse obesity, leptin replacement has only reversed obesity in leptin-deficient conditions, with replacement in typically obese individuals with elevated leptin levels showing limited efficacy. It has FDA approval for the treatment of congenital or acquired generalized lipodystrophy (non-HIV-related). Particular studies show leptin replacement has efficacy in reversing some abnormalities present in the above-mentioned syndromes, but these conditions are not yet a recognized indication for the use of recombinant leptin as a treatment.