A history and physical examination are important in identifying cervical injury, as many injuries may be evident. Cervical fractures and dislocations can present with neck stiffness or pain.

Explore the mechanism of injury and the subsequent status of the patient.

Spinal cord injury should be suspected in unconscious patients, or in patients with axial neck pain or those with evidence of neurological injury. Beware that absence of neurologic findings does not eliminate the possibility of spinal cord injury.

**Physical examination should include a detailed neurological examination**. It should include:

- Muscle strength grading, sensation, and eliciting deep tendon reflexes for both the upper and lower extremities

- Evaluating any tenderness, range of motion, and crepitus

The neurological examination is very important. The assessment of cervical nerves can help determine how extensive the injury if nerve compression is present and where it occurs. C1 to C3 are responsible for movements of the head, the dermatome of C2 is responsible for sensation to the dorsal aspect of the head, and C3 is responsible for sensation to the lateral aspects of the face and posterior portion of the head. C3 to C4 contribute to breathing by controlling the muscles of the diaphragm. Patients with an injury in this area of the cervical spine can complain of difficulty breathing. C5 to C7 are responsible for deep tendon reflexes of the biceps, brachioradialis, and triceps respectively. C5 controls shoulder abduction with the aid of C4 and elbow flexion with the aid of C6. C6 to C7 are responsible for elbow extension, wrist extension, and flexion. Innervation of C8 controls finger extension and abduction. Symptoms indicating neurological deficits at any of these levels can include weakness or paralysis of muscles innervated, decreased or absent reflexes, loss of sensation or proprioception. If C3 or C4 are involved, abnormal breathing or respiratory failure can occur. The cervical spinal column is divided into anterior and posterior columns. The anterior column contains the vertebral bodies, and the posterior column contains the spinal cord and spinous processes. An injury is considered unstable when the injury affects both the anterior and posterior columns.