Epithelial cells are located throughout the body and have many functions based on morphology and location. Structures of the apical domain significantly affect function. Microvilli are involved in fluid transport and absorption. The number of microvilli correlates to the absorptive properties of the cells. Also, cilia transport substances across the surface of epithelial cells. Stereocilia are essential in hearing and balance.

Simple squamous epithelium lines blood vessels (endothelium) or body cavities (mesothelium) and allows for diffusion of molecules like in gas exchange. Simple cuboidal cells have a secretory function and tend to form the lining of ducts. Simple columnar cells are found throughout the intestines and can have either an absorptive or secretory function.

Some stratified forms of these cells have similar functions. For example, stratified cuboidal cells are found in exocrine ducts and still have a secretory function. Stratified columnar cells are present in large exocrine glands. Stratified squamous epithelium does not allow for as much diffusion of nutrients as simple squamous because the nutrients would have to traverse through many layers, but the layers provide protection. There are also two other categories of the epithelium, pseudostratified columnar and transitional (uroepithelium) epithelial cells. The pseudostratified epithelium is often ciliated to aid in transporting luminal contents. Transitional epithelial cells are present within distensible organs.