Patient-centered care is best achieved through an interprofessional approach through interprofessional communication. The nursing staff and emergency medical services are among the first members of the healthcare team to monitor and assess a patient's airway. Guidelines established by the American College of Surgeons Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) course and the American Heart Association have made airway management the top priority when assessing a patient. Pre-hospital basic airway management for patients at risk for airway compromise ensures the best outcomes in morbidity and mortality for when the patient reaches in-hospital care.

Physicians, nurse anesthetist, respiratory therapists, nurses, radiologists, and pharmacists all play an important role in not only detecting early airway compromise but also in the event of an emergency endotracheal intubation. Proper advanced airway management is vital, and an expert skill level is required. Incorrect placement of an advanced airway can cause gastric insufflation, hypoxia resulting in anoxic brain injury, alterations in blood gases and acidosis, ischemia to vital organs, and if not corrected may cause death.

Adequate ventilation is critical to life, which is why an interprofessional approach is the best way to improve outcomes in patients. All members of the interprofessional healthcare team should monitor the patient and alert the physician, nurse anesthetist, or respiratory therapist of a patient in impending respiratory failure. A radiologist can provide information on specific lung pathology or confirm the proper positioning of an endotracheal tube. Likewise, a respiratory therapist may detect early signs of worsening lung mechanics and patient symptomatology. Pharmacists play an important role in having available the medications that will facilitate a rapid sequence induction and intubation. Further, they must guide the clinicians in the selection of appropriate drugs to assist intubation and avoid drug interactions or complications. If intubation is unsuccessful or suspected to be a difficult airway, it is advised to consult an anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist if the patient is in a hospital setting. (Level V)