Various techniques for ovulation induction are:

- Lifestyle modification for obesity-related infertility

- Medical methods

- Surgical methods

**Lifestyle Modification for Obesity-related Infertility**

Obesity is defined as a Body mass index (BMI) of more than 30 kg/m^2, and overweight is defined as BMI ≥25 kg/m^2.

**Medical Methods**

**Anti-estrogens**

**Clomiphene Citrate (CC)**

It is an anti-estrogenic drug. It binds with estrogen receptors at the hypothalamus, blocking the binding of estrogen hormone to estrogen receptors. Hypothalamus detects a lack of estrogen binding at the receptors and releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GRH). GRH signals the pituitary to secrete more follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).

FSH and LH stimulate the development of ovarian follicular. Estrogen level rises after follicular development; however, it does not decrease the levels of FSH and LH because there is no negative feedback on the hypothalamus as estrogen receptors are occupied by clomiphene citrate. Clomiphene citrate is a mixture of two isomers; enclomiphene (62%) and zuclomiphene (38%). Enclomiphene has a shorter duration of action and remains in the patient’s body for few days, while zuclomiphene remains in circulation for over a month.

Indications for clomiphene citrate include WHO type II group of patients (normal hypothalamus-pituitary ovarian axis); anovulation; luteal phase defect; unexplained infertility; endometriosis stage 1 and endometriosis stage 2. Prerequisites for prescribing clomiphene citrate are normal thyroid function test, normal prolactin function test, normal male partner evaluation, normal tubal patency, and normal adrenal functions. Contraindications include suspected pregnancy, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, liver diseases, large functional ovarian cysts, and a history of hypersensitivity to any drug. Adverse effects of clomiphene citrate include vasomotor flushes, mood swings, nausea, blurred vision, visual disturbances, breast tenderness, pelvic discomfort, ovarian cancer, and OHSS (ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome). The starting dose of clomiphene citrate is 50 to 100 mg, and it can be started from day 2 through 5 of the menstrual cycle. The maximum dose should not exceed more than 150 mg. It should not be given for more than 6 ovulatory cycles.

**Tamoxifen**

Tamoxifen is useful in inducing ovulation in patients with failed clomiphene citrate treatment cycles. Rates of spontaneous abortions are lower in women having conception with tamoxifen or letrozole compared with clomiphene citrate.

**Aromatase Inhibitor**

**Letrozole**

Letrozole is an aromatase inhibitor and is used for ovulation induction. The main advantage of Letrozole is that it is a reversible enzyme inhibitor. It blocks the conversion of androgen to estrogen and thus increases the level of testosterone. It is used in a dose of 2.5 to 5 mg orally from day 2 or 3 of the cycle for five days. Its half-life is about 30 to 60 hours. Because of this short half-life of 4 to 5 hours, it is an ideal ovulation-inducing agent. Indication for its use is in clomiphene citrate resistant cases, PCOS patients, poor responders, endometriosis, an older woman, and breast cancer patients. Its major advantage over clomiphene citrate is that it has no anti-estrogenic effect on the endometrium and cervical mucus. It reduces multiple pregnancy rates and decreases the chance of OHSS. The use of letrozole has been recently increased in anovulatory infertility in comparison to clomiphene citrate.

**Dopamine Agonists**

Cabergoline is used as a dopamine agonist. It reduces vascular permeability. It decreases receptor expression for vascular endothelial growth factors. Hence, cabergoline reduces the incidence of OHSS.

**Insulin Sensitizers**

Metformin is used for ovulation induction. Metformin increases pregnancy rates in PCOS patients.

**Gonadotropins**

These directly stimulate the ovaries, which stimulates the hypothalamus and indirectly increases the FSH and LH simultaneously. Bruno Lunnenfeld first reported the use of human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG). The various FSH hormone preparations available are hMG, hMGhp, urinary FSH, FSHhp, recombinant FSH and recombinant FSH, and recombinant LH combination. Indications of gonadotropin therapy are hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypothalamus-pituitary dysfunction, CC resistant patients, CC failure patients, superovulation combined with IUI controlled ovarian hyperstimulation in ART cycles.

**Surgical Methods**

Laparoscopic ovarian drilling was first introduced by Gjonnaess in 1984. This procedure is less invasive when compared with wedge resection and involves producing multiple holes on the ovary and surface using either electrocautery or laser. Electrosurgical reduction in the volume of ovarian stroma decreases ovarian androgen production and provided a better follicular environment. Reduction in androgen production causes lesser peripheral aromatization, elevated FSH levels, and re-establishing the HPO axis.