**Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis**

The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is involved in the production of glucocorticoids and adrenal androgens from the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis. In response to circadian rhythms or stressors, paraventricular neurons (PVN) in the hypothalamus make and secrete corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).

Circulating glucocorticoids negatively feedback on the hypothalamus (long loop) and the anterior pituitary (short loop), suppressing the release of CRH and ACTH, respectively. This prevents the continued rise of glucocorticoid levels.

ACTH is released from the anterior pituitary in a pulsatile pattern that parallels the fluctuating levels of cortisol. Both ACTH and cortisol levels rise to a peak in the morning (6:00 AM to 8:00 AM) and decline throughout the day, reaching their nadir at around midnight.

**Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone-System**

The zona glomerulosa produces mineralocorticoids. While pituitary ACTH regulates adrenal glucocorticoid and androgen synthesis, it is not the primary regulator of mineralocorticoid synthesis. The 2 primary regulators of aldosterone are (1) the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and (2) potassium levels. The kidney releases renin in response to decreased renal perfusion sensed by the juxtaglomerular apparatus. Renin converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin I (AT-I), which is then converted to angiotensin II (AT-II) via angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the lung. AT-II stimulates aldosterone synthesis in the zona glomerulosa by activating aldosterone synthase.

**Adrenal Medulla and the Sympathetic Nervous System**

The sympathetic nervous system regulates the secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla.