# Continuing Education Activity

Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (NAS) is a spectrum of clinical manifestations seen in neonates due to withdrawal from intrauterine drug exposure. It is more commonly associated with maternal opioid use. The incidence of NAS has increased fivefold in the past decade, increasing hospital expenses. There is significant long term neurodevelopmental morbidity and mortality among NAS babies. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of NAS and highlights the healthcare team's role in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and epidemiology of neonatal abstinence syndrome.
- Describe the typical presentation, evaluation options, and assessment tools for neonatal abstinence syndrome.
- Outline the management models, treatment options and long term outcomes for neonatal abstinence syndrome.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by neonatal abstinence syndrome.

# Introduction

During pregnancy, substance abuse is on the rise, especially opioids, both prescribed and illicit, resulting in a hidden epidemic of neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). NAS is diagnosed every 25 minutes in the United States. It is a multisystemic disorder resulting from chronic in-utero exposure and its abrupt cessation at birth. The predominant symptoms include central nervous system (CNS), gastrointestinal (GI), and autonomic manifestations. The pathophysiology of this condition remains unknown. Multiple neonatal and maternal factors affect the expression of symptoms, including gestational age, sex, genetics, and maternal polysubstance abuse or smoking. The diagnosis is made based on an accurate maternal history and neonatal clinical features, with or without biological testing. Multiple assessment tools exist, but the traditional Finnegan scoring system is the most commonly used to evaluate neonates and make management decisions. Non-pharmacological care, like rooming-in and control of environmental factors, is the first clinical management strategy and should continue even after discharge from the hospital. Breastfeeding should be strongly encouraged unless there is maternal polysubstance abuse or maternal medical contraindication. When withdrawal signs are severe, pharmacotherapy is initiated. Although no clear consensus exists on which medication is best, morphine remains the most commonly used first-line agent.

More recent evidence supports methadone or buprenorphine to treat NAS as their use is associated with shorter hospital stays and decreased pharmacologically treated days. Phenobarbital and clonidine are useful as second-line agents with variable effects. A standardized approach to both non-pharmacological and pharmacological treatment is essential. A new management approach called "eat, sleep, and console" is based on the basic functioning of the infant, standardized non-pharmacological care, and an increase in the family's involvement in the care of the baby. This approach is showing promising results.

Management of NAS must also address maternal issues such as coexisting mental illness, intimate partner violence, and limited healthcare access to maintain the mother-infant relationship necessary for the infant's normal development. NAS is associated with long-term consequences, including but not limited to neurodevelopmental delays, behavioral problems, and, when untreated, death. Adequate data still lacks long-term outcomes attributed to NAS because of the existence of multiple uncontrollable confounding factors. A public health approach is necessary to reduce the incidence of NAS and the resultant economic burden.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.

# Etiology

The clinical features of neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) result from chronic in-utero exposure to certain drugs or substances of abuse and its abrupt cessation at birth. Research cites several drugs as possible etiologies, but traditionally opioids have been the number one etiological agent. Among opioids, heroin or morphine has been the most commonly abused drug since the 1800s. However, with improved drug manufacturing over the decades, neonatal withdrawal from prescription opioids like hydrocodone, oxycodone, and opioid-containing combination products has also been found. Likewise, NAS can also result from synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids like methadone and buprenorphine, which have been the standard for opioid addiction (medication-assisted therapy or MAT) during pregnancy.

During pregnancy, psychiatric medication usage like antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)/serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) antipsychotics, both typical and atypical, have been implicated in causing neonatal withdrawal signs and symptoms. However, caution is necessary while interpreting these symptoms as these studies have used Finnegan’s scoring to describe NAS, which he initially developed for babies having withdrawal from opioids. Several other substances like benzodiazepines, nicotine, alcohol, methamphetamine, and inhalants also may produce signs and symptoms consistent with NAS.

In addition to the possibility of being the sole etiology for NAS, substances like gabapentin, benzodiazepines, cocaine, and nicotine also alter the severity of NAS expression. Polysubstance abuse during pregnancy further potentiates the severity. Marijuana usage in pregnancy, which is the most commonly abused substance during pregnancy, and its effect on modifying the severity of NAS, is unclear.

# Epidemiology

The incidence and prevalence of neonatal abstinence syndrome require an understanding of maternal substance use epidemiology during pregnancy. Globally, as of 2016, the highest prevalence for any substance use disorder (SUD) was in Australasia, while opioid dependence disorder was highest in North America.

In the US, the prevalence of opioid use during pregnancy has increased by 333% over 15 years (1999 to 2014) and continues to rise.

The increasing incidence of NAS has, in turn, lead to increasing admission rates to NICU, from 7 per 1000 to 27 per 1000 cases.

The incidence of NAS rose from 21,732 in 2012 to 32,128 in 2016, while hospital charges have tripled to $2.5 billion.

# Pathophysiology

Neonatal abstinence syndrome is influenced by many factors, including maternal-fetal-placental pharmacokinetics, neurotransmitter dysregulation, genetic and epigenetic factors. The pathophysiology underlying NAS has not been fully understood. However, rat models show differences between neonatal and adult withdrawal processes. Although several mechanisms have been proposed as potential pathways, there appears to be a complex interaction between the various neurotransmitters (like dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate), lack of adequate expression of some opioid receptors (kappa and delta receptors), and differential maturation of neuronal circuit.

Genetic mechanisms for differences in NAS expression have additionally been suggested. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the genes for opioid receptors (mu - OPRM1, delta - OPRD1, and kappa - OPRK1) and dopamine metabolism pathway (catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene) are associated with shorter hospital stay and duration of treatment. Studies evaluating SNPs in the genes for opioid metabolism like the ABCB1 gene and cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes like CYP2B6, CYP2D6, and CYP34A have been inconclusive. Besides the genetic mechanisms, epigenetics, like DNA methylation resulting in decreased expression of OPRM1 genes, have also correlated with increased NAS expression severity.

Several neurotransmitters play some role in NAS, but most signs and symptoms of NAS are secondary to increased noradrenergic output from locus ceruleus, which is the leading site for noradrenaline production in the brain. Chronic opioid stimulation in-utero and sudden cessation post-birth lead to increased norepinephrine levels through upregulation and super-activation of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Through the same pathway, other neurotransmitters are also altered and believed to cause NAS's clinical manifestations. For example, decreased serotonin causes sleep deprivation, decreased dopamine causes hyperirritability, and increased acetylcholine causes cholinergic symptoms such as sneezing and diarrhea in NAS babies. Increased corticotropin release from activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis has also been noted to cause stress and hyperphagia during the opioid withdrawal process in the neonates.

The mechanism for signs and symptoms of withdrawal from other drugs seems to be almost similar to opioid withdrawal, although some distinction exists. Withdrawal symptoms from in-utero exposure to SSRI/SNRI may be secondary to excessive serotonin and norepinephrine. Neonatal TCA withdrawal may be due to excess cholinergic transmitters. Withdrawal symptoms from in-utero exposure to Benzodiazepines are probably due to increased gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

# Toxicokinetics

Low molecular weight and lipophilicity allow opioid drugs to transfer across the placenta to the fetus easily. Due to the same reason, these drugs can accumulate in the developing fetal brain by crossing the blood-brain barrier. There appears to be a direct relationship between the gestation age and the amount of opioids transferred across the placenta. Variations in the ability to cross the placenta also exist among the opioids; semisynthetic opioids are transported across the placenta in a lower amount than synthetic opioids. Slow metabolism and longer half-life of opioids in the fetus may be one reason for severe withdrawal symptoms.

# History and Physical

Neonatal abstinence syndrome is a constellation of signs and symptoms with multisystem involvement. The clinical features categorize into CNS, autonomic, respiratory, and GI system disturbances. Initial clinical presentation varies widely; however, the most specific presentation for withdrawal is a triad of increased muscle tone, tremors when undisturbed, and exaggerated Moro reflex. Other initial presenting symptoms include excessive high-pitched crying, irritability, sneezing, and diarrhea, all of which are due to increased noradrenergic state.

CNS symptoms typically include hyperirritability, high-pitched cry, jitteriness, and tremors. Hyperirritability, in turn, leads to sleep disturbances and difficulty maintaining a calm state.

GI symptoms observed in NAS include poor feeding, regurgitation, vomiting, and diarrhea. Heroin withdrawal is notable for severe GI symptoms leading to dehydration and electrolyte disturbances. Diarrhea, in turn, leads to skin breakdown around the perianal region and the resultant rash. Withdrawal is a state of excessive caloric demand; this, combined with the GI losses and excessive autonomic stimulation, can lead to weight loss and failure to thrive. Hence it may be necessary to increase caloric intake with feeding.

Neonatal abstinence syndrome clinical features are also believed to be due to neurobehavioral dysregulation. An imbalance exists between the four behavioral components, i.e., state control/attention, autonomic control, sensory processing, and motor and tone control. When the infant spends more time in one subsystem, such as increased muscle tone, the energy consumed in another subsystem, like attention, is very minimal, and this imbalance is also considered to be a hallmark feature. The neonate's self-regulatory capacity is lost, leading to hyperirritability and difficulty being consoled by the caregiver; this also alters the infant's developmental trajectory.

Neonatal abstinence syndrome babies have significant variability in the presenting symptoms and severity of the presentation. Inter and intra-subject differences also exist.

# Evaluation

Neonatal abstinence syndrome is a clinical diagnosis based on pertinent signs and symptoms in the setting of a high index of suspicion. A verbal history from the mother about drug use or abuse, taken in a non-judgmental, non-threatening, and caring manner, helps identify the majority of the NAS cases. However, this history may not be readily available, and hence, testing the infant may be necessary. Several methods are available to identify and/or confirm the in-utero drug exposure; the infant's urine, meconium, cord blood, or hair can be useful options. Testing the infant's urine or meconium for drugs is most commonly practiced because of its ease of collection and timely results. Urine testing can identify drug exposure only a few days before delivery. Depending on the type, the timing of the last dose, and the cumulative amount of drug exposure in-utero, the maternal drugs may be identified in the infant's urine between 2 to 4 days. If there is a delay in collecting neonatal urine, there is a high chance of false-negative results. Hence it is important to collect the urine as soon as possible, preferably the first void urine. Meconium testing can identify drug exposure dating back to 20 weeks of gestation and hence, more sensitive than the urine test. Internal metabolism and clearance of drugs in both the mother and the fetus can also affect the result. Most opioids can be identified by either of these tests, except for synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids, which require a specialized test to identify. Although these immunoassay screening tests are easy to perform in most hospitals, confirmatory mass spectroscopy tests are expensive and require advanced expertise. Hair and umbilical cord testing for drugs have also been evaluated but found to be less sensitive, with practical difficulties, and hence, its clinical utility is limited. All of the above tests have false positive and false negative results and require cautious interpretation. False-positive results are common with amphetamine exposure, when there was soap or alcohol used before collecting the specimens or when meconium has urine contamination. Maternal usage of analgesics during the peripartum period can positively result in the infant's test and hence also require cautious interpretation. False negatives can occur after marijuana exposure or improper storage of meconium. The best yield for confirmation is a combination of maternal urine and infant meconium testing.

The assessment for babies with known or suspected fetal exposure must start at birth. Several tools have been developed over decades to assess the severity and the need to start, adjust and wean interventions, specifically pharmacological agents. The Finnegan Neonatal Abstinence Scoring System (FNASS) and its modified versions have long been considered the "gold standard" for NAS assessment.

To overcome the limitations of FNASS, multiple scoring tools have undergone development.

Alternative assessment approaches have also been attempted. A new approach called the "Eat, Sleep, Console" model was recently developed based on the basic functioning of infants, the family's involvement in the infant's care, and maximizing the non-pharmacological treatments before starting medications.

# Treatment / Management

Management options for neonatal abstinence syndrome can broadly divide into non-pharmacological, alternative, and pharmacological treatments.

**Non-pharmacological Treatment**

Treatment should always begin with non-pharmacological care while maintaining the mother-infant dyad and should continue even after discharge from the hospital. The goal of non-pharmacological treatment is to assist the self-organization of the neonate and support the neuro-maturation. AAP has also recommended it as first-line in the management of NAS.

Since opioids are present in minute quantities in breastmilk, breastfeeding should be strongly encouraged unless the mother has other absolute contraindications such as HIV, Hepatitis B or C, polysubstance abuse, or IV drug abuse. The support for breastfeeding has also received endorsement by various organizations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics. But several barriers to breastfeeding among women in Medication-Assisted Treatment (MAT) program exist, and efforts must take place to overcome those to reap the benefits of breastfeeding that is beneficial to the infant's neurodevelopmental outcomes.

There may be a debilitation of maternal well-being in the perinatal period. Hence, multi-level professional care must be offered to the mother and maintain the mother-infant dyad. Despite many studies showing the benefits of preserving the dyad, significant barriers exist. For example, mothers report feeling guilty or having mistrust and judgmental behavior from the staff caring for their baby. Provider biases preventing the involvement of the mother in the individualized care of the infant also exist. Hence to reap the benefits of this strong relationship, physicians must support and teach the parent in a non-judgemental way to optimize the non-pharmacological care for their infant, which can be easily provided at the bedside by the parent and continued even after discharge from the hospital.

**Alternative Treatment**

Many alternative therapies have undergone evaluation for their use in NAS. Massage therapy, foot and auricular acupressure therapy, and Reiki have correlated with soothing effects and positive changes in the baby's vitals. A recent study on laser acupuncture has shown a reduction in LOS, although the LOS is comparatively longer than the national average. Besides these, ongoing studies are evaluating the effects of aromatherapy and music therapy, as well.

**Pharmacological Treatment**

Even though nonpharmacological treatment remains the first line, AAP endorses the use of pharmacotherapy when indicated, keeping in mind that it is also associated with a more extended overall stay in the hospital, which is detrimental to the mother-infant dyad.

Multiple studies, including randomized control trials, have been conducted to find the optimal medication. Still, the results have varied widely in length of stay in hospital and treatment duration. Despite these variations, opioids remain the preferred mainstay pharmacological agent in the treatment of NAS, although there is no clear consensus on the choice of opioids.

Methadone, a long-acting synthetic opioid, has been evaluated as an alternative. It has the advantage of being dosed twice daily due to its long half-life, but that also limits the dose's frequent titration. The length of stay had ranged from 16 to 44 days when using methadone. Recent evidence shows only a modest reduction of LOS with methadone compared to morphine.

Buprenorphine, a partial agonist opioid, has recently drawn attention because it correlates with shorter length of stay than morphine and methadone and its ease of use through sublingual administration. Even though the LOS range was between 12.4 days and 32 days, recent RCT showed that the median LOS was significantly shorter by 12 days compared to morphine.

Second-line pharmacotherapy for infants whose symptoms remain uncontrolled with maxed opioid treatment includes Phenobarbital and clonidine. Again, there is no clear consensus that among the two, one is more effective, but Phenobarbital is used more frequently in the US than clonidine.

Naloxone, an opioid antagonist, is not recommended in the management of NAS because it can precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Its efficacy, dosing, and safety profile in neonates have not received adequate study as well.

Pharmacotherapy can get weaned and discontinued once the NAS signs and symptoms are well-controlled based on the scoring tool used. Many institutions have used a 10 to 20% reduction in the daily dosing of the opioid as the weaning protocol. However, there is no consistency among institutions, and the necessity of longer weaning protocols is also questionable.

**Location of the Treatment**

Babies with neonatal abstinence syndrome have long received treatment in the NICU, and this has been a traditional practice than evidence-based. According to a recent Pediatric Health Information System (PHIS) database, about 87% of neonates with NAS were managed in the NICU.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is vital to consider other diagnoses before attributing the clinical features to neonatal abstinence syndrome, even if there is a clear history of prenatal drug exposure. In some cases where maternal history is unyielding or unclear, physicians can mistake some signs and symptoms of NAS as a different condition. For example, autonomic instability leading to mottling, sweating, tachypnea, and changes in temperature in NAS can be mistaken for sepsis.

Essential diagnoses to consider in evaluating a patient with NAS include:

- Sepsis

- Birth trauma

- Gastrointestinal reflux

- Hyperthyroidism

- Hypoglycemia

- Hypocalcemia

- Hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy

# Prognosis

Poor long-term outcomes have correlated with infants with prenatal opioid exposure. Research exists about adverse changes in neurodevelopment, cognition, school performance, behavior, vision, and mortality. However, researchers have inferred many of these results from observational studies. The presence of multiple prenatal confounders such as polysubstance exposure, prematurity, intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), and postnatal confounders like NAS pharmacotherapy, continued maternal drug abuse, maternal socioeconomic and environmental factors, makes it challenging to attribute prenatal opioid exposure as the cause for the poor outcomes.

Studies have consistently shown a significant difference in neurodevelopmental outcomes in opioid-exposed infants versus their counterparts.

Prenatal opioid exposure has been linked to psycho-behavioral problems, as well. These children are two times more likely to be identified with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorders, and adjustment disorders. They are also more likely to be aggressive and have anxiety disorder compared to their controls. Infants with NAS are reportedly at increased risk of rehospitalization during childhood due to maltreatment, trauma, and behavioral problems. The mortality rates have been consistently higher among opioid-exposed infants for many decades and across many developed countries, with rates as high as four times in New York City. These indicate the need for continued support for this highly complex and vulnerable population.

Despite all these findings, a large randomized control trial called MOTHER (Maternal Opioid Treatment: Human Experimental Research) study evaluated the neurodevelopmental and growth outcomes among NAS infants and found conflicting long-term outcomes.

# Complications

Opioid-exposed babies, more commonly after heroin exposure, are more likely to be born premature, have intrauterine growth restriction and low birth weight. As alluded to earlier, due to the hypermetabolic state combined with difficulties in feeding and increased intestinal losses, these babies are at high risk for growth failure. NAS has been associated with life-threatening complications - seizures, especially in methadone-exposed infants, even though recent evidence shows it's a rare occurrence secondary to withdrawal. Ultimately, NAS babies are at higher risk for death as well.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Following discharge from the hospital, a close follow-up must be arranged with the medical provider to assess for relapse or late onset of NAS symptoms, monitor weight to prevent growth failure, and reinforce caregiver education. Arranging follow-up with subspecialty clinics such as developmental pediatrics, child psychiatry, pediatric ophthalmology, pediatric neurology, occupational therapist, physical therapist, and dietician may be necessary for early identification and management of the long-term problems that commonly present in NAS infants.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The mother or caregiver and the patient's family should receive education on natural history, medical management, complications, and NAS prognosis. Any women of the childbearing age group must be informed about the potentially harmful effects of drug abuse, including NAS. It is a preventable condition if the woman stops drug usage before becoming pregnant or stops the drug usage once pregnant. It may be necessary to enroll the woman in a safe, supervised medical program - MAT if it is not safe to stop the drugs during the pregnancy. Symptoms of NAS can happen within 24 to 48 hours of life or as late as one week after birth. So it is necessary to look out for such symptoms even after discharge from the hospital. Management during hospital stay includes supportive care for the baby, and the mother should be actively involved in their baby's care. Some babies may require medications to relieve discomfort and other problems of withdrawal. Breastfeeding is strongly encouraged as the benefits are immense, and it does not affect the symptoms of NAS. Breastfeeding is a contraindication only if the mother has any medical contraindication. After discharge from the hospital, it is crucial to have close follow-up with medical providers to avoid NAS complications. More information for the patient's family is available at the American Academy of Pediatrics website.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Several authors have called for national public health measures to curtail the opioid epidemic and the hidden public health crisis of neonatal abstinence syndrome. A multi-faceted, interprofessional team approach involving healthcare professionals, researchers, and government officials is required to improve mothers' care with substance use disorder (SUD) and their infants with NAS.

Management of NAS must start from the prenatal period and span across the perinatal period.

NAS assessment requires standardization, and tools must be developed based on strong clinical data instead of psychometrics. Non-pharmacological care must be provided to all infants with NAS, be standardized, and include couplet care across units to promote rooming-in, breastfeeding, and skin-to-skin.

State and federal governments need to recognize the growing problem of NAS, which remains a hidden consequence of the opioid epidemic. States must have laws that clearly define what is reportable. The diagnosis and definition of NAS must be standardized to better surveillance and understand the epidemic.