A Lisfranc dislocation or injury describes a spectrum of injuries involving the tarsometatarsal joints of the foot. The Lisfranc joint is comprised of the articulation between the first, second, and third metatarsals bones and the cuneiform bones. Injuries of the joint can range from complete tarsometatarsal displacement with associated fractures and ligamentous tears to partial sprains with no displacement. Although a Lisfranc injury can involve various parts of the foot the Lisfranc ligament itself is an isolated ligament that connects the medial cuneiform to the second metatarsal. Lisfranc joint injuries are uncommon and are often misdiagnosed and mismanaged. It is important to recognize these injuries early and start treatment promptly because failure to recognize and treat these will lead to midfoot arthritis, chronic pain, and functional instability. Even when recognized and treated promptly, there is still a high risk for chronic disability and complications. This activity describes the pathophysiology , evaluation, and management of Lisfranc joint injuries and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the causes of Lisfranc joint injuries.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with a Lisfranc joint injury.
- Describe the treatment options for Lisfranc joint injuries.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to enhance outcomes for patients with Lisfranc joint injuries.