The spine is made up of vertebral bones and intervertebral discs. There are seven cervical, twelve thoracic, and five lumbar vertebrae plus the sacrum. Posterior elements of the vertebra include the vertebral arch, spinous process, pedicles, and laminae. The vertebral body forms the anterior element. The thoracic spinous processes are angulated steeply and project inferiorly, while lumbar spinous processes are nearly horizontal. At each vertebral level, paired spinal nerves exit the central nervous system (CNS).

The spinal cord occupies the vertebral column, surrounded by the pia mater, arachnoid mater, and dura mater. It is widely taught that the spinal cord extends from the foramen magnum to L1 in adults and L3 in children, moving cephalad with age. Therefore, a lumbar puncture below L1 in an adult and L3 in children should avoid needle trauma to the spinal cord. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) resides in the subarachnoid or intrathecal (IT) space. Layers from outermost to innermost to reach the IT space include skin, subcutaneous fat, supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, ligamentum flavum, dura mater, subdural space, arachnoid mater, and subarachnoid space.

CSF is found in the cerebral ventricles, cisterns, and subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal cord. It cushions the CNS from trauma and helps clear waste products. Most CSF is formed by the choroid plexuses of the lateral ventricles, some by the ventricles' ependymal cell linings, and smaller quantities formed from fluids leaking into perivascular space from surrounding cerebral vessels. CSF production in adults is 21 mL/hr, with a total volume of about 150 ml. CSF flows from lateral ventricles through the intraventricular foramina into the third ventricle, through the cerebral aqueduct into the fourth ventricle, and through the foramen of Magendie and the foramina of Luschka into the cerebellomedullary cistern. CSF enters the subarachnoid space from the cerebellomedullary cistern, circulating the brain and spinal cord before being absorbed in arachnoid granulations. CSF is isotonic with plasma despite lower potassium, bicarbonate, and glucose concentrations. Its protein content is limited. Absorption of CSF is the principal means by which perivascular and interstitial protein is returned to the blood due to a lack of lymphatics in the CNS.

**Pharmacology**

Morphine is the neuraxial opioid used most often due to its long duration of action compared with fentanyl and sufentanil. Morphine mainly binds to mu-opioid receptor subtypes.