While in the storage phase, urine is contained in the bladder by the tone of sphincter complexes. The internal urinary sphincter, an elongation of the trigone/detrusor muscle, encircles the neck of the bladder.

During urine storage, the proximal urethral pressure must exceed the pressure within the bladder to ensure continence. While the bladder is filling, urethral pressure increases progressively through the stimulation of internal and external sphincters via the hypogastric and pudendal nerve, respectively. This is known as “the guarding reflex.” When there is an urge for voiding, inhibition from the midbrain and prefrontal cortex is reduced, and the guarding reflex is suppressed by the pontine micturition center through the spinobulbospinal tracts. There is inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system, a decrease in the stimulation of Onuf’s nucleus and the pudendal nerve, causing relaxation of the external sphincter muscle that results in decreased urethral pressures. Micturition then occurs with the activation of the parasympathetic nervous system (S2–S4). However, in DSD, the detrusor contracts against a closed bladder outlet as there is an involuntary contraction of the urinary sphincter. Pathophysiologically, this probably occurs from disruption of the spinobulbospinal tract between the pontine micturition complex and Onuf’s nucleus resulting in increased urethral closure pressures during detrusor contractions.

Hydronephrosis and renal deterioration have been associated with sustained, elevated detrusor pressures over 40 cm of water.

There may also be an association between DSD and autonomic dysreflexia, but this has been difficult to document as diagnosing these two conditions has not been standardized.