Several other conditions present with involvement of the dorsal and lateral columns and can mimic the clinical and radiologic findings of subacute combined degeneration:

- **Nutritional/metabolic deficiency or toxicity:**Copper deficiency and vitamin E deficiency can both present with T2 hyperintensity of dorsal columns and mimic the neurological deficits of subacute combined degeneration. Copper deficiency mainly occurs in patients with a history of gastrointestinal surgery, zinc overload, parenteral nutrition, malabsorption, or malnutrition. Low levels of copper and ceruloplasmin and the presence of myelodysplastic syndrome differentiate this condition from subacute combined degeneration. Vitamin E deficiency and methotrexate-induced myelopathy may also look identical to subacute combined degeneration.

- **Demyelinating myelopathy:**Transverse myelitis can cause demyelination of the spinal cord, but unlike subacute combined degeneration, demyelination does not preferentially involve dorsal columns and is limited to one or two spinal segments. Multiple sclerosis is another cause of demyelinating lesions, although the spinal cord involvement is asymmetric and affects fewer segments. Multiple sclerosis mainly affects younger patients and may be associated with other signs and symptoms (scanning speech, intention tremor, nystagmus).

- **Infectious myelopathy:**Vacuolar myelopathy can occur in HIV-positive patients with low CD4 counts and shares the histology, MRI findings, and symptoms of subacute combined degeneration. It presents similarly with symmetrical involvement of the posterolateral columns. A history of HIV, low CD 4 counts, opportunistic infections, AIDS-defining illness, and malignancy helps to establish a diagnosis. Tabes dorsalis, a form of late neurosyphilis that damages the dorsal columns, can also present with sensory ataxia and bladder involvement. Differentiating features include dorsal root involvement, lancinating pain, and the presence of Argyll Robertson pupils.

- **Friedreich’s ataxia:**An autosomal recessive disorder seen in adolescents that affects the dorsal and spinocerebellar tracts can present with impaired proprioception, vibration, and depressed tendon reflexes. Other associated features include cervical cord atrophy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hammertoes, nystagmus, and pes cavus.

- **Leukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation:**An autosomal recessive condition, seen mostly in adolescents and children that symmetrically involves the posterolateral columns. Unlike subacute combined degeneration, this condition affects the entire spinal cord and can extend to involve the medulla.

- Other disorders include inflammatory conditions such as sarcoidosis, ischemic lesions, and malignancies.