**Infant Respiratory Distress**

Infant respiratory distress is the leading cause of death in premature babies. Type II pneumocytes produce surfactant starting around 20 weeks gestation, but it is not fully secreted until nearly 30 weeks of pregnancy. Without ample surfactant, premature infants cannot overcome the collapsing surface tension in the respiratory alveoli.  Physicians hope to prevent infant respiratory distress when a patient goes into premature labor by offering the parent glucocorticoids.

**Emphysema**

The most common cause of emphysema is smoking; although, it can be caused by repetitive inhalation of any foreign particulate material. Emphysema, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), is characterized by poor airflow and difficulty exhaling because of narrowing bronchioles and the destruction of the alveolar wall. The collapse of the alveoli results in a significant loss of surface area for gas exchange.

Healthcare professionals assume that the destruction of the alveolar wall is a result of excessive lysis of elastin in the interalveolar septum. The abundance of macrophages and neutrophils that migrate to the acinus due to an increase in particulate bring an equal rise of elastase and other proteases. Alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency also causes emphysema because of an increase in elastin; however, in this disease, it is because the deficient antitrypsin usually inhibits elastin.

**Cystic Fibrosis**

Cystic fibrosis may also cause chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It is an autosomal recessive disease caused by a mutation to the CFTR gene on chromosome 7. This gene controls the Cl- channel protein involved in a variety of cells, including goblet cells in the lungs. The defective Cl-channel affects the viscosity of the mucus in the lungs. Thickening is due to increased absorption of sodium (Na) and water from the lumen. The thickened mucus disrupts the mucociliary escalator filtration function of the lungs resulting in obstruction. One of the supportive treatments for cystic fibrosis breaks the disulfide bonds found in mucous plugs, thinning out the sputum so it can be pushed out by the respiratory cilia.

**Heart Failure Cells**

In heart failure, the heart's inability to move blood efficiently results in congestion of the lungs. The increase in pressure of the blood in the pulmonary vasculature results in erythrocytes passing into the alveolar septum. The erythrocytes are promptly taken up by resident alveolar macrophages. As the macrophages engulf any red blood cells present, they are filled with hemosiderin and take on a brown granule appearance viewable under light microscopy with staining.

**Tumor Staging**

When staging primary carcinoma of the lung, it is crucial to identify the invasion of the elastic layer of the visceral pleura. This finding will increase the T stage of the tumor.  Since the elastic layer is difficult to visualize with routine stains, a special elastin stain may be used to demonstrate this finding.