The history and physical examination should drive the evaluation and workup of a patient with suspected anterior tibial compartment syndrome, and the diagnosis is largely clinical. For example, evaluating for acute trauma, chronic exertional compartment syndrome, and snake envenomation all have a very different clinical context. Evaluation should be directed at the primary etiology of the patient’s symptoms. In patients with classic symptoms of compartment syndrome associated with a tibial fracture, further workup is often unnecessary. Lab work early in the course of the disease is likely to be within a normal distribution.

Measurement of intracompartmental pressure remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of compartment syndrome. Measurement is typically performed using a needle manometer. However other techniques that include slit catheter, microtip pressure, wick catheter, and microcapillary infusion are available. Ultrasound does not increase the diagnostic accuracy of needle placement.

In chronic exertional compartment syndrome, compartment pressures are measured at rest. Then the patient exercises until symptomatic, and compartment pressures are measured again and compared to the baseline. The modified Pedowitz criteria are generally accepted for the diagnosis of CECS. Patients are considered positive with one or more of the following findings: (1) Pre-exercise pressure greater than or equal to 15 mmHg, (2) 1-minute post-exercise pressure greater than or equal to 30 mmHg, or (3) 5-minute post-exercise pressure greater than or equal to 25 mmHg.

In general, imaging studies do not have a role in the diagnosis of compartment syndrome. They are likely to help exclude other causes of the patient's symptoms. Radiographs are the initial imaging study of choice in a patient with suspicion for anterior tibial pain.