Evaluation of couples with RPL should be thorough and should include the following:

**Assessment of Medical Problems**

Studies should be performed to rule out diabetes, thyroid problems

**Genetic Evaluation**

Karyotype assessment of the couples has to be offered to recognize underlying balanced, reciprocal, or Robertsonian translocations or mosaicism that might be transmitted to the fetus, causing RPL. Though these tests are of low yield and expensive, one should consider evaluating the karyotypes of the couples with RPL.

**Assessment of the Uterine Anomalies**

There are several modalities that can be used to identify congenitally and acquired uterine anomalies, some of the valuable tools are the following:

- Pelvic ultrasound

- Saline infusion sonohysterography

- Hysterosalpingogram

- Hysteroscopy

- MRI is very valuable in identifying congenital uterine anomalies.

**Immunologic Work Up**

Investigations for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome must be undertaken. Measurement of anticardiolipin antibody, lupus anticoagulant, and anti-beta 2 glycoprotein should be done for patients with RPL. Studies have reported that anticardiolipin antibody and lupus anticoagulant has been associated with pregnancy loss, and testing for APAS  for patients with RPL is recommended.

**Progesterone Level**

Routine assessment of serum progesterone levels is not recommended, as it is not predictive of future pregnancy outcomes.

**Endometrial Biopsy**

A large number of studies show that this test is not reflective of fertility status in a woman.

**Testing for Infections**

In a healthy woman without symptoms, routine vaginal and cervical cultures for chlamydia, gonorrhea, bacterial vaginosis, and testing for TORCH serology are not useful in the evaluation of RPL.

**Evaluation of products of Conception (POC)**

Using a 24-chromosome microarray analysis adds significantly to the ASRM (American Society of Reproductive Medicine) recommended RPL assessment. Genetic evaluation of miscarriage tissue obtained at the time of the second and subsequent pregnancy losses should be offered to all couples with two or more consecutive pregnancy losses. The combination of a genetic evaluation on miscarriage tissue with an evidence-based assessment for RPL will identify a probable or definitive cause in over 90 percent of miscarriages.