Within the past two decades, there have been many reports about medication errors, and patient safety remains a concern. It is estimated that medication errors alone account for anywhere from 7000 to 10,000 deaths annually in the United States. While medication errors have many causes, one of the ways to reduce these errors is by improving written communication, whether electronic or written. In 2004, the Joint Commission developed the "Do Not Use" list of medical abbreviations as part of the requirements for meeting the National Patient Safety Goal, which primarily addresses the effectiveness of communication between healthcare workers. The Joint Commission has also recommended that all healthcare institutions create a standard list of acronyms, abbreviations, and symbols that should not be used. However, despite the development of "Do Not Use" lists, compliance is not 100%.

Further, the Joint Commission has banned the use of medical abbreviations in documents that pertain to patient rights, informed consent forms, discharge instructions, and all other documents that a patient and the family may receive from the healthcare institution.

The Joint Commission has also recommended having a uniform and standardized list of symbols, codes, and abbreviations that can enhance communication and understanding among healthcare workers, leading to improved patient safety. Many healthcare workers have consistently reported that they have a  great deal of difficulty interpreting medical abbreviations, even in their own hospitals.

To prevent any misunderstanding and jeopardize patient safety, the Joint Commission now requires healthcare institutions to develop a list of approved and not approved medical abbreviations. In addition, there should be a system or an audit process to ensure that there is compliance.

The healthcare institution must ensure that the medical abbreviation in the approved list is also not on the Do not use a list or vice versa. Further, if a medical abbreviation is permitted, then it can have only one universal meaning. For example, DOA can mean Date of Admission or Dead on Arrival.

The Joint Commission also recommends that healthcare institutions not use abbreviations on any patient-related documents. It is important to ensure that the patient and the family can understand the information provided to them without having to guess. Often patients have difficulty understanding discharge instructions, which can affect their ability to look after themselves or follow instructions.

The information in the discharge instructions must be clear and unambiguous; many times, the patient may feel embarrassed to ask questions about abbreviations, and this can impact the quality of care.

Sometimes laboratory results are sent to the patient, but this information often contains abbreviations. Whenever test results are provided to the patient, the healthcare provider should make a concerted effort to explain the results to the patient. While the use of imaging test names like CT and MRI are often abbreviated, it is essential for the healthcare provider to spell out other not well-known tests; for example, instead of "BE," the patient should be told "BE" means a barium enema.

**How can healthcare institutions reduce or eliminate medical abbreviation usage?**

Today some hospitals recommend that junior staff refuse to carry out orders that use medical abbreviations. In addition, physicians who write medical abbreviations are reprimanded. However, instead of enforcing authoritarian rules, the tide has now turned towards using more intensive and focused educational strategies to increase compliance with hospital rules (Abushaiqa et al., 2007). To encourage compliance, the following education interventions may help reduce medical abbreviations.

- Describe the abbreviation and provide a rationale for why and how it can lead to an error

- When an abbreviation is encountered, speak to the healthcare provider

- Teach junior staff and students about the dangers of using medical abbreviations

- Develop a list of prohibited medical abbreviations and post them on every medical floor

- If a medical abbreviation is to be used, then provide the dose designation and correct terminology

- Develop a list of medication abbreviations that can pose a risk to patient safety

- Develop posters and stickers on prohibited medical abbreviations that can be placed on medical charts, medicine cabinets, order sheets, and in the pharmacy

- Have regular in-service education sessions for physicians, nursing staff, pharmacists, and other healthcare professionals

- Perform regular audits on the charts to determine who is still using medical abbreviations and what is the frequency

- Develop a system where nursing and other healthcare staff report the use of medical abbreviations by other staff. This is not meant to be as a whistleblower, but to identify the individual and punish them and to educate them about the dangers of medical abbreviation.