The most important differential to consider in patients with RA and neutropenia is LGL leukemia. Also termed "pseudo-Felty syndrome," it can present as neutropenia with or without splenomegaly. Most patients with LGL leukemia have an associated autoimmune condition, particularly RA; therefore, it can be challenging to distinguish FS from LGL leukemia. Immunophenotyping showing cytotoxic T lymphocytes with CD 2, 3, 8, 16, and 57 surface marker positivity together with bone marrow biopsy and peripheral smear showing increased LGL cells can help in differentiating the two diseases. Many consider these two to be part of the same disease continuum rather than separate entities. The involvement of a hematologist to rule out hematological malignancy as the cause of neutropenia is important.

Other causes of neutropenia and splenomegaly should be evaluated and ruled out. Medications are an important cause to consider. Methotrexate can cause bone marrow suppression and neutropenia in patients with RA. Similarly, TNF inhibitors can cause neutropenia. Worsening of neutropenia after temporary cessation of these agents provides a clue to the diagnosis of Felty syndrome. Viral infections like EBV and HIV can present with neutropenia and splenomegaly. If suspected, serological tests can help rule out these conditions. Other autoimmune conditions such as lupus, which can have similar features as an extra-articular RA, can usually be distinguished through clinical features and serological tests.