The platysma is a thin muscle that extends from the upper thorax to the cheek and lower lip. It functions to draw the central lip inferiorly (the commissure of the lip is contracted inferiorly via the depressor anguli oris, innervated by the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve), and tense the neck superficially, and receives nerve supply from the cervical branch of the facial nerve.

The sternocleidomastoid muscle has two muscle heads that originate from the sternal manubrium and the medial clavicle. These muscle heads merge and insert at the mastoid process of the temporal bone and the superior nuchal line. It functions to rotate the head to the opposite side that is contracting. Its innervation is by CN XI.

The trapezius muscle is a large muscle of the back that extends from the external protuberance of the occipital bone inferiorly to the lower thoracic vertebrae and laterally to the spine of the scapula. CN XI innervates the trapezius, and functions to stabilize and move the scapula.

The suprahyoid muscles consist of the digastric, mylohyoid, and geniohyoid muscles. These muscles attach to the hyoid bone and portions of the mandible, except for the digastric muscle. The digastric muscle has two bellies, the posterior belly of which attaches to the mastoid process of the temporal bone. Innervation of the geniohyoid is via CN XII, also known as the hypoglossal nerve. The anterior belly of the digastric muscles and the mylohyoid receive nerve supply from the mylohyoid nerve, a tributary of the mandibular division of CN V. The facial nerve innervates the digastric muscle's posterior belly. Their function is to elevate the hyoid bone.

The infrahyoid muscles consist of the thyrohyoid, omohyoid, sternothyroid, and sternohyoid muscles. They all obtain their nerve supply via the ansa cervicalis (C1-C3) except for the thyrohyoid muscle, which is innervated by CN XII. The omohyoid muscle originates at the scapula, passes around the sternocleidomastoid, and attaches to the hyoid bone. The names of the sternohyoid, sternothyroid, and thyrohyoid muscles describe their origin and insertion sites.