As noted above, both history and physical examination may provide few diagnostic cues as to the etiology of pneumonia (bacterial versus virus). With the existence of specific effective treatment modalities, diagnoses of and identification of viruses causing pneumonia is of increased importance. Fortunately, the diagnostic acuity of laboratory examination in combination with radiography and history and physical examination has progressed.**Laboratory Examination****CBC with differential**- There are no absolute diagnostic findings as viral pneumonia may result in elevated, normal, or decreased WBC counts. However, viral etiology is less commonly associated with elevated WBC and "left shifts" of the differential than bacterial types of pneumonia.**Chemistry panel**- Useful for gauging the degree of dehydration, relative renal dysfunction, and dosing of renal excreted medications**C-reactive protein **- As a reactive phase reactant, the CRP level may be elevated with viral pneumonia, although this is not a specific or sensitive finding.**ELISA
****- rapid antigen tests**- ELISA tests allow real-time data for a number of viral pneumonia pathogens. Commonly available ELISA tests include the following:

- Herpes simplex virus (HSV)

- Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)

- Influenza A and B

- Cytomegalovirus (CMV)

A caveat is that many viruses may be detected via ELISA in the presence of other known bacterial pathogens, and in some cases, the detection of a viral pathogen does not always indicate active disease. **Gene amplification**- First and second-generation PCR testing exists and may allow viral pneumonia etiology diagnosis within clinically relevant timing.  Clinically available tests using PCR methodology include the following:

- CMV

- RSV

- HPV

- Coronal viruses

**Cytological evaluation**- No single cytological evaluation of patient tissue cells is entirely diagnostic for viral pneumonia. However, the generalization can be made that DNA viruses typically produce intra-nuclear inclusions, and RNA viruses typically produce cytoplasmic inclusions.**Viral culture**- Although viral cultures are the gold standard for the final diagnosis of viral pneumonia, there are limitations such as the following:

- Viral cultures are routinely not available for 10 to 15 days, which limits them for acute clinical care decisions.

- The cultures are very dependent on obtaining a valid specimen.

- The success of delivering a viable specimen to the lab varies as many of the viruses have very specific transport requirements.

- The fastidious nature of some viral pathogens limits the validity of a negative culture result.

**Viral antigens serology** - The great majority of the viral entities involved in viral pneumonia have serological markers that can be obtained in the tract. Diagnostic problems include positive serology obtained for people with chronic viral infections that are not a factor in the presence of pneumonia and the limited use in acute treatment and decision making of viral pneumonia. **Chest x-ray** - As there is a tremendous overlap in findings on chest x-ray with both bacterial pneumonia and viral pneumonia, no one finding or set of findings is pathognomonic.

Features that are suggestive of bacterial pneumonia include the following:

- Alveolar infiltrates

- Lobar consolidation

- Nodular densities

- Pleural effusion

Features that are more suggestive of viral pneumonia include the following:

- Interstitial infiltrates

- Patchy distribution of interstitial infiltrates

- Bilateral infiltrates

- Pneumonia-like syndrome with an unremarkable chest x-ray

**Chest CT scan** - The advent of thin-section CT scan has revolutionized the radiographic diagnosis of viral pneumonia. It has been observed, particularly in cases of viral pneumonia-like clinical presentation and normal chest radiography, thin-section CT scan will be positive for parenchymal defects and aid in diagnosis.