Hydrocephalus, if left untreated, can cause permanent brain damage, physical and mental impairment, and death. Initial treatment is directed to the etiology. In cases of intraparenchymal hemorrhage or tumors, surgical evacuation may resolve the hydrocephalus. When hydrocephalus persists, treatment is surgical with the insertion of a ventricular shunt.

Ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt is the most common type of shunt. It usually drains CSF from the lateral ventricle to the peritoneal cavity; in children, it has the advantage that the distal peritoneal part may be left long and will not require changing during the growth of the child. The other common type is a ventriculoatrial shunt (VA) shunt. It shunts CSF through the jugular vein and superior vena cava into the right atrium. It’s mostly used in patients with abdominal abnormalities like peritonitis, after extensive abdominal surgery, or morbid obesity. Ventriculo-pleural shunt is a second line option only if the treatments mentioned above fail. A lumboperitoneal shunt is considered in cases of pseudotumor cerebri. Historically, in cases of acquired obstructive hydrocephalus, a shunt of choice was a Torkildsen shunt. It shunts the ventricles to the basal posterior cisternal space.

There are alternatives to shunting that may be considered. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) opens the floor of the third ventricle to permit the CSF in the third ventricle to enter the prepontine basal cistern. ETV is commonly used in cases of aqueductal stenosis to prevent a permanent shunt; however, the result in very young infants is not good. Also, results are not good in patients with long-standing shunted obstructed hydrocephalus as the arachnoid granulations had lost the absorptive capacity. Choroid plexus coagulation can be used for cases over-production of CSF. Repeat lumbar punctures can be done in cases of communicating hydrocephalus if it’s considered that spontaneous resorption is likely to occur.

Acute hydrocephalus is a medical emergency. For those cases where a shunt can not be placed urgently, an anterior fontanelle ventricular tap may be performed in infants. In adults and children, placement of external ventricular drain is the most common procedure performed in these cases. Lumbar puncture in posthemorrhagic and postmeningitic hydrocephalus is an option.

Premature infants with posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus may improve with serial fontanelle taps. The majority of patients with a posterior fossa tumor who present with hydrocephalus do not require a permanent shunt. A ventriculostomy may be placed temporarily preoperative or intraoperative to help for the tumor resection and removed when not needed. Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, decreases CSF secretion by the choroid plexus and hence used in the treatment of hydrocephalus. It is mostly used in pseudotumor cerebri.