The evaluation of an acute laryngitis patient must always begin with a thorough history and physical examination. Special attention should be directed at recent URI or other illnesses, sick contacts, or any other signs of systemic illness. The physician should also explore past medical history including immune status, immunization status, allergy and travel history, and history of other confounding pathologies such as GERD. Special attention should be paid to the onset and duration of the symptoms, as well as if they have ever happened before. If the patient has been treated prior to presentation, the efficacy and nature of such treatment must be explored also.

Initial symptoms of acute laryngitis are usually abrupt in onset and worsen over two or three days, though may persist up to a week without treatment. These can include:

- Change in quality of voice, in later stages there may be a complete loss of voice (aphonia)

- Discomfort and pain in the throat, particularly after talking

- Dysphagia, odynophagia (if present, exercise caution - may hint at additional pathology)

- Dry cough

- General symptoms of dryness of throat, malaise, and fever

- Frequent throat-clearing

- Early voice fatigue or loss of vocal range

Diagnosis can usually be made based on history.

The examination of the larynx can confirm the diagnosis. Indirect examination of the airway with a mirror or with a flexible laryngoscope is warranted. Laryngeal appearance can vary with the severity of the disease. In the early stages, there is erythema and edema of the epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, arytenoids, and vocal cords. As the disease progresses the vocal cords can become erythematous as well as edematous. The subglottic region may be involved, depending upon the inciting agent, though this is rarer. Sticky, ropy, secretions may also be seen between vocal cords or in the inter-arytenoid region. In the case of vocal abuse or misuse, several changes can be seen in the vocal folds. Reinke's edema is a common finding in both acute and chronic laryngitis. Submucosal hemorrhage may be seen in acute vocal trauma, or previously undiagnosed nodules or pseudo-nodules may be present. If left untreated, all of these can progress to chronic voice pathology.