Despite continual improvement in surgical care and rehabilitation of flexor tendon injuries, complications still occur; their effects on hand function can be devastating and long-lasting.

- Ruptures are slightly more common in flexor pollicis longus than other tendons, occurring in approximately 5% of all total repairs. Rupture warrants immediate exploration and re-repair before scarring and retraction prevent successful repeat repair.

- 
              
- The greatest protection against repair site rupture is a well-performed multistrand core suture, with a concomitant running circumferential repair and early initiation of high-quality hand therapy. 
              
              
- 
                  
- Reports have demonstrated that 2-stranded methods are not strong enough for controlled active motion or early postoperative use of the hand, with a rupture rate of 11.7%.
                  
                

              
              
- By allowing surgeons to identify and repair tendon gaps prior to skin closure, the WALANT approach to flexor tendon repair has decreased the rupture rate by 7%. Eliminating the gap with full fist flexion and extension testing intraoperatively gives the team confidence to hold to true active movement-based therapy protocols post-operatively.

- Adhesions result from a limited range of motion subsequent to postoperative and postinjury scarring, with an increased likelihood of adhesion formation following periods of prolonged immobilization or after severe injuries. It is here where the tendinous extrinsic healing component acts as the culprit of adhesion formation between the tendon and its surrounding fibro-osseous sheath. Adhesions with resultant digital stiffness remain one of the most common complications after flexor tendon repair.

- 
              
- Adhesion formation with subsequent restriction of tendon excursion prompting the need for tenolysis has been reported in rates varying from 12-47%.
              
              
- Tenolysis can be considered if 3-6 months have elapsed since still-intact tendon repair; however, the active range of motion remains significantly less than the passive range of motion, or there has been no appreciable improvement in the range of motion after aggressive hand therapy.

- 17% of tendon repairs progress to develop contractures; their prevention is primarily via splinting, with operative treatment proceeding to either open or closed capsulotomy for recalcitrant cases.

- Only after the near complete restoration of PROM should patients be considered for tenolysis to secondarily improve AROM.

- Infection, skin flap necrosis, mechanical failure of an implant (if used), pulley disruption, swan neck deformity, infection, and synovitis are also possible complications following operative therapy for flexor tendon injuries.

- Disruption of the distal implant juncture after stage one, rupture of the graft, a graft that is too loose or too tight, development of an intrinsic plus phenomenon, reflex dystrophy, nail deformity, scar sensitivity, triggering, and flexion deformities are complications considered in the case of staged tendon reconstruction