The initial preoperative evaluation should be focused on determining the patient's goals, identifying significant medical and surgical history, and assessing breast anatomy.  All these factors will help the patient and surgeon to navigate the various surgical options. The patient’s expectations and goals translate into what the patient wishes to change, namely, breast shape, size, or both. However, patients are commonly unaware of their own breast asymmetries and chest wall abnormalities whenever they are present.  So clinical photography is imperative, as it can make the patient aware of them.

The next step is to thoroughly evaluate the patient's medical, surgical, and smoking history, medications, and any other pertinent information. It is important to pay close attention to the breast history, including size changes during pregnancy, weight changes, personal or family history of breast tumors, recent mammograms, and the desire to breastfeed in the future. The screening mammogram is only recommended based on the US Preventive Services Task Force guidelines and the patient’s breast cancer risk.

The physical examination begins with an assessment of the breast’s skin and parenchymal quality and the measurement of various distances between both breasts and the neighboring landmarks to objectively identify asymmetries and allow comparison of pre and postoperative changes.  Furthermore, it is essential to know how each technique modifies the different breast measurements when deciding each patient's most suitable approach.

The nipple to IMF (N-IMF) distance determines the lower pole’s skin redundancy and decreases after the vertical and inverted-T mastopexies. The suprasternal notch to nipple (SSN-N) distance identifies any asymmetry between the two nipples; it remains unchanged after a vertical mastopexy, but it lengthens with a combined augmentation/mastopexy. The SSN to IMF distance is measured as a vertical line between the SSN and the breast fold level; it remains unchanged after most mastopexies, except for the Hall-Findlay mastopexy, which shortens the distance. Augmentation/mastopexy could lengthen the SSN to IMF distance, especially when the implant is placed in the subpectoral plane.

The differentiation of low versus high breasted patients is based on the relative position of the breast footprint to the clavicle and humerus.  The correct identification of low breasted patients is essential; otherwise, these patients could erroneously be perceived as having ptotic breasts. Low breasted patients do not have true breast ptosis, so instead of a mastopexy, improving the upper pole with breast augmentation or fat grafting is more suitable.