The functionality of peripheral nerve fibers is testable in clinical practice, most commonly through nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyograms (EMG). An NCS is performed by placing a stimulating electrode along a peripheral nerve and recorded by a recording electrode on a muscle for a motor nerve study. The stimulating electrode may be placed on the skin with the recording electrode placed proximally on the nerve for sensory nerve studies. The electrical impulse gets generated by one electrode and recorded by the other. This impulse can generate different parameters of the study, including the amplitude, duration, and conduction velocity of the action potential. Some special tests, such as the F and H responses, can provide information about more proximal segments of the nerve. Information about peripheral nerve dysfunction can be collected from these studies. Indications for NCS include neuropathies, demyelinating conditions such as Guillain-Barre syndrome, and radiculopathies.

During a needle EMG, the tester places needle electrodes through the skin directly into a muscle. As the patient contracts the muscle with increasing force, more motor units get recruited. Based on Henneman’s size principle, small, slow-twitch motor units are recruited at a lower threshold than large, fast-twitch motor units. One sign of nerve damage is when successive motor units are not recruited under normally sufficient muscle tension. This test is particularly helpful in diagnosing muscular conditions and those affecting the motor neuron unit and neuromuscular junction, such as muscular dystrophy, myasthenia gravis, and motor neuron loss in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In practice, neurologists often perform nerve conduction studies and electromyograms together.