Laboratory associated infections continue to become sources of diseases to the laboratory workforce; this is because of the failure in implementing fundamental control measures in the laboratory which stems from the most effective control which is "elimination", followed by "substitution", "engineering controls", "administrative", and "personal protective equipment" (e.g., respirator use) as the least effective.

**Biosafety level 1 (BSL-1)**controls microorganisms unusually known to cause disease with "minimal hazards" to the laboratory and the community. A recent study involves the selection of a BSL-1 bacteriophage surrogate to assess the efficacy of a chlorine-based surface disinfectant for Ebola outbreaks. This study recommends the collaboration of BSL-4 and non-BSL-4 facilities to assist in the selection and research of better surrogates, which can be more effective in BSL-4 conditions.

**Biosafety level 2 (BSL-2)**controls microorganisms generating "moderate hazards" to the laboratory and the community. In other parts of the world, there are still no available guidelines for the validation and certification of biosafety laboratories

**Biosafety level 3 (BSL-3)**includes the control of infectious agents, which can cause both "serious hazards" and can cause a potentially lethal condition to laboratory and community via the respiratory transmission of the organism. A typical example of an organism under this classification is theMycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacterial agent responsible for tuberculosis. There have been challenges for program and tuberculosis (TB) laboratory managers in implementing the specific considerations for this level, particularly in resource-limited and TB, high-burden settings because there is insufficient biosafety expertise available to conduct individualized risk assessments for TB laboratories. The application of the biosafety level classification in BSL-3 requirements may not practically and adequately match the specific precautions relevant to the laboratories performing TB-related tests and procedures. To solve this problem, TB laboratories adopted a risk-assessment approach instead of applying the concept of BSL-3 (which is a risk-group approach). Any TB laboratory (a clinical, medical, or public health laboratory carrying out TB diagnostic tests) can classify as low risk, moderate risk, or a high TB risk based on the amount of aerosol generated during the conduct of a particular laboratory procedure. Countries where TB is still a significant public health concern, have already adopted these guidelines.

**Biosafety level 4 (BSL-4)**is the highest and "most complex" biohazard level, involving a relatively few clinical microbiology laboratories. There is a high transmission via aerosol, making the pathogens more dangerous for the laboratory workforce and the surrounding community. Marburg and Ebola viruses fall into this risk group. Stakeholders and international experts attended conferences in the past in Europe to revisit the issues that emerged for BSL-4 implementation. They seek opportunities for the use of BSL-4 in public health, diagnostics, and research in terms of its sustainability, improvement of existing training designs and curricula, and strong collaboration to address biosafety and biosecurity. An integrated partnership of human, veterinary, and military laboratories with BSL-4 facilities is necessary to unify its approach to the development of laboratory biosafety standards. The participation of BSL-4 in outbreaks can be substantial to attain a more effective outbreak management.