Axon connects to the soma at a cone-like part of the structure known as the axon hillock. This part of the axon has considerable functional importance since action potential originates here. In other words, this region of the neurolemma processes the incoming signals from other neurons. It represents a trigger zone where the summation of incoming graded excitatory (excitatory postsynaptic potentials, EPSPs) and inhibitory (inhibitory postsynaptic potentials, IPSPs) potentials are realized and, in turn, the action potential is realized or not. If the summation overcomes the threshold limit of the axon hillock, potential starts, and it will be transmitted, in a continuous or saltatory mode, along the axon toward the synapse. In structural terms, the axon hillock may contain fragments of Nissl substance.

The axon hillock continues with the initial segment of the axone, located about 30 to 40 micrometers from the perikaryon and close to the first myelinated element. Structurally, in this axonal segment, the various axoplasmic elements begin to align longitudinally. Neurofilaments and mitochondria are present. Microtubules are also present, arranged into fascicles interconnected by sidearms. Furthermore, residual  Nissl substance can persist. Functionally, in this region, axo-axonic synapses may occur. Of note, the axolemma of the axonal region where action potential originates and starts its run shows a dense granular layer similar to that demonstrated at the nodes of Ranvier. Recent studies proved that action potentials could originate not only at the axon hillock but also in this initial axonal segment. In some neurons, the action potential may even originate from the first Ranvier node.

Axons are both structurally supportive of a neuron and the facilitators of communication both intra- and interneuronally. The diameter of a single axon is incredibly small and, therefore, commonly measured in micrometers with the average diameter of an axon being about 1 micrometer. A cluster of axons together forms a nerve. The axonal membrane is a phospholipid bilayer that has proteins embedded inside it. These voltage-gated ion channels facilitate the movement of ions in and out of the membrane and critical to the neuronal transmission. Many neurons are myelinated, meaning they contain sectioned covers wrapping around the axon known as the myelin sheath.

An important axonal structural element is the architecture of the cytoskeleton. Interestingly, this architecture is partly different in composition and organization from that of the dendrite. Although the cytoskeletal proteins are mainly synthesized in the cell body and then transported to their various cellular sites, the dendritic microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) is synthesized directly in the dendritic compartment. On the contrary, due to the lack of a protein synthetic apparatus, the axonal microtubules are synthesized and organized in the soma (by the microtubule-organizing center, MTOC) and then to the axon compartment. Furthermore, MAP2 is not present in the axonal compartment. Another difference concerns the microtubule polarity. While dendritic microtubules show a mixed polarity with both plus and minus ends distal to the cell body, in the axon microtubules, have the plus end distal to the cell body. Again, research has demonstrated that axonal and dendritic microtubules differ in the different quantity of tau proteins and the different degrees of phosphorylation. Finally, although neurofilaments are abundant in the axons, they are scarce in the dendritic site.

The cytoskeleton plays a fundamental role in the processes of axon growth and guidance. Since these processes are the basis of the formation of neural networks, there is considerable interest in this aspect of neuroscience. Alterations during the constituent phases of the circuits, indeed, are linked to the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders such as intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder.