As reported by the FDA, intravenous infusion of inamrinone is associated with a range of hematologic, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, nervous system, dermatologic, respiratory, and hepatic adverse effects.

- Thrombocytopenia is among the most commonly reported adverse effects of prolonged inamrinone therapy, with reduced platelet counts in 20 to 46% of patients.

- New, sustained atrial and/or ventricular arrhythmias or worsened heart failure occurs in 9% of patients; and chest pain in 0.2%.

- Inodilators such as inamrinone worsen myocardial ischemia from oxygen supply-demand mismatch.

- Patients may also experience general abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea, nausea, and/or vomiting.

- The FDA also reports that patients may experience dizziness, headache, or fatigue, and there are reports of inamrinone-mediated respiratory infections in other patients. Skin dryness, yellow-nail discoloration, loss of smell, and loss of taste may also occur. Only 0.2% of patients experience a burning sensation at the site of intravenous infusion.

- Some patients may be hypersensitive to inamrinone and may experience general viral-like symptoms such as myalgias, arthralgias, and fever. Hepatic toxicity has been recorded, but it is infrequent in the short-term administration of inamrinone.

- Excessive vasodilation and hypotension can be significant limitations of type-3-phosphodiesterase inhibitors, particularly when administered at high doses and/or when therapy is initiated with a bolus dose.

- Severe ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death are the leading cause of mortality, the mechanism of which could be explained by the intracellular calcium overload due to cAMP in myocardial cells and disproportionate increase of cardiac contractility, heart rate, and metabolism.