Chest pain is a common complaint encountered in the emergency department, and it is essential to keep a broad differential in mind. The top six differentials of chest pain need to be immediately ruled out, given their life-threatening consequences. These are acute myocardial infarction, pericardial tamponade, aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, and esophageal rupture. In the acute setting, most patients who present with chest pain will have an EKG performed immediately. The EKG may have changes that are concerning for ischemia, but it is important to remember: do not only treat the EKG. First, compare it to a prior EKG. Also, missing another diagnosis, like aortic dissection or pulmonary embolism, can delay appropriate care and result in inappropriate interventions, which may be life-threatening.

**H****istory**

A thorough history, including onset, duration, provoking, and relieving factors, quality, and associated factors is critical. Posterior myocardial infarction, like other types of myocardial infarction, classically presents with chest pain. Patients often describe the pain as crushing substernal chest pain or pressure. Many patients insist it is only pressure and will not describe it as pain or use phrases like "an elephant sitting on my chest." They may have radiation to the arms, jaw, or epigastrium. The sensation may be relieved with nitroglycerin.

While not a definitive way to differentiate chest pain of cardiac origin from chest pain from other causes, there are factors that increase and others that decrease the likelihood of ACS.

Factors that increase the probability of ACS include:

- associated with nausea or vomiting

- associated with diaphoresis

- is worse with exertion or strong emotion

- Chest pain that radiates to the arms or jaw

Factors that decrease the probability of ACS include:

- pleuritic in nature

- positional

- is described as sharp or stabbing and less than 1 minute

- Reproducible chest pain

In patients with these symptoms, it is essential to remember that MI is less likely, but by no means excluded. However, if the latter factors are present, additional history should be obtained, including risk factors for pulmonary embolism (PE). These are a history of unilateral leg swelling, recent surgery or trauma, history of PE or deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in the past, hormone use, recent immobilization, history of malignancy, or hemoptysis. Chest pain that began after an inciting injury or strain may be musculoskeletal. Abdominal causes of chest pain include gastroesophageal reflux (GERD), cholecystitis, and peptic ulcers.

**Exam**

The presentation of myocardial infarction is variable. The patient may present fairly well-appearing or might be obviously in extremis. In every patient with chest pain, it is important to perform a focused physical exam.

- Obtain vital signs, including blood pressures in both arms.

- Heart rate

- Tachycardia is common, but bradycardia with or without heart block may ensue if the RCA is involved as it typically supplies the SA and AV nodes
- Arrhythmia is possible at any time in the course of myocardial infarction

- Blood pressure

- Hypertension is common and may be significant, but hypotension is possible and raises mortality risk.

- Isolated posterior infarction is less common than posterior infarct associated with inferior/inferolateral infarction. As such, the infarcted area may be preload dependent, and the administration of nitroglycerin may lead to significant hypotension. 


- A significant discrepancy between blood pressure in each arm should raise concern for aortic dissection.

- General appearance

- Patients may be ill-appearing, diaphoretic, or in obvious distress.
- Levine's sign: holding a clenched fist to the chest

- Neck

- Look for jugular venous distention, a sign of heart failure.

- Heart exam

- Murmurs 

- Acute mitral regurgitation due to ischemia of the papillary muscles may be silent or produce a murmur. The regurgitation is better appreciated by echocardiography with Doppler.
- Concomitant aortic stenosis may result in significant hypotension if the patient receives nitroglycerin.


- Distant heart sounds may be a result of pericardial effusion, which should raise suspicion of other etiologies like dissection and subsequent hemopericardium.

- Lung exam

- Bilateral rales on auscultation are likely secondary to heart failure
- Unequal breath sounds should raise concern for pneumothorax

- Chest exam

- Tenderness to palpation of the chest wall may be musculoskeletal
- "Hamman's crunch" or Crepitus is evidence of subcutaneous emphysema, which may be from rib fractures, pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum

- Abdominal exam

- Tenderness in the abdomen should prompt concern for intra-abdominal etiology (cholecystitis, pancreatitis, GERD), which may lead to radiation of pain into the chest or difficulty differentiating visceral abdominal pain from chest pain.

- Neurological exam

- Neurologic deficits should also raise the suspicion for aortic dissection

- Extremities

- Edema: bilateral edema can be evidence of heart failure whereas unilateral edema should prompt further evaluation for DVT and PE
- Pulse deficits, mottling, or cool extremities are evidence of decreased perfusion. If unilateral, consider aortic dissection

- Patients may present in cardiac arrest. If the presenting rhythm is ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia, the recommendation that the patient goes for coronary angiography after achieving the return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC), and the patient is stable for transfer.