Testing for HIV infection involves both a screening test and a confirmatory test. These laboratory assays are looking for specific antibodies or antigens.  Patients with new diagnoses of HIV or those who are presenting for evaluation of an acute medical problem should have a complete blood cell count performed to evaluate for leukopenia, anemia, or thrombocytopenia.  Viral loads and CD4 counts should be ordered if this information will help with the management of the HIV patient. However, results may not be immediately available.  The differential of a complete blood cell count can help estimate the patient's CD4 count.  If the white blood cell and lymphocyte counts are within normal ranges, then the CD4 count is likely normal. If the absolute lymphocyte count is below 950 cells/mm3, the patient may have a CD4 count of less than 200 cells/µL, which would be low enough to cause immunosuppression and risk of opportunistic infection.

Further testing should be considered based on the differential diagnosis and the patients presenting symptoms.  If a cardiac problem is being considered, such as acute coronary syndrome, then EKG and cardiac biomarkers should be ordered.  Bedside ultrasound or echocardiography may be considered when evaluating a patient who potentially has acute valvular pathology, pericarditis, or cardiac tamponade.

Chest radiography may also be useful for cardiac presentations or for those patients who need evaluation for pulmonary infections. If chest radiography does not reveal an obvious pulmonary process and there is still concern for lung pathology, computed tomography of the chest may be a consideration for further evaluation. Arterial blood gas analysis will aid the provider in determining if steroids are required for a patient with Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP.)  Blood cultures should be performed before starting antibiotics in the AIDS patient.  Sputum cultures from induction or bronchoalveolar lavage or serum and urine bacterial antigen testing may identify the causative organism of a pulmonary infection.  Testing for tuberculosis (TB) should be performed if signs and symptoms are suggestive of the disease.  In-depth testing with advanced diagnostic imaging such as CT may be necessary if extrapulmonary or disseminated TB is a possibility, specifically in the more immunocompromised group of patients with AIDS, as presenting signs may be as clear. Patients suspected of having tuberculosis should be placed in respiratory isolation even before confirmatory testing is returned.

A complete metabolic profile is useful in many situations, whether obtaining baseline renal and hepatic function or evaluating for abnormalities due to ART or acute medical conditions. Patients with lower CD4 counts or AIDS are more prone to acute hepatobiliary problems such as pancreatitis and acalculous cholecystitis. Quantifying transaminases, bilirubin, and lipase will be useful in evaluating these conditions. Diagnostic imaging, possibly abdominal computed tomography or ultrasound, may be considered based on the patient’s presentation. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy may be necessary for the evaluation of esophagitis in AIDS patients with odynophagia or dysphagia.  AIDS patients are also prone to acquiring various diarrheal illnesses.  Testing for ova, parasites, bacteria, and C. difficile toxins should be done for immunocompromised patients presenting with diarrhea.  Colonoscopy may be required in severe or refractory cases.

When evaluating neurologic complaints in the HIV or AIDS patient, providers should have a low threshold for computed tomography of the head and lumbar puncture with CSF analysis in HIV patients who may be immunocompromised presenting with altered mental status, focal neurologic complaints or concern for meningitis.  Cryptococcal meningitis may have a subtler presentation, and antigen testing should be considered for patients with altered mental status.