Significant opportunities are available for improved interprofessional care coordination with regard to celecoxib.

As mentioned above, in the inpatient setting, celecoxib is increasingly being used as part of pre-operative and post-operative multimodal pain management algorithms. Research has shown in several small randomized trials that administering celecoxib peri-operatively for elective procedures such as total hip arthroplasties, total knee arthroplasties, and other procedures with some success in reducing pain and improving functionality such as early ambulation. The use of non-opioid medications to improve pain and function after surgery is becoming increasingly important due to societal and political pressure to reduce overall opioid analgesic consumption as a response to increasing rates of overdose deaths. It is, therefore, important for clinicians (including MDs, DOs, PAs, and NPs), nurses, pharmacists, physical and occupational therapists, and other support staff to coordinate a concerted effort to set patient-specific goals regarding pain and function in the acute care and rehabilitative settings and to reinforce how celecoxib use can help to achieve these goals to the patient. Clinicians and the interprofessional health care team must also maintain constant and open communication while monitoring the patient for improvements in pain and function and for possible adverse effects the patient may be experiencing. This interprofessional approach will yield the best therapeutic results while minimizing the chance of adverse events. [Level 5]

In the outpatient setting, prescribers of celecoxib must also coordinate with pharmacists to prevent and monitor for unsafe drug interactions and with the patient, family members, and caregivers to monitor therapeutic benefit and possible adverse drug effects. When the caregivers function as an interprofessional team, patients can obtain maximum benefit with celecoxib with minimal adverse effects.