Essentially, infant head lag can be physiological or pathological. Physiological head lag is attributed to the expected delay in the development of the neuromuscular pathway. In contrast, pathological infant head lag can be caused by myogenic and/or neurogenic deviations and several underlying problems, resulting in postural instability and axial hypotonicity.

Head lag could result from abnormal sensory functioning. Failure to detect a change in head position (attributable to abnormal feedback from the vestibular-ocular righting and proprioception systems) could lead to an inability to make the necessary motor adjustments in anticipation of a change in positioning.****This explanation is reasonable, considering previous research suggesting problems with anticipatory motor and postural control, and in the addition of sensory input.

According to several studies, head and neck control is affected by various medical conditions such as prematurity, cerebral injury, low birth weight, and environmental factors, including extensive mechanical ventilation in the neonatal period.****Head lag also provides useful clinical information regarding the muscle tone of a preterm infant. The delay in head righting during infancy may be attributed to poorly developed muscle tone in preemies. Healthy preterm infants without any identifiable neurological pathology may have poor motor development, contrasted with term infants, and prolonged head lag in preterm infants has been documented even at term-equivalent age.