# Continuing Education Activity

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is a rare benign self-limiting inflammatory lymphadenitis that develops in young patients, initially described in Asian populations in the 1970s. Diagnosis is based on excisional lymph node biopsy, and has a unique histological appearance. Kikuchi disease must be differentiated from infectious, autoimmune, and malignant causes of lymphadenopathy. Management of the disease is typically supportive, with corticosteroids and immunosuppression reserved for severe cases. Kikuchi disease is rarely associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and patients must be monitored for the development of SLE after a diagnosis of Kikuchi. Given the rarity of the condition, Kikuchi disease is often misdiagnosed, which leads to inappropriate antibiotic use and incorrect management. This activity reviews the etiology, evaluation, and treatment of Kikuchi disease and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Discuss the epidemiology of Kikuchi disease.
- Describe the clinical presentation of Kikuchi disease.
- Outline the evaluation of Kikuchi disease, including the infectious, inflammatory, and malignant diagnoses that must be considered.
- Summarize the evaluation and treatment of Kikuchi disease and highlight the role of the interprofessional team in managing this rare condition.

# Introduction

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is also known as histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. This is a rare benign self-limiting inflammatory disease that was first described in Japan in 1972 by Japanese pathologists Kikuchi and Fujimoto. Kikuchi disease mainly affects young and pediatric patients of Asian origin, although Kikuchi disease has been described in all ages and ethnicities. Presentation is acute to subacute, with painful, tender, mobile cervical lymphadenopathy associated with systemic symptoms including fevers, malaise, weight loss, and arthralgias; also notable are a variety of skin manifestations. Diagnosis is established through excisional lymph node biopsy, which will characteristically show a paucity of neutrophils and eosinophils, with immunohistochemistry showing histiocytes positive for myeloperoxidase and CD68, T-cells positive for CD8, and infrequent B cells. The histologic findings are crucial in differentiating Kikuchi disease from lymphomas and infectious etiologies, and cultures and serology are used to support the histologic diagnosis. While histology will appear similar in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) lymphadenitis, the presence of hematoxylin bodies in SLE lymphadenitis helps differentiate SLE from Kikuchi disease. Of note, SLE is the most common autoimmune pathology known to develop in connection with Kikuchi disease. However, unlike SLE, Kikuchi disease has a self-limiting course lasting several months, with a 3-4% recurrence rate. Management is typically supportive, with corticosteroids and immunosuppression reserved for severe or relapsing disease. The overall prognosis is excellent, with exceedingly rare complications such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Diagnostic challenges do exist due to the rarity of the disease, as patients may be inappropriately treated for alternative etiologies. Thus, clinicians and pathologists can help improve patient outcomes by becoming more familiar with this rare condition.

# Etiology

There are two broad theories as to the etiology of Kikuchi disease – infectious and autoimmune. Many infectious agents – both viral and bacterial – have been considered as possible triggers for Kikuchi disease. The viral triggers list is extensive and includes Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 (HSV 1/2), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), human herpesvirus (HHV 6, 7, 8), parvovirus B19, human papillomavirus (HPV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), human T-lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1), rubella, paramyxovirus, and parainfluenza. However, no viral particles have ever been identified in biopsied tissue and thus a direct viral cause has never been confirmed

In terms of the autoimmune hypothesis, there has been an identification of human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) in populations more likely to get this disease. More specifically, HLA class II alleles HLA-DPA1 and HLA-DPB1 are more common in Asian populations where the disease is more prevalent. Kikuchi disease has been associated with a long list of autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjogren’s syndrome, Wegener’s granulomatosis, rheumatoid arthritis, Still’s disease, et cetera

There have also been case reports of malignancies, central nervous system infections, renal failure, interstitial lung disease, foreign body implants, and even Roun-en-Y gastric bypass surgery associated with Kikuchi disease, suggesting that various physical insults can trigger the onset of the disease

# Epidemiology

Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease is exceedingly rare and the incidence is unknown

# Histopathology

Excisional biopsy of an enlarged lymph node is required for diagnosis of Kikuchi disease, and immunohistochemistry helps rule out alternative differential diagnoses. Three histological stages have been described – the proliferative, necrotizing, and xanthomatous stage. The proliferative stage shows follicular hyperplasia with infiltrates composed of histiocytes and lymphocytes, with an absence of neutrophils and eosinophils. The necrotizing stage shows extensive histiocyte nuclear breakdown (karyorrhexis) and multiple necrotic foci, with lymph node architecture remaining intact.  Lastly, the xanthomatous stage shows foamy histiocytes with regression of necrosis.  Uniquely, throughout these stages, there is a lack of neutrophils or eosinophils, which helps differentiate Kikuchi disease from infectious etiologies

Immunohistochemistry will subsequently show histiocytes that are positive for myeloperoxidase, CD68, lysozyme, CD163, and CD4. It will also show T cells that are CD8 positive. Notably CD20 positive B cells will be absent

While the histopathology of Kikuchi disease is similar to SLE lymphadenitis, biopsy in SLE may show hematoxylin bodies (collections of nuclear DNA), DNA deposits in vessel walls, and areas of vasculitis around the areas of necrosis. These histologic characteristics point to lupus lymphadenitis rather than Kikuchi disease and help differentiate the two diseases

# History and Physical

Symptoms of Kikuchi disease develop over several weeks, with an acute to subacute presentation. The most common presentation is of unilateral tender posterior cervical lymphadenopathy in 60-90% of cases, with occasional involvement of the supraclavicular and axillary nodes. Affected lymph nodes are typically mobile, solitary, nonsuppurative, and are painful in approximately half of cases. The affected nodes are enlarged typically to 1-2cm in diameter, however up to 7cm has been reported in the literature

# Evaluation

There are no set diagnostic criteria for Kikuchi disease, given its rarity and variable presentation

The initial lab work may reveal mildly elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, ferritin), elevated aminotransferases and elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase. Leukopenia occurs in 20-58% of cases; leukocytosis is rare and occurs in 2-5% of cases. There may be atypical peripheral lymphocytes present in 25% of cases

Infectious workup should be initiated, guided by the history of any recent infectious illnesses, travel, animal exposures, tuberculosis exposures, or recent antibiotic use. Serology for various viral causes of lymphadenitis including testing for acute EBV, CMV, Hepatitis B, Herpes simplex, HIV, parvovirus B19, and viral respiratory causes such as parainfluenza should be obtained. Testing for other infectious causes of lymphadenitis such as Bartonella henselae, Toxoplasma gondii, Entamoeba histolytica, and Yersinia enterocolitica should be performed depending on exposure history and clinical presentation. Testing for tuberculous causes of lymphadenitis can be initiated with tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA). Typically, patients present for evaluation for Kikuchi disease after having already failed trial of empiric antibiotics for common bacterial lymphadenitis etiologies such as Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes, however, these common bacteria may remain in the differential.

Autoimmune workup should be performed, particularly evaluation for SLE with antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to double-stranded DNA, anti-Smith, anti-Ro, and anti-La antibodies. If the patient has positive lupus serologic markers, the histology must subsequently differentiate Kikuchi disease from lupus lymphadenitis. Serum ACE level can be checked, although is nondiagnostic for sarcoidosis. A personal or family history of autoimmune disease should be elucidated. Peripheral flow cytometry can be performed if there his suspicion for malignancy, and histology and immunohistochemistry will be crucial to rule out this diagnosis.

In terms of imaging, ultrasound of the affected lymph node(s) should be performed and may show hypervascularity and node enlargement typically 1-2cm, up to 7cm in the literature

Ultimately, excisional lymph node biopsy is required. The histological characteristics of Kikuchi disease are unique, as explained in the histopathology section of this paper, and will ultimately cinch the diagnosis. Occasionally, a repeat biopsy may be required if the initial biopsy is inconclusive due to the predominance of necrosis

# Treatment / Management

There is no specific treatment available for Kikuchi disease. It is typically a self-limiting disease, and spontaneous resolution occurs within one to four, or one to six months. Treatment includes supportive management with antipyretics and analgesics, although some patients with severe disease may require a prolonged corticosteroid taper, after infectious etiology is ruled out. Other treatments that have been successful in the past include hydroxychloroquine, minocycline, or intravenous immunoglobulin

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of Kikuchi disease includes infectious lymphadenitis, autoimmune causes such as systemic lupus erythematosus, and malignancy, particularly lymphoma

Particularly in the pediatric populations, sources of benign lymphadenopathy (such as pharyngitis, otitis media, upper respiratory infection) should be considered

Autoimmune differentials include SLE, sarcoidosis, Kawasaki disease; SLE is highest on the differential. On histology, findings of SLE and Kikuchi disease may be similar, with hematoxylin bodies being unique to SLE on histology compared to Kikuchi disease. Additionally, the two diseases would be differentiated based on serology and clinical picture, as SLE autoimmune markers would be negative in Kikuchi disease alone. Another autoimmune differential such as sarcoidosis typically presents with non-necrotizing granulomas and can be screened for with ACE level, chest imaging, and symptomatology such as cough

Of note, autoimmune pathologies can be co-diagnosed with Kikuchi disease. There are case reports of Kikuchi disease co-diagnosed with primary Sjogren’s syndrome manifesting as necrotizing lymphatic granulomas, Kikuchi disease co-diagnosed with relapsing polychondritis manifesting as bilateral pinnae inflammation and lymphadenopathy, and Kikuchi disease in Still’s disease and mixed connective tissue disease

Lastly, lymphoma is in the differential in Kikuchi disease. Histology as well as immune staining of the biopsy sample can help rule out these malignant etiologies, as can peripheral bloodwork. On histology, the paucity of CD-20 positive B cells makes B cell lymphoma less likely, and positive stains for myeloperoxidase in Kikuchi disease are absent in T-cell lymphomas. The absence of Reed-Sternberg cells and CD30/CD15 staining, as well as unremarkable peripheral flow cytometry, can additionally be used to rule out lymphoma

# Prognosis

Kikuchi disease is typically a benign, self-limiting inflammatory process that resolves with supportive measures within months without any specific treatment.  The relapse rate is about 3-4% in adults and is treated with corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulins, or hydroxychloroquine

# Complications

Exceedingly rarely, the immunologic stress of Kikuchi disease can lead to hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), which is a strong immunologic response associated with histiocytic proliferation, hemophagocytosis, systemic inflammatory response and disseminated intravascular coagulation that can be life-threatening with a mortality rate of 20-42%. HLH is managed with intravenous immunoglobulin and methylprednisolone, and pediatric outcomes are typically better than adults

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Given the rarity of the condition, patient education in Kikuchi disease is of paramount importance. Reassurance that this is a self-limiting condition can be comforting to patients and family members, especially as initial evaluation includes differentials such as malignancy and serious infection. However, the possible complications and correlation to autoimmune disease should be made clear. Management including symptomatic control with analgesics and antipyretics should be explained to patients and caregivers, and the lack of indication for antibiotics should be emphasized. The importance of follow up for symptom monitoring and resolution is key, and patients should be educated on the importance of following up with their primary care provider and rheumatologist for long-term monitoring.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Due to the rarity of the disorder, clinicians are often unfamiliar with the diagnosis of Kikuchi disease, and subsequently, there is a misdiagnosis rate estimated to be up to 40%. This is associated with inappropriate courses of antibiotic therapy and increase the time to diagnosis for this disorder