Patients with tonsillitis often present with a sore throat, a common symptom with a myriad of possible diagnoses. A thorough history and physical exam performed by the healthcare team is paramount to hone in on a diagnosis.

When diagnosing tonsillitis and implementing treatments, it is important for the healthcare provider to discuss treatment options and choices with the patient, especially when considering the administration of antibiotics. Risks and adverse reactions should be disclosed to the patient when prescribing any drug.

In cases where other diagnoses are possible, it can be helpful to recruit specialists, including otolaryngology, internal medicine, and nephrology, depending on the patient's clinical picture and test results. Additionally, when ordering imaging, it is important to provide the radiologist with physical exam findings to hone in on areas of interest when reading films.

Evidence of treatment effectiveness includes multiple large randomized controlled trials included in several Cochrane review articles. The decision-to treat-model, Centor criteria, has also been evaluated in several extensive studies. The evidence on this topic consists of a broad range of evidence and overall study quality though level 1 evidence is available in regards to the use of antibiotics in GABHS, causing tonsilitis and the use of Centor criteria in risk stratification. Rarer etiologies such as tuberculosis and Lemierre disease, however, exist primarily as level 5 evidence simply as a result of rarity.

Tonsillitis diagnosis and treatment requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Primary care providers evaluate and order treatments. Ambulatory and otolaryngologic nurses educate patients and their families, updating the team as needed. Pharmacists assess doses, interactions, and compliance. [Level 5]