# Continuing Education Activity

Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia is a severe form of thrombocytopenia with reduced or absent megakaryocytes in the bone marrow. It can be congenital or acquired. There is an eventual progression to impairment in the production of all three cell lines. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and explains the interprofessional team's role in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia.
- Summarize the epidemiology of amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia.
- Review pathophysiology of amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies that the healthcare team can use to improve outcomes in patients with lipoid proteinosis.

# Introduction

Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia is a severe form of thrombocytopenia with reduced or absent megakaryocytes in the bone marrow. It can be congenital or acquired.

**Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT)**is a rare, severe form of thrombocytopenia with reduced or absent megakaryocytes in the bone marrow since birth, especially seen in the neonatal period. There is an eventual progression to impaired production of all three cell lines and should be considered inherited pancytopenia.

**Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (AAMT)**is seen in later years of life and is again characterized by diminished or absent megakaryopoiesis with otherwise normal bone marrow.

# Etiology

**CAMT**

CAMT is an autosomal recessive disease with two main types described by Ballmaier et al. in 2001.

Type 1 results from a stop codon or frameshift mutation, causing a loss of the intracellular domain of the MPL receptor with complete loss of function of the receptor. This results in early progression to bone marrow failure, with the mean age being one year and 11 months.

Type 2 results from a splicing defect or amino acid substitution, which can affect the MPL receptor's glycosylation and result in an inability to react with thrombopoietin (THPO). These mutations can also cause a loss of hydrogen bonds within the MPL receptor, making it unstable. However, some residual receptor function exists. Bone marrow failure usually occurs at age 3 to 6 years, with the mean age being five years.

However, alternate etiologies have been proposed, including an X-linked variety of CAMT, a homozygous mutation in thrombopoietin, an anti-HLA A2 antibody, and some rare mutations in genes besides c-Mpl which could interfere with MPL receptor signaling and lead to CAMT.

**AAMT**

AAMT can be considered as a heterogeneous group of disorders leading to a common downstream clinical manifestation. Three mechanisms have been proposed:

- Suppression of maturation of megakaryocytes by an exogenous agent: AAMT is seen in association with Ebstein Barr virus (EBV), parvovirus B19, hepatitis C virus, interferon therapy, cytomegalovirus, benzene exposure, alcohol abuse, vitamin B12 deficiency, and radioiodine therapy.

- Suppression of megakaryocyte maturation by endogenous stimuli due to antibody-mediated or T-cell autoimmunity: AAMT has been seen in association with thymoma with a more aggressive disease course, adult-onset Still disease, eosinophilic fasciitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, Graves' disease, and hyperestrogenic states.

- An early manifestation of a stem cell abnormality: AAMT has been described as a precursor to acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, aplastic anemia, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

# Epidemiology

**CAMT**

CAMT has been seen in consanguineous families. A slight female preponderance exists.

**AAMT**

Similarly, the incidence rate of AAMT is higher than reported because many cases are misdiagnosed as immune thrombocytopenic purpura.

# Pathophysiology

Megakaryopoeisis begins with the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) in the bone marrow, which matures into a multipotent progenitor cell, a committed megakaryocyte progenitor cell, an immature megakaryocyte, and finally into a mature megakaryocyte, which gives rise to blood platelets.

The THPO receptor also called the MPL receptor, is found in the bone marrow, liver, spleen, and CD34+cells.

**CAMT**

The c-Mpl gene is located in the 1p34 locus and consists of 12 exons.

It is interesting to note that a homozygous mutation p.R119C of the THPO gene impairs the secretion and function of THPO, producing the same clinical picture of CAMT.

Thompson and Nguyen described a rare variant of CAMT associated with radioulnar synostosis due to mutation in HOXA11, which regulates megakaryocyte differentiation.

**AAMT**

AAMT can be caused by antibody or T-cell-mediated autoimmunity.

Anti-MPL antibodies have been seen with systemic lupus erythematosus and systemic sclerosis.

# Histopathology

On peripheral smear, platelets appear normal in size and morphology.

For comparison, the number of megakaryocytes usually seen on bone marrow biopsy is 5 to 10 per low power field. In patients with CAMT, bone marrow studies early in the disease course can have minimal findings that can be misleading, and serial bone marrow biopsies may be required to elucidate the diagnosis.

# History and Physical

**CAMT**

CAMT generally presents with severe thrombocytopenia within the first month of life or even earlier in the fetal period, which can manifest as petechiae, intracranial bleeds, recurrent rectal bleeding, or pulmonary hemorrhage.

A family history of thrombocytopenia may be present.

**AAMT**

AAMT is a diagnosis of exclusion, and patients usually present with bleeding complications not responding to standard treatment for immune thrombocytopenia like steroids or intravenous immunoglobulin therapy.

# Evaluation

Bone marrow biopsy is the mainstay of the diagnosis of CAMT or AAMT (see the section on histopathology).

**CAMT**

Approximately 1% to 5% of newborns are found to have thrombocytopenia, of which 5% to 10% have platelet counts below 50,000.

The c-Mpl gene analysis is done with bidirectional sequencing of all 12 exons, including coding regions, splice sites, and intron-exon boundaries. This testing is conducted at GeneDx in Maryland (with 95% to 97% sensitivity to detect CAMT mutations) and Prevention Genetics in Wisconsin.

The findings of homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in c-Mpl are considered confirmatory for the diagnosis of CAMT.

**AAMT**

Since the etiology of AAMT is so varied, no standard algorithm can be laid out to come to the diagnosis. A strong clinical suspicion for AAMT and a knowledge of the disease are needed to request a bone marrow biopsy and confirm the diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

**CAMT**

1. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is the only curative option for patients with CAMT with c-Mpl mutations (the majority of cases).

2. Supportive treatment with irradiated, leukocyte-reduced platelet transfusions, antifibrinolytics like tranexamic acid, avoidance of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and aspirin is important. Once pancytopenia develops, packed red blood cells and antibiotics may be needed.

3. Romiplostim-a THPO peptide mimetic and Eltrombopag-a small molecule agonist of the MPL receptor, which induces conformational changes in the receptor, can be used for CAMT cases with THPO mutations.

4. Experimental therapies: Gene therapy with lentiviral vectors have been used to repair the mutant c-Mpl gene. However, concerns about the leukemogenicity of this approach remain.

**AAMT**

The goal of therapy must be to treat the underlying etiology of AAMT, e.g., resection of the thymus in thymoma-associated AAMT.

The following medications and therapies have been used for the treatment of AMMT: steroids which suppress immune B and T cell-mediated autoimmunity, high dose intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, which binds antibodies against THPO and megakaryocytes, rituximab which suppresses the production of autoantibodies by B cells, cyclosporine which is a calcineurin inhibitor, anti-thymocyte globulin which suppresses T cell-mediated autoimmunity and stimulates hematopoiesis directly, bone marrow transplant, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine especially in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, lithium carbonate, vincristine, mycophenolate mofetil, danazol, eltrombopag, recombinant IL-11. A case report described successful treatment of adult-onset Still’s disease with tocilizumab and cyclosporine.

# Differential Diagnosis

**CAMT**

Differential diagnosis includes thrombocytopenia due to birth asphyxia or placental insufficiency, TORCH (toxoplasmosis, rubella, CMV, herpes) infections. sepsis, congenital syphilis, varicella, parvovirus B19, Wiskcott Aldrich syndrome, Fanconi anemia, and dyskeratosis congenita.

**AAMT**

Etiology for thrombocytopenia in adults is extensive. Each cause must be painstakingly ruled out before one can come to the diagnosis of AAMT, which is ultimately confirmed on bone marrow biopsy. Thrombocytopenia can be caused by:

- Infections like Epstein–Barr virus, varicella, leptospirosis, anaplasmosis, dengue, babesiosis, and tick-borne diseases

- Medications like daptomycin, valproic acid, linezolid, penicillins

- Beverages like alcohol, tonic water containing quinine, and herbal supplements

- Vitamin deficiency like B12 and folic acid deficiency

- Decreased THPO production due to liver dysfunction

- Blood cancers or solid organ cancers with metastasis to the bone

- Chemotherapy and radiation therapy used to treat blood cancers or metastatic cancer

- Rheumatologic conditions like systemic lupus erythematosus with or without the anti-phospholipid syndrome

- Peripheral destruction of platelets by shearing stress as seen in the use of intra-aortic balloon pumps and aortic aneurysms

- Splenic sequestration of platelets

- Consumptive coagulopathies like disseminated intravascular coagulation, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia with thrombosis, or hemolytic uremic syndrome

# Prognosis

**CAMT**

Once pancytopenia develops, the prognosis of CAMT patients is poor. A study has shown 30% of CAMT patients die from bleeding complications, and another 20% die from complications related to HSCT.

**AAMT**

In AAMT, patients can achieve remission immediately after targeted therapy or develop a long relapsing and remitting course. However, more commonly, patients progress to aplastic anemia or require HSCT to achieve remission.

# Complications

**CAMT**

Progression to bone marrow failure and aplastic anemia is seen at a mean age of 13 months for patients with CAMT type 1 and 5 years for patients with CAMT type 2.

CAMT patients are at an increased risk of development of myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. The pathogenesis of the above conditions can be explained by karyotype instability, mutator effect, i.e., an increased accumulation of chromosomal aberrations over time, or an expansion of abnormal cell clones in the bone marrow.

**AAMT**

AAMT can progress to aplastic anemia from an average of 1 month to 2 years after diagnosis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia is a rare disease. It can either be congenital due to genetic defects or acquired due to various diseases. In CAMT cases, parents must be educated about the importance of early diagnosis with invasive procedures like a bone marrow biopsy and the need for HSCT once the diagnosis is confirmed. In AAMT cases, patients must be educated about avoiding activities like skiing or gymnastics due to the high risk of intracranial bleeds. The treatment of AAMT is sometimes frustrating due to the failure of multiple immunosuppressive and immunomodulatory agents, and patients may ultimately land up needing supportive platelet transfusions more than once a week.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia is a rare disease requiring a high degree of suspicion for diagnosis before serious complications like fatal hemorrhage or pancytopenia occur. It requires collaboration between primary care physicians and specialists, including hematologists, to avoid any delay in care. Communication between team members is crucial for managing these cases, including the nursing staff, to pick up any slight bleeding or new symptoms that can reflect serious complications. Shared decision-making about treatment options and their pros and cons must take place with patients and their families.

Enrollment of patients in national and international studies is essential because of the rarity of the disease. At the moment, there are no large multicenter randomized control trials; hence hematologists have to depend on case reports describing success with various therapies for CAMT and AAMT.