**Infection**

**Osteomyelitis**

All the nuclear medicine imaging modalities described above may be used in the evaluation of osteomyelitis. When bone scintigraphy is used, it is typically in the form of a three-phase bone scan. When osteomyelitis is present, the bone scan will demonstrate hyper-perfusion, hyperemia, and increased levels of bone turnover at the site of infection. The sensitivity of this imaging test for post-traumatic osteomyelitis is good, ranging from 89 to 100%; however, specificity is less than 10% in this setting.

The three-phase bone scan also offers differentiation between osteomyelitis and cellulitis. Cellulitis shows strong uptake in phases one and two, followed by weak uptake in the third phase, while osteomyelitis shows uptake in all phases. There is some evidence that adding a fourth phase to the scan may increase specificity, particularly in patients with peripheral vascular disease or diabetes mellitus.

When intramedullary infection is suspected, this test should be performed with a 99mTc sulfur colloid scan to differentiate between active marrow and sites of infection. Labeled leukocytes have no inherent affinity for bone; therefore, this scan does not differentiate between bone and soft tissue infection. Single-photon emission tomography/computed tomography, or SPECT/CT, is a useful adjunct in investigating osteomyelitis, particularly with surrounding soft tissue infection. This imaging improves anatomic localization, providing better differentiation between osseous and soft tissue infections. SPECT/CT has similar overall sensitivity to triple-phase bone scan and labeled leukocyte scans but improves the accuracy of both exams when evaluating for osteomyelitis.

FDG-PET is most useful in spinal osteomyelitis, demonstrating high sensitivity and specificity and excellent anatomic localization when performed as PET/CT. FDG-PET offers much higher sensitivity than labeled leukocytes in spinal osteomyelitis and higher specificity than combined Gallium/Bone scintigraphy protocols. In the workup of spinal osteomyelitis, FDG-PET offers a useful adjunct to MRI in patients with non-diagnostic MRI findings or contraindications to MRI such as metallic implants.

**Peri-prosthetic Joint Infection (PJI)**

Bone scintigraphy is limited in utility due to the inability to distinguish aseptic loosening and PJI. Postoperative increased uptake on technetium-99m bone scintigraphy after total hip arthroplasty and total knee arthroplasty may also be normal for up to two years due to bony remodeling around the implant. Bone scintigraphy is sensitive but not specific for PJI and therefore is best used as a screening tool. Bone scintigraphy has been combined with gallium-67 scintigraphy or labeled leukocyte scans with variable results.

Labeled leukocyte scintigraphy, when combined with 99mTc sulfur colloid scans, offers higher sensitivity and specificity for PJI when compared with bone scintigraphy.

Implantation of arthroplasty hardware may cause an abnormal distribution of hematopoietic bone marrow, complicating the interpretation of results. Adding a 99mTc-Sulfur Colloid scan may offer better discrimination of normal bone marrow, and reactive leukocyte infiltrates in infection.

**Diabetic Foot Infection**

The most common nuclear medicine modalities used in diabetic foot infections are bone scintigraphy and labeled leukocyte scintigraphy, with the latter being the current gold standard. Loss of skin integrity in the form of a pedal ulcer can rapidly lead to underlying osteomyelitis. As seen with other forms of osteomyelitis, bone scans are highly sensitive but poorly specific. Attempts have been made to improve the accuracy of bone scans in diabetic infection, such as adding a late 4 phase which demonstrates uptake in woven bone, common in osteomyelitis but seen in other conditions such as fractures and degenerative changes.

Neuropathic conditions such as Charcot joint may also mimic osteomyelitis by demonstrating focal hyperperfusion, hyperemia, and bony uptake, making diagnosis challenging. In addition, fractures and degeneration are an integral part of the Charcot joint. Labeled leukocyte imaging also demonstrates increased uptake in the neuropathic Charcot joint, which has been attributed to increased conversion of fatty to hematopoietic marrow activity. Sulfur colloid imaging is a useful adjunct in these instances. Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography or SPECT/CT may assist in differentiating soft tissue and bony infectious lesions. However, due to the proximity of these structures in the foot, clear differentiation may be challenging.

**Trauma**

Bone scintigraphy is sensitive for detecting bone remodeling, periostitis, and microfractures associated with bone stress injury.

Fractures of the pars interarticularis, or spondylolysis, are a common pediatric stress fracture, and early bony changes may not be evident on radiographs or computed tomography.

Acute occult bony or soft tissue injuries in children, such as a toddler’s tibia fracture, may be quickly and easily diagnosed with bone scintigraphy.

Occult insufficiency fractures of the spinal column, sacrum, pelvis, and femoral head or neck may also be evaluated with bone scintigraphy, demonstrating increased uptake at the fracture site in delayed phases. SPECT/CT provides more precise anatomic localization. MRI has largely replaced these tests in this indication. However, bone scintigraphy provides a useful adjunct when MRI would be otherwise contraindicated or affected by metallic artifacts from implanted hardware at the site in question.

**Tumor**

Bone scintigraphy has historically been the most common nuclear medicine imaging modality used in the workup of metastatic musculoskeletal disease. It is most commonly used to evaluate bony metastasis but is limited in specificity and anatomic localization. FDG-PET and PET/CT are now the mainstay nuclear medicine modalities for identification and workup of both soft tissue and bony metastases and provide useful information for biopsy guidance, staging, response to therapy, and anatomic localization.

FDG-PET offers several advantages over bone scintigraphy and SPECT/CT. FDG is taken up directly by tumor cells, in contrast to 99mTc-MDP, which reflects changes in bone metabolism by a tumor. This direct uptake of FDG allows for more precise differentiation of active and healing lesions, giving a clearer picture of response to therapy. FDG has no inherent affinity for bone and, therefore, can also detect soft tissue metastases. FDG has a high affinity for osteolytic lesions such as renal and thyroid carcinoma, detecting these metastases with high sensitivity. It also identifies both skeletal and extraskeletal lesions in multiple myeloma, where bone scintigraphy is poorly sensitive.

Bone scintigraphy, in contrast, offers better sensitivity for detecting osteoblastic tumors and metastases such as prostate and small cell lung carcinoma. Patients with mixed lesions such as in breast carcinoma should therefore undergo both imaging tests. FDG-PET is now ubiquitous in the staging and surveillance of essentially all types of lymphoma and detects intramedullary bony metastases with more accuracy than bone scintigraphy and bone marrow biopsy.

**Other less common indications for nuclear medicine imaging include the following:**

**Avascular Necrosis**

Bone scintigraphy may be used to assess bone vascularity in cases of a suspected bone infarct. Bone scintigraphy is typically used to evaluate the femoral head, femoral condyles, and jaw. Changes seen on bone scintigraphy occur quickly compared to radiographs or MRI and can be seen in less than 72 hours. Changes include the absence of uptake in affected areas, which also may include a ring of high uptake around the necrotic lesion indicating reactive hyperemia. Labeled leukocyte scintigraphy and FDG-PET have little clinical utility in this condition.

**Paget Disease/Fibrous Dysplasia**

Bone scintigraphy may demonstrate well-delineated areas of intense bony uptake and hyperemia. The main indication for bone scintigraphy in this condition is the diagnosis of polyostotic involvement of fibrous dysplasia—Paget disease results in diffuse intense uptake in affected bones. There is little evidence to support the utilization of bone scan to follow disease progression for either Paget disease or fibrous dysplasia.

**Complex Regional Pain Syndrome**

Bone scintigraphy results in a characteristic finding of diffuse intense hyperemia of the affected area in the flow and blood pool phases, followed by a less common finding of peri-articular bony uptake in delayed phases. The presence of peri-articular uptake in the delayed phases is highly suggestive of the diagnosis.

**Myositis Ossificans and Heterotopic Ossification**

Early extraskeletal bone formation shows poorly delineated areas of increased uptake on bone scintigraphy that becomes less intense as the lesion matures. Myositis ossificans may continue to show increased uptake even after the lesion becomes stable enough for excision. Some evidence recommends against the exclusive use of bone scintigraphy to determine the timing of excision.

**Sports or Overuse injuries**

Bone scintigraphy may be used for various injuries, including plantar fasciitis, Achilles or peroneal tendonitis, Osgood-Schlatter disease, and medial tibial stress syndrome.