The patient is asked to lie down with the head elevated by 30 degrees and look straight ahead with eyelids shut gently. The USG probe is placed horizontally over the eyelid to get an axial view of the orbit. The probe should exert minimal pressure over the globe to avoid compression of orbital vessels.

**Doppler Indices**

- **Peak Systolic Velocity (PSV):**The maximum velocity noted during the systole phase of the Doppler waveform.

- **End Diastolic velocity (EDV):**The minimum velocity recorded during the diastole phase of the Doppler waveform.

- **Resistivity Index (RI):**The ratio of the difference of PSV and EDV to the value of the PSV during the same cycle of the Doppler waveform.

**Imaging of the CRA:**The CRA is localized in the optic nerve head at 1 to 10 mm behind the posterior wall of the globe. It has an estimated diameter of 0.2 mm. It shows a low resistance flow, low PSV, and a rapid flow in the diastolic phase. The central retinal vein is a small-caliber vessel located close to the CRA. The CRV has a flow waveform below the zero lines. (Figure 1)

**Imaging of the OA:**The OA is imaged in the nasal orbit as it crosses the ON at a depth of 35 to 36 mm. It has a diameter of 0.7 to 1.5 mm. It is imaged, making an angle less than 60 degrees between the ultrasound beam and the vessel lumen. It has a moderate to high resistance flow, a rapid systolic peak with a dichotomous notch, and a sharply decreasing diastolic phase. (Figure 2)

**Imaging of the SPCA vessels**: The SPCA vessels appear as numerous branches lateral and medial to the ON at 1 to 3 mm behind the posterior pole. The vessels have a diameter of 0.1 to 0.2 mm. Their flow is a low resistance waveform with velocities between the OA and the CRA flow velocities.

**Imaging of the SOV**: The SOV is localized in the superomedial orbit. Due to the absence of valves and flaccidity of the orbital veins, the venous flow waveform depends on multiple external factors.

The flow velocities vary depending on the depth of Doppler imaging, with a deeper vascular localization yielding a falsely low flow waveform.

Definite reporting is done after averaging out the results of at least three doppler waveforms and flow-velocity values on repeat imaging.

Wide differences in the values of these indices have been seen between populations. The average values observed by different investigators have been tabulated below:

Suprasanna et al.

(Study location: India)

Kaiser et al.

(Study location: Switzerland)

Fukukita et al.

(Study location: Japan)

Rusia et al.

(Meta-analysis)