TE and TB are two common benign histologic mimickers of basal cell carcinoma. Histologically, TB appears as a sizeable dermal tumor without connection to the epidermis. It is well-circumscribed and composed of primitive basaloid cells that may arrange in multiple large or small nodules.

TE appears similar to TB; however, tumor cells appear more mature and may be accompanied by horn cysts (i.e., foci of excessive keratinization) and have a connection to the epidermis. Both TE and TB exhibit peripheral palisading and spindled-fibroblast follicular stroma without mucin. Papillary mesenchymal bodies (tumor-cupping oval stromal blebs) are not always seen; when seen, they are specific for benign hair germ-cell tumors.

A histologic variant of TE is desmoplastic trichoepithelioma (DTE), which presents with narrow strands of basaloid cells accompanied by keratinized horn cysts and fibrous, desmoplastic stroma.

Multiple histologic variants of TB exist according to the updated 2018 World Health Organization (WHO) "Skin Tumors" classification, including nodular, retiform, cribriform, racemiform, and columnar. Less common variants of TB include clear cell, pigmented, and adamantinoid. Furthermore, dermatopathologists may recognize TE as a variant of TB with smaller tumor nodules and more superficial clusters of cells, and abundant fibrotic stroma. "Conventional" and "desmoplastic" TE may also be reported as "cribriform" and "columnar" TE, respectively. Another rare adamantine variant of TB has been described, referred to as cutaneous lymphadenoma, due to the prominent lymphocytic infiltrates within tumor nests.