Neuronal and glioneuronal tumors are primary CNS tumors arising, at least in part, from mutations in cellular growth pathways, as noted earlier. The precise molecular characterization of many of these tumors remains difficult due to their rarity, but ongoing efforts continue to uncover genetic aberrations leading to their development.

Tumor location plays a major role in the pathophysiology of most of these lesions as they are typically WHO 1. Central neurocytoma, extraventricular neurocytoma, and cerebellar liponeurocytoma are WHO grade 2 lesions. The anaplastic form of ganglioglioma represents the only WHO grade 3 lesions in the group. Some newly described tumors, such as DLGNT and MGT, do not yet have a classification due to their rarity. As noted, these tumors can occur anywhere in the supratentorial or infratentorial space, although certain tumors have a predilection for a specific location. For example, dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma occurs in the cerebellum as Lhermitte-Duclos disease in the setting of Cowden syndrome.

However, the most common tumor location appears to be in the temporal lobe, partly because ganglioglioma and DNET are the most common tumor types within this group and have a predilection for this location. These tumors are also found in extra-temporal locations.

The propensity for these tumors to cause seizures may not only be related to their location since intra-tumoral EEG recordings have demonstrated intrinsic epileptogenic activity in both DNET and ganglioglioma, likely related to their abnormal neuronal cells and structure.

Other symptoms are also related to location. Headache, nausea, vomiting, papilledema, hydrocephalus, cerebellar dysfunction, and focal neurological deficit have also been described. Headache, vomiting, and papilledema are signs of elevated intracranial pressure, which is expected with space-occupying lesions. Since many of these lesions are slow-growing, they may reach large sizes before clinical recognition, with these signs and symptoms being the initial presenting factor that leads to tumor recognition.

Hydrocephalus is mainly secondary to intraventricular or posterior fossa lesions, as tumors in these locations can disrupt the normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) outflow pathways. This is usually obstructive-type hydrocephalus, which may be acute if there is a sudden block of normal CSF outflow pathways, as in rare cases of central neurocytoma.