The following steps are taken:

- A pregnancy test is recommended in reproductive-age women prior to surgery, as well as preoperative hemoglobin or hematocrit levels and any additional laboratory tests as indicated by the patient’s medical conditions.

- Pubic/vulvar hair removal: Scissors or an electric clipper device should be used only if the hair is covering the operative site. Shaving may increase the risk of wound infection or cellulitis and should, therefore, be avoided.

- DVT prophylaxis: Sequential compression devices should be placed and assessed for proper functioning.

- Proper patient positioning: The patient should be placed in a supine position or dorsal lithotomy position with the help of boot-type stirrups.

- Antibiotic prophylaxis: A single intravenous dose is given 15 to 60 minutes prior to skin incision for surgical site infection prevention. A second dose should be administered for procedures lasting longer than 3 hours or when the intraoperative blood loss is estimated greater than 1,500 mL. Cephalosporins are the most commonly used and studied antimicrobials for prophylaxis in abdominal hysterectomy.

- Time out: All personnel should take a moment to pause prior to commencement of surgery, as per the standard hospital protocol, in order to verify the patient’s identifying information, type of operation, equipment, and the surgeon performing the procedure. Pelvic Examination: The patient should be examined once under anesthesia for uterine size, shape, and mobility and to confirm the best surgical approach. The surgeon can also assess the location of pathology and characterize pelvic structures.

- Skin preparation:

- Pelvis: Bacteriostatic scrub (betadine or chlorhexidine) is generously introduced inside the vagina and applied to the hair-bearing skin from the pubic symphysis, inferiorly to cover the entire female external genitalia.
- Abdominal: The umbilicus is first cleaned using Q-tips. Bacteriocidal scrub (chlorhexidine with isopropyl alcohol) is applied using a circular motion, beginning at the umbilicus and extending outwards from the xiphoid to the anterior thighs and bilaterally to the midaxillary line.

- Draping: Sterile surgical drapes are used to cover the patient to ensure a sterile field.

- Bladder decompression: A Foley catheter is inserted and remains postoperatively until the patient is ambulatory. Other preparations to consider in special circumstances include preserved blood preparation in cases where a large amount of bleeding is predicted and urinary stent placement if there is a high risk for ureteral injury.