Our understanding of each of the biological sciences becomes heightened by the study of biochemistry and molecular biology. In the last few decades, advances in laboratory techniques for the study of these microscopic sciences have led us to a greater understanding of the central dogma of molecular biology – that DNA transcribes RNA which then gets translated into protein. Understanding protein synthesis is paramount in studying various medical fields, from the molecular basis of genetic diseases through antibiotic development to expressing recombinant proteins as drugs or clinical laboratory reagents. As one of the foundational concepts in biology, protein synthesis is sufficiently complex that many believe it evolved once, giving the protein synthetic machinery in all organisms on the planet a common ancestry.  Despite having certain underlying similarities in their mechanism, protein synthesis in the three major lines of descent (bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes) has diverged to the point that substantive mechanistic differences have arisen.  These differences have been exploited in nature as organisms produce compounds targeting the protein synthetic machinery of competitors as they vie for limited resources. Science has modified many of these compounds that target the machinery for protein synthesis in pathogenic microbes for use in the clinic as antibiotics. As our understanding of the mechanisms of protein synthesis continues to grow, there will likely be countless additional applications for this knowledge in medicine, research, and industry.