Understanding the underlying anatomy and function of mesencephalic structures is key to understanding why specific damage in the tegmentum of the midbrain can, in some cases, cause the aforementioned symptom cluster.

The midbrain is classically divided cross-sectionally into the: tegmentum (or a ventral portion, excluding the cerebral crus/peduncle) and tectum (dorsal portion) and longitudinally into the: superior colliculus and inferior colliculus. The following major structures are encountered if one travels ventrally from the periaqueductal grey matter and stays in the medial half of the tegmentum at the level of the superior colliculus: 1) Edinger-Westphal nucleus, 2) oculomotor nerve, 3) medial longitudinal fasciculus, 4) red nucleus, 5) substantia nigra and finally 6) cerebral peduncle.

- Edinger-Westphal nucleus: the origin of the parasympathetic supply to iris sphincter and ciliary muscle travels with the oculomotor nerve. Damage causes mydriasis and difficulty with visual accommodation.

- Oculomotor nucleus: innervates 4/6 muscles controlling eye movement and levator palpebrae superioris. Damage causes a classic ‘down and out’ pupil and ptosis.

- Medial longitudinal fasciculus: integrates eye movements from cranial nerves III, IV, and VI. Isolated damage causes internuclear ophthalmoplegia not seen in Benedikt syndrome due to oculomotor palsy.

- Red nucleus: receives input via the dentatorubrothalamic tract from the cerebellum and cerebral cortex before subsequently decussating to form the rubrospinal tract, which is a descending motor tract that plays an important role in flexor muscle tone, coordinated movement, and motor reflexes. Damage can, therefore, cause problems on the contralateral part of the body in forming a coordinated movement.

- Substantia nigra: part of the basal ganglia and has a complex but critical role in regulating movement as part of the nigrostriatal pathway. Damage or loss of function (as is the case seen in Parkinson disease) causes resting tremor, postural instability, and difficulty in initiating movement.

- Cerebral peduncle: contain the main descending motor pathways, including the corticospinal tract from the cerebrum that controls voluntary movement, these decussate in the medulla oblongata. Damage to this structure causes contralateral muscle weakness with loss of voluntary control of muscles, increased tone, and hyperreflexia.

Putting the above together illuminates both the syndrome and its variation. The red nucleus, substantia nigra, and cerebral peduncle all control movement (in the case of the red nucleus and substantia nigra in complicated relaying pathways), therefore, slight variations in how damaged each of these structures is in different patients could give heterogenous presentations despite having very similar localized damage. Thus in this light, Holmes tremor, choreoathetosis, cerebellar ataxia all become plausibly part of the same condition across different case reports with varying clinical presentations.

The structures mentioned above are supplied by numerous peduncular arterial branches derived from the proximal posterior cerebral artery. These branches penetrate the cerebral peduncle and go on to supply the rest of the structures in turn involved with this syndrome.