There are many potential etiologies of small and large bowel obstructions that are classified as either extrinsic, intrinsic, or intraluminal. The most common cause of SBOs in industrialized nations is from extrinsic sources, with post-surgical adhesions being the most common. Significant adhesions can cause kinking of the bowel leading to obstruction. It is estimated that at least two-thirds of patients with previous abdominal surgery have adhesions. Other common extrinsic sources include cancer, which causes compression of the small bowel leading to obstruction. Less common but still prevalent extrinsic causes are inguinal and umbilical hernias. Untreated or symptomatic hernias may eventually become kinked as the small bowel protrudes through the defect in the abdominal wall and becomes entrapped in the hernia sack. Hernias that are not identified or are not reducible may progress to obstruction of the bowel and are considered a surgical emergency with the strangulated or incarcerated bowel becoming ischemic over time. Other causes of SBO include intrinsic disease, which can create an insidious onset of bowel wall thickening. The bowel wall slowly becomes compromised, forming a stricture. Crohn disease is the most common cause of benign stricture seen in the adult population.

Intraluminal causes for SBOs are less common. This process occurs when there is an ingested foreign body that causes impaction within the lumen of the bowel or navigates to the ileocecal valve and is unable to pass, forming a barrier to the large intestine. However, it is noted that most foreign bodies that pass through the pyloric sphincter will be able to pass through the rest of the gastrointestinal tract. LBOs are less common and compromise only 10% to 15% of all intestinal obstructions. The most common cause of all LBOs is adenocarcinoma, followed by diverticulitis and volvulus. Colonic obstruction is most commonly seen in the sigmoid colon.