Recognizing oculomotor nerve dysfunction (oculomotor nerve palsy) is crucial because it can be a sign of underlying or uncontrolled chronic disease states. It is an essential clinical symptom that can be life-saving in certain circumstances.

**Pathophysiology**

The cause of oculomotor nerve palsy is most commonly by microvascular diseases including diabetes, hypertension, compression from an intracranial neoplasm or an aneurysm, or trauma.

The microvascular disease can affect the vasa vasorum. In these instances, the fibers innervating the upper eyelid and most of the extraocular muscles become ischemic. Compression of the oculomotor nerve can also occur via an aneurysm, intracranial neoplasm, or uncal herniation. These ischemic events can affect the outer pia blood vessels supplying the fibers to the pupil and lens and eventually the inner vasa vasorum.

**Clinical Signs**

- Ptosis (droopy eyelid) - due to paralysis of levator palpebrae superioris

- "Down and out" positioning of the affected eye

- Position caused by unopposed action of:

- lateral rectus muscle (eye abduction action)

- innervation = abducens nerve (VI)


- superior oblique muscle (Adduct and move eye down)

- innervation = trochlear nerve (IV)

- Diplopia ("seeing double") - due to a misalignment of the eyes (ptosis may block the vision in one eye, resulting in the absence of diplopia)

- 
Dilated pupil - caused by lack of parasympathetic innervation

- Abnormal swinging flashlight test - if parasympathetic nerve fibers are affected, shining a light into EITHER eye will NOT result in pupillary constriction of the affected eye

- Inability to accommodate - this may be difficult to assess in an older patient because their lens may already be hard and difficult to change shape due to a normal part of the aging process

**Labs and Imaging**

Evaluation should base its conclusions on the presence or absence of pupil involvement.

If the pupil is spared, obtain:

- Blood pressure measurement

- HbA1C

- Complete blood count

- Erythrocyte sedimentation rate

If the pupil is involved, compression from the outside should be suspected, and one should obtain

- Prompt referral to a neuro-ophthalmologist

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

- Computed tomogram (CT) angiography (if an aneurysm suspected)

**Conservative Management**

Treatment is conservative in the acute phase.

If diplopia is present and distressful, an eye patch, opaque contact lens, or a blurred lens in glasses covering the affected eye can be helpful.

Botulinum toxin can be useful in the acute setting of partial third nerve palsy with horizontal deviation; best used with paralysis of only the medial rectus. With injection into the overcompensating lateral rectus in these cases, horizontal deviation in the primary position is correctable. If there is mild vertical deviation remaining, prisms in glasses may be of some help. Botulinum toxin should be avoided in vertical muscle imbalance due to the high rate of complications.

Most patients (63%) with an acquired third nerve palsy recover completely with conservative management. Patients with microvascular etiology having the greatest chance of full recovery.

**Surgical management**

Minimal or no improvement after 6 months of conservative therapy warrants strabismus surgery. Strabismus surgery involves fixing the malalignment of the extraocular muscles. Surgery usually involves a combination of a recession (cutting the muscle from the eye and reattaching it posterior to the initial position to WEAKEN the muscle's function) and resection (removing a section of the muscle to shorten it, STRENGTHENING the muscle's function). Depending on the pair of muscles involved, the surgeon will typically recess the contracted muscle while resecting on the antagonist muscle.

If the pupil is involved, patients should undergo a thorough evaluation by a neurologist.