Although the diagnosis is by endoscopy, diagnostic imaging has an important role in the etiological definition, especially in identifying external compressions in secondary tracheomalacia. For instance, cine fluoroscopy combined with contrast swallow may give information regarding the degree of tracheal collapse and delineate esophageal abnormalities and external tracheal compression. It is of high specificity and low sensitivity; however, the exam is a useful adjunct to endoscopy, mainly when other imaging modalities are unavailable.

Multidetector or ultrafast computed tomography (CT) imaging allows a quick airway assessment. Other mediastinal structures can also be studied if using contrast. When paired with bronchoscopy, it demonstrates good diagnostic accuracy.

The gold standard investigation is direct visualization of the airway during spontaneous respiration via bronchoscopy; this is often undertaken alongside other imaging methods, as previously described. Bronchoscopy can demonstrate the narrowing of the lumen of the trachea with associated loss of the semicircular shape and bulging of the posterior membranous wall. There are currently no studies comparing rigid bronchoscopy to flexible bronchoscopy, and it is accepted that each has its benefits and drawbacks.

A variety of imaging techniques may give further information about the disease. Plain radiographs might not show tracheal abnormalities; however, other abnormalities such as vascular anomalies and respiratory pathologies may be visible. Although the literature pertaining to the use of dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the assessment of tracheomalacia is limited, it provides excellent delineation of the anatomy along with no radiation. Thanks to advances in technology, cine-MRI may enable a dynamic airway assessment. The technique is, however, time-consuming and may require intubation or sedation in younger children. Novel imaging approaches such as ultrashort echo-time magnetic resonance imaging (UTE MRI) can represent an interesting solution for assessing tracheomalacia dynamically in neonates without sedation and ionizing radiation.

Pulmonary function tests may show an obstructive pattern and provide supportive evidence; however, they should not be used in isolation to diagnose tracheomalacia.