**S****imple allergic conjunctivitis:**All patients should be educated about general allergic eye care. They should be discouraged from rubbing their eyes, which causes mast cell degranulation and worsening of symptoms. They should be asked to apply artificial tears and cool compresses frequently. If possible, they need to avoid known allergen exposures and remove contact lenses (if applicable). Mild acute forms can be treated over-the-counter antihistamines or antihistamine and vasoconstrictor combination drops for relatively short periods. The patient should be warned against mild rebound conjunctival injection if they use a drop with a vasoconstrictor. Seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis should receive combination antihistamine and mast cell stabilizing drops. Topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drops are more effective than placebo but far less so than antihistamine/mast cell stabilizing drops. For refractory cases, corticosteroid drops are a viable option in short bursts (less than two weeks) in conjunction with a specialist consultation and follow-up. Systemic antihistamines and steroids also have a limited role in refractory cases and cases where the patient has systemic, as opposed to isolated ocular, symptoms.

**Vernal and Atopic Keratoconjunctivitis:**Patients should be given the same education about general allergic eye care (avoid rubbing eyes, use artificial tears and cool compresses, avoid allergen exposure) as simple allergic conjunctivitis.  Initial pharmacotherapy is similar to seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis with topical combination antihistamine/mast cell stabilizing drops. Refractory cases should be referred to a specialist who can prescribe topical corticosteroids. If the patient continues to be refractory or cannot be weaned from topical steroid therapy, topical or systemic calcineurin inhibitors can be used.

**Giant Papillary Conjunctivitis:**First item of management is to remove the mechanical irritant, which is most commonly a contact lens. Patients should be educated and begin the same general allergic eye care used in other subtypes of ocular allergy (avoid rubbing eyes, use artificial tears and cool compresses, avoid allergen exposure). Initial pharmacotherapy is similar to other ocular allergies, for example, topical antihistamine or combination antihistamine and mast cell stabilizing drops. In conjunction with a specialist, topical corticosteroid drops are used in refractory cases (similar to vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis), but calcineurin inhibitors have no role in treatment.