**Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)**is a genetically heterogeneous disease progressing with frequent and recurrent life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections and granuloma formation.

**Hyper immunoglobulin M syndrome**is a heterogeneous syndrome that resulted from a defect in class switch recombination (CSR) and characterized by normal or high IgM levels, low IgG, and IgA levels. The most prevalent form of the disease is the X-linked form resulting in mutation in the CD40LG gene coding the CD40 ligand.

**X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome**typically indicates an irregular response of the immune system to Epstein Barr virus infection. Dysgammaglobulinemia, lymphoma, and fulminant mononucleosis are the 3 cardinal symptoms. Also, lymphocytic vasculitis, aplastic anemia, and lymphoid granulomatosis can be seen.

**Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome**is an X-linked disorder occurring as a result of a mutation in the gene coding Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp). The disease is characterized by susceptibility to infections (due to both adaptive and innate immune disorders), microthrombocytopenia, and eczema. The course of the disease can both be severe depending on the mutations in the WAS gene (classical form) and relatively be in mild forms such as X-linked thrombocytopenia and X-linked neutropenia.

**X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID)**is the most prevalent and severe immunodeficiency occurring as a result of a defect in the common gamma chain IL-2 receptor gamma and causing mortality within the first 2 years if not treated.

**X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA)**is a primary immunodeficiency characterized by profound hypogammaglobulinemia, antibody deficiency, and susceptibility to infections.

**IPEX**is an abbreviation established by using the initials of immune deficiency, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, and X-linked expressions. IPEX is a rare but fatal X-linked disorder.