**Patellar Instability**

Patellar instability refers to a range of clinical manifestations from abnormal medial or lateral displacement to dislocation or subluxation of the patella. The cause of patellar instability is often multifactorial but can most commonly be attributed to anatomical and mechanical imbalances of the patellofemoral joint. These imbalances result in chronic instability and secondary flattening of the lateral aspect of the femoral trochlea. This causes the patella to slip laterally during flexion and either dislocate completely or snap back medially to its correct position as flexion progresses. After an acute injury such as dislocation or subluxation, patellar instability can be treated non-surgically with immobilization and decreased weight-bearing. Once the knee has healed, physical therapy can help correct the mechanical imbalances that led to instability in the first place. However, since tissue damage often occurs during a during a dislocation, the patella often remains less stable after the injury than it was prior and recurrence of dislocation is common. After multiple dislocations, surgery is generally recommended to correct the underlying problem. This usually involves arthroscopic reconstruction of the ligaments holding the patella in place.

**Trochlear Dysplasia**

Trochlear dysplasia, a common cause of recurrent patellar instability, refers to one or more anatomical defects of the femoral trochlea that effect normal tracking of the patella. Defects seen in trochlear dysplasia include decreased height of the medial femoral condyle, decreased trochlear depth, an increased sulcus angle, and/or a decreased lateral trochlear facet that is either flat or convex. Trochlear dysplasia can be identified radiographically by the “crossing sign,” defined as a convergence of the deepest part of the femoral groove with a most prominent aspect of the lateral femoral trochlear facet. The crossing sign is seen in 96% of individuals with objective patellar dislocation and 85% of those with recurrent patellar instability. Trochlear dysplasia is treated similarly to patellar instability with surgical intervention reserved for those who suffer from recurrent dislocations. Surgical interventions include medial patellofemoral ligament reconstruction, tibial tubercle osteotomy, or tracheloplasty.

**Patella Alta**

Patella alta is characterized by a high riding patella that lies superior to the trochlear groove of the femur, which leads to failure of the patella to articulate with the trochlear groove until later in flexion. This places the patella at an increased risk for dislocation. Patella alta is also associated with other patellofemoral abnormalities including chondromalacia patella, a dysplastic condyle, a dysplastic trochlea, small patella, excessive patellar tilt, joint effusion, and ligamentous laxity. The Insall-Salvati index measures the ratio of the length of the patellar ligament to the greatest diagonal length of the patella on a lateral radiograph of a flexed knee, and it is a well-validated measurement used in the diagnosis of patella alta. Generally, patella alta is diagnosed if the Insall-Salvati ratio is greater than 1.2. Conservative treatment of patella alta involves manual gliding to modify the resting height of the patella before knee extension or taping to correct the positional fault of the patella. Surgically, patella alta can be treated with tibial tuberosity osteotomy where the attachment of the patellar ligament is moved inferiorly on the tibia.

**Patella Baja**

Patella baja, or a low-riding patella, is characterized by a decreased distance between the inferior pole of the patella and articular surface of the tibia when the patella is in the distal position of the femoral trochlea and/or a permanent shortening of the patellar tendon. Patella baja can cause anterior knee pain, joint stiffness, alterations in joint mechanics, a decreased lever arm, and extensor lag, and a reduction in the range of motion. Like patella alta, patella baja can be defined by the Insall-Salvati index; a ratio of 0.8 or less is diagnostic of patella baja. In normal individuals, the patella does not articulate with the trochlea when the knee is in full extension; whereas, in patella baja, the patella is always in contact with the trochlea, even in full extension. Patella baja is commonly seen after rupture and repair of the patellar ligament, patellar fracture or high tibial osteotomy due to decreased tension forces of the quadriceps muscle that allow the patella to sit more inferiorly. Treatment of symptomatic patella baja usually involves surgical intervention to proximalize the patella. A variety of surgical techniques such as transferring the tibial tubercle to restore patellar height and lengthening of the patellar tendon using autografts or allografts have been described, but there is no gold standard in the treatment patella baja.

**Patellofemoral Arthritis**

Patellofemoral joint arthritis is characterized by the loss of articular cartilage on either surface of the patella and the trochlear groove. The etiology of patellofemoral arthritis is multifactorial, but in general, it is thought to occur due to abnormal forces across the patella that result in secondary degenerative changes to the joint. Micro or microtrauma, weight and activity level, and genetic quality of the cartilage may also affect the development of patellofemoral arthritis. Most cases of patellofemoral arthritis can be treated non-surgically with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), low-impact exercise, weight loss, physical therapy, cortisone injections, and viscosupplementation, which involves injecting hyaluronic acid into the joint to improve the quality of the synovial fluid. Once non-surgical management has failed, a variety of surgical procedures may be considered to help symptoms. Chondroplasty involves arthroscopically trimming and smoothing the roughened arthritic joint surface. This is usually an option considered in cases of mild to moderate cartilage wear. Cartilage grafting may also be used to fill defects in the articular cartilage, but this procedure is usually reserved for younger patients who only have small areas of cartilage damage. In older patients with refractory symptoms, a partial or total knee replacement may be recommended. During a partial or patellofemoral knee replacement, damaged bone and cartilage surfaces are removed and replaced with metal and polyethylene components secured to the bone with cement. A partial knee replacement cannot be done if there is arthritis involving parts of the knee other than the patellofemoral joint. In that case, a total knee replacement is generally performed to replace all of the cartilaginous surfaces of the knee. Metal prosthesis is placed at both the end of the femur and the top of the tibia with a plastic spacer in between to create a smooth gliding surface.