Atypical hyperplasia lesions are pre-malignant. Many authorities believe the patient should undergo complete surgical excision to exclude malignancy and prevent the development of advanced neoplasia if found on a breast biopsy. Surgical excision for core biopsies that show ADH is considered standard of care. However, ALH may be an incidental finding in small biopsies, and standard surgical resection of these lesions is more controversial. In general, excision is usually recommended in high-risk patients. In carefully selected lower-risk patients such as those without a family or personal history of breast cancer, without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, solitary lesions, or lower BI-RADS score, surveillance, and/or medical therapy such as estrogen receptor modulators are possible management options. Short-term follow-up with increased mammography frequency should be recommended for patients in whom surgical resection is not performed.

ADH is considered a pre-malignant, high-risk lesion, and ALH only a high-risk lesion. Either can be found in association with or at the periphery of a more advanced lesion; therefore, it is important to remember that atypical hyperplasia found on a biopsy may not accurately represent the greater lesion. Upgrade on surgical excision after atypical hyperplasia is found on biopsy varies from 10% to as high as 30%, with cases of atypical hyperplasia suspicious for DCIS having a higher rate of an upgrade after undergoing excision. Studies have failed to show reliable, independent indicators of which atypical hyperplasia lesions are associated with more aggressive entities such as high-grade DCIS or invasive cancer.

It is important to note that while surgical excision after identifying atypical hyperplasia in a core biopsy is generally considered appropriate, some disagreement persists regarding the management of high-risk lesions in certain cases. Proper management will depend on discussing all factors with the patient, and this includes a review of current treatment modalities and recommendations, patient risk factors, careful radiologic/pathologic correlation, and the overall clinical picture.