Quantitative clinical values must always be interpreted not only with the average value in mind but also with the variance of the measure in the reference population. The variance (or a multiple of it) is often incorporated into a reference range provided with each lab result. For example, a resting heart rate of 65 beats per minute is generally not concerning. Although the mean resting heart rate might be in the 70s or 80s, the corresponding reference range (incorporating variance around the mean resting heart rate) is 60 to 100 beats per minute. Since 65 falls within this reference range, it does not fall far enough from the mean to be of concern. In this manner, knowing the variance is critical to interpreting any quantitative clinical measurement, including values that are part of the physical exam (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure) and laboratory results (e.g., hematocrit, serum sodium level).

Variance also plays a role in medication selection and dosing. We consider the case of levothyroxine, a T4 analog, and liothyronine, a T3 analog, as medications for the management of hypothyroidism. The reason clinicians generally prefer levothyroxine to liothyronine is because of levothyroxine’s longer half-life. Since the body metabolizes levothyroxine more slowly, its levels are less variable and more stable across time. Levothyroxine’s lower variance provides a patient with a more consistent thyroid hormone level, often making it more desirable in the management of hypothyroidism. Of course, other clinical reasons make a T4 analog-like levothyroxine a more desirable first-line therapy than a T3 analog-like liothyronine, including the peripheral physiologic conversion of T4 to T3 via deiodination. In summary, a robust conceptual understanding of variance can aid physician decision-making in the clinical setting.