**MP Joint Arthritis in patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Rheumatoid arthritis is a common autoimmune disease associated with a progressive disability caused by synovial inflammation and hyperplasia that leads to the production of autoantibodies, rheumatoid factor, and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies which attack the MP joint and cause increasing degrees of swelling, pain, and underlying cartilage and osseous destruction.

MP joint arthritis is a distinguishing feature of rheumatoid arthritis. In RA, the destruction of the MP joint connective tissue leads to an imbalance of the active and passive forces, leading to joint instability, pain, and deformity.

**MP Joint Dislocation**

Metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint injuries and dislocations of the fingers and thumb commonly occur secondary to direct trauma and/or falls.

A patient with an MP joint dislocation will typically present with a swollen, bruised, and obviously deformed finger.  The patient will be focally tender to palpation over the joint itself in addition to the limited ability to move the finger.

Dislocations are described concerning the distal osseous fragment or bone's position relative to the proximal osseous element.  Dorsal dislocations are the most common presentation pattern.  In addition, dislocations are further classified as simple versus complex.  The former implies a successful closed reduction is achieved by applying axial traction and splinting, while the latter indicates the MP joint dislocation is irreducible by closed means.

The classic description of complex dorsal MP dislocations are:

- Proximal phalanx hyperextension

- Volar plate rupture and avulsion off of the proximal metacarpal head

- Volar plate interposes and impedes closed reduction as it lies on the dorsum of the metacarpal head

- Flexor tendons show ulnar displacement; metacarpal head displaces in both radial and volar directions

- Metacarpal head "button-holes" between 4 structures:

- Lumbrical
- Flexor tendon on the ulnar side of the dislocated digit
- Transverse bands of the natatory ligaments (distal)
- Superficial transverse ligament (proximal)

Complex MP dislocations, by definition, require open reduction to remove the interposing structures which are impeding reduction.

For the thumb MP joint, anatomical structures that may become trapped include the volar plate, sesamoid bones, bony fracture fragments, and the flexor pollicis longus tendon.

**Thumb Collateral Ligament Injury**

Thumb collateral ligaments include injuries to the radial collateral ligament (rare) or ulnar collateral ligament (UCL).  Thumb UCL injuries can also be described based on existing eponyms in the literature:

- Chronic thumb UCL injuries: gamekeeper's thumb

- Acute thumb UCL injury: skier's thumb

- Stener lesion: 

- By definition, it implies complete UCL avulsion and displacement above the adductor aponeurosis. The aponeurosis then lies between the UCL and its attachment site, preventing healing
- Stener lesions can include thumb UCL avulsion with or without an avulsed osseous attachment

Patients will typically present with a swollen, discolored thumb, with pain that is exacerbated by movement in any direction. Patients may also present significant weakness of grasp, at the base of the thumb in the first webspace, and wrist pain. The mechanism of injury is commonly hyperextension of the MP joint.

Failure to repair a Stener lesion inevitably results in chronic pain, instability, deformity, weakness, and arthritis. This causes a UCL tear to be managed surgically to prevent long term disability.

Milder injuries and ligamentous sprains (without instability) are amenable to nonoperative management.  A thumb spica splint may be utilized until symptoms resolve.

**Sagittal Band Rupture**

Sagittal band rupture is known as “boxer’s knuckle,” for its tendency to commonly affect members of the pugilist profession. This injury involves a traumatic extensor tendon rupture on the dorsal aspect of the MP joint. Sagittal band rupture often goes unrecognized because the extensor tendon can remain in its normal midline position following the injury.