Key embryologic mechanisms during weeks six through eight are necessary for proper organ development. Dysfunction during these mechanisms can result in congenital anomalies. The pancreas is one example of an organ that may be disrupted by failed embryologic events. Pancreas divisum is the most common congenital defect involving the pancreas. It occurs due to failure of fusion of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds during the seventh week of gestation. Pancreas divisum causes two separate ductal systems to persist rather than one.

When the dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds fuse, the pancreatic accessory duct may degenerate or become a less functional pancreatic duct. Without fusion of the pancreatic buds, the accessory duct ends up draining the majority of the pancreas. By contrast, the normal anatomy of the pancreas would cause most drainage to occur through the main pancreatic duct. The majority of patients with pancreas divisum are asymptomatic. However, this anomaly can present in a young child with recurrent episodes of pancreatitis. It should be considered in the differential diagnosis when there are no other known etiologies for pancreatitis in the child.

Another possible congenital malformation of the pancreas is annular pancreas. The embryologic mechanism by which this occurs is from a failure of rotation of the ventral pancreatic bud. In normal development, the ventral pancreatic bud undergoes rotation with the duodenum. Lack of rotation may cause the ventral pancreatic bud to encircle the duodenum and possibly constrict it. The major complication that may result is small bowel obstruction. Similar to pancreas divisum, many patients with annular pancreas are asymptomatic.  Patients who develop symptoms may present with features of a small bowel obstruction such as bilious vomiting, abdominal pain and distension, and the inability to have a bowel movement.