**Asthma/COPD:**The effect of nadolol on the beta-2 receptors of the bronchial lining prevents bronchodilation and increases airway resistance, which exacerbates the effect in patients with a bronchospastic disease like asthma, thus causing wheezing and shortness of breath.

**Sinus Bradycardia:**One known effect of nadolol is reducing the resting heart rate. In patients with low heart rates originating from sinus node dysfunction, nadolol can further reduce the rate unless a pacemaker is present.

**Greater than first-degree AV Block:**Nadolol reduces conduction through the AV node, potentially causing an AV block. Thus, nadolol can lead to serious bradyarrhythmia in patients with partial or complete AV block. The use of other drugs that might impair AV nodal conduction can exacerbate AV blockage.

**Cardiogenic Shock:**The combined effect of lowering the resting heart rate and increasing the AV nodal conduction delay can potentially aggravate the already reduced cardiac output in patients with cardiogenic shock.

**Decompensated Cardiac Failure:**Beta-blockers are a cornerstone in the long-term treatment of compensated chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. It reduces the detrimental effect of sympathetic drive on the heart. However, nadolol is contraindicated in patients with uncompensated heart failure. These patients rely on catecholamines for sustaining their heart rate and cardiac output, and nadolol in these patients can exacerbate the symptoms of heart failure.

**Pregnancy and Breastfeeding:**For managing hypertension during pregnancy, beta-blockers like labetalol are preferable to nadolol.

Hypersensitivity to nadolol.

Anesthetic agents that can cause myocardial depression.