The primary objectives of TCCC are to provide early, life-sustaining medical care to the casualty, limit further casualties, and achieve mission success. TCCC is divided into three phases of care: Care Under Fire (CUF), Tactical Field Care (TFC), and Tactical Evacuation Care (TACEVAC).

- **Care Under Fire****(CUF)**is the first objective of TCCC and begins once a casualty is established. The primary goal is fire superiority and movement of the casualty to cover. Cover is defined as concealment (something that visibly hides the combatant) that will stop bullets, ballistics, and bombs (explosives). Fire superiority in order to suppress hostile forces limits additional casualties and allows the injured militant to either move themselves to cover and begin self-aid or for additional forces to intervene as appropriate. To achieve fire superiority the medical personnel and casualty firepower, if capable, are essential for success. At this point, an unresponsive victim is assumed to be beyond capabilities of care and rescue plans are evaluated on a risk basis. The only initial medical intervention during CUF is the early application of tourniquets for major hemorrhage control. All other interventions are delayed until a secure location is obtained and tactical field care is begun.  Tourniquet placement is “high and tight” meaning rapidly placed over the uniform, proximal to the wound, and tightened until bleeding is stopped. If the first tourniquet fails, place the second tourniquet more proximal, leaving the first in place. Multiple tourniquets should be easily accessible by either upper extremity for self-aid.

- **Tactical Field****Care**is the basis of EMS/medic or prehospital tactical care which is rendered once the appropriate cover has been achieved while still within the battlefield environment. Generally, medical care provided through gear carried by the medical personnel. Care during TFC follows the MARCH algorithm. Ideally, massive hemorrhage has been controlled during CUF; if not, tourniquet placement is the first priority.

- **Tactical Evacuation Care**continues with ongoing monitoring and intervention encompassed through TFC during transport out of the tactical environment to the hospital facility. During this phase of care, more invasive maneuvers such as supraglottic or endotracheal airway interventions can be performed along with ongoing evaluation and monitoring following the MARCH algorithm.