Before treatment with cobalamin, the physician should evaluate the patient with some investigations, including serum vitamin B12, folate, iron, hematocrit, and reticulocyte count. Effective therapy may quickly reverse the laboratory abnormality within 24 hours and reestablish normal bone marrow hematopoiesis within 48 hours. The reticulocyte count may increase after 3 to 4 days and reaches its peak level after one week. A complete blood count may become normal approximately within eight weeks. Compliance with cobalamin supplementation should be monitored in vitamin B12 deficient patients. If the homocysteine or methylmalonic acid level fails to return to a normal level during the first week of treatment, it is suspicious for an incorrect diagnosis.

Evidence of neuropsychiatric improvement varies according to the severity of symptoms and the level of vitamin deficiency. Usually, neurologic manifestations begin to improve within the first week of treatment, and it takes six weeks to three months for complete recovery, although residual neurological abnormalities may persist. Patients with delayed improvement, especially with gait, urinary, or bowel dysfunction, should be offered rehabilitative therapy.

Erythropoiesis significantly increases after treatment with cobalamin that may lead to hypokalemia. Thrombocytosis may occur after anemia correction. So, platelet count and serum potassium level require monitoring during cobalamin therapy.

Therapeutic response to cobalamin may be less in some patients with renal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, elderly age, bone marrow suppressants use like chloramphenicol, infection, and concomitant iron or folate deficiency.

Folate supplementation is necessary if the patient has concomitant folate deficiency, but folate treatment in a patient with vitamin B12 deficiency may cause irreversible neurological symptoms because folic acid can aggravate vitamin B12 deficiency. That is why folic acid and cobalamine should not be prescribed concomitantly in a patient with suspected vitamin B12 deficiency.