Although the relationship between implicit bias and interdisciplinary teams is relatively unexplored, it is evident that no single member is responsible for molding a healthcare team's culture. A culture that values open discussion of biases and protects psychological safety promotes team productivity, whereas rudeness and negative behaviors in healthcare teams may adversely affect team performance.

Tools for self-reflection of implicit biases among healthcare teams have been shown to improve patient trust in the quality of care. [Level 1] Clear communication of expectations and responsibilities minimizes the impact of bias on choosing team roles.

**Interprofessional Education Collaborative and Core Competencies**

Interprofessional teams share their values, perspectives, and strategies for planning interventions, and each member of the team plays a role in delivering patient care. Team members share their expertise and skills to provide effective patient care and achieve optimal outcomes. Teams function optimally when the members effectively communicate and have mutual respect for each other and their individual roles. Four core competencies have been established for interprofessional collaborative practice (see IPEC Core Competencies for Interprofessional Education Collaborative):

- **Work with individuals of other professions to maintain a climate of mutual respect and shared values. (Values/Ethics).**When team members place a high value on treating patients and team members equally and respectfully and operate ethically, interventions to reduce the harmful effects of implicit bias that result in health disparities can be created in a culturally safe and accepting environment.

- **Use the knowledge of one's own role and those of other professions to appropriately assess and address the health care needs of patients to promote and advance the health of populations. (Roles/Responsibilities)**Each interprofessional team member is responsible for identifying how implicit bias affects perceptions and clinicians' treatment decisions, leading to disparities in healthcare delivery and health outcomes.

- **Communicate with patients, families, communities, and professionals in health and other fields in a responsive and responsible manner that supports a team approach to promoting and maintaining health and preventing and treating disease. (Interprofessional Communication)**Discussions regarding cultural safety and the continued need for clinicians to engage in ongoing self-reflection and self-awareness and hold themselves accountable to provide culturally safe care should be a priority. Open discussions focused on accepting that everyone has implicit biases and that everyone has the ability to recognize them and change their behavior through interventions, such as counter-stereotyping, are helpful. Strategies to improve patient-clinician communication are beneficial, especially with patients in stigmatized groups.

- **Apply relationship-building values and the principles of team dynamics to perform effectively in different team roles to plan, deliver, and evaluate patient/population-centered care and population health programs and policies that are safe, timely, efficient, effective, and equitable (Teams and Teamwork)**Teams should work together to develop strategies to eliminate discriminatory practices that result in disparities in healthcare delivery, limited access, and suboptimal patient outcomes. Time should be given to interventions that embrace and increase diversity in the workforce.