A good quality urine specimen is vital in making the diagnosis. However, treatment must not be delayed if the clinical scenario strongly suggests a urinary tract infection.

Most patients can provide a high-quality midstream urine sample with appropriate instructions. If that is not possible, a catheterized urine sample (indwelling catheter or a straight in-out catheter) may be used. Catheter insertion is not without some risk, and this must be weighed against the diagnostic advantage of having a urine specimen for analysis and culture. In general, obtaining a urine specimen for culture before initial antibiotic administration is recommended whenever possible and feasible. Most patients with complicated UTIs will demonstrate pyuria. The presence of white blood cell casts strongly suggests renal involvement.

Different normal white cell ranges depend on the urine sample, and the results should be interpreted accordingly.

Often, urine samples in prostatitis may not be diagnostic, especially if the patients have already been partially treated. A pre and post-prostate massage urine sample (also known as the four-glass test or even the shortened two-glass test) can improve the diagnostic yield in patients with prostatitis. In general, pelvic or perineal pain, difficulty in urination, failure of initial therapy, and rapid recurrence of symptoms suggest prostatitis.

Blood cultures are also useful in more severe septic presentations. A positive blood culture can sometimes also help corroborate a urine sample result and reduce any suspicion of contamination.

Some patients with clinical signs of a UTI may not demonstrate any urinary bacteria on culture. Patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria have no urinary symptoms but grow large numbers of bacteria on culture.

Radiological investigations are not helpful in the initial diagnosis of most infections limited to the genitourinary tract. There should be sufficient clues from the history, physical examination, and laboratory results. Ultrasound and CT scans may sometimes be useful or even critical for diagnosing a perinephric abscess, urinary retention, hydronephrosis, and obstructive pyelonephritis from stones in septic patients. All septic patients and febrile patients who fail to respond to appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics within 48 to 72 hours should undergo imaging to exclude complications such as abscesses, urinary retention, calculi, gas, and obstructive uropathy, pyonephrosis, and hydronephrosis. Renal ultrasonography is quicker, less expensive, and avoids radiation exposure to the patient but the CT scan is the definitive standard. It should be strongly considered in difficult or intractable cases, even if the ultrasound is negative, as the results can sometimes be life-saving.

All patients who present with a complicated UTI, even the first presentation of ascending pyelonephritis in non-pregnant immune-competent females, should undergo a renal tract ultrasound at a minimum to evaluate for anatomical abnormalities hydronephrosis, stones, or other lesions. Since there is no reliable clinical method to rule out urinary obstructions in complicated UTIs (such as a stone), the treating physician's responsibility is to do so with an ultrasound or CT scan.

Older patients, especially those with dementia, are at increased risk for complicated UTIs.