If the CXR shows a unilateral source of bleeding or a known source from the H&P is found, place the affected side down to isolate bleeding and spare the remaining lung.

If the decision is made to intubate, it is advisable to use at least an 8.0mm ID endotracheal tube (ETT) to allow subsequent use of bronchoscopy and bronchial blockers. Direct laryngoscopy is generally preferred over video laryngoscopy when there is significant bleeding. Attaching a meconium aspirator to the ETT may help with visualization. If bleeding is uncontrolled, it may be necessary to intubate the right main stem. If the bleeding is originating from the left side of the lung and there is no bronchoscope available, place the patient in right-lateral decubitus to shift the mediastinum to the right. In a study on 25 cadavers, intubaters were able to select the desired lung by first intubating the patient and then rotating the ET tube 90 degrees toward the desired side and advancing until resistance was met. This technique was found to be successful 72.3% of the time for the left lung and 94% successful for the right lung.

Reversals: If the patient is on anticoagulation, reversal of any medication is paramount to assist in achieving hemostasis

TXA: With the success of the WOMAN and CRASH-2 trial in post-partum hemorrhage and trauma, respectively, there has been some case reports of the use of IV TXA or nebulized TXA in pulmonary hemorrhage with some success.

Double Lumen tubes: Double lumen tubes are generally not recommended for a myriad of reasons.

Fiber-optic bronchoscopy (FOB): Allows for visualization of the source of bleeding, clearing airway of bleeding and clots (especially in the non-bleeding lung). Visualization of the bleeding source is essential to enable hemostatic techniques such as a bronchial blocker placement later. Many times in large scale bleeding, FOB is necessary for proper intubation of the non-bleeding lung. It can be used to wedge into the bleeding site to create tamponade.

Rigid Bronchoscopy: Allows of simultaneous evaluation of bleeding source and ventilation of non-bleeding lung. The large channels of this device can accommodate additional suction catheters as well as FOB for visualizations. The rigid bronchoscope also allows the user to use the full array of intrabronchial therapeutic techniques.

Bronchial blocker: This device allows for simultaneous ventilation of clear lung as well as tamponading off the bleeding side of the lung. The device is usually inserted with the assistance of a FOB through an ETT and allows for insertion of a cuffed catheter that can tamponade the bleeding lung; it is usually inserted into the main stem bronchus or bronchus intermedius.

Intrabronchial treatments: These include cold saline lavage, epinephrine injections, spigots, cellulose mesh, ADH derivatives introduced through either FOB or rigid bronchoscope. If a definitive source of bleeding is present and reachable, electrocautery, cryotherapy, laser, argon plasma coagulation is also an option.

Bronchial Artery Embolization (BAE): Definitive treatment if bleeding is from the bronchial artery system (approximately 90% of the time), it is often considered the first line management in massive pulmonary hemorrhage. Success rates are up to 90% in the right patient population.

Surgery: Resection is considered last resort for management of pulmonary hemorrhage largely due to high mortality rates. Based on a study by Adrejak et al., mortality rates of 35% were seen in emergent resections, and significantly decreased mortality rates of 4% in resections scheduled after hemostasis and 0% in resections scheduled for after discharge.