PHACE syndrome is a neurocutaneous disorder. Cutaneous anomalies are manifested by hemangioma which can be absent, subtle at birth, or obvious after birth. It can be present at birth as premonitory lesions as an erythematous patch or a telangiectatic red macule. It is typically characterized by a large segmental cervicofacial hemangioma as red-bluish soft masses covering a broad cutaneous territory or manifests as confluent plaques or small individual papules clustered that assume a specific distribution. The pattern, in some cases, has a dermatomal involvement, occurring trigeminal patterns V1, V2, and V3 facial hemangioma is the most frequent localization. It can occur unilaterally or bilaterally. Lesions undergo a proliferative phase followed by slow involution often leading to complete regression. There are reports of a suspected link between the distribution of facial hemangioma and extracutaneous manifestations.

The face divides into four segments related to the prominences of facial develo­pment: frontotemporal (segment 1), maxillary (segment 2), mandibular (segment 3), and frontonasal (segment 4). Hemangioma on the frontotemporal and frontonasal segments have been reported with a higher risk of ocular, cerebrovascular, and brain involvement, whereas those on the mandibular segment correlate with a potential risk of midline and cardiovascular defects. However, these correlations have not been fully elucidated.

Furthermore, the hemangioma may occur elsewhere in the body; the most common association is with the segmental hemangioma or the subglottic (airway hemangioma) and occasionally may be seen in the gastrointestinal tract.

The extracutaneous manifestations include abnormalities of the brain, cerebral vasculature, aorta, eyes, and chest wall. The most common associated extracutaneous findings are cerebrovascular (91%), cardiovascular (67%), and brain (52%) abnormalities. Thereon, the cerebrovascular involvement typically is related to the ipsilateral internal carotid artery.  The most frequent cardiovascular abnormalities are aberrant subclavian artery and coarctation of the aorta, which are present in 20% of cases. Brain abnormalities mainly involve the posterior fossa and may include cerebral hypoplasia, cortical dysgenesis, and Danky-Walker malformation. Additionally, neurological symptoms are variable, depending on the associated territory of the occluded artery. The ophthalmologic manifestations include microphthalmia, glaucoma, and coloboma.