Treatment and management depend if the colloid cyst is found incidentally or is symptomatic.

If the colloid cyst is symptomatic and causing hydrocephalus, the colloid cyst should be treated. For acute, life-threatening hydrocephalus, treatment of the hydrocephalus should be the next priority after ensuring adequate airway, breathing, and circulation. An external ventricular drain (EVD) can be placed to relieve acute hydrocephalus and may be a life-saving procedure.

After acute, life-threatening hydrocephalus has either been treated or ruled out, the clinician can deal with the colloid cyst. Current treatment options include craniotomy with excision via a transcallosal or transcortical route, endoscopic removal, and stereotactic aspiration.

**Craniotomy for Colloid Cyst Removal**

A colloid cyst can be removed with a craniotomy. A craniotomy is a surgery where an incision is made in the scalp, and part of the skull is removed for the duration of the surgery, then the skull is put back in place. Two separate routes exist to remove the colloid cysts: transcallosal and transcortical. In the transcallosal approach, the two frontal hemispheres are split apart, and a surgical corridor is created through the rostral end of the genu of the corpus callosum to access the colloid cyst. For the transcortical route, a surgical corridor is developed directly through the brain cortex, most commonly through the right frontal and middle gyrus, to access the lateral ventricle. The colloid cyst can then be removed through the lateral ventricle.

Removing a colloid cyst via a craniotomy has the highest up-front surgical risk but may have the lowest recurrence and reoperation rate. The open craniotomy provides more degrees of freedom for access to the colloid cyst and may be more suitable for larger colloid cysts but does have limitations based on the approach chosen.

**Endoscopic Removal of a Colloid Cyst**

An endoscopic surgery consists of making a small incision in the scalp and a small hole in the bone. A small tube, typically called a sheath, is advanced through the brain to get access to the lateral ventricle. An endoscope can then be passed into the lateral ventricle to remove the colloid cyst. An endoscopic, in its simplest form, is a tube with a light, camera, and working channel. The light provides illumination for the camera to see what is going on. The working channel provides the surgeon with a way to get instruments and tools in front of the camera to perform surgery.

Endoscopic removal of a colloid cyst tends to have less up-front risk than open surgery but also may have a slightly higher reoperation rate than open surgery. The endoscopic approach may not be suitable for all colloid cysts depending on the size and location of the cyst.

**Stereotactic Aspiration of a Colloid Cyst**

A third option to treat a colloid cyst is a stereotactic aspiration. This is performed by making a small incision in the scalp and then a small hole in the bone. The surgeon then advances a needle through the brain and into the cyst using some variety of either frame-based or frameless neuronavigation. The contents of the colloid cyst may be able to be aspirated, decreasing its size.

Aspiration of a colloid cyst may not be achievable if the contents of the colloid cyst are particularly thick or if there is no safe corridor to the colloid cyst. Stereotactic aspiration of a colloid cyst has less relative surgical risk than an endoscopic or open resection of the colloid cyst but has the highest reoperation rate compared to the other two treatment modalities. With the aspiration of the colloid cyst, the cyst is left in place and simply decompressed. The cyst may reexpand over time and become symptomatic again.

**Asymptomatic Colloid Cyst**

An asymptomatic colloid cyst does not necessarily warrant treatment. If there is hydrocephalus, all surgeons would agree that surgery is warranted, but if a colloid cyst is found incidentally, then surgery is not necessarily warranted. Colloid cysts that are smaller than 10 mm or more centrally located in the third ventricle are less likely to obstruct the near term. Such colloid cysts may be monitored over time with serial imaging looking for colloid cyst size and location as well as any evidence of hydrocephalus. There have been infrequent reported cases of colloid cysts which were followed clinically but caused acute hydrocephalus and death.