**Immobilization**

The type of material used, method of fixation employed, the percentage area of the material that comes in contact with the patient during the procedure, and technique used to support the patent all affect the procedure's reproducibility. Immobilization may require masks, which may be hazardous for patients with claustrophobia. Pretreatment identification of the patients and setting up limits and appropriate margins, up to which irradiation can be provided in such scenarios, may be useful in achieving optimum results.

**Compliance of the Patient**

The patient's inability to assume a posture for the duration of treatment may compromise the procedure. Anxiety, neurological deficit, and nausea due to raised intracranial tension may lead to movement.

Accuracy of treatment delivered may also vary due to the uncertainty associated with using multiple images acquired through different techniques. Transfer errors associated with each imaging stage might attain significance and affect outcomes.

**Reproducibility of the Setup**

It depends upon the immobilization technique used. Set up errors in the region of 1.3 to 2 mm have been reported using stereotactic frames. The degree of setup errors encountered during immobilization also depends upon the material of the masks used, ranging from 3 mm with the use of high melting point thermoacrylic systems, 4-5.5 mm using low melting point thermoacrylic systems, and 3.27 mm when thermoplastics are used in combination with a bite block.

**Internal Organ Movement**

The lack of movement of the brain within the cranium limits the effect of internal organ motion, thus, making the use of intrafraction analysis unnecessary.

**Radiotherapy Fields and Imaging**

The timing and frequency of imaging to the brain need to be standardized.

A review of the field edges and the isocentre, with the use of images that are representative of all treatment fields, may be required to preserve critical structures in the brain. Double exposures with asymmetrical fields may be required to prevent injury to critical structures when the anatomy of the intracranial structures is not evident in one image.

Measurement of fiducial surrogates might provide good information when clear images cannot be obtained, either due to the structure of immobilization devices or non-coplanar arrangement of the fields.

Concomitant exposure to vital structures needs to be reduced while treating benign tumors such as pituitary adenoma. An attempt may be made to target the site of interest while preserving target structures nearby, even at sites for which double exposure may be required.

Virtual planning CT scanning should be done before irradiation for planning. Virtual CT simulation when part of the brain is being irradiated.

**Treatment Planning**

**Whole-brain Radiotherapy**

- The use of parallel fields in WBRT enables coverage of the entire brain. Recent research has focused on reducing the dose of radiation delivered to the parotid gland (an organ at risk) by using WBRT with non-coplanar beams and four field box therapy, which is delivered with the patient's head bent forwards. While bilateral WBRT is delivered using parallel opposed beams, four field box therapy uses anterior, posterior, and bilateral beams. The parallel fields in WBRT include the brain parenchyma, skull, and the spinal cord (until the level of the second cervical vertebrae).

- 3 D planning, which should use CT data fused with T1 weighed gadolinium-enhanced images. Gross tumor volume is defined by the contours of the gadolinium enhancement on T1 weighted image (after adding 2 mm to the contours/borders for adjustments due to MRI fusion uncertainties). The routine use of intensity-modulated treatment should be considered. Dose delivered in a single daily fraction may vary from 16 Gy.

- The field of irradiation includes the whole brain with a clearance of 1 cm from the outer table and the base of the skull extending up to the bottom of C2. This might be achieved with the use of lateral parallel opposed fields for virtual simulation.

- Fractionation schedules may include 30 Gy in 10 fractions, 20 Gy in 5 fractions, and 12 Gy in 2 fractions, in those with poor performance status.

**Stereotactic Radiosurgery**

Standard SRS is reserved for lesions less than 3 cm in diameter to reduce the risk of radiation necrosis in the surrounding brain parenchyma. Standard SRS places an isocentre target within individual brain metastases, following which each isocentre is set up and managed sequentially. There has been a move towards anointing a single isocentre within the brain, along with the use of helical tomography and volumetric modulated arc therapy to target multiple metastases at the same time.

**Hypofractionated Stereotactic Radiotherapy**

Hypofractionated SRT allows increased time for recovery of surrounding parenchyma by allowing 3-5 fractions on successive or alternate days. The two most common regimens enable the delivery of 25 Gy in 5 fractions and 21 Gy in 3 fractions, respectively.

**Supratentorial Boost**

Supratentorial boost optimization of 2-3 field plan may be achieved by using 3D planning using CT data along with MRI fusion. A boost delivering 10 Gy in 5 fractions may be delivered over the course of one week.

**Posterior Cranial Fossa Boost**

Virtual simulation may use opposing lateral fields extending from the posterior fossa to the second cervical vertebrae. Adequate anatomical coverage can be achieved by using MRI fusion, which may aid in the outlining of the contours of the cerebellum and brainstem. A boost delivering 20 Gy in 5 daily fractions may be delivered over one week.

**Hippocampal Avoidance Region**

Bilateral hippocampal contours can be generated on a thin slice MRI-CT fusion image set. The HA region is generated by expanding the hippocampal contour by 5 mm.

**Contouring of Brain Metastasis**

MRI with gadolinium contrast has been advised for treatment planning. Fusion with axial CT is also advised. Gross tumor volume is defined upon gadolinium enhancement with a 1 mm margin. Planning tumor volume or the total treatment volume is calculated by adding a 1-3 mm margin to the gross tumor volume in geometrical form. The tolerance dose for critical structures, while using intensity-modulated radiotherapy treatment, is calculated using the planning at risk volume, which can be created by adding a 3 mm margin to the critical structure.

**Quality Assurance**

Dose homogeneity (HI) values close to zero indicate superior homogeneity.