The toxicity of nitroprusside is related to its potent antihypertensive effects and the accumulation of toxic metabolites (cyanide, thiocyanate, and methemoglobin).

**1. Cyanide toxicity:**Nitroprusside combines with hemoglobin and is subsequently metabolized to 5 cyanide ions and cyanmethemoglobin. Cyanide then converts to thiocyanate via rhodanese-mediated donation of a sulfur group (from thiosulfate or cysteine); this final step can quickly become overwhelmed with large quantities of the drug.

- Patients at high risk for cyanide toxicity include those with hepatic impairment, malnourishment, vitamin B12 deficiency states, patients on cardiopulmonary bypass, and those undergoing therapeutic hypothermia.

- Cyanide toxicity may manifest in the form of metabolic acidosis, hypoxemia, bradycardia, altered mental status (e.g., confusion), and/or convulsions.

- If cyanide toxicity is suspected, the administration should be stopped immediately, and antidotal therapy given, preferably using a combination of hydroxocobalamin (to bind intracellular cyanide) and sodium thiosulfate (to act as a sulfur donor).

One strategy that has helped combat cyanide toxicity in patients receiving high doses or prolonged infusions of nitroprusside involves the co-administration of sodium thiosulfate (a sulfur group donor) at a 10 to 1 ratio.

**2. Hypotension**: Profound hypotension may occur with resultant compromised perfusion to vital organs

**3. Thiocyanate toxicity**: Thiocyanate toxicity rarely occurs, most often in the setting of renal failure and/or prolonged infusions (>72 hours).

- The earliest signs of thiocyanate toxicity are frequently tinnitus, abdominal pain, weakness, and variable levels of altered mental status (agitation, disorientation), which can ultimately progress to lethargy, seizures, and coma if not recognized and treated.

- Of note, serum thiocyanate levels are only useful if used for confirmation of suspected toxicity in symptomatic patients. Early signs (e.g., tinnitus) may be present at levels above 35 mcg/mL, while symptoms of serious toxicity are expected with serum levels >100 mcg/mL.

**4. Methemoglobinemia**: Methemoglobinemia most often occurs in patients receiving infusions >10 mcg/kg/minute and presents with signs of impaired oxygen delivery despite normal PaO2 and cardiac output.

- First-line treatment with methylene blue should be given in symptomatic patients or those with methemoglobin levels exceeding 30% (10% in those with preexisting conditions limiting tolerance to hypoxemia).

**5. Increased intracranial pressure:**a result of cerebral vasodilation.