The cornea is a smooth, clear structure at the front of the eye. It functions to (1) shield the eye from foreign substances and (2) help control visual focus.

The cornea is composed of 5 layers: epithelium, Bowman’s layer, stroma, Descemet’s membrane, and endothelium (Figure 1A).

The cornea of the human eye is the most densely innervated part of the body, 300 to 600 times more sensitive than skin.

**Corneal Reflex**

The cornea is the first substance irritants or foreign objects will touch when they come in contact with the eye. Contact with the cornea initiates 2 reflexes: blink reflex (corneal reflex) and tear production. The corneal blink reflex is caused by a loop between the trigeminal sensory nerves and the facial motor (VII) nerve innervation of the orbicularis oculi muscles. The reflex activates when a sensory stimulus contacts either free nerve endings or mechanoreceptors within the epithelium of the cornea. Sensory information transmits through the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (V) to synapse within the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the brainstem (blue pathway, Figure 1B). The contacted nerve within the spinal trigeminal nucleus then projects to the facial nucleus and synapses with the facial nerve (purple pathway, Figure 1B). The facial nerve exits the facial nucleus, wraps around the abducens nucleus, and exits the skull at the stylomastoid foramen. After exiting the skull, the facial nerve travels medially over the surface of the face to activate the orbicularis oculi muscle. Contraction of this muscle causes a blink movement (i.e., eye closure; red pathway; Figure 1B).

There are 2 stages to the blink reflex, early and late. A-beta fibers activate the initial movement of the eyelid (early response) on the ipsilateral side. Other fiber types activate the late stage. The late-stage reflex stimulates facial nerves bilaterally so that both eyes blink. Input from the secondary motor system (e.g., interpositus nucleus of the cerebellum, red nucleus, and reticular activating system) can modulate this late stage reflex.

The motor output of each blink can vary in non-pathological conditions. Many factors can influence the blink response. One factor is the duration and intensity of the sensory stimulus.

The blink response causes the eyelid to close. This system works together with a secondary circuit pathway through the oculomotor nucleus to re-open the eyelid. This secondary pathway is activated by the same touch pathway used by the blink response (Trigeminal V1). To facilitate this response, V1 nerves have secondary inputs within the trigeminal spinal nucleus onto nerves that project to the oculomotor nucleus. These spinal nucleus/oculomotor neurons synapse onto oculomotor neurons that then activate the levator palpebrae. The oculomotor pathway initiates the eyelid to re-open after it closes in the blink response. It works in conjunction with the facial motor pathway.

**Tear Production**

Touching the cornea can also activate circuits that initiate tear production. This reflex circuit follows the same pathway as the blink reflex except that the parasympathetic nerves within the facial VII nerve innervates the lacrimal and meibomian “tarsal” glands instead of muscle (green circuit; Figure 1B).

Tears have several functions.

- Form smooth optical surface

- Keep cornea surface moist

- Wash away debris or irritants

- Have antibacterial properties that help to prevent infection

The corneal blink reflex is not the only reflex that can trigger tear production. Certain visual and taste reflexes can also stimulate these glands. Bright lights trigger visual reflexes. Specific chemicals that may be specifically noxious if they entered the eye (e.g., peppery, spicy, or hot foods) activate taste reflexes. Both systems contact parasympathetics that generate tear production.