Most of the cases of hereditary elliptocytosis are asymptomatic and may be an incidental finding during the workup for anemia, while others may present with symptoms of anemia like fatigue or reduced exercise tolerance. It is important to focus on anemia in family members, as HE may be misdiagnosed as another condition like iron deficiency anemia. Rarely HE may present as neonatal jaundice. Long-standing hemolytic anemia can lead to splenomegaly (early satiety, left upper quadrant abdominal pain, and abdominal discomfort). Frontal bossing may be seen in patients with HPP and leg ulcers in a patient with chronic hemolysis. The presentation is different in the different subtypes of HE, which is described below.

Common hereditary elliptocytosis: This is the most common form of HE, and the patient is generally asymptomatic. Neonates may present with transient hemolysis, which typically resolves within the first year of life. Transfusion and phototherapy may be required if neonates present with severe hemolytic anemia and jaundice. The hallmark of common HE is the presence of elliptical-shaped RBCs in the peripheral blood smear, and their number ranges from 15% to 100%. A few spherocytes, stomatocytes, and poikilocytes (fragmented cells) may be seen.

Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP): It is the most severe form of HE and most commonly affects African-American neonates that present with neonatal jaundice and hemolytic anemia persisting throughout life. The peripheral blood smear shows poikilocytes and spherocytes with rare elliptocytes. The affected neonates most commonly have complications related to hemolysis like splenomegaly and pigment gallstones that often require transfusion and splenectomy.

Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO): Also known as stomatocytosis elliptocytosis, is most commonly seen in malaria-endemic regions. It is associated with mild or no hemolysis and confers resistance against Plasmodium falciparum infection. The peripheral blood smear shows stomatocytes, ovalocytes, and macro-ovalocytes.

Spherocytic elliptocytosis (SE):****Most commonly noted in the Italian people with mild to moderate hemolysis.

Physical examination findings in HE include pallor in patients undergoing hemolysis, splenomegaly, and right upper quadrant pain in patients with a gallstone.