Prevention of painful, traumatic Foley catheter removals and early identification of catheter mal-positioning can minimize pain, urinary tract infections, discomfort, and hematuria as well as eliminate long-term complications of urethral strictures and incomplete bladder emptying. It also allows for the early removal of the Foley catheter.

Traumatic, unintended Foley catheter extractions, whether patient-initiated or accidental, can cause permanent urologic complications, affect hospital length of stay, decrease patient satisfaction grades, increase catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs), and lower hospital quality scores. These injuries are usually managed with catheter replacement for 10 to 14 days (optimal) or with just observation. Rarely, they can cause severe, even life-threatening hematuria that may require pelvic arterial embolization to control.

The following guidelines will help prevent such events by early identification of patients at risk and reasonable steps that nursing services can then initiate and perform on their own without specific physician orders. Tips on early recognition of mal-positioned Foleys are included so that these painful and potentially dangerous conditions can be identified and corrected more quickly.

The use of a larger (30 mL) balloon Foley to minimize unintended self-extraction is controversial. While the 30 mL balloon is certainly much larger and therefore more resistant to being pulled out while inflated, it would do more damage to the urethra if a determined patient manages to extract it. Also, larger catheter balloons may be more stimulating and increase an at-risk patient's attempts to remove the catheter. For that reason, it is not routinely recommended. However, it may be reasonable to use a larger balloon initially for new suprapubic tubes.