Evaluating delusional states can prove difficult, even for the seasoned clinician. Prior to a psychiatric evaluation, the physician should rule out delusional manifestation in the setting of a medical disease.

There is no specific diagnostic test to identify delusions; however, the following factors should be considered essential as part of any clinical evaluation.

**1. Genetics/Family History as Risk Factor**

Positive family history for mental disorders should be considered as a risk factor in symptom expression.

**2. Environment as Moderator**

Smeets et al. in 2014 noted that there is evidence suggesting environmental implications on the manifestation and theme of delusions.

**3. Early Exposure to Trauma as a Specific Risk Factor**

There is a significant body of research on the link between early/childhood exposure to trauma and the subsequent development and severity of delusions.

**4. Tenacity of Beliefs**

Despite their encapsulation, these beliefs are impervious to reasoning, evidence, and argument; attempts to confront the delusions may precipitate resistance, early treatment termination, and alienation from the patient.

**5. Content and Culture**

Delusions appear in many cultures. Persecutory delusions appear most frequently, followed by religious and grandiose delusions. However, recent research indicates that the delusional content and expression is partly reflective of the person's culture as well as the socio-economic and political events experienced by that person.