**What is the composition of RNA?**

The primary structure of RNA is composed of nucleotides attached by 5’-3’ phosphodiester bonds between ribose sugars. Ribose has the molecular formula, C5H10O5, and has a naturally occurring D-ribose form and a less common L-ribose. The D and L designations refer to the hydroxyl group positions. The nucleotide bases consist of adenine, guanine, cytosine, and uracil. Two hydrogen bonds form between adenine and uracil, while three bonds form between cytosine and guanine. The base pairing via hydrogen bonds is the basis of RNA secondary structure. The RNA tertiary structure is the result of RNA folding, which creates a three-dimensional shape consisting of helices and grooves. RNA differs from DNA in that it contains a uracil nucleotide instead of thymine and carries a 2’ hydroxyl group rather than a 2’ hydrogen. Due to its interaction with the solvent environment, the 2’ hydroxyl group contributes to RNA conformation.

**How is it made?**

RNA polymerases synthesize RNA from DNA through a process called transcription. In prokaryotes, a single RNA polymerase catalyzes transcription for all types of RNA. In eukaryotes, there are different types of RNA polymerases, each responsible for synthesizing a specific RNA. RNA polymerase I synthesize rRNA. RNA polymerase II creates mRNA, and RNA polymerase III makes tRNA. To initiate transcription, an RNA polymerase enzyme binds to a promoter region on DNA, and the DNA double helix unwinds into a template strand and non-coding strand. During transcription, an RNA polymerase uses the 3’-5’ DNA template strand to synthesize a 5’-3’ RNA strand with complementary nucleotides. The newly synthesized RNA strand is nearly identical to the non-coding strand of DNA except for uracil substituting thymine. In eukaryotes, each RNA polymerase has a unique mechanism to terminate transcription. For example, RNA polymerase II transcribed RNA has an AAUAAA poly(A) site that recruits a group of factors to cleave the transcript.

Prokaryotic RNA undergoes Rho-dependent or Rho-independent termination. In Rho-dependent termination, a Rho factor helicase binds to C-rich sites on the RNA, and ATP hydrolysis powers Rho to unwind the DNA-RNA complex and release the RNA transcript.