The management of a psychotic patient varies greatly depending on the origins of the psychosis. A psychiatrist, inpatient, or out should evaluate any patient experiencing an episode of psychosis. Antipsychotic medications are the gold-standard treatment for psychotic episodes and disorders, and the choice, dosing, and administration of the medication will largely depend on the scenario.

Antipsychotics are generally the treatment for schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Initial dosing should be at a low dose and titrated up as needed. Of note, there has been long-standing debate as to whether second-generation antipsychotics are more efficacious than the first generation.

Antipsychotics have also been shown to be most effective in treating the psychotic symptoms of drug-induced psychosis, mania, delirium,

Antipsychotic medications have demonstrated to be most effective in positive symptoms of psychosis discussed earlier (hallucinations, delusions, disorganized thoughts, and behavior) and less useful for negative symptoms.

Evidence shows benzodiazepines to be an effective treatment for catatonic symptoms of psychosis.

Along with medications, family and caregivers also play an essential role in the management of a psychotic patient, including providing a safe and therapeutic environment for the patient, as well as interacting with them in and calm, empathetic manner.

In the scenario of an agitated, potentially aggressive, acutely psychotic patient at risk of harming themselves or someone else, they should be hospitalized and placed in the care of health care professionals. An injectable form of a typical antipsychotic with a benzodiazepine is most effective in this case.

Along with medications, cognitive behavioral therapy can play an important role in the treatment of patients with psychotic symptoms.

Lastly, it is critical to note that for acute onset psychosis in patients, ultimately developing a schizophrenia-spectrum psychotic disorder, early intervention may improve clinical outcomes. Delays in treatment have statistical links with poorer treatment outcomes.