The key to managing cyanide toxicity is patient education. Healthcare workers that include nurses, pharmacists, and physicians, need to educate the public about the dangers of cyanide in the workplace. Cyanide can even be absorbed through the skin; hence people who work with cyanide-related chemicals must wear appropriate garments and protective inhalational devices. The public should also be educated on buying cyanide-containing anticancer and anti-HIV treatments sold over the internet. The public should be asked to speak to their health care provider before purchasing such products. Finally, all patients exposed to cyanide should follow up with their healthcare provider to ensure they have not developed any residual neuropsychiatric sequelae. In addition, patients treated with hydroxocobalamin should avoid sun exposure to prevent photosensitivity.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes after cyanide poisoning depend on the concentration. Those with mild exposure and few symptoms usually have a good prognosis, but those with severe exposure usually have a poor outcome. People who intentionally take large doses usually have a poor outcome. Patients who are removed from the exposure and treated immediately tend to have a good outcome. Following intravenous administration, cyanide can result in a fatality within seconds or minutes, compared to a few hours after oral ingestion. Even individuals who survive may have signs of anoxic encephalopathy. Anecdotal reports indicate that movement disorders and neuropsychiatric symptoms are not uncommon.