For prescribers, it may be difficult to distinguish legitimate pain from drug-seeking behavior. Pain is often difficult to assess because patients may be impaired, and self-reporting may be inaccurate or difficult to obtain. The astute clinicians should rely on a combination of taking an accurate history, physical, and observation-based assessment.

**Signs of Pain**

- Activity changes: Appetite, increased fatigue, increased alcohol consumption, routines, and increased sleep.

- Facial expressions: Frowning, grimacing, and rapid blinking

- Body movements: Guarding, fidgeting, inactivity, motor restlessness, pacing, rigidity, rocking, and muscle tension

- Interpersonal interaction changes: Aggression, diminished sex drive, disruptive behavior, irritability, resisting care, and being withdrawn

- Mental status change: Anxiety, crying, confusion, depression, distress, irritability, and suicidal thoughts

- Verbalizations: Calling out, "I hurt everywhere," requesting help, sighing, and verbal abuse

**Symptoms of Pain**

- Diaphoresis

- Hypertension

- Pupil dilation

- Tachycardia

- Tachypnea

**Pain Evaluation Questions**

- **Character**- A description of how the pain feels (dull, pinching, pounding, sharp, shooting, throbbing, pounding, stinging, burning).

- **Radiation**- Does the pain move anywhere?

- **Site**- Where is the pain? Where does it hurt?

- **Onset**- When did the pain start?

- **Progression**- Has the pain gotten worse or better since it started?

- **Duration**- For how long have you had the pain? Is it episodic?

- **Severity**- What is the pain severity (1 to 10)?

- **Aggravating factors**- Does anything make it worse, such as movement or a position?

- **Relieving factors**- Does anything you do or not do make the pain better? What treatments have you tried?

- **Associative factors**- The clinician should query other relevant questions from a review of systems based on the patient complaint.

**Signs and Symptoms of Drug-seeking Behavior and Diversion**

A common method to evaluate whether a patient is taking or misusing opioids is a random urine drug screen. Studies show that as high as 25% of patients prescribed opioids will randomly test negative. Patients discontinue opioid use due to remission of pain, side effects, lack of efficacy, and in some instances, opportunities to sell their medications.

Behaviors suggesting opioid drug use disorder

- Aggressive demand for more drugs

- Forging prescriptions

- Increased alcohol use and lack of control

- Increasing dose without permission

- Injecting or inhaling drugs prescribed for oral use

- Obtaining drugs from illegitimate sources

- Obtaining opioids from other providers

- Prescription loss

- Refusing to decrease pain medication dosage when stabilized

- Resisting medication change

- Requesting early refills

- Requesting specific medications

- Selling drugs

- Sharing prescriptions

- Stockpiling medications

- Using illegal drugs