Clozapine, due to its many lethal adverse reactions, has become a drug that many clinicians are afraid to prescribe due to fear of patient safety. One of the most significant concerns for clozapine is the adverse effect of agranulocytosis and requires cessation of therapy and hematology consultation. The FDA has mandated a national registry to monitor weekly white blood cell count levels for anyone prescribed clozapine. There are many limitations for clozapine use, described in a systematic review looking at barriers to its use. There are three levels this study uses to describe the barriers; these are the patient, the clinician, and health-system-related barriers. Some patient barriers include non-compliance to weekly blood draws, tolerating clozapine adverse effects, and patients prescribed multiple drugs. From the clinician’s perspective, some barriers are inadequate experience and knowledge of prescribing clozapine, fear of side effects, lack of adherence to guidelines, need for intense monitoring, and perception of patient non-compliance. Some systemic problems include insufficient resources, including staffing and nurses, shortage of beds, and service fragmentation. Point-of-care devices, educational interventions for clinicians and patients, and shared decision-making involving patients are crucial to tackling these barriers. These solutions need evaluation using controlled study designs.

Coordination of clozapine treatment is best through the national registry, which helps identify the patient and collaborate the care by interprofessional health care team members consisting of prescribers, nurses, physician assistants, specialists, psychiatrists, and pharmacists.