Management is guided by whether the patients are high-risk or low-risk. Patients with the following are considered as high risk:

- Receipt of cytotoxic therapy sufficiently myelosuppressive to result in anticipated severe neutropenia (ANC <500 cells/mcL) for >7 days

- CISNE score of ≥3

- MASCC risk index score <21

- Active uncontrolled comorbid medical problems

- Uncontrolled or progressive cancer

- Evidence of hepatic insufficiency (aminotransferase levels >5 times normal values) or renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance of <30 mL/minute)

- Use of alemtuzumab or CAR-T cell within the past two months

In the outpatient setting, oral empiric therapy with fluoroquinolone plus amoxicillin/clavulanate is recommended in low-risk patients. Ciprofloxacin 500-750 mg orally every 12 hours and amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg orally every 8 hours is a common empiric regime.

Clindamycin can be used for those with penicillin allergies. If the patient remains febrile for 48 to 72 hours, the patient will require admission.

For high-risk patients presenting with neutropenic fever, intravenous antibiotic therapy should be given within 1 hour after triage and monitored more than 4 hours before discharge. The Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) recommends monotherapy with antipseudomonal beta-lactam agents such as cefepime, carbapenems, or piperacillin/tazobactam.

- Cefepime or ceftazidime: 2 g IV every 8 hours or

- Piperacillin/tazobactam: 4.5 g IV every 6 to 8 hours or

- Antipseudomonal carbapenems:

- Imipenem-cilastatin: 500 mg IV every 6 hours
- Meropenem standard: 1 to 2 g IV every 8 hours

Vancomycin is not recommended for initial therapy but should be considered if suspecting catheter-related infection, skin or soft tissue infections, pneumonia, or hemodynamic instability.

- Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA): vancomycin, linezolid, and daptomycin

- Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE): linezolid and daptomycin

- Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing organisms: carbapenems

- Klebsiella pneumoniae: carbapenems, polymyxin, colistin, or tigecycline

Empiric antifungal coverage is advised in high-risk patients with persistent fever after 4 to 7 days of broad-spectrum antibacterial regimen and suspicion of fungal infection.

Appropriate antibiotics may be continued until the ANC is ≥ 500 cells/mm or when the infection is cleared. If the patients remain neutropenic after the appropriate treatment course is completed and oral fluoroquinolone prophylaxis with the resolution of all signs and symptoms of documented infection is resumed until marrow recovery.

Recommendation for prevention of infection in neutropenic patients:

- Fluoroquinolones as prophylaxis for patients who are at high risk

- Antifungal prophylaxis with an oral triazole with patients with profound neutropenia

- Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is the recommended treatment for patients receiving chemotherapy regimens associated with greater than 3.5% risk for pneumonia from Pneumocystis jirovecii.

- Yearly influenza vaccination is recommended for all patients receiving chemotherapy.

- Treatment with a nucleoside reverse transcription inhibitor is recommended for patients at high risk of hepatitis B virus reactivation.

- Herpes simplex virus- seropositive patients undergoing allogeneic HSCT or leukemia induction therapy should receive prophylaxis.

- Patients with a ≥ 20% risk of febrile neutropenia may benefit from using colony-stimulating factors.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines recommend that patients at a high risk of neutropenic fever can benefit from granulocyte-colony stimulating factors (G-CSFs).