Digoxin, a negative chronotropic agent, slows the conduction in the atrioventricular node, which is used as an advantage in diseases such as atrial fibrillation. It also increases the automatically in cardiac tissue, creating the potential complication of AV dissociation if toxic dose levels occur. Normal digoxin levels are (0.8-2 ng/ml) with signs of toxicity arriving with levels of more than 2ng/ml. Digoxin is excreted mainly from the kidneys, thus associated renal failure can lead to a dangerous rise in digoxin levels.

- Downsloping ST depression with a characteristic “Salvador Dali sagging” appearance

- Junctional AV nodal tachycardia

- Ventricular tachycardia

- Conduction block

- Ventricualr bigeminy rhythm

- AV dissociation

Treatment of digitalis toxicity is via digoxin immune Fab.

Toxicities from rate control anti-hypertensives can also contribute to atrioventricular dissociation. Calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers can cause myocardial conduction deficits leading to AV dissociation. Clinical presentation is differentiated as patients overdose on calcium channel blockers as the patients are more alert despite severe bradycardia and hypotension, while beta-blocker overdose patients have altered mental status with respiratory depression. Treatment of either overdose is similar, with intravenous fluids, calcium chloride, glucagon, and atropine. Calcium chloride helps facilitate calcium back into myocardial tissue, competitively in cases of calcium channel blocker toxicity. Glucagon has an established role in the treatment of beta-blocker overdose.