Determining the type of metabolic acidosis can help clinicians narrow down the cause of the disturbance. Acidemia refers to a pH less than the normal range of 7.35 to 7.45. In addition, metabolic acidosis requires a bicarbonate value less than 24 mEq/L. Further classification of metabolic acidosis is based on the presence or absence of an anion gap, or concentration of unmeasured serum anions. Plasma neutrality dictates that anions must balance cations to maintain a neutral charge. Therefore, sodium (Na), the primary plasma cation, is balanced by the sum of the anions bicarbonate and chloride in addition to the unmeasured anions, which represent the anion gap. Unmeasured anions include lactate and acetoacetate, and these are often some of the main contributors to metabolic acidosis.

- Anion gap (AG) = [Na] –([Cl] + [HCO3])

Anion gap metabolic acidosis is frequently due to anaerobic metabolism and lactic acid accumulation. While lactate is part of many mnemonics for metabolic acidosis, it is important to distinguish it is not a separate etiology, but rather a consequence of a condition.

Mnemonic for anion gap metabolic acidosis differential: CAT MUDPILES

- C: Cyanide and carbon monoxide poisoning

- A: Arsenic

- T: Toluene

- M: Methanol, Metformin

- U: Uremia

- D: DKA

- P: Paraldehyde

- I: Iron, INH

- L: Lactate

- E: Ethylene glycol

- S: Salicylates

Non-gap metabolic acidosis is primarily due to the loss of bicarbonate, and the main causes of this condition are diarrhea and renal tubular acidosis. Additional and rarer etiologies include Addison’s disease, ureterosigmoid or pancreatic fistulas, acetazolamide use, and hyperalimentation through TPN initiation. GI and renal losses of bicarbonate can be distinguished via urine anion gap analysis:

- Urine AG = Urine Na + Urine K – Urine Cl

A positive value is indicative of renal bicarbonate loss, such as renal tubular acidosis. Negative values are found with non-renal bicarbonate losses, such as diarrhea.