**Oral Candidiasis**

If not treated, oral candidiasis can lead to chronic persistent infection or invasive candidiasis, necrotizing ulcerative mucositis, and oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis. It may further progress to cause bronchitis, pneumonia, and endocarditis.

**Aspergillosis**

Sinus infection is often invasive, involving the bone. The fungi invade the blood vessel wall resulting in thrombosis, hemorrhagic necrosis, and fatal bleeding. Hematogeneous spread to distant sites like eyes, brain, skin, and gastrointestinal tract can occur.

**Mucormycosis**

The infection from the nasal cavity rapidly spreads to the paranasal sinuses and then to the orbit. Visual impairment and facial paralysis due to cranial nerve involvement can occur. If left untreated, the infection may spread to the brain through ethmoidal sinuses and orbit, resulting in death.

**Histoplasmosis**

A pathological fracture can occur as a result of progressive bone destruction. The infection may get disseminated to extrapulmonary sites like the adrenal gland, spleen, liver lymph nodes, and gastrointestinal tract.

**Blastomycosis**

Dissemination occurs commonly on the skin. Other sites include bone, prostate, testicles, and central nervous system.

**Cryptococcosis**

Dissemination is common in immunocompromised patients and can occur in the skin, prostate, eyes, and bone. The infection may rarely spread to salivary glands.

**Paracoccidiomycosis**

The oral lesion may precede the pulmonary infection. Hence lung evaluation is essential even in patients without pulmonary symptoms.