**Missed Opportunities and Myths**

A recent study revealed that 87.8% of human trafficking survivors had been in contact with a healthcare provider in some capacity during their victimization. Furthermore, 68.3% had received an evaluation in the emergency department.

Recently, a smaller study of emergency department nurses in an urban setting concluded that the nurses want better awareness of the specific resources available to human trafficking victims. Ongoing research into the impact of institutional policy, human trafficking protocols, and continuing education regarding the recognition and treatment of trafficked individuals is required

Myths or misperceptions often lead to missed opportunities to identify victims

Victims can be coerced to take part in crimes, thus landing them in a detention center or jail. They may present to the emergency department for medical clearance. Proper screening of these individuals is vital in our attempts to identify victims, recognize the red flags of trafficking, and take appropriate action. Having the mindset that this patient is "just a criminal or "just a prostitute" is a bias that inhibits practitioners from reading verbal and nonverbal cues and recognizing the patient as a human trafficking victim. A victim may be revictimized if returned to an exploitative environment. Revictimization is a chief concern for practitioners. The United Nations Convention against Corruption defines “revictimization” as "a situation in which the same person suffers from more than one criminal incident over a period of time." Perhaps more important when assessing and interviewing a potential victim of trafficking is the potential for "secondary victimization.”  The UNODC Model Law on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime defines secondary victimization as "victimization that occurs not as a direct result of the criminal act but through the response of institutions and individuals to the victim."

If an individual is free to come and go, then he or she may not be recognized as a person being trafficked. As discussed previously, bonds are often not physical chains or cuffs, but "invisible" or psychological ones. Fear paralyzes victims, acting as a shackle that emotionally confines them to the trafficking situation. Mental weapons used by the trafficker to exercise power and control over a victim may include threats of harm to children, siblings, or other family members; deportation or return to a traumatizing situation; calls to social services; and physical violence or reminders of past violence for misguided offenses.

Debt bondage, withholding of pay, and maintaining possession of identifying documents may further lead to an invisible bond or tie to the pimp/trafficker. Trafficked victims may use a school bus, a public bus, a train, or a taxi. Control over the trafficked person is far beyond a physical wall, chain, or border. Much like intimate partner violence, victims usually do not self-identify, self-report, or recognize that they are being manipulated, controlled, stigmatized, or dehumanized.

**Cultural Considerations**

Language barriers and cultural misconceptions may lead to a missed opportunity to identify a potential victim.

In suspected cases of human trafficking or intimate partner violence, it is imperative that no family member or accompanying party be allowed to translate. Ensure that your institution provides a certified interpreter.

**Reasons Victims/Traffickers Access Medical Care**

Seeking health care for victims presents the opportunity for discovery. Traffickers may only seek care for their victims when they become seriously ill.

- Emergent medical conditions, such as profuse bleeding or pain caused by a beating or forced abortion, injury on a job site, or complications during pregnancy, such as an ectopic pregnancy

- Gynecological services for sexually transmitted infections caused by debris in the vagina from packing during menstruation or forced sex without condom use

- Follow up with an OB/GYN for a repeat beta HCG or ultrasound for a possible ectopic pregnancy identified in an emergency setting

- Addiction issues such as a severe overdose or withdrawal signs and symptoms

- Dental emergencies or plastic surgery consultations

- Prenatal care or lack thereof

- Health-related mental problems such as depression, suicide attempt, or anxiety disorder

- A patient on a psychiatric hold or court-mandated order

- Severe wound infections with signs of septicemia may force introduction into the healthcare system

Traffickers seek out the quickest means of care, and lengthy emergency department waits may lead to their decision to leave with the victim before receiving medical treatment. They may also "hospital shop" for quicker wait times from door to the provider. An accompanying "family member" that is impatient, "in your face," or upset over lengthy delays in overcrowded emergency rooms or clinics may, in fact, be a trafficker. Another indicator is the "spouse" or "boyfriend" that insists that a high-risk patient, such as one with a possible ectopic pregnancy or appendicitis, leave without being seen, against medical advice, or before care is completed.

Remember, a victim comes from all walks of life and may be perceived as having a stable home in a suburban community. Victims will never look or act the same; their individual responses to their traumatic event will follow no specific protocol. Healthcare providers must be diligent in identifying these silent victims, forced into a situation of no fault of their own, and made to carry out acts that reap emotional and social ramifications for years to come.