Although betaxolol is a selective beta-1 receptor antagonist, its overdose symptoms are similar to all the other beta-blockers, even the nonselective agents. This similarity is because at higher than therapeutic levels, betaxolol loses its selectivity and starts to bind to beta-2 and beta-3 receptors.

The hallmarks of beta-blocker toxicity included significant hypotension and bradycardia. What can separate these clinical signs from other antihypertensives like calcium channel blockers is the presence of concurrent hyperkalemia and hypokalemia. Additionally, one can see CNS depression, altered mental status, decreased myocardial contractility, arrhythmia, and respiratory compromise.

Due to these possible immediate life-threatening symptoms, the first step in evaluating a patient with potential beta-blocker toxicity should be to manage a patient’s airway if needed. Atropine administration before intubation may be necessary to prevent the vagal parasympathetic response, which could exacerbate bradycardia. For patients who develop QT prolongation, magnesium sulfate and sodium bicarbonate are options. Glucagon and intravenous fluids are the first-line treatments of choice in managing hypotension and bradycardia and reversal of beta-blocker toxicity. If the patient presents within 2 hours of ingestion, charcoal can help to prevent the absorption of the beta-blocker from the gut. Gastric decontamination with lavage is also an option, albeit rarely used, for patients who ingested large amounts of the beta-blockers or have serious symptoms.