As a phosphate ester prodrug, fosphenytoin converts into the active form of phenytoin in a 1-to-1 ratio.

Its primary mechanism of action is due to the modulation of voltage-gated sodium channels by prolonging the inactivation state of these channels. This effect is mediated by slowing the rate of recovery of voltage-activated Na+ channels, an action that is both voltages and use-dependent.

At therapeutic concentrations, the impact on Na+ channels is selective. However, multiple effects of phenytoin are evident at higher concentrations, including reduction of spontaneous activity and augmentation of responses to GABA. To a minor level, it may also modulate voltage-gated calcium channels and increase sodium-potassium ATPase activity. The amalgamation of multiple mechanisms reduces sustained high-frequency neuronal discharges, stabilizes neuronal membranes, and decreases seizure activity.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**When administered by the parenteral route, fosphenytoin is converted to phenytoin. Peak plasma concentrations are achieved at the end of IV infusion. In the case of IM administration, peak plasma concentrations are attained in approximately 30 minutes.

**Distribution:**Fosphenytoin has high plasma protein binding (95% to 99%) and primarily binds to albumin. The volume of distribution(Vd) of fosphenytoin increases with dose and ranges from 4.3 to 10.8 liters.

**Metabolism:**Phosphatases play a major role in the metabolism of fosphenytoin. Each mmol of fosphenytoin is metabolized to 1 mmol of phenytoin, phosphate, and formate. Phenytoin is metabolized in the liver by CYP2C9 and CYP2C19.

**Excretion:**Fosphenytoin is not excreted in the urine. Phenytoin derived from the metabolism of fosphenytoin is excreted in the urine primarily as hydantoin metabolites, and 1% to 5% of the fosphenytoin dose is recovered unchanged in the urine. Phenytoin follows zero-order kinetics at higher drug concentrations and first-order kinetics at low drug concentrations.