Harrison groove can appear soon after birth in either premature infants who suffer from severe respiratory obstruction or newborn with weak diaphragmatic muscle. In such cases, the groove resolves once the chest clears and once the diaphragm regains its strength, respectively. Children in their first or second year of life also acquire this defect through pneumonia, asthma, or rickets. Here the duration and amount of episodes of pneumonia and asthma can play a role in possibly determining the depth of the groove. Children with pneumonia in their first two years of life or experiencing more than two episodes of pneumonia reported had deeper grooves.

Another patient population that Harrison grooves can occur in is patients with congenital heart diseases such as septal defects, Teratology of Fallot, and pulmonary stenosis.

Harrison groove has classically shown a correlation with rickets in the past. These were mostly children that had pigeon breast deformity. Currently, the belief is that the Harrison groove and pigeon breast are due to rickets. Instead, the suggestion is that since chest infections are common in rickets, it is the associated dyspnea that leads to groove formation. Harrison groove has also presented in other diseases like whooping cough, bronchitis, and measles, but the incidences are too few to make any meaningful associations.

It is important to bear in mind that the Harrison groove is an unreliable sign. Harrison grooves can appear in normal healthy children with no relevant history of any illness.