Aspiration occurs secondary to swallowing dysfunction, reflux, or inability to protect the airway adequately. The presence of foreign material in the lungs subsequently initiates an inflammatory response. There is conflicting evidence concerning the role of acidity in morbidity. A normal airway pH is 7.3, and the presence of acidic gastric fluid has been speculated to reduce surfactant functioning and damage bronchial epithelial cells by a combined mechanism of direct toxicity and digestive enzymes such as bile salts and pepsin.

**Swallowing Mechanisms and Alterations**

The practice of normal swallowing necessitates greater than thirty muscles in the recruitment and coordination of the lips, palate, tongue, pharynx, larynx, and esophagus. The process is separated into four phases and demands exquisite timing. The first two phases, oral preparatory and oral, are voluntary. In the oral preparatory phase, the closed chamber of the mouth receives food, and through chewing and enzyme-rich saliva addition, a bolus is formed. The tongue and palatoglossus muscle work to keep the bolus in place, not spilling out the anterior oral cavity or prematurely entering the pharynx. In the oral phase, the conscious decision to swallow is made, and the bolus is transferred posteriorly into the pharynx by the tongue and muscles on the floor of the mouth. Elevation of the soft palate at this time prevents nasal regurgitation.

The following pharyngeal and esophageal phases are involuntary. The pharyngeal phase is particularly critical in protecting against aspiration. As the bolus is propelled posteriorly, the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves stimulate the simultaneous laryngeal inlet closure and esophagus opening. As swallowing continues, the body halts respiration, adducts the vocal cords, approximates the false vocal cords, elevates the larynx, and flexes the epiglottis over the larynx.

This coordinated muscle action ensures the food bolus passes into the pyriform sinus and around the epiglottis and airways. When the larynx lifts, pharyngeal contraction shortens, and the upper esophageal sphincter passively opens, allowing the passage of the bolus into the negatively pressured esophagus. b Normally, swallowing occurs during the expiratory phase of respiration when lung volumes are low. The expiration of air pushes foreign material away from the larynx, further preventing aspiration.

During the pharyngeal phase of swallowing, the food particles may enter the supraglottic area surrounding the vocal cords. If the vocal cords do not approximate fully, or if the ability to force expiration is diminished, there is a propensity for foreign material aspiration into the trachea. Once past the vocal cords, the musculature is controlled by the afferent recurrent laryngeal nerve. Sensory stimulation in the subglottic region elicits a normal cough reflex stimulating laryngeal adduction and a forceful cough, ideally propelling the particulate out of the vocal cords.

**Reflux**

Reflux is the retrograde passage of stomach contents. It can also contribute to pulmonary aspiration as foreign material is near the larynx when the body is not undergoing the swallowing process. In the majority of cases, reflux is secondary to impaired functioning of the lower esophageal sphincter or a hiatal hernia. Normally the lower esophageal sphincter acts as a barrier preventing stomach contents from entering the esophagus at the gastroesophageal junction. There is some physiologic reflux after eating because the sphincter transiently relaxes to allow gas ventilation from the stomach. Pathologic reflux occurs when the sphincter is relaxed for extended periods. Several things can cause this relaxation, including obesity, pregnancy, diabetes, scleroderma, and various medications such as cholinergic agonists and calcium channel blockers. Other etiologies of reflux include obstruction and bariatric surgery. In the same way, microaspiration stimulates the vagus nerve, and reflux initiates the same inflammatory response of edema, mucus production, and smooth muscle contraction. Microaspirate and reflux have synergistic effects compounding the diseased state.