**Plain Radiography**

The forearm fractures are routinely diagnosed with the help of plain radiographs, including anteroposterior and lateral views of the forearm. A standard anteroposterior view of the forearm is taken with the elbow extended and the forearm in full supination. These images should involve the elbow and wrist joint for a complete evaluation of either joint. A lateral view can result in overlapping of the radius and ulna; therefore, an oblique view of the forearm can be useful to determine the fracture pattern, whether it’s a simple fracture or comminuted fracture.

There is a high chance of injury to the distal radio-ulnar joint (DRUJ), proximal radio-ulnar joint, and elbow dislocation in forearm fractures. The features suggestive of DRUJ instability are dorsal displacement of the distal ulna, change in ulnar variance, fracture of the base of styloid, and widening of the DRUJ on the PA view. The distal third radius fractures with features of DRUJ instability suggest Galeazzi fracture-dislocation. The associated injuries should be evaluated using anteroposterior and lateral plain radiographs of the elbow and posteroanterior and lateral plain radiographs of the wrist joint.

**CT Scan**

Computed tomography (CT) is only indicated if there is a suspicion of intraarticular distal end radius fracture pattern. However, routinely CT and MRI are not frequently done for the assessment of acute forearm fractures.

**MRI Scan**

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) helps to diagnose DRUJ injury and associated TFCC injury.

**Classification**

Although a number of classification systems exist to describe forearm fractures, only a few are practically useful in providing prognostic information and guiding treatment. No single classification takes into account all the types of forearm fractures. Due to this reason, anatomic descriptions of the fracture location, fracture pattern, degree of angulation, displacement, and associated soft tissue injuries are typically used to describe the forearm fractures.

The AO/OTA classification is an alpha-numerical classification that is widely used for forearm fractures. Gustilo and Anderson classification and the OTA open fracture classification systems are used for open forearm fractures, whereas Monteggia and Galeazzi fractures have their own subclassifications.