**Total Knee Replacement**

Although the most recent reports still cite that up to 1 in 5 patients remain dissatisfied following TKA, the risks of patient-reported dissatisfaction can be mitigated by selectively operating on patients that have had other potentially relevant clinical pathologies like hip and/or back conditions ruled out as confounding pain generators. Success following TKA results in significant improvements in patient-reported pain and functional outcome scores in the short- and long-term postoperative periods.

Mechanical symptoms can develop following this major operation due to interaction with femoral components of the prosthesis. Ultrasound-guided injections can confirm the diagnosis and may be used therapeutically if the patient finds consistent relief; however, there is a higher infection risk with injecting around a prosthetic knee.

Another consideration that may also be taken to avoid popliteal tendon dysfunction is the actual size of the prosthesis. The variation in the size of femoral and tibial components, even if fitted appropriately, can result in popliteal tendon impingement. Studies have shown that normalized or oversized tibial components can lead to abnormal physiologic function of the popliteus through the arc of motion of the lower extremity. Undersized tibial components showed no change in pre-surgical physiological motion.

**Approaches to the Knee**

Several approaches to the posterolateral corner of the knee have been described in the literature concerning popliteal tendon repair. Historically, the more common approach has been an open repair, but arthroscopic techniques have been developed in recent years. The popliteal tendon insertion is intracapsular, so a capsulotomy must be performed when using an open approach. The surgeon must consider the possible complications due to exposure, such as wound drainage, intraarticular sinus formation, infection, and stiffness. Arthroscopy certainly comes with risk, as does any operation; however, this approach may limit the mentioned complications.