Nitrates can relieve angina by acting as a vasodilator. Nitrates reduce symptomatic and silent ischemic episodes in coronary heart disease patients with ST-segment alterations. These anti-ischemic effects can improve prognosis by infarct prevention and prevention of deterioration of left ventricular function due to chronic myocardial ischemia. Nitrates decrease the frequency of ischemic episodes and reduce the number of anginal attacks that produce clinical symptoms. Nitrates decrease preload, as vasodilation pools blood into distal extremities and decrease the blood returning to the heart.

Sildenafil, vardenafil, tadalafil, and avanafil are PDE 5 inhibitors that are first-line for management of erectile dysfunction in men. PDE 5 is an enzyme found in the smooth muscle of the corpus cavernosum that cleaves and degrades cGMP to 5’GMP. PDE 5 inhibitors bind and inhibit PDE 5, inhibiting cGMP hydrolysis, thus enhancing the effects of NO. The erection then prolongs as a result of the increase in cGMP in smooth muscle cells.

Nitric oxide-cGMP enhancers are also useful in treating primary pulmonary hypertension; these act by dilating the pulmonary arteries and bringing the mean pulmonary artery pressure down, thus reducing right ventricle afterload; this has shown functional class improvement, cardiac index improvement and improvement in 6-minute walking distance. There have been trials in which nitrates have been combined with other agents like endothelin receptor blocker and prostaglandins to show improvements. But only combination therapy which is FDA approved combines ambrisentan (endothelin receptor blocker) and tadalafil (PDE5 inhibitor). There have been trials in which nitrates and sildenafil have been used concomitantly for treating pulmonary hypertension in congestive heart failure.

Nitrates can cause excessive hypotension. Vasodilation increases blood flow to distal extremities, decreasing blood flow returning to the brain, which can cause symptomatic hypotension and headaches, in which case, nitrate therapy should be discontinued. Hypertensive crisis can occur if nitrates are used in patients with acute inferior myocardial infarction associated with right ventricular dysfunction or infarction, or with concurrent use of PDE 5 inhibitor or N-acetylcysteine.

Nitrate tolerance can occur with long term continuous administration as it decreases vasodilatory effects. To prevent tolerance from long-term nitrate therapy, providers should advise a 10 to 12-hour nitrate-free interval; thus nitrates would be administered only for a portion of each day. Also, during the nitrate-free periods, some patients might develop an increase in angina and will require sublingual nitroglycerin for short term therapeutic relief.