The diagnosis and management of tardive dyskinesia are best made with an interprofessional team. In most cases, the primary clinician may suspect the diagnosis during follow-up. It is crucial to consult collaboratively with a pharmacist as part of the interprofessional team approach to managing the medication profile for patients who have developed tardive dyskinesia or are at risk for developing the condition.

Movement disorders like tardive dyskinesias are frequently aggravated by the use of drugs that block dopamine. In susceptible patients, even a single dose of an anti-dopaminergic drug can quickly develop disabling movement disorders. Thus, besides the clinician, the role of the pharmacist is critical. Patients vulnerable to tardive dyskinesia include people with schizophrenia and those with developmental disabilities who may develop the movement disorder when administered a dopamine blocking agent. The pharmacist must note these patients and with which medications they are treated. The caregiver should be informed about the possibility of this adverse effect and the alternatives. Nursing can also monitor the patients for symptomatic improvement or decline and immediately report their observations to the prescriber and/or pharmacist to enact appropriate therapeutic interventions.

Clinicians should be advised not to start such medications if there are other options. Plus, the pharmacist must educate the patient about wearing an alert bracelet that warns against the administration of such drugs. Once the patient is started on neuroleptic, close monitoring is essential because with early diagnosis, the drug may be discontinued or the dose lowered to prevent full-blown tardive dyskinesia.

**Outcomes**

Data on the management of tardive dyskinesia are inconsistent and difficult to understand. Some studies show an improvement when the antipsychotic drug is decreased in dose or discontinued, and other studies show no change. Long-term studies suggest that tardive dyskinesia persists at tardive dyskinesia persists in at least 10 to 30% of patients. Recent studies show that the outcomes of tardive dyskinesia are improved in younger patients treated with low doses for shorter periods. Switching to low potency antipsychotic drugs has been shown to lower the risk of tardive dyskinesia. Recently the FDA approved the drug valbenazine to treat tardive dyskinesia. Early data from the clinical trial reveals that the drug effectively alleviates tardive dyskinesia and is safe. However, the study was conducted by many physicians who also received some type of compensation from the pharmaceutical companies- so one has to take this data with a grain of salt until more long-term data are available.