The histopathologic features of leukocytoclastic vasculitis will vary based on the time frame of the vasculitis.  Fresh lesions biopsied within the 1st 18-24 hours of onset, from a nonulcerated site have the highest yield with most diagnostic findings.  On light microscopy, findings of vessel wall destruction by the infiltration of inflammatory cells within and around the vessel wall can be seen. Classically leukocytoclastic vasculitis demonstrates neutrophil infiltration in the small vessel walls. The neutrophils undergo degeneration, known as leukocytoclasis with nuclear dust (karyorrhexis). Fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel walls can be apparent around the vasculature. Extravasation of red blood cells can be present in the dermis as well. In drug-related cases, eosinophils are often noted in the dermis.  Older lesions especially those more than 48 hours old can demonstrate lymphocytic infiltration.

Direct immunofluorescence is strongly recommended in cases of new-onset leukocytoclastic vasculitis.  While a negative result carries a low yield, a positive result can sometimes be diagnostic of an underlying disease and can provide insight into the underlying disease pathophysiology.  Further, light microscopy and histopathological features of leukocytoclastic vasculitis may not be sufficient in differentiating pauci-immune vasculitis from immune complex-mediated vasculitis.  Immunofluorescence shall be performed with fluorescein-labeled antibodies against IgG, IgM, IgA, and C3.  Strong IgA deposition without other antibody deposition is indicative of HSP.  Leukocytoclastic vasculitis associated with underlying systemic lupus erythematosus can show diffusely positive immunofluorescence in addition to increased dermal mucin.