The procedure is performed under local anesthesia. Conscious sedation is routinely given to avoid stress and calm the patient. The most commonly used approach is the percutaneous femoral (Judkins) approach. Once the patient is anesthetized with a superficial injection of lidocaine to the skin, and subcutaneous tissues over the right femoral artery, a needle is inserted into the femoral artery (percutaneous access). Successful insertion of the needle is followed by insertion of a guidewire through the needle into the lumen of the blood vessel. The needle is then removed with the guidewire remaining in the vessel lumen. A sheath with an introducer is placed over the guidewire and into the femoral artery. Next, the guidewire and introducer is removed, leaving the sheath in the vessel lumen. This provides easy access to the femoral artery lumen. Next, a long narrow tube, known as the "diagnostic catheter," is advanced through the sheath with a long guidewire in the catheter lumen. The diagnostic catheter follows the guidewire and is passed retrograde through the femoral artery, iliac artery, descending aorta, over the aortic arch to the proximal ascending aorta. The guidewire is removed leaving the tip of the diagnostic catheter in the ascending aorta. The diagnostic catheter is attached to a manifold with a syringe. The manifold allows the ability to inject contrast, check inter-arterial pressure, and administer medications.

The diagnostic catheter is then manipulated into the ostium of the left main coronary artery, or right coronary artery. Contrast dye is injected, and cineangiography images are obtained in multiple views of both arteries. If severe stenosis exists in one of the arteries, PTCA can be performed. The diagnostic catheter is removed and exchanged for a similar guide catheter. Guide catheters have a larger luminal diameter for ease of passage of wires and balloons during angioplasty. After the guide catheter is placed in the ostium of the respective artery, a PTCA guidewire is advanced through the catheter and across the stenosis. Once the PTCA guidewire is passed across the stenosis, it is left in place until the end of the procedure. A balloon wire can be placed over the PTCA guidewire and advanced until the balloon is directly over the stenosis. The cardiologist controls the direction and movement of the PTCA guidewire, and balloon wire by twisting the part of guide wires that sit outside the patient. The balloon is then inflated and deflated repeatedly until the artery is patent. In most instances, a stent is required. The balloon wire is removed and exchanged for a stent. A stent is a latticed metal scaffold that is delivered crimped over a balloon of a balloon wire. The stent is then placed in the position of the stenosis, and the balloon is expanded. Once the stent is expanded, it cannot be removed from the artery. The balloon is deflated, and the stent remains in place. The stent can maintain long-term patency. Repeated injections of contrast media are utilized to check for patency of the artery.

Upon successful insertion of the stent and expansion of the vessel, the balloon wire is removed. Lastly, the PTCA guidewire is removed. During the procedure, anticoagulation is administered to prevent the formation of clots. The entire procedure can take from 30 minutes to 3 hours depending upon the technical difficulties of the case.