Dawson et al. (2010) recommend a three-stage process which is well tolerated and can diagnose de Quervain's synovitis accurately.

In the first step, the patient's pain is assessed with gravity-assisted gentle active ulnar deviation at the wrist. This version is suitable for patients who present in the acute phase. This test is positive if the patient reports pain aggravation at the tip of the radial styloid process.

If this step does not elicit pain, the examiner can gently apply an ulnar deviation force to the hand which results in an increased passive stretch across the first dorsal compartment. Again, this test is positive if the patient reports pain aggravation at the styloid process.

If this also does not provoke any pain, the examiner can then perform the original version described by Finkelstein et all which is suitable for patients in the chronic stage that are unlikely to experience substantial pain in the first two steps. In this step, the examiner grasps that thumb and then passively flexes it into the palm. A positive test result occurs when the patient experiences increasing pain at the radial styloid tip. Performing the test in this staged manner is hypothesized to result in fewer false-positive results as it is less provocative than the Eichhoff's test.

For performing the Eichhoff test patient's forearm is rested and the edge of the table in the same manner as Finkelstein's test. The patient is instructed to form a fist with the thumb placed within the hand and clenched tightly with the other fingers. The hand is then passively abducted in an ulnar direction by the examiner. Due to its very provocative nature, Eichoff's maneuver can produce a lot of false-positive test results, and hence it is not preferred over the three-staged Finkelstein test.