**Acute AR**

For acute severe AR, emergency surgery is indicated. Medical management is limited and used to stabilize the patient temporarily. Afterload reduction is achieved by using intravenous diuretics and vasodilators (such as sodium nitroprusside) to improve forward flow. Inotropes such as dopamine or dobutamine may be used to increase the cardiac output. Beta-blockers are avoided as they reduce the CO, and slowing the heart rate allows more time for diastolic filling of the LV. Intraaortic balloon counterpulsation is contraindicated.

Surgery may be deferred in patients with acute AR secondary to active infective endocarditis who are hemodynamically stable for 5 to 7 days of antibiotic therapy. However, the operation must be undertaken if hemodynamic instability develops or if there is abscess formation.

**Chronic AR**

**Monitoring during disease course:**Asymptomatic patients with mild or moderate AR with normal cardiac size should be followed clinically and by echocardiography every 12 or 24 months. Patients with chronic severe AR and normal LV function who are asymptomatic should be examined every 6 months.

**Medical treatment:**Indications for medical treatment in AR are limited. Systemic arterial hypertension with chronic AR should be treated with vasodilator therapy. Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers (ACEIs/ARBs) are preferred.

**Staging of Chronic AR:**Chronic AR is classified into 4 stages based on the 2014 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease with no changes in the 2017 update.

**Stage A:**Patients at risk for AR. These patients have no hemodynamic consequences or symptoms.

**Stage B:**Progressive AR. Patients have mild to moderate AR but normal LV systolic function and no clinical symptoms.

**Stage C:**Asymptomatic severe AR. Patients will have AR jet width greater or equal to 65% of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT). Stage C is subclassified further depending on LV systolic function.**C1:**Normal LVEF (>50%) and mild to moderate LV dilation (LVESD <50 mm).**C2:**Reduced LVEF (<50%) with severe LV dilation (LVESD >50 mm).

**Stage D:**Symptomatic severe AR. Findings of severe AR jet on echocardiography. It can have either normal or abnormal LVEF. Symptoms include exertional dyspnea, angina, or heart failure.

Of note, given the differences in body surface area (BSA) among patients, the use of indexed end-systolic diameter has been included in the guidelines as an alternative.

**Surgical treatment:**Treatment guidelines for AR are based on the recommendation by the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology 2014. The treatment of choice is aortic valve replacement (AVR) for patients with severe symptomatic chronic AR and patients with severe asymptomatic chronic AR with LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF <50%).

AVR is also a reasonable option for patients with severe AR who are asymptomatic with normal LV function (LVEF ≥50%) but in whom severe LV dilation is present (LVESD index >25 mm/m2 or LV end-systolic dimension [LVESD] >50 mm).

AVR can also be considered for patients with severe AR who are asymptomatic and have a normal LV systolic function at rest (LVEF ≥50%, stage C1) but in whom progressive severe LV dilatation (LV end-diastolic dimension >65 mm) is present given the surgical risk of the procedure is low.

Even though the guidelines suggest that valvular surgery is recommended with the development of symptoms, left ventricular systolic dysfunction, or left ventricular dilatation, newer studies that suggest evidence of subclinical myocardial dysfunction and irreversible myocardial fibrosis in patients with chronic AR challenge the current recommendations on the timing of intervention.