Congenital causes are due to abnormal diaphragm muscle development. There is a defect in the migration of myoblasts to the septum transversum causing partial or total replacement of the diaphragm muscle with fibroelastic tissue. This creates a thin and weakened hemidiaphragm resulting in a cephalic displacement of the affected side. Eventration can also occur in association with other congenital disorders and infections. These disorders include spondylocostal dysostosis, Kabuki syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Poland syndrome, chromosomal defects, pulmonary hypoplasia, spinal muscular atrophy, malrotation, and congenital heart disease. Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorder has been linked to diaphragmatic dysfunction in the neonatal period. Infectious associations include fetal rubella and cytomegalovirus infections.

Acquired cases are more common and are due to etiologies that result in phrenic nerve injury and muscle atrophy. Injury may be due to blunt or penetrating trauma, birth trauma, or thoracic surgery. Phrenic nerve dysfunction or damage may also occur as a complication of other illnesses, including multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, nerve compression, radiation therapy, and connective tissue diseases. Paralysis or phrenic nerve damage can then lead to muscle atrophy and thinning of the diaphragm with cephalic displacement.

Eventrations of the diaphragm are further divided on an anatomical basis as complete, partial, or bilateral. On embryological bases, congenital eventration could be anterior, posterolateral, and medial.