The first step in the treatment of rosacea is to advise the patient to identify and then avoid triggers such as UV light, spices, weather changes, and alcoholic beverages. Universal skin care recommendations for all patients with rosacea include pH-balanced skin cleansers (as opposed to soaps), broad-spectrum sunscreen with SPF 30 or higher and regular use of moisturizers. Rosacea often causes the skin to become sensitive and irritable, and products that cause irritation should be avoided. Cosmetics containing green pigment are best for masking persistent erythema.

**Topical Treatment**

Erythema

- Brimonidine tartrate (alpha-2 agonist) 0.33% gel (Daily application on the face)

- Oxymetazoline hydrochloride (alpha-1 agonist) 1% cream (Daily application on face)

- Inflammatory papules and pustules

- Ivermectin 1% cream (daily application)

- Azelaic acid 15% gel, foam or 20% cream (daily 1 to 2 times application)

- Metronidazole 0.75% and 1% gel or cream (daily 1 to 2 times application)

**Ocular Involvement**

Artificial tears

- Fusidic acid gel (daily 1 to 2 times application on eyelids) limited data available for efficacy

- Metronidazole 0.75% gel (daily 1 to 2 times application on eyelids) limited data available for efficacy

- Cyclosporine 0.05% eyedrops, (one drop every 12 hours) limited data available for efficacy

**Systemic Treatment**

Flushing

- Propranolol (20 to 40 mg 2 to 3 times/day), carvedilol (6.25mg 2 to 3 times/day)

- Clonidine (50 mcg twice daily)

Inflammatory papules and pustules

- Subantimicrobial-dose doxycycline, modified-release (40 mg daily, 30 mg immediate-release and 10 mg delayed-release beads, for 8 to 12 weeks)

- Minocycline (50 to 100 mg twice daily for 8 to 12 weeks)

- Tetracycline (250 to 500 mg twice daily for 8 to 12 weeks)

- Azithromycin (250-500 mg 3 times weekly for 4 to 8 weeks)

- Isotretinoin (0.25 to 0.3 mg/kg/day for 12 to 16 weeks)

**Phyma (inflamed)**

- Doxycycline (100 mg 1 to 2 times daily for 8 to 12 weeks)

- Tetracycline (250 to 500 mg twice daily for 8 to 12 weeks)

- Isotretinoin (0.25-0.3 mg/kg/day for 3 to 4 months)

**Ocular Involvement**

- Subantimicrobial-dose doxycycline, modified-release (40 to 100 mg daily)

**Procedures/Interventions**

- Erythema/telangiectasia

- Intense pulsed light therapy

- NdYAG laser

- PDL pulsed dye laser 585 to 595 nm

**Phyma (non-inflamed)**

- CO2 laser 10,600 nm

- Surgical resection

- Electrosurgery

Referral to an ophthalmologist is recommended if the patient shows any ocular involvement, especially severe symptoms or visual disturbance. Topical treatment is recommended in pregnant women. Azithromycin, erythromycin, and clarithromycin are considered to be safe in pregnant women with mild-severe inflammatory rosacea. Systemic therapies are often used for flares that don’t respond to topical therapy alone. Continuation of topical treatment is recommended to maintain remission after controlling the flareup.