The available intravitreal implants and their indications are listed:

**Non-biodegradable Intravitreal Implants**

- 
**Ganciclovir**

**Vitrasert**(Bausch and Lomb, Rochester, USA)

Vitrasert is an intravitreal sustained-release implant consisting of an active agent, 4.5mg ganciclovir, and an inactive agent, 0.25% magnesium stearate.

The EVA helps in limiting the surface area of ganciclovir. The device works by allowing diffusion of fluid inside it, leading to the dissolution of the drug pellet, which then releases the drug into the vitreous cavity at a constant rate.

Indication: Acquired immune deficiency (AIDS) virus-associated cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis.

**Fluocinolone Acetonide**

**Retisert**(Bausch & Lomb, Rochester, NY)

Retisert is an intravitreal NBI of a corticosteroid, fluocinolone acetonide (FA), which the FDA approved in 2005 for treating chronic non-infectious uveitis.

Indications: Chronic non-infectious posterior uveitis (NIPU) is the main indication, but it is also effective in diabetic macular edema (DME) and macular edema (ME) secondary to central retinal vein occlusion (RVO).

**Iluvein**(Alimera Sciences Inc., Alpharetta, GA)

Iluvein is another intravitreal NBI of FA, cylindrically shaped with a composition similar to Retisert. It is the smallest NBI measuring 3.5 mm in length and 0.37 mm in width. One end of the cylindrical tube is coated with PVA, and the opposite end is coated with a silicone adhesive that delivers FA to the retina. It releases FA at the rate of 0.2 mcg (low dose insert) or 0.5 mcg/day (high dose insert) and lasts up to 3 years.

Indication: DME - It is being evaluated in phase 2 trials for dry AMD, retinal vein occlusion, and non-infectious uveitis.

**Yutiq**(EyePoint Pharmaceuticals, Inc., MA, USA)

Yutiq is another intravitreal NBI of FA which received FDA approval in 2018. It is similar to Iluvein but contains 0.18 mg FA and releases FA at the rate of 0.25 µg/day for three years.

Indication: Chronic NIPU.

**Triamcinolone Acetonide**

**I-vation**(SurModics, Eden Prairie, MN)

I-vation is a helically shaped implant containing a titanium PVA-EVA reservoir that contains 0.925 mcg of triamcinolone acetonide (TA), a steroid. The helical shape serves to anchor the implant to the sclera and increase the surface area for delivery of the drug, thus favoring enhanced drug diffusion. It measures 0.4 mm in length and 0.21 mm in width and is coated with polybutyl methacrylate and polyEVA. It lasts for up to 2 years.

Indication: DME.

**Ranibizumab Port Delivery System (PDS)**

The PDS is a new intraocular drug delivery system for continuously delivering an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) antibody, ranibizumab. It is non-biodegradable, permanent, and refillable. It is made up of an ocular implant and four ancillary devices that are used for initially filling ranibizumab, for surgical implantation, for refill exchange, and for explanation. It has an extra-scleral flange that helps anchor it to the sclera, a silicon self-sealing septum that allows refilling, an implant body with the drug reservoir, and a titanium release control element that helps in titrating the ranibizumab diffusion into the vitreous. Its capacity is approximately 20 µl. It releases a minimum of 2.3 µg/day for six months.

Indication: Neovascular AMD (nAMD).

**Biodegradable Intravitreal Implants**

**Dexamethasone**

DEX implant (Ozurdex, Allergan Inc., Irvine, CA, United States)

DEX implant is biocompatible and biodegradable. It contains 0.7 mg dexamethasone, which is released sustainably in the vitreous. It received FDA approval in June 2009 for treating retinal vein occlusion-associated macular edema and in 2010 for treating non-infectious posterior uveitis. It is a rod-shaped pellet measuring 6.5* 0.45 mm in size and contains a mixture of dexamethasone with a biodegradable PLGA polymer matrix and utilizes Allergan’s NO-VADUR technology, which degrades it to lactic and glycolic acid slowly. This allows for a prolonged release of the dexamethasone for up to 6 months.

Indications: The main indications are RVO (central and branch) associated with ME, DME, and NIPU. It also has off-label use in Irvine Gass syndrome, nAMD, vasoproliferative retinal tumors, retinal telangiectasia, Coats’ disease, radiation maculopathy, retinitis pigmentosa, macular edema secondary to scleral buckle and pars plana vitrectomy.

**Verisome (Ramscor, Inc., Menlo Park, CA)**

It is a long-acting intravitreal injectable drug delivery system for different drugs, including steroids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), and anti-VEGF. Verisome with TA provides a mean vitreous level of 1.1 mcg/ml and lasts up to 1 year.

Indication: Verisome with TA: Chronic cystoid macular edema (CME) due to RVO, Verisome with ranibizumab: nAMD.****

**Table 1: Common Indications and the Appropriate Intravitreal Implants**

FDA approved

- DME eyes undergoing cataract surgery

- Pseudophakic patients with DME

- DME patients with recent stroke or heart attack

- Vitrectomized eyes with DME

- DME with fovea threatening hard exudation

- DME- Second-line treatment in eyes unresponsive to anti-VEGF



Off label
To slow of progression of diabetic retinopathy







FDA approved

- Pseudophakic DME eyes that have a poor response to available therapies

- Visually impaired patients with chronic DME that is insufficiently responsive to available treatment

- DME in patients with poor response to corticosteroid therapy

- Patients previously treated with a course of corticosteroids without a clinically significant rise in intraocular pressure (IOP)



Off-label

Persistent or recurrent DME





FDA approved

- CRVO associated ME

Off-label

Chronic ME due to CRVO

Off-label

Chronic ME due to RVO

FDA approved

Chronic NIPU

FDA approved
AIDS-associated CMV retinitis

FDA approved
Patients with nAMD who have previously responded to at least two anti-VEGF injections

Off label 
As an adjunct to ranibizumab