There are substantial morbidity and mortality associated with abusive head trauma. Morbidity ranges from mild learning disabilities to severe cognitive or physical abnormalities and death. Blindness, attention deficit, developmental delays, intellectual deficits, sensory deficits, hearing impairment, motor dysfunction, failure to thrive, feeding difficulties, seizures, behavior, and educational difficulties are expected manifestations.

Abusive head trauma may also cause hemiplegia, quadriplegia, hydrocephaly, and microcephaly. The prognosis of patients with abusive head trauma correlates with the extent of injury identified on CT and MRI imaging.

Long-term survivors of severe abusive head trauma have a substantial reduction in quality of life. Even those with mild injuries may have a substantial lifetime impairment.

Studies have evaluated the neurodevelopmental outcomes after abusive head trauma versus accidental head injuries. They found that infants younger than 36 months old with abusive head trauma experience more frequent non-contact injury mechanisms that result in cardiorespiratory compromise, deeper brain injuries, diffuse cerebral hypoxia-ischemia, and worse outcomes than those with an accidental head injury. Children diagnosed with abusive head trauma are more likely to die than children with accidental head trauma.

- More than half of children aged 0 to 4 years injured by abusive head trauma will die before they turn 21.

- Children who are severely injured from abusive head trauma have a 55% reduction in health-related quality of life.

Abusive head trauma commonly causes a number of long-term sequelae. More than 50% of children will have partial or complete blindness. Another 5% need eye surgery, and more than 20% will require a feeding tube after the injuries.