Nivolumab is an oncologic drug that belongs to the immune-checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) class. Depending on the indication, it can be given as a single agent or in combination with ipilimumab (anti-CTL4 immune checkpoint inhibitor). Nivolumab is currently FDA-approved for the treatment of:

- 
**Melanoma**

- 
              
- Unresectable or metastatic melanoma, as a monotherapy or in combination with ipilimumab
              
              
- As an adjuvant therapy in lymph node involvement or metastatic disease after complete resection.

- 
**Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)**

- 
              
- Metastatic, with progression during or after platinum-based chemotherapy (and after progression under targeted therapies for EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations in case these aberrations are present).
              
              
- As first-line therapy combined with ipilimumab in metastatic or recurrent NSCLC with a PD-L1 expression equal or higher to 1% with no EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations.
              
              
- As first-line therapy in combination with ipilimumab, given with two cycles of platinum-doublet chemotherapy

-  **Renal cell carcinoma (RCC)**

- 
              
- After prior anti­angiogenic therapy.
              
              
- previously untreated, of intermediate or poor risk, in combination with ipilimumab.

-  **Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)  of  the  head  and neck**

- 
              
- Recurrent or metastatic with progressive disease on or following a platinum-based therapy.

- 
**Pleural Mesothelioma**

- 
              
- In combination with ipilimumab for unresectable pleural mesothelioma.

- 
**Small cell lung  cancer (SCLC)**

- 
              
- Metastatic, with progression after platinum-based chemotherapy and at least one additional therapy.

-  **Urothelial carcinoma**

- 
              
- Advanced or metastatic, showing disease progression   on   or   after a   platinum-based chemotherapy
              
              
- Progressive disease within  12  months of neo- or adjuvant treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy.

- 
**Colorectal   cancer (CRC) with   microsatellite   instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR)**

- 
              
- Metastatic, in patients 12 years and older, following progression after treatment with fluoropyrimidine, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan. It can be given as a monotherapy or in combination with ipilimumab.

- 
**Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)**

- 
              
- Following previous treatment with sorafenib, combination with ipilimumab

- 
**Classical Hodgkin lymphoma**

- 
              
- After relapse or progression following an autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation  (HSCT) and brentuximab vedotin, or at least three systemic therapies (including autologous HSCT)

- 
**Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC)**

- 
              
- After prior fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based chemotherapy.