Accurately diagnosing chronic venous disease requires a thorough history and physical examination, supplemented by noninvasive testing. Invasive testing is typically reserved for cases where surgery is being considered. In an upright position, the skin should be inspected for conspicuous, dilated veins such as telangiectasia, reticular veins, or varicose veins, and their distribution should also be noted. Additionally, active or healed ulcers, hyperpigmentation, stasis dermatitis, atrophie Blanche, or lipodermatosclerosis should be evaluated. The standard tourniquet test (e.g., the Brodie-Trendelenburg) can be conducted at the bedside to differentiate between deep and superficial reflux. In addition, a handheld continuous-wave Doppler may be used to aid in bedside assessment.

Currently, venous duplex imaging is the most popular and recommended method for assessing the etiology and anatomy and diagnosing CVD. Venous duplex imaging combines B-mode imaging of the deep and superficial veins with pulsed Doppler assessment of flow direction using provocative methods.

Air plethysmography (APG) can assess all potential pathophysiologic processes of CVI, such as reflux, obstruction, and muscle pump failure.

When a venous duplex fails to provide conclusive evidence on the etiology of CVI, APG may be therapeutically beneficial. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance venography require intravenous contrast material and are particularly useful for evaluating proximal veins and their surrounding structures to assess for intrinsic and extrinsic compression. Before intervention is advised, these procedures may be utilized to characterize complex venous anatomy, such as an iliofemoral venous blockage.

Photoplethysmography, strain gauge plethysmography, and foot volumetry are other noninvasive diagnostic procedures.

Invasive testing includes a) contrast venography is most beneficial to identify reflux in the common femoral vein and at the saphenofemoral junction and may be used in cases of venous reconstruction; b) intravascular ultrasound is a catheter-based ultrasound probe and is employed to visualize periluminal vascular anatomy to detect venous obstruction or stenosis;  c) Ambulatory venous pressure measurement is the gold standard for determining the hemodynamics of CVI; it requires insertion of a needle into the dorsal foot vein and connecting it to a pressure transducer.

Despite its value in determining CVI's severity and clinical outcomes, it is rarely used because of its invasive nature and alternative diagnostic modalities.