Almost on a weekly basis, there are reports of an active shooter in the workplace.  There was a time when it was thought that an active shooter in a healthcare facility would never occur, but this notion is no longer held. From 2000 to 2011 there were 154 hospital-related shootings and since 2010 an additional 7 events.

**The Consensus on Active Shooters in Hospitals**

Because active shooter events are now a common occurrence in the United States, all healthcare facilities must prepare to limit damage and death.  Law enforcement officials now actively assist the hospital administration in planning and guidance in dealing with active shooter events.  In 2016 OSHA updated their healthcare safety field Rule 3148, Guidelines for Preventing Workplace Violence for Healthcare and Social Service Workers.  Incorporating an active shooter incident plan must now be part of every healthcare facility’s agenda and emergency management plan.  There is no one size intervention that fits all health care institutions and one must take into account, the size of the hospital, the different departments, geographical setting, patient access, available security and exits and location of staff offices.  Each work area has distinct features that require attention.

**Active Shooter versus Shooting Incident: What is the Difference?**

It is important to make the distinction between a shooting incident and an active shooter.  An active shooter is a term used by law enforcement to describe a situation where a shooting is in progress, and this particular crime requires a set of protocol when responding to the incident.  According to the US Department of Homeland Security, an active shooter is "someone who is actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a confined and populated area.” (DHS, 2013)

The majority of active shooter events are preplanned; the shooter usually has prepared himself well with the aim of killing as many individuals as possible.  In most cases, the active shooter has already accepted the fact that he or she may also die during this shootout.  The active shooter events usually do not last long; most are over within 19 minutes, either because law enforcement stops the shooter, the guns jam, or the person runs out of bullets.  However, within these 10 minutes, the shooter can do a lot of damage.  Data show that multiple people can be shot within a few minutes and at least two-thirds of active shooter incidents are over by the time law enforcement arrives.  On the other hand, a shooting incident is a spontaneous, unplanned event that may involve two participants who either know or do not know each other.  For example, a patient may have been unhappy with the surgeon following a surgical complication.  The surgeon may unjustly blame the patient, and the latter shoots the surgeon.  Or a healthcare worker may be upset at the manager for refusing to pay him overtime and may pull out a gun.  The unplanned or spontaneous events may occur because of impulsive action, extreme anger or loss of control.  The spontaneous shooting events in healthcare facilities usually involve one or two shots from a gun and may be involved in a shooting between two or more individuals, for example, a spouse, manager, or colleague.