# Continuing Education Activity

Chloracne is an uncommon acneiform dermatosis caused by exposure to halogenated aromatic compounds. It represents a hallmark cutaneous manifestation of systemic toxicity. The malar cheeks, postauricular skin, axillae, and groin are commonly affected areas. Severity follows a typical dose-response relationship curve. This activity reviews the presentation, evaluation, and management of chloracne and highlights the role of an interprofessional team approach to the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of chloracne.
- Describe the appearance and classical distribution of chloracne.
- Explain the treatment of chloracne.
- Identify how to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members and optimize outcomes for patients affected by chloracne.

# Introduction

Chloracne is an acneiform eruption caused by exposure to halogenated aromatic compounds. Dioxin is recognized as the most significant environmental chloracnegen

# Etiology

Routes of exposure include direct skin contact, ingestion, and inhalation. Most cases are related to occupational

Chloracne is caused by exposure to halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons found in:

- Fungicides

- Herbicides

- Insecticides

- Wood preservatives

Chemicals responsible for inducing chloracne include:

- Chlornaphthalene

- Chlorobenzene

- Polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs)

- Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)

- Polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs)

- Pyrazole derivatives

- Chlorophenol contaminants

- Trifluoromethyl

# Epidemiology

Chloracne is a rare skin condition that is most often reported as a hazard of occupational exposure and may be seen in chemical production workers, and those who handled, applied, or were exposed to 2,3,7,8-TCDD-contaminated pesticides.

# Pathophysiology

Chloracne is an acne-like condition that occurs due to the persistence of toxic chemicals and their metabolites. Toxins accumulate within the sebaceous glands and alter their normal physiology from oil-producing glands into the cyst-like structures (hamartomas) of chloracne.

Systemically, chloracnegens can act as endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs), in which they behave like other endogenous hormones such as estrogens, progesterone, and androgens. They can also manipulate numerous receptors, like those related to retinoids or aryl hydrocarbons, resulting in overactivation and perturbations of the normal metabolic pathways. As a result, EDCs can lead to thyroid dysfunction, reproductive issues (cryptorchidism, hypospadias, testicular cancer, and female precocious puberty), leukemia, brain tumors, neurobehavioral disorders, type 2 diabetes, and obesity.

# Histopathology

The most distinguishing histopathologic feature of chloracne is the glaring lack of sebaceous glands.

# History and Physical

The course of systemic symptoms and skin changes varies based on the duration and level of toxic exposure. If massive exposure occurs, symptoms may appear within days. Chloracne lesions may not appear for weeks to months after exposure.

Acute, high-level exposure to halogenated aromatic compounds may cause the following systemic symptoms:

- Gastrointestinal distress (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea)

- Liver dysfunction

- Pancreatitis

- Neuropathy

- Joint pain

Skin lesions appear on the cheeks and postauricular skin and may progress into the axillae and groin. They may also involve the shoulders, chest, back, and abdomen or in very advanced cases, extend to the extremities. The skin may first appear excessively oily before the typical lesions of chloracne arise including:

- Open and closed comedones (blackheads and whiteheads)

- Nodules and cysts

- Pustules

Other cutaneous and mucosal problems seen with chloracne include:

- Palmar and/or plantar hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating of the palms and/or soles)

- Porphyria cutanea tarda (pigmentation, increased hair growth, and blisters on exposed skin)

- Hypertrichosis of body hair

- Hyperpigmentation of skin, hair, or nails

- Conjunctivitis, hyperpigmentation of the conjunctival mucosa, and enlargement of meibomian glands

# Evaluation

A targeted history and physical exam are vital for a correct diagnosis. Toxicologic screenings for halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons may be performed but there is conflicting evidence as to their reliability. In the past, the measurement of polyhydrocarbons routinely was made in the blood and urine. In a group of individuals exposed to 2,3,7,8-TCDD, chloracne, elevations in GGT and triglycerides, as well as alterations in FSH and LH correlated to serum 2,3,7,8-TCDD levels.

Biopsies of affected skin may show a reduction of the normal sebaceous gland density and skin hamartomas. Immunohistochemistry can be carried out on biopsy specimens to assess the gene expression (i.e. CYP1A1).

# Treatment / Management

Once chloracne is diagnosed, the primary action is to prevent further exposure to the chemical source, which in many cases will result in improvement of the lesions. If lesions persist for a long time despite the elimination of further toxin exposure, treatments used for acne vulgaris such as topical retinoids, oral antibiotics or isotretinoin may be considered. Comedones may be expressed and cysts may be excised. Recently, a small cohort of Japanese patients with dioxin-related sequelae for 30-40 years was treated orally with a cinnamaldehyde-containing antioxidant called Keishibukuryogan. Treatment with this herbal medicine, which exhibits AHR–CYP1A1 inhibition and NRF2 activation, resulted in improvement in the patients' chloracne and associated systemic symptoms.

Patients with chloracnegen exposure history must be followed longitudinally because the toxic exposure may also impact other organs than the skin and may be linked to various malignancies.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acne vulgaris

- Favre-Racouchot syndrome (also known as solar or senile comedones and nodular elastosis with cysts and comedones)

- Folliculitis

- Dilated pore of Winer

- Epidermal inclusion cyst

- Milia

- Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides

- Nevus comedonicus

# Prognosis

The severity and duration of chloracne lesions correlate to toxin exposure time and levels. Once the exposure has been isolated and removed, lesions will generally improve without further intervention, although this may take years.

# Complications

Chloracne is associated with a variable amount of permanent scarring. Lesions on the malar cheeks and postauricular skin tend to persist longer than those localized elsewhere on the body.

Immunotoxicity, namely immunosuppression

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with occupational risk factors such as exposure to herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, wood treatments, or those who may have been exposed to Agent Orange should be counseled on systemic and cutaneous signs and symptoms associated with chloracne. The data for an association with other health problems such as congenital anomalies are conflicting;

# Pearls and Other Issues

Other health problems associated with chloracne include:

- Abnormal liver function

- Fatigue and sleep disturbance

- Transient peripheral neuropathy

- Encephalopathy, leading to poor concentration or depression

- Hyperlipidemia (particularly increased triglycerides)

- Impotence

- Type 2 diabetes

Patients should undergo regular full body skin exams as well as blood work including a CBC with differential, liver function tests, hemoglobin A1c and serum cholesterol to monitor for cutaneous malignancies, lymphoma, liver dysfunction, type 2 diabetes, and hyperlipidemia.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Chloracne is a rare skin disorder but when it presents, it is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes poison control, a dermatologist, a biohazard expert, and an internist. The source needs to be identified as rapidly as possible to help minimize a public health disaster. Chloracne is the hallmark cutaneous feature and may best be treated by a dermatologist when recalcitrant. However, regular physicals and blood work monitoring should be carried out by an internist to identify other possible systemic sequelae.