**Osteonecrosis of the Hip**

Nonoperative treatment ( Alendronate only therapy and bisphosphonates combination) is controversial, with some trials showing the benefit of bisphosphonates in preventing a femoral head collapse and delaying disease progression in early cases with subchondral lucency. However, its delayed onset of pain relief can compromise its compliance.

Many patients will ultimately need a total hip arthroplasty; however, joint salvaging procedures such as core decompression report varying results. Core decompression is most effective in the early stages of osteonecrosis and when the lesions only involve a small amount of the weight-bearing surface of the femoral head.

Rotational osteotomy can be indicated when the lesion can be diverted away from the weight-bearing surface. Medial diseases can be rotated through intertrochanteric varus osteotomy, while anterolateral disease can be rotated via intertrochanteric valgus and flexion-producing osteotomy.

Total hip arthroplasty is indicated for irreversible etiologies and when patients are older than 40 years and have large lesions or in young with more advanced femoral head collapse and degenerate acetabulum. Cementless prosthesis for both femur and acetabulum is predominantly used; however, extreme caution must be taken during femoral canal preparation to avoid perforation. Outcomes are usually good in terms of pain reduction and functional improvement. However, a high rate of polyethylene wear and osteolysis have been reported in young patients with osteonecrosis.

Hip arthrodesis would be indicated only in young patients involved in heavy labor occupations.

**SONK (Spontaneous Osteonecrosis of the Knee)**

Most cases resolve following a trial of protected weight-bearing and physiotherapy focused on quadriceps strengthening. In recent literature, bisphosphonates have been shown to reduce the need for surgery by 50% by delaying postnecrotic remodeling and preventing joint surface collapse.

**Osteonecrosis of the Shoulder**

Nonoperative treatment is the first line of treatment: pain control, physiotherapy, and modification of activities to restrict overhead activities and manual labor.

Operative management is classified according to staging. For early disease, core decompression is the preferred treatment option. Humeral head resurfacing or hemiarthroplasty is recommended for moderate disease with focal cartilage defects and sufficient epiphyseal bone stock. A total shoulder replacement is reserved for advanced disease.[10]

**Osteonecrosis of the Talus**

The incidence of osteonecrosis of the talus in talar neck fractures is reduced by utilizing a procedure to achieve operative anatomic reduction and stable fixation.

**Keinbock’s Disease**

Treatment in early-stage disease aims to revascularize the lunate either directly using bone grafts or indirectly utilizing procedures to offload the lunate. Immobilization, including external fixation, is often attempted in stage 1 and 2 diseases.

**Preiser Disease**

Early-stage treatment options involve immobilization, cortisone injections, radial wedge osteotomy, and bone graft. Later stages may warrant arthroscopic debridement, scaphoid excision, proximal row carpectomy, or even arthrodesis. Typically, surgical intervention is unavoidable in most cases.