The GI tract consists mainly of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large intestine, with each containing all of, or a combination of four functions mentioned previously.

- After swallowing, a food bolus must travel from the pharynx to the stomach. The esophagus acts as a conduit between these two points and has a unique system of propelling food from its proximal to its distal end and through the lower esophageal sphincter.

- Separated from the esophagus proximally by the LES, and the duodenum distally by the pyloric sphincter, the stomach uses a complex system of neural and hormonal signals to accomplish three main tasks: Acting as a reservoir, breaking food down into smaller particles and mixing them with gastric juices, and emptying gastric content at a controlled rate.

- The principal function of the small intestine is the absorption of food. The small intestines display an unsynchronized pattern of contractions ideal for the movement of food back and forth to allow both the mixing with digestive enzymes as well as to allow time for absorption. However, there is an overall albeit slow push forward which takes approximately 90 to 120 minutes to allow the first part of a meal to reach the large intestines, whereas the final portions of a meal may not arrive for five hours.

- The function of the large intestine is primarily to store fecal material, extract water and ions while secreting mucus, and move fecal material toward the rectum. In this process, there are no digestive enzymes secreted by the colon, and absorption of nutrients does not occur.

- The primary purpose of the rectum and anus are to propagate feces forward and to allow for the act of defecation.

- Salivary, gastric, intestinal, biliary, and pancreatic secretions are paramount for the digestion of food. These processes not only break food down, but they react with them chemically, altering the structures to allow for either excretion or absorption, the latter of which the body can then utilize for energy expenditure among a myriad of functions.