Histamine’s role in autoimmune and allergic diseases has been the topic of much research.

Urticaria is a common skin condition represented by itchy wheals on the superficial tissues such as the skin, whereas angioedema is the same reaction of the deep mucocutaneous tissue. Acute urticaria and angioedema are associated with sensitivity to allergens such as foods, drugs, latex, and other substances and is due to IgE-mediated mast cell degranulation. Chronic urticaria and angioedema result from histamine release from basophils due to circulating IgG autoantibodies against FcεRIα and IgE.

Allergic rhinitis is a condition associated with inflammatory symptoms arising in the nose, which occur as a result of the immune system overreacting to allergens in the air. Symptoms include clear rhinorrhea, sneezing and nasal and palatal pruritus. In severe cases, adjacent mucous membranes such as the mucous membranes of the eye or middle ear may be affected. Exposure to a specific allergen and the subsequent release of histamine can explain all of the associated symptoms of allergic rhinitis. For example, the pruritus is the result of activation of H1-R on sensory nerve endings. The rhinorrhea is caused by increased mucus secretion due to muscarinic gland discharge due to activation by histamine and eicosanoids. For many years H1-R blockers have served to moderate these symptoms. Recently, second-generation antihistamines (loratadine, cetirizine, and fexofenadine) have seen an increase in use due to lesser sedation and higher selectivity for the H1R.

Atopic dermatitis is a chronic pruritic skin disease. Scratching leads to further damage to the skin and causes redness, swelling, cracking, crusting, and scaling. The acute phase is mediated primarily by Th2 cytokines, whereas the chronic phase is associated with Th1 cytokines. Atopic dermatitis is regarded as a cutaneous expression of atopy. As a result, 50 to 80% of children with atopic dermatitis will develop asthma or allergic rhinitis by five years of age. The interplay of Th1 and Th2 cells, dendritic cells, and keratinocytes themselves paint a very complex picture for the pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis, and more research is necessary for its complete elucidation.

Recently, histamine has proven to be a critical factor in the interactions between the tumor tissue and infiltrating immune cells, which allows the malignant cells to multiple escape mechanisms from the immune system.