# Continuing Education Activity

Insomnia is a highly prevalent disorder in the US and worldwide. Insomnia is defined as the presence of long sleep latency, frequent nocturnal awakenings, or prolonged periods of wakefulness during the sleep period, or even frequent transient arousals. Zaleplon is a medication used in the management and treatment of insomnia. It is in the hypnotic class of drugs but is unrelated to benzodiazepines, barbiturates. This activity reviews the indications, actions, and contraindications for zaleplon when using it as a valuable agent in managing insomnia.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of zaleplon.
- Review the appropriate dosing of zaleplon.
- Summarize the potential adverse effects for patients using zaleplon.
- Explain the importance of using zaleplon and how improving care coordination among the interprofessional team will lead to better outcomes.

# Indications

Insomnia is a highly prevalent disorder in the US and worldwide. The definition of insomnia is the presence of "long sleep latency, frequent nocturnal awakenings, or prolonged periods of wakefulness during the sleep period or even frequent transient arousals."

The criterion used to distinguish individuals with insomniacs from good sleepers are self-reported sleep symptoms, such as sleep latency (time to fall asleep) or wakefulness after sleep onset (WASO) greater than 30 minutes.

The actual prevalence of insomnia varies according to the stringency of the definition used. Insomnia symptoms are seen in approximately 33% to 50% of the adult population, insomnia symptoms with distress or impairment in 10% to 15%, and specific insomnia disorders in 5% to 10%.

This result of insomnia has far-reaching adverse consequences on the physical, social, mental, and emotional health and wellbeing of the patient, including increased risk of accidents, decreased work productivity, increased risk of comorbid psychiatric disorder, decreased quality of life, and increased usage of healthcare resources. Various pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic modalities have been tried to help patients with this condition. Regardless of the chosen modality, therapy aims to improve the quality and quantity of sleep while minimizing daytime impairments as well as improving the overall quality of life.

# Mechanism of Action

There has been a proposal that insomnia is a hyperarousal disorder that could reflect a deficit in sleep homeostasis.

In the central nervous system (CNS), there is a balance between the excitatory effects of the Glutamate receptors and the inhibitory effects of the GABA receptors. In the central nervous system, GABA exerts its influence via ionotropic GABAA and GABAC receptors and metabotropic GABAB receptors.

BZs and Z-drugs act via the so-called BZ-binding site located at the interface between a- and c-subunits and thereby specifically bind to gamma-containing receptors.

Zaleplon, a pyrazolopyrimidine hypnotic, binds to the benzodiazepine type 1 site on the gamma-aminobutyric acid subtype A (GABA-A) receptor/chloride-ion channel complex.

Zaleplon improves sleep without producing rebound effects in outpatients with insomnia.

# Administration

Zaleplon is a Schedule IV prescription medication. It is available as 5 mg and 10 mg oral capsules. It comes in a capsulated form with an opaque green cap and an opaque pale green body with 5 mg and 10 mg written with black ink on the body. The recommendation is to start with 5 mg by mouth, to be taken immediately before bedtime. The usual dose is 10 mg by mouth immediately before bedtime. It is given 7 hours before the planned awakening. The maximum dose can go up to 20 mg by mouth to be taken directly before bedtime. The maximum dose in elderly or debilitated patients should be 10 mg by mouth taken immediately before bedtime. If the provider plans to stop the medication, they should taper it down slowly.

Zaleplon is metabolized mainly by the liver, and correspondingly the dose of zaleplon requires a reduction in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. The oral clearance of zaleplon decreases by 70% and 87% in compensated and decompensated cirrhotic patients compared to healthy subjects. In cases of hepatic impairment, the dose should be lowered to 5 mg by mouth, taken immediately before bedtime. Its use is not recommended for use in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

The kidneys minimally metabolize zaleplon, and hence the pharmacokinetics of zaleplon is not altered in patients with renal insufficiency. Doses do not require modification for patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. The medication has not had adequate research in patients with severe renal impairment.

Currently, there is a lack of randomized controlled trials and the availability of evidence regarding the safety and appropriateness of usage of hypnotics in the pregnant population. One of the studies from Wikner and colleagues in 2011 reported that there did not seem to be an increased risk of malformations with these medications, and the tentative association with some intestinal malformation may be due to chance alone.

A small amount of the medication is secreted in breast milk, especially about 1 hour after its use. Even these small amounts of the drug from breast milk may result in potentially significant concentrations in infants. Because its effects on a nursing infant are unknown, it is not recommended for lactating mothers.

There is also currently a lack of data regarding the safety and effectiveness of zaleplon in the pediatric population.

# Adverse Effects

More common adverse effects include drowsiness, dizziness, diarrhea, grogginess, and decreased ability to concentrate. Other less common adverse severe events include abnormal thoughts and behavior, including aggressive behavior, confusion, agitation, hallucinations, worsening of mood issues including worsening depression, suicidal thoughts, memory loss, and severe allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis.

Most Z-drugs appear to have a dose-dependent effect on anterograde amnesia, supposedly explained by the agonistic action on the GABAA receptors. Zaleplon is less likely than zolpidem and zopiclone to cause anterograde amnesia.

Patients have reported adverse effects of parasomnia, amnesia, and hallucinations associated with Z-drugs.

Given this, the FDA has further issued a contraindication for the use of Z-drugs in patients who have previously experienced these kinds of behaviors while on these medications. There is also a concern since most of the patients on these medications already have a lower threshold, and these Z- drugs can exacerbate those symptoms.

Psychomotor effects of the Z-drugs are a significant concern in the elderly as their impact becomes exaggerated secondary to altered pharmacokinetics. They are listed in the Beers List for medications to avoid in the elderly. Nocturnal awakening, which is common in the elderly, also predisposes them to balance issues, and an increased risk of falls may get pronounced when they are on these drugs. The residual psychomotor effects from Z-drug use include dizziness, postural instability, ataxia, and falls. Falls can occur at higher than usual dosages or when mixed with other psychoactive substances.

Psychomotor impairment during midnight awakening is more pronounced with Z-drugs with a longer half-life like zopiclone and zolpidem, rather than with zaleplon. Zaleplon has not shown this impairment with doses up to 10 mg at bedtime.

# Contraindications

Contraindications include hypersensitivity to zaleplon or any ingredients in the formulation of the medication. There have been reports of symptoms such as throat closing, shortness of breath, nausea, and vomiting after taking the medication, suggesting anaphylaxis. Rare reports of angioedema exist in patients after taking the first or subsequent doses of sedative-hypnotics, including zaleplon. Patients with a history of angioedema with zaleplon should not receive this drug. As mentioned earlier, zaleplon is not recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

Recently FDA has added Boxed Warning to certain prescription insomnia medication after reports of injury and death resulting from complex sleep-related behaviors like sleepwalking, sleep-driving, and engaging in other activities while in a sleep-like state after taking these medicines. These new warnings will be necessary for the Z group of drugs, including eszopiclone, zaleplon, and zolpidem.

# Toxicity

Toxicity in a milder form can cause lethargy, drowsiness, and confusion. Severe toxicity can lead to respiratory depression, ataxia, hypotension, hypotonia, loss of consciousness, coma, and rarely death. Rare cases of fatalities have following overdose with zaleplon have been reported, most of which correlate with the use of other CNS depressants.

Management aims at providing supportive treatment, including gastric lavage and IV fluids. Researchers have conducted animal studies that show flumazenil is useful as an antagonist to zaleplon, but there are no clinical trials regarding the use of flumazenil as an antidote to zaleplon overdose.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, PAs and NPs, nursing staff, and pharmacists, must work together to understand the type of patient's sleep problems. Taking a good history is paramount because many times, there could be extraneous factors like infants, pets, loud neighbors, erratic work schedules, medications causing or confounding sleep problems. If the clinician decides on prescribing a pharmacological treatment for the patient, they must account for the demographics of the patient and comorbid issues. The interprofessional team needs to be upfront in cautioning the patient and their families about minimizing any other central nervous system depressants with the medication.

Teams should also be good at communicating with the patients about the potential side effects of the drug while at the same time keeping a watch for the rare ones if they occur; this is where a nurse who is familiar with the drug can counsel the patient and answer any questions. The nurse can also be alert for any "red flags" to prescribing the medication and alert the prescriber should they be present. The pharmacist will verify that dosing is patient-appropriate and verify the patient's medication record to check for drug interactions, and consult with the prescriber should they see any issues. These examples of interprofessional team dynamics can make zaleplon therapy more effective while minimizing adverse events. [Level 5]