Overall, studies of ultrasound therapies have demonstrated it to be a safe, non-invasive, and effective procedure that clinicians can offer as primary or adjuvant therapy to traditional treatments.

There is level III evidence for the use of HIFU for atrial ablation in patients with atrial fibrillation. Ninet et al. found a cure rate of 80% at six months when HIFU was used to ablate aberrant atrial tissue causing paroxysmal and persistent atrial fibrillation.

Numerous studies have shown level II and level III evidence for MRgFUS that demonstrate its safety and effectiveness for breast and uterine soft tissue masses. A systematic review conducted by Peek Et al. found the absence of a tumor or residual tumor in 95.8% of patients undergoing HIFU treatment for breast cancer.

Lastly, there is level III evidence for the use of low-intensity ultrasound for pain in degenerative musculoskeletal disorders. Muftic et al. compared two groups receiving low-intensity ultrasound treatment at varying power settings and found visual analog scores for the pain to decrease by approximately 4 points in both groups.

Interprofessional teamwork is an optimal approach to treating patients receiving ultrasound therapy. This team can include clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, and physical therapists, depending on the condition being treated. All members of the interprofessional team should coordinate their activities and share information about the patient with the rest of the team to optimize patient outcomes.