A systematic approach should be followed to reach the right diagnosis.

- Wood's lamp examination - This is used for better visualization of skin lesions to differentiate pigment abnormalities (especially hypopigmented lesions from depigmented lesions). This is done in a darkened room using a Wood's lamp that emits long-wave UVA (Ultraviolet light A) with a wavelength of approximately 365 nm.****The light source should be held at 4 to 5 inches away from the skin surface. Normal skin does not fluoresce. Depigmented lesions (eg., vitiligo) and hypopigmented lesions with decreased melanin production are markedly enhanced, appear bright white whereas, hypopigmented lesions with normal melanin (IGH, PMH) are not accentuated. A few of the characteristic features of Wood's lamp examination are orange fluorescence in P. versicolor, red fluorescence localized to follicles in PMH, bright blue-white fluorescence in Vitiligo, etc.

- Dermatoscopy - This refers to the skin examination using a skin surface microscope, especially used to evaluate pigment abnormalities of the skin. Dermoscopic findings give details about- nature of pigmentation, edges of the lesion (well-defined/ ill-defined), the appearance of lesions (scaly/ non-scaly), perifollicular hyperpigmentation (seen in Vitiligo), presence of telangiectasia, and characteristics of the surrounding skin.

- KOH mount of skin scrapings - This test is useful to quickly identify fungal infections like Tinea versicolor (Spaghetti and meatball appearance of hyphae) in outpatient settings. The specimen is prepared by adding one drop of 10% KOH to skin scrapings and examining it under the microscope.

- Skin Biopsy - Although skin biopsy gives accurate diagnosis in most conditions, this is not routinely performed; it is used only when the diagnosis is unclear or suspecting infectious causes like leprosy, sarcoidosis, or underlying malignancy. Tissue biopsy is processed and studied under a microscope using various stains like hematoxyline and eosin, Fontana Masson, or Melanin-A stains. Immunofluorescence studies on the specimen could be performed for the presence of antibodies, and infiltration of lymphocytes into the epidermis, etc.

- Electron Microscopy - This is not commonly available in clinical settings, and physicians should rely on other clinical findings. Electron microscopic study of skin lesion gives an insight into ultrastructural details of the lesion and helps differentiate the causes for hypomelanosis. For example, clinical differentiation of ash leaf spots (ALS), a common presentation in the pediatric age group from nevus depigmentosus (ND), is challenging even based on histopathologic findings. The findings under electron microscopy show a decrease in melanosome transfer to keratinocytes in ND, and reduced size and melanization of melanosomes result in the formation of aggregates in keratinocytes in ALS.