Clinical suspicion, family history, and tissue biopsy establish the diagnosis.

Tissue biopsy

- The subcutaneous abdominal fat aspirate is an easy and innocuous procedure that will stain Congo red positive with apple-green birefringence and has an 81% diagnostic sensitivity in AL amyloidosis.

- Biopsy of minor salivary glands can establish systemic amyloidosis diagnosis 60% of the times when fat aspirates are negative.

- Biopsy of the liver should be done by the transjugular route, since an amyloid-loaded liver may result in fatal bleeding.

Plasma cell clone identification

Serum and urine electrophoresis with immunofixation and free light chains (FLC) should be requested to rule out plasma cell dyscrasia. When monoclonal light chains are not present, bone marrow biopsy can help establish the diagnosis by immunohistochemical staining. Immunofluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) should be ordered along with a skeletal survey.

When plasma cell dyscrasia is ruled out, other types of amyloidosis should be considered. Tissue typing can be done by mass spectrometry, immune electron microscopy or immunohistochemistry. Transthyretin can be detected by isoelectric focusing on the serum which separates wild-type (or formerly known senile cardiac amyloidosis) and variant transthyretin.

Gene sequencing

Should be done when hereditary amyloidosis has to be ruled out based on clinical grounds.

When transthyretin has not been identified, and patients have macroglossia and other typical organ involvement, AL should still be suspected despite plasma cell dyscrasia absence. ATTRwt is diagnosed by cardiac biopsy showing positivity to antibodies against normal transthyretin. Cardiac Scintigraphy with bone tracers can help differentiate AL amyloidosis which shows mild or no uptake from transthyretin amyloidosis which has strong uptake. This could potentially spare cardiac biopsy.

AA amyloidosis is considered when transthyretin and AL have been ruled out, and there are kidney involvement and neuropathy. Immunohistochemistry aids in the diagnosis of AA.

Organ involvement and staging of the disease should be established to design the treatment plan. For cardiac function, evaluation should include an echocardiogram with an assessment of strain, NT-proBNP, troponins, ECG, Holter ECG, and cardiac MRI should be solicited. For kidney function, evaluation 24-hour urinary protein and eGFR are needed. Liver function tests and imaging (ultrasound (US), MRI, or CT scan) can help with hepatic function assessment.