The treatment of ECC is complex and is determined by many factors, including the age of the child, the extent of dental damage, and concomitant complications.

In mild cases of white spots and enamel proximal lesions, extensive restoration may not be needed. The clinician can prevent further decay and spread through parent education, dietary advice, and topical fluoride indication.

Varnish topical fluoride with resin base is highly recommended.

Chlorhexidine varnish can also be applied to protect the tooth surface. Likewise, bimonthly application of 10% povidone-iodine has been recommended by some authors for its antimicrobial effect against Streptococcus mutans.

Applying casein phosphopeptide (CPP) stabilizes the calcium and phosphate and preserves them in an amorphous or soluble form called amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP). In the presence of casein phosphopeptide, calcium and phosphate form highly insoluble complexes. These CPP-ACP complexes enhance fluoride action and improve the remineralization of enamel.

In moderately severe to advanced cases, pulp treatment, extensive restoration, and tooth extractions are required. In these cases, deep sedation or general anesthesia with its inherent complications is needed due to lack of compliance within the age group.

Restoration is preferably done with prefabricated stainless steel crowns for primary or permanent teeth with caries.

**Newer Treatment Approach**

The traditional restorative and surgical way of managing early childhood caries requires general anesthesia with its attendant health risks and is expensive and does not prevent further caries but only treats the result of the disease. Therefore, up to 79% of patients treated with conventional therapy relapse.