As nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is an investigational drug, there is limited clinical data about its potential adverse effects. However, data from the EPIC-HR trial suggests that it is generally well-tolerated by patients with COVID-19. The most common adverse effects include dysgeusia, diarrhea, hypertension, and myalgia.

In addition, hypersensitivity reactions, which may manifest as urticaria, angioedema, pruritus, and dyspnea, have been reported. Cases of anaphylaxis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis have also been reported with ritonavir use. Hyperlipidemia, hypertriglyceridemia,  and other metabolic adverse effects have also been noted with ritonavir.

Hepatic transaminase elevations have been reported, but transaminase elevations have also been attributed to COVID-19(A confounding factor). The risk of hepatotoxicity is low, and the Likelihood score is E:(unlikely cause of clinically apparent liver injury).

Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir has significant drug-drug interactions due to the ritonavir component. As a potent CYP3A inhibitor, ritonavir can increase plasma concentrations of concomitant medications, increasing the risks of developing severe and life-threatening drug-related adverse effects. Due to these drug-drug interactions, many CYP3A-metabolized drugs are contraindicated in patients taking nirmatrelvir/ritonavir.

In patients with undiagnosed or uncontrolled HIV-1 infection, there is a theoretical risk that the use of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir will facilitate the development of antiviral cross-resistance against HIV-1 protease inhibitors due to the ritonavir component, which is an HIV-1 protease inhibitor; hence nirmatrelvir/ritonavir use is cautioned in patients with undiagnosed or uncontrolled HIV-1 infection.