Several psychiatric disorders are included in the differential diagnosis for conversion disorder.

- Factitious disorder – In factitious disorder, patients exhibit signs and symptoms consistent with specific medical or psychiatric disorders, as occurs with conversion disorder. However, patients with factitious disorder deliberately deceive physicians by exaggerating, faking, or lying about symptoms, hurting themselves to create symptoms, or altering their test results. The definition of this disorder is the patient having the desire to appear ill to obtain medical care but not to achieve personal or financial gain. There is also factitious disorder by proxy, in which a person acts as if someone under their care is sick. Patients with conversion disorder do not intentionally create their symptoms to obtain care.

- Somatic symptom disorder – When the DSM-5 was released, the disorders previously referred to as the somatoform disorders (including hypochondriasis and somatization separately) are now referred to as “somatic symptom disorder” collectively. The diagnostic criteria for somatic symptom disorder include one or more somatic symptoms that cause distress or lead to significant disruption of daily life, excessive thoughts, feelings or behaviors related to these symptoms (which can present as mild, moderate, or severe in intensity), and persistence of symptoms (typically for greater than six months). There may be some overlap between somatic symptom disorder and conversion disorder, as patients with conversion disorder often display somatic symptoms that cause distress or disrupt daily life. However, patients with conversion disorder typically do not have as exaggerated a response to their symptoms, and their symptoms tend to be inconsistent with true medical diagnoses.

- Illness anxiety disorder – Illness anxiety disorder was previously referred to as “hypochondriasis” in the DSM-4. Patients will illness anxiety disorder have very few somatic symptoms, if any. They present as having a preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness. These patients exhibit excessive health-related behaviors (e.g., repeatedly checking themselves for signs of disease) or exhibit maladaptive avoidance (e.g., avoiding appointments with doctors or hospital visits). Patients with conversion disorder do not typically display the level of preoccupation that patients with illness anxiety disorder do.

- Malingering is not a psychiatric disorder but a behavior that patients may display. Malingering is a patient feigning or exaggerating symptoms of physical or psychiatric disorders for personal or financial gain. Specific examples include: patients faking symptoms of illness to avoid a criminal conviction, avoid obligations such as work, school, or their jobs, or obtaining addictive medications when they are not warranted. Unlike patients with factitious disorder, these patients are often not compliant with complete physical exams or treatment plans.

There are many general medical conditions or neurologic disorders that may share features with those of conversion disorder; this largely depends on the specific presenting symptom that the patient displays.

- Multiple sclerosis – Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating disease of the central nervous system. Patients will present with signs of central nervous system dysfunction, such as spinal cord syndrome, brainstem syndrome, or optic neuritis. Their symptoms typically follow a relapsing and remitting course. They will generally have corresponding neurologic deficits on the exam relative to their presenting symptoms. MRI showing characteristic lesions in the brain and spinal cord is diagnostic.

- Epilepsy – Some of the most common differences between psychogenic nonepileptic seizures and seizures characteristic of epilepsy were discussed above. Another helpful diagnostic tool is serum prolactin, which is often elevated after an epileptic seizure and not in psychogenic seizures. During video-EEG monitoring, clinicians may also use the placebo effect to induce a psychogenic seizure. One example would be photic stimulation, where the patient is exposed to bright, flashing lights and instructed that this may induce a seizure.

- Myasthenia gravis – Myasthenia gravis is a disorder of neuromuscular transmission characterized by weakness in the bulbar, ocular, respiratory, and extremity muscles. Aside from history and physical exam, serologic testing will often reveal positive antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor (AChR-Ab) and/or positive antibodies against muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK-Ab). Electrodiagnostic tests, such as repetitive nerve stimulation and single-fiber electromyography, can also help diagnose myasthenia gravis.

- Stroke – Strokes will have characteristics, anatomical patterns of the motor, sensory, or generalized neurologic changes.

- Spinal disorders – There are many disorders of the spinal cord that cause motor and sensory disturbances, which patients may mimic in conversion disorder. Some of these conditions include cervical myelopathy, spinal stenosis, etc.

- Movement disorders – Many of the common differences between functional movement disorders and movement disorders secondary to the underlying neurologic conditions appeared in the sections above.

In strokes, spinal disorders, and movement disorders, the essential exam findings in conversion disorder are inconsistencies with anatomical or neurologic patterns.