The lung is the second most frequent site of metastatic focus. It is estimated that 20 to 54% of malignant tumors developing elsewhere in our body would have pulmonary metastasis.

Patients with metastasis to the lung have clinical prognosis and treatment options very different from their primary tumor of origin.

Distant metastasis plays an important role in the staging of the tumor. e.g., distant metastasis of breast cancer decreases the 5-year survival from 96% to 21%. In colorectal cancer, patients who present with metastasis to the lung or liver have a 5-year survival of less than 10% compared with 91% of those without distant metastasis.

About 1500 people die every day from metastatic cancers, indicating limitations of the modern-day treatment options once the disease is widespread.

A study was conducted on 228 patients with lung nodules. The study revealed the median age of the group was 61.8 yrs. About 53.5% were male, 46.5 % female. The primary tumor site  in these patients was as follows:

- Colorectal in 25.8%,

- Head and neck 19.4%

- Urologic (kidney, ureter, prostate, testes) 14.7%

- Gastrointestinal non-colorectal cancer 10.9%

- Breast cancer 10.5%

- Melanoma 6.5%

- Gynecologic cancer (ovarian, endometrial, cervical) 6.1%

- Other primary sites (sarcoma, thyroid, squamous cell) 6.1%

- Concomitant extra pulmonary nodules were present in 25.9% of cases.

A single nodule was present in 49.1 and multiple in 50.9 cases. Size of pulmonary nodules range from 20 to 30 mm ( 50%), 10 to 20 mm (28.5%), < 10 mm (21.5%). Cavitary or necrotic nodules were present in 88.5% of cases and absent in 11.5 % of cases. Patients previously received thoracic radiotherapy in 8.3% of cases. Regarding smoking history, 61% of patients were current or former smokers, 30.3% were never smokers, and data was not available for 8.7% of cases. After the biopsy, metastatic disease was present in 146 patients (64%), 60 patients (26.3%) were diagnosed with a second primary lung tumor, and 22patients (9.6%) had no cancer on biopsy. The presence of a malignant lesion on biopsy was much higher with concomitant multiple lung lesions. The study concluded that multiple pulmonary nodules (> 5 mm) and cavitation were the two characteristics associated with the highest chances of metastatic disease. Pulmonary nodules should not be assumed to be metastases without performing a biopsy.

There has been a case reported where a single patient had simultaneous lung adenocarcinoma and metastatic breast cancer nodules in a single lung.