Normal mouth opening ranges between 40 to 60 cm (two to three finger breadths), and many authors consider a maximum mouth opening of less than 35 mm trismus.

Patients presenting with trismus will note a restricted mouth opening and sometimes pain when attempting to open the mouth. However, patients often have complaints related to the causative condition rather than the resulting trismus. Those with odontogenic etiologies may complain of tooth or gum pain and swelling; patients with traumatic causes may note facial or mandibular pain. A complete clinical examination should be performed to identify systemic causes. Fever may indicate an infectious source; weight loss may be notable among patients with neoplastic causes; carpopedal spasms and paresthesias may accompany trismus in patients with neurogenic or metabolic causes. A history of tobacco use or known cancer could raise suspicion of a neoplastic cause.

Trismus may also be encountered when attempting to visualize the oral and pharyngeal structures during a physical exam. This challenges the examining clinician's attempt to ascertain the cause of trismus. As much as possible, the exam should be targeted to the teeth and gums; facial bones and TMJ; pharyngeal pillars, tonsils, uvula; and the neck.

Assessment of the patient's speech may be necessary; some pharyngeal infections implicated in trismus may also cause changes in the patient's voice; a "hot potato voice" may be associated with tonsillitis or peritonsillar abscess. A directed neurologic exam should be performed to evaluate for neurogenic causes.