**Nonoperative**

It includes prostheses, orthoses, and shoe lifts to treat limb length discrepancy. If a child is younger than six years, they can be followed biannually; however, an annual assessment can be done using a limb length radiograph if a child is older than six years.

**Operative**

Patients diagnosed as type 1a, 1b, 2a, and 2b of congenital femoral deficiency can be successfully managed with lengthening reconstruction surgery compared to prosthetic reconstruction surgery. However, in some patients with hip and knee deformities, before considering such a procedure, they should undergo some preparatory procedures to prevent the compli­cations associated with it.

**Type 1 Congenital Femoral Deficiency**

It is the most reconstructable type among all. In such cases, before opting for the lengthening procedure, hip stability should be assessed radiographically, which can be evaluated using the center edge angle. If the acetabular index is less than 30 degrees and the center-edge angle is less than 20 degrees, then a Dega osteotomy procedure should be performed before lengthening.

In scenarios where the neck-shaft angle is less than 120 degrees, then correction of coxa vara becomes the priority before going for a lengthening procedure. The superhip procedure should be considered in cases where coxa vara and hip dysplasia are present. The osteotomies, including pelvic and femoral, should be performed at least twelve months prior to the first lengthening. After a successful superhip procedure followed by femoral neck ossification, it can be reclassified from type1b to type1a.

**Type 2 Congenital Femoral Deficiency**

If the head of the femur is mobile, it can be reattached to the existing part of the femur using a superhip two procedure where the greater trochanter is reconstructed in the femoral neck.

- The femoral head can be separate from the acetabulum, which converts it to type 2a then the superhip two procedure can be performed.

- The femoral head can be enucleated from the acetabulum, and then a superhip three procedure can be performed, which is a form of trochanteric arthroplasty.

- Initially, a soft tissue release can be planned, followed by the lengthening of the femur; then, at the time of skeletal maturity, a pelvic support osteotomy can be performed.

**Type 3 Congenital Femoral Deficiency**

In such cases, the most reliable and predictable management option is prosthetic reconstruction surgery with either a Syme amputation or rotationplasty. Initially, the Van Nes rotationplasty was popularized by Torode, later modified by Brown, and then in 1997, Paley changed it further. For the management of type 3c, Paley-Winkelmann rotationplasty can be used.