The extent of surgical resection for intracranial ependymomas has been the most reliable and consistent independent prognostic factor. Intracranial ependymomas show a low metastatic potential and predominantly present a locally invasive histological pattern. Ependymomas that fall within the histological grade III from the WHO classification have correlated with a worse outcome than grade II.

Patients who undergo complete resection without signs of residual disease have presented a better outcome and overall survival compared to patients who undergo partial resection. For this reason, treatment typically consists of aggressive surgical excision.

Across the different subgroups, infratentorial ependymomas generally have an excellent prognosis, even without treatment. Supratentorial ependymomas, however, often present a higher histological grade and have a lower survival rate despite treatment with resection and adjuvant radiation.

Prognosis varies for pediatric patients and will be subject to location, type of treatment, and pathological classification. A previous study showed that gross total resection had the best overall and progression-free survival. Patients with WHO classification grade II had improved overall survival after gross total resection in addition to external beam radiation therapy, and improved progression-free survival after gross total resection alone. Patients with WHO classification grade III had improved overall survival after subtotal resection in addition to external beam radiation therapy. While progression-free survival was better in patients with infratentorial tumors following subtotal resection in addition to external beam radiation therapy.