Without proper social service and mental health intervention, all forms of abuse can be recurrent and escalating problems, and the prognosis for recovery is poor. Without treatment, domestic and family violence usually recurs and escalates in both frequency and severity.

- Of those injured by domestic violence, over 75% continue to experience abuse.

- Over half of battered women who attempt suicide will try again; often they are successful with the second attempt.

In children, the potential for poor outcomes is particularly high as abuse inflicts lifelong effects. In addition to dealing with the sequelae of physical injury, the mental consequences may be catastrophic. Studies indicate a significant association between child sexual abuse and increased risk of psychiatric disorders in later life. The potential for the cycle of violence to continued from childhood is very high.

Children raised in families of sexual abuse may develop:

- Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

- Conduct disorder

- Depression

- Bipolar disorder

- Panic disorder

- Sleep disorders

- Suicide attempts

- Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

**Health Outcomes**

There are multiple known and suspected negative health outcomes of family and domestic violence. There are long-term consequences to broken bones, traumatic brain injuries, and internal injuries.

Patients may also develop multiple comorbidities such as:

- Asthma

- Insomnia

- Fibromyalgia

- Headaches

- High blood pressure

- Chronic pain

- Gastrointestinal disorders

- Gynecologic disorders

- Depression

- Panic attacks

- PTSD