**Graft-versus-host Disease**

A major clinical significance of HLA antigens is their role in transplant rejection.

The opposite can occur when immune cells get transplanted with the graft into the recipient. Hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation (e.g., bone marrow, stem cells) must mainly deal with this phenomenon. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is caused by the presence of donor antibodies against HLA class II antigens. One study at Henri-Mondor University Hospital in France demonstrated that when donors have antibodies against the specific recipient HLA antigens, there is a correlation with the incidence of GVHD.

A study in the UK of stem cell transplants between 1996 and 2003 showed that patients with a class I HLA mismatch were more likely to developed chronic GVHD. Additionally, the pairs that had the mismatches also had a higher mortality rate after one year. Multiple HLA mismatches show higher rates of GVHD.

HLA antigens can be matched when administering blood products. Research has demonstrated that blood banks that use the HLA genotypes of the blood donors have better transfusion outcomes. There has been a discussion of the possibility of creating a database with genotyped donors to make it slightly easier to find blood for patients with rare HLA antibodies so that their transfusions can have less risk of adverse outcomes because of having matched donors.

As discussed above, studies have identified particular HLA antigens have as correlating with disease processes. These allow for the development of specific treatments for diseases.

**Multiple Sclerosis**

HLA-DR2 is associated with multiple sclerosis. Since there is such a strong association between the disease and the antigen, there have been studies looking at immunotherapy to target the DR2 antigen in the treatment of the disease. In one particular study, the molecule PV-267 was examined for its promise as a therapy. PV-267 functions as a cytokine inhibitor and inhibits the proliferation of myelin-specific DR2 antigens. By using PV-267 derived from multiple sclerosis patients, researchers found the potential for further therapeutic options.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Rheumatoid arthritis shows strong associations with DR4. These have been thought to indicate disease susceptibility. When DR4 binds with a class II-associated peptide, it may indicate an increased risk for rheumatoid arthritis. The DR4 binding changes the presentation of the citrullinated peptides, contributing to the development of the disease.

**Graves Disease**

Graves disease is associated with HLA-DR3. In addition to environmental factors, the HLA haplotype plays a significant role in disease development. Important clinically, HLA typing may help to predict the outcome of Graves disease before and post-antithyroid medical therapy.

**Behçet Disease**

Behçet disease is associated with HLA-B51, which influences the clinical features of the disease. Patients with the HLA-B51 haplotype have been shown to develop symptoms of the disease earlier in life (less than 40 years of age). Additionally, neurological and gastrointestinal symptoms of the disease were more prevalent in patients without the HLA-B51 haplotype rather than those who had it.