The muscle of the triceps surae is part of the muscles of the posterior area of the leg. It is comprised of three heads, two of which are superficial; the medial head and the lateral head, which form the gastrocnemius muscle, and a deeper muscle, the soleus muscle, and in a small percentage, the plantaris muscle.

**Anatomy**

- The medial head of the gastrocnemius originates from the epicondyle and the posterior surface of the medial condyle of the femur. We can identify a lateral origin and a medial origin. The latter involves a flattened, strong, thicker tendon, which contacts the upper area of the medial condyle, below the tendon's insertion of the muscle adductor magnus, and the medial supracondylar crest. The lateral origin has a short tendon in admixture with muscle fibers contacting the knee joint capsule and on the popliteal area of the medial femoral condyle. It knows this insertion zone as the medial supracondylar tubercle.

- The lateral head of the gastrocnemius originates from the lateral surfaces of the epicondyle, in a posterior and lateral fossa, proximal to the popliteal muscle tendon, attaching to the lateral supracondylar crest.

The two heads are directed downward, delimiting the popliteal fossa, and at the level of the middle third of the leg, they unite to constitute a large aponeurosis that completely covers the anterior area of the muscular bodies going downward. The aponeurosis continues distally as a calcaneal tendon. The gastrocnemius muscle is a bi-articular muscle and morphologically defined as pennate.

- The soleus muscle has a fibrous origin from the head and the posterior face of the fibula, from the soleus muscle line of the posterior face of the tibial bone, and the fibrous arch between the fibula head and the soleus muscle line—a wide, flattened belly forms from these origins, which continues in a large aponeurosis directed downward. At the level of the lower third of the leg, it joins the deep fascia of the aponeurosis of the gastrocnemius muscle, constituting the calcaneal ligament. The latter reaches the foot and inserts into the tuberosity of the heel; a mucous bursa separates the calcaneal bone and the deep face of the tendon; a second, more superficial bursa lies between the skin and the tendon (subcutaneous calcaneal bursa). The soleus muscle is mono-articular and is covered by the twins of the gastrocnemius.

The plantaris muscle, absent in about 10% of the population, inserts with a tendon lateral to the insertion of the calcaneal tendon (rarely joining); in cases of rupture of the calcaneal tendon, the plantaris muscle-tendon remains intact.