Therapy selection depends on the patient's age and gender as well as the site, size, and type of lesion. No single treatment method is ideal for all lesions or all patients. A biopsy should be performed in all patients with suspected BCC to confirm the diagnosis and determine the histologic subtype. The main goals of BCC treatment are (1) to completely remove the tumor to prevent recurrence at a later date, (2) to correct any functional impairment resulting from the tumor, and (3) to give the best cosmetic result to the patient, especially because most BCCs are on the face.

Treatment of BCC is usually surgical, but some forms of BCC are amenable to medical treatment or radiation therapy. The various types of therapy include Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS), standard surgical excision, EDC, radiation, photodynamic therapy, cryosurgery, topical therapies, and systemic medications such as Vismodegib. The recurrence rates for primary BCC are as follows: Mohs surgery, 1.0%; surgical excision, 10.1%; EDC, 7.7%; radiation therapy, 8.7%; and cryosurgery, 7.5%.

Mohs surgery provides the best long-term cure rate of any treatment modality for BCC. MMS is the gold standard for treating high-risk BCCs and recurrent BCCs because of its high cure rate and tissue-sparing benefit. The high cure rate is attributed to an examination of 100% of all the tissue margins when compared with standard vertical sectioning, wich only examines less than 1% of the outer peripheral and deep margins. By only taking thin tissue layers from the areas with positive tumor margins, the wound size is minimized, and a superior cosmetic outcome can be expected.

Postoperative pathologic analysis with permanent sections follows standard surgical excision. Four-millimeter margins are typically adequate for well-circumscribed tumors that are less than 2 centimeters in diameter. For facial lesions, simple excision with narrow margins is often not adequate for effective removal. EDC is frequently used to treat low-risk BCCs. Cure rates are reportedly as high as 97% to 98%, but the clinician should be cautious to select the appropriate cases (those without extension into the deep dermis).  BCCs treatment with EDC is the least expensive and fastest treatment method, but because they are left to heal by second intention, the procedure commonly results in a white atrophic scar that can be cosmetically disfiguring.

Radiation therapy is a primary option for treating BCC or SCC if surgery is contraindicated. It also can be used as an adjuvant treatment for basal cell carcinoma when further surgery could sacrifice major nerves or other vital structures, or there is a perineural invasion by cancer cells. The disadvantages of radiation therapy are cost, poor cosmesis in some patients, prolonged course of treatment (15 to 30 visits), and increased risk for future skin cancers. Scars from radiation therapy tend to worsen with time, while surgical scars improve over time.

Cryosurgery is another treatment option for low-risk BCCs. It involves the controlled application of liquid nitrogen to the clinically visible tumor and a small surrounding margin of normal-appearing skin for margin control. A temperature probe can be used and is inserted at the lateral tumor margin, and the tip is positioned position the tip just below the tumor by pushing it obliquely. Next, liquid nitrogen is applied and continued until reaching a temperature of -60 degrees C. In practicality, a temperature is seldom employed during this procedure. The procedure is advantageous for those wishing to avoid invasive surgery, and it is also relatively quick. The treated area may be painful and swollen after it thaws. Cryosurgery also can cause hypertrophic scarring and permanent pigment alteration.

Topical therapy is another treatment for basal cell carcinoma. Topical 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and Imiquimod 5% cream are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat superficial BCC. Both topical therapies are good options in patients with multiple superficial BCCs and in patients who are poor surgical candidates. Application site reactions are common and include erythema, pruritus, pain, edema, hypopigmentation, hyperpigmentation, crusting, bleeding, and erosions. Another disadvantage is there no histologic confirmation of complete tumor clearance.

A more recent treatment for patients with advanced or metastatic BCC that is untreatable with conventional therapeutic methods is Hedgehog pathway inhibitors. The FDA approved Vismodegib in 2012. A second inhibitor, sonidegib, was also approved. The side effects of vismodegib and sonidegib can lead to discontinuation in up to 55% of patients. The most commonly reported adverse effects included nausea, dysgeusia, muscle spasm, alopecia, weight loss, diarrhea, and fatigue.

In specific populations, such as the immune-suppressed, the elderly, and those with poor baseline functional status and cases of metastatic, advanced, recalcitrant, or cosmetically sensitive disease, nonsurgical management may be a desirable alternative.