Chlorpromazine is a low-potency antipsychotic that mainly causes non-neurologic side effects. It is highly lipid-soluble and stored in body fats, thus very slow to be removed from the body. Being a low-potency typical antipsychotic, it primarily causes dry mouth, dizziness, urine retention, blurred vision, and constipation by blocking the muscarinic receptors. There is a risk of angle-closure glaucoma in the elderly. It also causes sedation due to the blockade of histamine H1 receptors.

Antagonism at the D2 receptors in the tuberoinfundibular pathway is believed to be responsible for the increase in the prolactin level. This hyperprolactinemia can cause several endocrinal side effects, such as decreased libido in both genders. In males, increased prolactin may cause gynecomastia, galactorrhea, and erectile dysfunction. Rarely, it may cause priapism. In females, an increase in prolactin levels may result in irregular menstruation, oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, and galactorrhea.

When administered as intramuscular or intravenous injections, it may cause hypotension and headache. Prolonged use of chlorpromazine may cause corneal deposits and lens opacity. It may prolong the QT interval. Studies have shown that chlorpromazine may also result in cholestatic jaundice by impairing the bile flow. The drug-induced hepatotoxicity results from inflammation and injury to the liver, which may significantly increase the alanine aminotransferase level (ALT). It can be prevented by regular monitoring with liver function tests, and in case of the early detection of liver injury, the drug should be stopped, and symptomatic management should start.

Despite being a low-potency drug, chlorpromazine can still cause extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) such as acute dystonia, akathisia, parkinsonism, and tardive dyskinesia (TD). The evolution of EPS side effects can occur from hours to days. Acute dystonia refers to muscle stiffness or spasm of the head, neck, and eye muscles that can start hours after starting the medication. Akathisia includes restlessness and fast pacing. Parkinsonism includes bradykinesia, "cogwheel" rigidity, and shuffling gait. TD results from prolonged exposure to antipsychotic drugs and includes involuntary, repetitive abnormal movements of the face and extremities. Patients are at risk of developing neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), a life-threatening manifestation where the patient presents with "lead-pipe" muscle rigidity, autonomous instability, hyperpyrexia more than 40 degrees Celsius, altered mental status, leukocytosis, and elevated serum creatinine kinase.