Anesthetic care of elderly patients is a challenging aspect of perioperative medicine. As patients with more comorbidities and physiologic changes require anesthesia for procedures, an interprofessional team with adequate training and excellent communication is vital to decreasing morbidity and mortality. The role of the interprofessional team may include anesthesiologists, surgeons, nurses, surgical technicians, geriatricians, palliative care physicians, pharmacists, chaplains, and more. Failure of the team in assessing the patient and forming a surgical plan to maximize benefits while minimizing risks can result in poor outcomes and preventable patient harm. Before the patient arrives in the procedure room, assessments by team members should focus on determining the patient's physiologic reserve and be directed at cardiopulmonary risk factors, cognitive function, and common geriatric pathologies.

Intraoperatively, the surgical and anesthetic plans should minimize known risks for elderly patients. General anesthesia in geriatric patients is associated with acute respiratory failure, lengthier hospital stays, and higher mortality in hip fractures. Some studies suggest spinal anesthesia to be a safer primary anesthetic, but more research is needed to evaluate this hypothesis.

Finally, the incidence of Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction is increasing each year. Early detection and thorough postoperative assessment of cognition changes should be a joint effort by physicians and nurses. Guidelines should be implemented at the institutional level and taught to all perioperative employees to improve neurologic outcomes.