There are multiple management options available once TTTS is diagnosed. These include expectant management, amnioreduction, intentional septostomy (not commonly performed currently), fetoscopic laser photocoagulation, selective reduction, and voluntary pregnancy termination. Amnioreduction is typically performed to correct the polyhydramnios to < 8 cm, can be performed at any point > 14 weeks, and can be performed once or serially. Selective reduction is typically not considered unless the TTTS has reached stage III or IV.

Fetoscopic laser photocoagulation is performed under ultrasound guidance typically between 15 to 26 weeks of gestation with the goal of creating “two chorions,” each supplying one twin. The procedure can be completed outside of this timeframe, but there are different disadvantages in these timeframes; at under 16 weeks, there is a greater risk of PPROM, and at over 25 weeks, there is greater difficulty in coagulation due to the increased size of vessels. In the past, it has been recommended to selectively coagulate AV, AA, and VV anastomoses rather than nonselectively coagulate. However, there is concern that some anastomoses could be missed and may result in a greater risk of recurrence of TTTS and twin anemia polycythemia sequence (TAPS).

The Solomon technique was then developed, consisting of coagulating in a thin line from one end of the placenta to the other after finding and coagulating the anastomoses. This technique does result in fewer TTTS recurrences, decreased development of TAPS, and increased perinatal survival, but there is a greater risk of placental abruption. Based upon the available data, the authors of the 2019 Update on TTTS in Best Practice and Research Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology recommend a partial Solomon technique in which anastomoses are coagulated as well as a small area along the division of the placenta to optimize sufficient anastomoses coagulation and salvaging of a healthy placenta.

Management recommendations differ based upon the stage of TTTS and gestational age and are outlined below:

Stage I: Expectant management is recommended due to similar outcomes compared to amnioreduction and fetoscopic laser photocoagulation. Weekly ultrasound checks can be considered. Additionally, only about 25% of Stage I TTTS progresses in stage, and with expectant management, the survival of at least one twin occurs in most pregnancies.

Stage II, III, IV: Fetoscopic laser photocoagulation is recommended at these stages at gestational age < 26 weeks.

Stage V: No interventions have been evaluated at this stage.