The wheelchair (WC) is one of the most important examples of mobility-assistive equipment (MAE) available to patients with impaired mobility. Otherwise known as a "wheeled mobility device" (WMD), the WC has revolutionized the treatment of patients experiencing disability and has had a significant impact on those with serious functional restrictions. According to the National Institutes of Health, fifty-three million Americans lived with a disability in 2017.

It is important to have an understanding of the components of a WC. The main features include the seat (sling, solid, folding), wheels, tires, casters, fork & stem, leg rests, anti-tippers, wheel locks, hand rims, armrests, lap trays, seatbelt, and seat cushions. Supplementary seating options include skin protection, positioning devices, and backrest cushions. Presented here is an overview of the process of patient assessment (WHO step 2) and device fitting (step 6) for patients requiring WCs with special emphasis placed on WC fitting, seating evaluation, and the roles of the interdisciplinary rehabilitation team members. A poorly fit WC or seating system can lead to a less desirable outcome for the disabled and unforeseen consequences. As part of its WC service delivery model, the WHO has established a hierarchy of WC users' seating and positioning needs: basic, intermediate, and complex.basic and intermediate level needs; patients with complex needs require specialized training and a more in-depth explanation of care delivery.