The clinical presentation of plasma cell neoplasms largely depends on the specific disease. The first step in approaching any suspected plasma cell neoplasms patient is to obtain a thorough history, clinical examination, and laboratory tests to verify whether that the patient’s diagnosis is PCM or a premalignant stage of PCM, such as MGUS or smouldering PCM, which do not require therapy and may be easily misdiagnosed as PCM. MGUS patients are usually asymptomatic with a risk of progression of approximately 1%. MGUS has been reported to progress to PCM, solitary plasmacytoma, or amyloidosis

PCM is the main disease entity in plasma cell neoplasms and presents variably, with symptoms ranging from asymptomatic to aggressive. The diagnosis is based on the assessment of pathological, radiological and clinical features (table 2). Symptoms of PCM include symptoms related to bone marrow infiltration (fatigue and pallor, bleeding, and infections) and symptoms related to monoclonal gammopathy, often referred to as CRAB symptoms (hypercalcemia, renal insufficiency, anemia, and bone lesions). Extramedullary involvement leads to masses/organomegaly with lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly being the most common organs involved. The manifestation of advanced diseases such as fatigue, generalized weakness, weight loss, and fever are possible presenting symptoms

PCM has the following three variants

- **Asymptomatic****(smoldering) plasma cell myeloma**show classic M protein and bone marrow findings with no symptoms.

- **Non-secretory myeloma**shows an absence of an M-protein; however, elevated serum free light chains and/or an abnormal free light chain ratio are detectable.

- **Plasma cell leukemia (PCL)**shows extensive and diffuse involvement by clonal plasma cells (greater than 60%) and association with extramedullary tissues infiltration as well as increased incidence of CRAB symptoms.

Plasmacytoma is generally classified into solitary bone plasmacytoma (SBP) and extramedullary (extraosseous) plasmacytoma (EMP). SBP refers to the involvement of the cortical bone with monoclonal plasma cells. The most common bone sites involved include the vertebrae, ribs, and skull.  SBP presents as localized bony pain and may have soft tissue extension. SBP shows progression to PCM or multiple plasmacytoma in up to 70% of cases, therefore close observation and follow up is crucial. SBP can be confused with early PCM, therefore complete and careful assessment to exclude PCM is crucial, including clinical examination, tests to assess for M-protein, bone marrow aspirate/biopsy with no evidence of clonal plasma cells, and normal skeletal survey except for the primary solitary lesion identified. Solitary plasmacytoma with minimal bone marrow involvement refers to a variant of SBP where clonal plasma cells less than 10% have been identified in the bone marrow biopsy

EMP is localized plasma cell neoplasms that arise in tissues other than bone. The distinction between lymphomas that exhibit extreme plasma cell differentiation and EMP may be difficult. Examples of lymphomas with prominent plasmacytic differentiation that need to be differentiated from EMP include extranodal marginal zone (MALT) lymphoma and extranodal marginal zone lymphoma (MZL). EMP occurs commonly in the upper respiratory tract (80%; sinuses, naso- and oropharynx); symptoms are generally related to the tumor mass including rhinorrhea, epistaxis, and nasal obstruction. The second most common site of EMP involvement is the gastrointestinal tract (5%); symptoms include loss of appetite, bleeding, abdominal discomfort or obstruction. Other organs that can be involved include the lung, lymph nodes, bladder, CNS, breast, thyroid, testis, parotid, and skin

Monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition diseases include primary amyloidosis (AL) and light and heavy chain deposition diseases. Both of these disorders are characterized by deposition of aberrant immunoglobulin in soft and visceral tissue, leading to organ dysfunction; the major difference between the two disease entities is that AL stains positive with Congo red stain. Primary AL is more common than light and heavy chain deposition diseases, very rare disease entities. AL is caused by a plasma cell neoplasm that secretes intact or fragments of abnormal immunoglobulin light chains, or less commonly, heavy chains, which deposit in various tissues. This disease entity is associated with PCM in approximately 20% of patients, therefore thorough assessment is crucial. Sites of involvement include subcutaneous fat, kidney, heart, liver, gastrointestinal tract, peripheral nerves and the bone marrow. Clinical symptoms are extremely variable and depend on the organs involved. For instance, heart involvement may present as congestive heart failure, kidney involvement may present as nephrotic syndrome, gastrointestinal involvement may present as malabsorption, and liver involvement may present as hepatomegaly. As the clinical symptoms vary, clinical suspicion of the disease should always be kept in mind.

Plasma cell neoplasms with associated paraneoplastic syndrome include two disease entities: POEMS syndrome and TEMPI syndrome (provisional disease entity). POEMS syndrome is an osteosclerotic myeloma that is characterized by fibrosis and osteosclerotic changes in bone trabeculae and lymph node changes similar to the plasma cell variant of Castleman disease. This rare syndrome's symptoms include polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and skin changes (POEMS). The characteristic lesion in osteosclerotic plasmacytoma may be single or multiple. Most patients do not present with all the manifestations of POEMS syndrome. The most common presenting symptom is a chronic, progressive polyneuropathy.