# Continuing Education Activity

The American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) defines pica as eating non-nutritive, non-food substances over a period of at least one month. Additionally, the behavior must not be in keeping with the child's developmental stage and must not be socially normative or culturally acceptable behavior. The nature of ingested items is variable, including but not limited to earth (geophagy), raw starches (amylophagy), ice (pagophagia), charcoal, ash, paper, chalk, cloth, baby powder, coffee grounds, and eggshells. This activity describes the risk factors, evaluation, and management of pica and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in enhancing care delivery for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Explain how cultural and social norms can influence the diagnosis of pica. 
- Explain when the diagnosis of pica can be made. 
- List other conditions that can mimic pica. 
- Examine the role of collaboration amongst interprofessional team members to improve care coordination and minimize oversight, leading to earlier diagnosis and treatment and better outcomes for patients with pica.

# Introduction

The American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) defines pica as eating nonnutritive, nonfood substances over a period of at least one month. The term is derived from "pica-pica," the Latin word for the magpie bird, because of the bird's indiscriminate gathering and eating a variety of objects for the sake of curiosity.

Although pica is seen in children, it is also a common eating disorder in patients who are intellectually impaired. In women, it is most often seen during pregnancy. In some parts of the world, the consumption of non-nutritive substances is culturally accepted. Pica usually occurs as an isolated disorder but there are instances when it may co-exist with schizophrenia, OCD, and trichotillomania.

It is important to understand that in order to diagnose pica, the individual must be at least 2 years of age. It is not unusual to notice that younger children are frequently eating nonnutritive substances.

# Etiology

Many factors have been implicated in the etiology of pica; however, no direct causality has been established. Studies of psychological factors have reported an association between pica and stress, child neglect and abuse, and maternal deprivation.

While the causes of Pica remain unknown, some of the risk factors for developing the disorder include the following:

- Stress

- Cultural factors

- Learned behavior

- Low socioeconomic status

- Underlying mental health disorder

- Nutritional deficiency

- Child neglect

- Pregnancy

- Epilepsy

- Familial psychopathology

# Epidemiology

A variety of reasons make it challenging to estimate the exact prevalence of pica; for example, studies use variable definitions of pica, under-reporting is common among affected subjects, and a strong cultural and social influence adds further difficulty to detection.

# History and Physical

A comprehensive history should be pursued along with caregiver interviews. The details of the exposure should be sought, including the type of substance, amount, duration of exposure, settings where behavior usually happens, the source of the substance, any co-ingestions, and symptoms of toxicity.

While, in most cases, the physical exam will be normal,

# Evaluation

Laboratory evaluation should be tailored according to the suspected substances ingested. Iron studies in patients with pica should be performed, especially in women who are pregnant, and children. Lead (in pica for paint and chalk) and zinc levels should be checked where appropriate.

Imaging studies are usually required when patients have abdominal symptoms. This may include plain abdominal x-rays, barium studies, and endoscopy. In many cases, serial studies are needed to ensure that the substance has passed.

# Treatment / Management

Primary prevention should be utilized to identify at-risk patients such as children who live in old homes with lead paint and woman who are pregnant. This could be achieved by screening for the condition among such populations.

There are no medications specifically for the treatment of pica. While there are anecdotal reports about antipsychotic use to reduce pica behaviors, these drugs also cause constipation and other adverse effects.

Besides the removal of the substance from the environment, it is important to assess the cultural traditions and beliefs that promote pica behavior.

# Differential Diagnosis

Careful screening should be performed for mental health problems in the setting of pica. Several psychiatric illnesses should be considered in the differential diagnosis including other eating disorders, schizophrenia and psychosis, autism and developmental delay in children, substance abuse, and addiction.

# Prognosis

Pica is usually a benign disorder if it is short-term. In pregnant women and children, the condition spontaneously disappears without any sequelae. However, in individuals with intellectual impairment, it may persist for years. When Pica is long term it can result in bowel obstruction, bezoars, and even toxicity. Ingestion of dirt and paint can lead to infections and heavy metal toxicity. Many reports exist of people who have had to undergo surgery to relieve bowel obstruction, perforation, and ulcers.

# Complications

The complications of pica can be categorized according to the type of substance ingested:

- Geophagia: Clay ingestion is a very common form of pica. It can lead to constipation, hypokalemia with myopathy, and nutritional deficiencies.

- Pagophagia: Ice ingestion could lead to iron deficiency, especially during pregnancy.

- Amylophagia: Excessive starch consumption has been associated with iron deficiency. It also can cause high blood sugar and obesity due to its high carbohydrate content.

- Other substances: Ingested materials can contain a wide variety of toxic contaminants such as lead, mercury, arsenic, fluoride, and many others. Exposure to such items can lead to a wide range of toxic effects such as lead poisoning.

**Fetal Toxicity**

Pica during pregnancy can have dire consequences on the growing fetus. There are case reports of intrauterine toxicity due to maternal pica. Lead poisoning has been implicated in long-term neurological disability.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Treatment of patients with pica should utilize an interprofessional team approach. A team consisting of a physician, psychiatrist/psychologist, behavioral therapist, social worker, and dietitian. Patients should be treated in a nonjudgmental manner, with particular attention to their cultural and social background.

Patient education is vital. Failure to educate patients on healthy eating habits is a common reason why pica can be prevalent in some populations. Parents need to be educated about the harms of ingesting nonnutritive substances by their children and the need for limiting such exposure. In some jurisdictions, landlords have to ensure that lead-based painting is removed. A dietary consult may benefit some families. Close follow-up by the nurse practitioner may be required to ensure that the pica behavior is not continuing.

Clinicians should communicate with each other so that the same message is sent to the parent or caregiver.