The surgery can be performed open or laparoscopically.

**Open Technique**

Entrance into the peritoneal cavity

- An upper midline incision is made just superior to the umbilicus and extends superiorly to the xiphoid process.

- The peritoneal cavity is opened and inspected.

- A self-retaining retractor is placed in the abdomen for exposure, and a liver retractor is placed to facilitate access to the lesser curvature and diaphragmatic hiatus.

Distal esophageal mobilization

- The assistant retracts the greater curvature inferiorly to expose the GEJ.

- The peritoneal covering of the GEJ is incised, and the esophagus is encircled with a Penrose drain.

- The esophagus should be mobilized for a distance of 4 to5 cm above the GEJ.

- If the left lobe of the liver is obstructing exposure, the left triangular ligament may be divided.

Identification and division of the anterior vagal trunk

- A single vagal trunk is identified, typically 2 to 4 cm superior to the GEJ.

- The nerve is mobilized for a minimum of 2 cm.

- The trunk is then clipped and divided proximally and distally with medium clips for a minimum resected specimen of 2 cm.

Identification and division of the posterior vagal trunk

- The esophagus is now more mobile, having taken the anterior vagus nerve and is retracted anteriorly and to the patient's left side.

- The posterior trunk is identified along the right edge of the esophagus.

- The nerve is mobilized for a minimum of 2 cm.

- The trunk is then clipped and divided proximally and distally with medium clips for a minimum resected specimen of 2 cm.

Pathologic confirmation via frozen section

Drainage procedure or gastric resection with intestinal reconstruction

- Drainage procedures include gastroenterostomy, pyloroplasty (Heineke-Mikulicz, Finney, Jaboulay), and pyloromyotomy.

- Gastric resection can vary in location depending on the location of the ulcer but is typically distal and includes the antrum.

- Reconstruction after distal gastrectomy includes gastroduodenostomy (Billroth I), gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II), and the Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy.

Abdominal wall and skin closure