Many mediators play a crucial role in initiating the cascade in the acute inflammatory process. The first group of mediators is the toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are membrane-spanning proteins found on the surfaces of the innate immune system cells like macrophages and dendritic cells. These single-pass membrane-spanning receptors recognize the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or can recognize endogenous signals activated during tissue or cell damage known as danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPS). To date, research has identified more than ten TLRs. An important example is the CD14 (cluster of differentiation 14), a co-receptor for TLR4, which is present on the surface of innate immune system cells preferentially expressed in macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils. TLR4 can recognize the Lipopolysaccharide, which is the major component of the outer membrane of the gram-negative bacteria (PAMPs). Then the transmission of PAMPs and DAMPs are mediated by MyD88 (myeloid differentiation 88) along with the TLRs. Subsequently, the signaling will transmit through a specific cascade that leads to nuclear translocation of transcription factors, such as NF-kB, activator protein-1 (AP-1), or interferon regulatory factor 3(IRF3).

The second groups of mediators are arachidonic acid (AA) mediators. Arachidonic acid is a phospholipid that constitutes the membrane of the body's cells. Phospholipase can become activated by inducers, such as infection or tissue damage. This enzyme can act on this membrane phospholipids to liberate the arachidonic acid. This component can potentially metabolize into two main components through either the cyclooxygenase pathway or the 5-lipooxygenase pathway. The cyclooxygenase pathway forms the prostaglandins (PG) mediators; this includes the PGD2 and thromboxane, which are the bronchoconstrictive prostaglandins and the bronchoprotective or inhibitory PGE2 and prostacyclin. On the other hand, the 5-lipooxygenase pathway will form the leukotrienes (LTs). Examples of LTs include LTB4, which is neutrophil adhesive and chemotactic, LTC4, D4, and E4, which is involved in contraction of smooth muscle bronchioles, vasoconstriction, and edema formation.

The third group of mediators are the Mast cells, derived from precursors in the bone marrow and widely distributed in the connective tissue. These cells will become activated by tissue damage. Other immune molecules also contribute to the activation of these molecules, including the C3a and C5a, which lead to degranulation of human mast cells. Mast cells can also be enhanced by cross-linking of their high-affinity receptors for IgE. After activation, mast cell secretes a few pro-inflammatory molecules such as histamine, TNF, kinin, and leukotrienes (Leukotrienes play an important role in the delayed response of acute inflammation caused by mast cell activation).

The fourth group of mediators that can activate the acute inflammation is the Complements. The complements are a set of proteins that interact with one another to create a cascade. A large number of these complements can become activated through several pathways like the classical, alternative, or mannose-binding lectin pathway. The most important complement in acute inflammation include the C3a and C5a that mediate the anaphylatoxins, and also the C5a consider as chemotactic for neutrophils, C3b for opsonin for phagocytosis. These complements can then activate the MAC (membrane attack complex) that can activate the neutrophils, monocyte, and mast cells.

The last mediators are the Hageman factor, which is a part of clotting factors and also plays an important role in inflammation. Activation of this factor will lead to the activation of the kinin system and the formation of bradykinin. Bradykinin increases the permeability of the walls of blood vessels. This leakage leads to the swelling considered as part of the acute inflammation.

Other mediators and biomarkers of acute inflammation include Reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen oxide species (ROS and RNOS), cytokines such as IL-6, TNF-alpha, and chemokines, the formation of DNA adducts, acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein (CRP),  inflammation-related growth factors and transcription factors (NF-KappaB) and major immune cell types. The type of the mediators and immune cells involved all are variable and depend on several factors like the type of inducer, the duration of the injury, and multiple genetic loci.