A deficiency in pelvic floor muscle tension or an electrical abnormality of these districts will cause many disorders and pathologies, including visceral prolapse and urinary incontinence and fecal constipation. It is estimated that pelvic floor muscle disorders will increase by 35% over the next two decades, to an average of around 1.6 million visits per year for 2030. Pathogenesis is highly variable and multifactorial:

- Birth injury

- Elderly age

- Obesity

- Chronic pathological conditions that cause an increase in abdominal pressure

- Previous surgical interventions in the pelvic area

The major problems encountered in the anterior compartment include dysuria, urinary frequency, cystocele, and urinary incontinence. Vaginal or uterine prolapse usually represents central compartmental disorders. Changes in the posterior region cause pelvic and/or anal pain, constipation, rectal prolapse, and fecal incontinence. Peritoneal compartment disorders can lead to dyspareunia, constipation and low back pain due to alterations in rectum and sigma.

**The Stress Urinary Incontinence**

Pelvic floor issues may involve a few districts or all of them. The stress urinary incontinence (SUI), the most common of incontinence forms, occurs in the presence of stimuli such as a cough or sneezing, conditions where the increased pressure inside the pelvic cavity exceeds the muscular control ability. SUI affects about 26% of women between 30 and 59 years of age, with a peak at 40 to 49 years. The causes do not only affect the levator ani but its interaction with the adjacent muscles and joints. There is evidence that the pelvic floor acts in opposition to the respiratory diaphragm. The pelvic floor cannot properly distribute the tensions produced during trunk/ limb movements. There is a decreased electrical activity and/or electrical dissipation in the use of the muscles. A postural alteration of the lumbar spine alters the electrical behavior of the floor. The lack of pelvic tilt for lumbar hypolordosis (the pelvis is inclined posteriorly, the sacrum is displaced anteriorly in flexion, and the pubis oriented in anterior-inferior direction) cause an increase in the vertical load to the pelvic muscles, stretching the muscle fibers each time an individual walks or runs. This condition will progressively lead to the weakness of the levator ani. In healthy people with hypolordosis, visceral pressures in the pelvic cavity in the orthostatism increase, as there is an increase in the electromyographic spectrum of the elevator. Clinicians think that these events have a negative effect on continence in subjects with pelvic floor disorders. SUI in men is related to previous surgical prostatectomy.

**The Prolapse of the Pelvic Organs, and Constipation**

The prolapse of the pelvic organs caused by the weakness of the pelvic floor muscles is a problem affecting 30% to 50% of women, potentially leading to urinary and rectal problems, as well as disturbances to the sexual sphere. Researchers do not have accurate data on rectal prolapse in men. Constipation affects about 27% of the population, especially women, whose main causes can be related to the pelvic floor, to a paradoxical contraction of the musculature, general muscular weakness, and incomplete relaxation after contraction. Fecal accumulation in the rectum could lead to urinary and/or visceral prolapse.

**Pain**

Another problem related to the pelvic floor is a pain. Several dysfunctions including interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome, chronic prostatitis, provoked vestibulodynia, chronic vulvar pain disorder can present with several symptoms, but always with a single common denominator: painful muscle dysfunction (spasm, trigger point, hypotonia). Myofascial pelvic pain (MPP) affects about 14% to 23% of women, but data are underestimated, and not accurate in males. MPP presents with pain arising from muscular and connective tissue and can present as a single symptom or as a series of urological, gynecological, and colorectal symptoms. The source of pain not only involves the pelvic floor, the urogenital diaphragm, and the perineal membrane, but also some myofascial structures closely related, such as the piriformis and the internal obturator muscle. The symptoms may radiate from an initial area, affecting the gluteus, the abdomen, lumbar spine, chest, pelvis, and lower limbs. The muscle may create conditions such as the presence of trigger points (TPs). The causes are different and sometimes concomitant, such as a trauma or injury, the presence of a scar, chronically altered posture, metabolic dysfunctions and food deficiencies, and psychological stress. A constant change in the length of the muscle fibers can lead to an altered circulation, hypoperfusion, and ischemia, with the formation of TPs, even latent for many years. The pain arises when the TP is stimulated, for example, for a movement or a body function when a myofascial area is stretched or compressed. A constant stimulus of the nociceptive system forces a plastic change of the nervous structures, either peripheral or central, forming what is called central sensitization. This event results in an increased response of medullary neurons (allodynia), also persisting when the causal stimulus stops (hyperalgesia), causing an altered response from other non-injured tissues, resulting in pain (secondary hyperalgesia). The same connective tissue can be a source of pain, becoming less metabolically active and less adaptable to mechanical changes. The connective tissue can directly convey pain signals; in fact, it contains nociceptors that can translate mechanical stimuli into pain information; if there are nonphysiological mechanical stimuli, the proprioceptors can turn into nociceptors. Reduced sliding of the various layers limits the functionality of the endocannabinoid system. The fascial system is also important because it acts directly on the tension of the contractile tissue. Proprioceptors located in connective tissue (ligaments) activated by stretching, due to medullary reflex, can stimulate muscle contraction useful to suppress the tension created by the fascial fibers, ensuring the proper degree of tension and release of the muscle. An alteration in the muscle tone can cause dysfunction of the pelvic joints that, and even this condition can cause pelvic pain, as the same joints become a source of pain. A vicious circle is created where the structures used to correctly transfer the loads during movement fail in their functions, leading to further pain and symptoms. The pelvic floor with an altered status may trigger unspecific symptoms such as respiratory disorders, low back pain, sacroiliac joint pain, and pelvic girdle pain. The abnormal tension of the pelvic floor muscle can cause the same neurological compression/trapping syndromes that can be easily detected for the upper and lower limbs, such as compressing or preventing the nerves from sliding. An example is pudendal nerve syndrome or Alcock's syndrome, often negatively affected by muscular hypertonia. The pudendal nerve (S2 through S4) passes into the Alcock channel, between the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligament at the level of the ischiatic spine, affecting the fascia of internal obturator muscle. Its entrapment will cause unilateral genital pain to the genital area, anus, and pelvic area.

**Evaluation of Pelvic Floor**

A general manual and instrumental medical evaluation can be found in the literature. With regard to the manual examination, there is still no inspection technique involving all the components of the pelvic floor. The evaluation begins with an anamnestic interview and visual observation of any non-physiological change. The active movements of the lower limb, the lumbar spine, and the presence of symptoms are observed. The patient's posture, orthostatism, and walking are observed, as an altered body alignment could cause compensatory stress to the pelvic floor. The current manual evaluation focuses on measuring the ability to contract the pelvic muscle, quantifying its strength, and looking for TPs. The external tissues of the abdomen, thigh, gluteus, as well as perineal area, are tested to verify the presence of TPs. Intravaginal or rectal palpation is also performed to highlight the presence of sore areas. With the internal evaluation, a clinician can ask to contract the muscle to understand its ability to control and pain presence. Tthe Q-tip test is used to explore the presence of TPs and painful areas with intravaginal palpation. The test assigns the value of the present pain, with a minimum of zero for the complete absence of pain, and a maximum of 10 to report the worst pain as possible. To the muscle strength actively evaluated can be given a score of 0 to 5, with reference to the Chirarelli scale: zero corresponds the lack of contraction, while the maximum value of 5 indicates a physiological function of the musculature. One study proposes to evaluate the coccyx externally, placing the palm on the coccygeal area, with the sitting sit and in lateral decubitus; the patient is asked to contract the pelvic floor, following the bone movement through palpation.

**Diagnostic Tools**

The muscular strength of the pelvic floor can also be measured with intravaginal instruments such as manometers and dynamometers. The first measures the strength expressed in millimeters of mercury, while the second instrument calculates it in newtons. Differential tests are also performed to evaluate the presence of pain in the sacroiliac joint (SIJ), such as the Active Straight Leg Raise Test (ASLRT). ASLRT is the most important test to understand the presence of pain at SIJ and to differentiate joint dysfunction of the lumbar region and hip; it is also useful to highlight a potential dislocation of the SIJ. Intravaginal cones are intravaginal instruments that can give information on the pelvic floor contraction, and feedback on response to therapy. They have different shapes and sizes, with a dual purpose: to evaluate and help the patients to understand how they can work on their own muscles. Other medical instruments used for diagnosis are intravaginal or intracranial ultrasound, or suprapubic and perineal ultrasound, depending on the physician's decision. Ultrasound can produce 2-dimensional or 3-dimensional images, giving information on muscular and visceral behavior. Electromyography (EMG) provides information on how the pelvic floor contraction, either voluntary or not, behave. The electrodes can be superficial or intramuscular, and this depends on the area to be evaluated. These can placed on the surface for more general information, while more painful investigations are needed for deeper or more specific muscle areas. The use of the EMG and the proper reading of the spectrum depend on the position of the electrodes and the posture of the patient to be examined. EMG is less intense in the supine position and with bent legs than in sitting position and in orthostatism. The preferred diagnostic tool is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI can provide precise information on what is happening in the examined pelvic area (muscular, visceral and connective) with the ability to obtain real-time measurements of how the pelvic floor is positioned and how it contracts and how the viscera behave, without discomfort for the patient. The relaxed pelvic floor descends approximately 3 cm under the previously mentioned pubo coccygien line in healthy subjects. The choice of the use of this instrument will depend on the physician's experience. Computed Tomography (CT) can provide dynamic information on pelvic floor changes during contraction and defecation, but it represents a second choice compared to MRI for the presence of rays in the examination. In all cases, the physician decides how to orient the diagnostic procedure based on the subjective necessity of the patient.