Successful treatment of functional constipation requires an interprofessional team approach. Family members, health care providers, and the patient all have to play their part in the treatment of functional constipation and to prevent complications like encopresis and recurrent abdominal pain.

- Family members should receive education and a written plan at their initial visit. This information should be placed in their chart and reviewed at each subsequent visit.

- Treatment plans should include:

- Instructions for initial management, ongoing care, how to address relapses at home, and how and when to follow up for additional help and questions
- Lifestyle changes including increasing daily activity, increase fluid intake (especially water) and increased fiber intake.
- Behavioral interventions including sitting on the toilet after the same meal each day and trying 5 to 10 minutes to have a bowel movement (for toilet-trained children)
- Scheduled follow-up appointments: generally every 3 to 4 weeks until bowel movements normalized, then every 3 to 6 months and as needed

- Nursing staff should be familiar with constipation plans and be able to access individual plans in patient charts and be able to answer questions related to these plans over the phone when families call.

- If medications are prescribed, pharmacists should assist in monitoring for complications and effectiveness, reporting to the team concerns.

- Using an interprofessional team approach to coordinate care and educate the family will result in the best outcomes. [Level 5]