The frontal cortex receives its blood supply from two branches of the internal carotid artery: the anterior cerebral arteries and the middle cerebral arteries. The superior and medial aspects of the cortex receive its supply from the smaller anterior cerebral artery. In comparison, the inferior and lateral aspects receive supply from the much larger middle cerebral artery.  The left and right anterior cerebral arteries connect via a small vessel that runs between them, which is known as the anterior communicating artery. The anterior communicating artery is clinically crucial as it provides a collateral pathway for blood when the flow through one of the internal carotids is compromised.

Venous drainage of the cortex of the brain generally begins at the nearest large vein, and then to a sinus, before ultimately draining into the internal jugular vein. The superior cerebral vein course upward on the surface of the hemisphere, draining the top of the frontal cortex into the superior sagittal sinus. The inferior cerebral veins drain the bottom portion of the frontal cortex and either end in the superficial middle cerebral veins or the transverse sinus.

Lymphatic drainage of the nervous system behaves in a way that is unlike anywhere else in the body. This unique lymphatic system has been recently discovered and has the name of the ‘glial-related lymphatic system’ or the ‘glymphatic system.’  In the glymphatic system, lymph drainage behaves in a pattern similar to the way in which cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) enters the brain parenchyma.  In the frontal cortex, the anterior and middle cerebral arteries extend into pial arteries, which run through the subarachnoid and subpial spaces. They then dive deep into the brain parenchyma, where they transition into penetrating arterioles and create the Virchow-Robin perivascular space. Glial aquaporin 4 channels play an essential role in transporting the CSF fluid from the perivascular space into the deep brain parenchyma and allow interchange with interstitial fluid.  Ultimately, the perivenous space collects this fluid and drains it into the cervical lymphatic system.