Surgery is still considered the gold standard of treatment for patients with EMPD. Over the years, many therapeutic modalities have been attempted on patients with EMPD to reduce the significant morbidity associated with the often-radical surgical treatments performed. Because of the rarity of this condition, experience in its management is limited. Due to the high frequency of recurrences after excision, adjunctive therapy is often used. The literature recommends a safety resection margin of 2 cm, although a 1 cm margin could be sufficient for lesions with clinically clear margins. A lower recurrence rate has been reported when utilizing Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS). A study by Coldiron and colleagues evaluated recurrence of EMPD after MMS versus conventional excision using fixed or frozen margins. They combined results from their own experience with those from a written survey of members of the American College of Micrographic Surgery and compared with cases selected from the literature that had undergone conventional surgery. Coldiron et al. reported a recurrence rate of 23% for MMS versus 33% for conventional excision with margin control.

Systemic chemotherapy (vincristine, docetaxel, carboplatin, 5-FU, mitomycin-C, etoposide) can be used if there are contraindications to surgery and radiotherapy.****Radiation treatment can be utilized for inoperable lesions or as adjuvant treatment to surgical excision, namely, in the case of postoperative recurrence; the results are better in primary in situ EMPD. Local application of cytotoxic drugs (bleomycin, 5-fluorouracil) alone is not sufficient, but may decrease the margins of the lesions or assist in visualization, rendering resection more efficacious. Intralesional interferon has given promising results in some patients. The topical immune-response modifier, imiquimod, has been successfully used in a small number of EMPD cases it appears to be helpful in superficial forms. Imiquimod can be considered an alternative to surgery, an adjunct before or after surgery, and even part of a therapeutic combination with other treatment modalities. Though only case reports or case series have been published thus far, results seem promising for Imiquimod.