**Anterolateral Thigh Flap**

The anterolateral thigh flap is classically described as a fasciocutaneous perforator flap based on the septocutaneous perforator vessels, or more predomintantly, the musculocutaneous perforator vessels that arise from the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery (LCFA), the largest branch of the profunda femoris system in the thigh. Early anatomical dissections described the ALT pedicle as predominantly consisting of septocutaneous perforators; however, recent research suggests the contrary. Now, it is well accepted that musculocutaneous perforators comprise the predominant blood supply (87%) to this flap.

The vascular territory of the ALT flap extends from the anterior superior iliac spine superiorly to the lateral femoral condyle inferiorly and from the medial edge of the rectus femoris muscle anteriorly to the iliopubic tract posteriorly.

The LCFA, after arising from the profunda femoris artery, travels deep to the rectus femoris and divides into three branches: ascending, transverse, and descending. The descending branch of the LCFA travels along the medial edge of vastus lateralis muscle in the intermuscular septum, giving off perforators that supply the anterolateral thigh skin. The ALT flap provides a long pedicle (8 to 16 cm) with adequate vessel lumen diameter (2 to 2.5 mm). The flap drains via two venae comitantes that accompany the arterial pedicle. The ALT flap can also be harvested as a sensate flap by including the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve in the flap design, or even as a functional muscle flap by including the branch of the femoral nerve that innervates the vastus lateralis.

**Lateral Thigh Flap**

The lateral thigh flap is perfused by a pedicle based on the LCFA, mainly the ascending and transverse branches (tensor fasciae latae perforator vessels). This flap is classically employed for the reconstruction of ischial and trochanteric pressure sores. It can also be based on the ALT perforator vessels (descending branch of LCFA) or applied to perineal and abdominal wall reconstruction as a pedicled flap.