The American Dental Association (ADA) defines dental emergencies as a collection of potentially life-threatening diagnoses requiring immediate treatment to stop bleeding, remedy the infection, and alleviate severe pain. However, not all dental emergencies put life in danger. A dental emergency also refers to any problem affecting teeth or supporting tissues that require immediate action to prevent biological, functional, or aesthetic complications.

Pain is usually the most common presenting complaint.

The management of a dental emergency should be focused on immediate concerns to relieve symptoms, such as pain or bleeding, and then to evaluate what is required next. Because the definition of a dental emergency encompasses many diagnoses, it is helpful to organize the evaluation and treatment of dental emergencies into three categories: traumatic, infectious, and post-procedural.

**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Traumatic dental emergencies include tooth fractures, luxations, and avulsions. Traumatic dental injuries are all sustained by the direct or indirect impact on the dentition or surrounding structures.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Infectious dental emergencies in their early stages are localized and treatable. However, if they are not managed correctly, there is a risk of contiguous bacterial spread into the deep spaces of the neck or mediastinum or facial sinuses and brain, resulting in life-threatening infections and airway compromise.

Almost all dental infections begin with dental caries. Dental caries is highly prevalent - experienced by nearly 100% of adults worldwide.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-procedural Bleeding**

The most common post-procedural emergency seen in dental practice is post-extraction bleeding, which persists longer than eight to twelve hours after a dental extraction.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

Commonly known as "dry socket," alveolar osteitis is a common post-extraction complication characterized by persistent severe pain at the extraction site. Though the pathophysiology is not fully understood, the absence or loss of the fibrin clot at the extraction socket exposes an area of the alveolar bone, which causes prolonged pain and often leads to multiple dental visits for symptomatic relief.

Considering dental emergencies within the above categories will help healthcare team members better evaluate and treat patients while improving overall outcomes.