Hepatitis A is an infectious disease caused by the hepatitis A virus (HAV), which is a distinct member of the picornavirus family. HAV is a 27- to 32-nm spherical particle with cubic symmetry, contains a linear ssRNA genome that has a size of 7.5 kb.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes the hepatitis B. HBV is a hepadnavirus and has a double-stranded DNA genome with a size of 3.2 kb.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes hepatitis C. HCV is a member of the Flaviviridae family and is a 60-nm spherical particle, enveloped, and contains a single-stranded RNA genome with a size of 9.4 kb.

HIV is a retrovirus that comprises two subtypes: HIV-1 that is the most prevalent worldwide and most common etiological agent of AIDS. HIV-2 that primarily affects West Africa.

Human T-lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1) is a human retrovirus well-known to cause adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and  HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP).

Malaria is an infectious illness caused by parasites of the Plasmodium genus. It is primarily transmitted by bites of female mosquitoes of Anopheles species. It may transmit by blood transfusion collected from asymptomatic or parasitic donors with low parasite densities. Erythrocyte concentrate, along with fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate and platelet concentrate are involved in the genesis of transfusion-transmitted malaria.

Trypanosoma cruzi causes Chagas disease and is endemic in Latin America where it is primarily a problem in the context of blood transfusion transmission. Trypanosoma****is a genus of kinetoplastids and belongs to a group of unicellular parasitic flagellate protozoa.

West Nile virus infection (WNVI) is a vector-borne disease caused by West Nile virus (WNV), an enveloped ssRNA virus within the family Flaviviridae that impose a threat to many transfusion services worldwide.