The most common cause of PNIs (46%) is motor vehicle crashes (MVC) followed by motorcycle crashes (9.9%).

There are multiple possible mechanisms of acute PNIs. These include

- Stretch-related injuries, the most common type, happen when the stretching forces overcome the nerve’s elasticity. These injuries can be either isolated nerve injuries or associated with fractures of the extremities. They usually do not affect the continuity of nerve elements but may occasionally lead to complete loss of continuity, such as brachial plexus avulsion injuries.

- Laceration injuries caused by sharp objects (e.g., knives or blades) are the second most common type. They typically produce a partial loss of continuity, but complete loss of continuity is also possible.

- The third common type of PNI is compression injuries. Despite complete nerve continuity preservation, they can result in total loss of both motor and sensory nerve functions. Both ischemia and mechanical deformation, from direct compression effect, are thought to contribute to the injuries. Mechanical deformation is the main culprit in the more severe cases where neurological deficits last longer and may not necessarily show complete recovery. On the other hand, short term ischemia lasting less than 8 hours does not appear to cause any irreversible deficits and is not associated with any significant histological changes.

- Other less common mechanisms include thermal injury or ischemia due to a vascular injury.

- A combination of injury mechanisms may present.

It merits mentioning that some of the nerves are more vulnerable to injury due to their anatomical course (superficial and close to a bony structure and/or joint, so they are amenable to compression or stretching). For example, radial nerve (passes along the spiral groove of humerus shaft) injury due to improper prolonged sitting position on a chair or what is so-called “Saturday night palsy.”

Moreover, acute nerve injury can be associated with bone fractures. The injury can be primary (at the time of fracture) or secondary, which can be iatrogenic or from scar or callus formation. Radial nerve injury is associated with humeral shaft fracture and considered the most common peripheral nerve injury related to bone fracture (more than 10% of the cases).