Cardiovascular risks that arise with the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus include hypertension, dyslipidemia and may eventually lead to significant adverse cardiovascular events (MACE). In an effort to decrease these cardiovascular risks, clinicians and patients must work together to address glycemic control, as well as diet, exercise, and smoking cessation. Further recommendations include intensive hypertension and dyslipidemia control. Achieving this multifaceted goal with specific targets requires an interprofessional team to manage the care of these patients.

Though the cardiologist is generally the specialist to address various pathways to decrease cardiovascular risks in type 2 diabetic patients, patients with these co-morbidities require the help and expertise of many other professionals, operating as an interprofessional team. Pharmacists play a prominent role in medication reconciliation and ensuring medication interactions do not occur. They are also responsible for keeping the clinicians accountable for the appropriate use of pharmacologic agents to manage diabetes to ensure contraindications are not violated. Certified Diabetes Care and Education Specialists (CDCES) play an integral part in patient education regarding medication management, lifestyle changes, and self-monitoring to help identify adverse effects if and when they occur. Clinical nurses can work with the interprofessional team by providing additional patient counseling regarding their medications, compliance with treatment plans, and self-monitoring. Primary providers and/or endocrinologists can provide additional recommendations for implementing intensified type 2 diabetes treatment when target goals are not met.

Agents such as SGLT-2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists provide novel tools with different mechanisms to address glycemic control and minimize cardiovascular risks for patients at high risk of adverse outcomes. These relatively recent drug classes, when used with insulin, other antidiabetes medications where necessary, lipid-lowering therapy, and antihypertensive medications, can significantly reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality for patients with diabetes, provide appropriate glycemic control, and enhance patient outcomes and quality of life.

This interprofessional team approach, utilizing open communication channels and coordinated patient care efforts, will drive optimal patient outcomes for diabetes management as well as its potential cardiovascular sequelae and reduce the potential for adverse events from the disease process itself or inappropriate therapeutic interventions, thus ensuring the best possible patient results.[Level 5]