The primary feature of crescentic glomerulonephritis is the rupture of the basement membrane followed by extra capillary fibrin precipitate, and this, followed by the proliferation of parietal cells and formed capsular proliferate in a crescent shape. Hence, the name of crescentic GN. Each disease leads to this pathway in different ways:

In anti-GBM disorder, there are circulating antibodies; usually, IgG directed against an antigen present in the GBM and/or alveolar basement membrane, specifically the non-collagenous domain of alpha-3 chain of type IV collagen

In another 10 to 15% of cases are associated with the immune complex deposition in the glomerular capillary tufts. The mechanism is either by the formation of the immune complex in the circulation and getting deposited at the glomerular capillary tuft or production of this immune complex in situ in the glomerular capillary wall. The antigen associated with the immune complex formation is heterogeneous, either exogenous (virus/bacteria) or autogenous (nuclear antigens/tumor antigens). Immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis is often due to multisystem disease (lupus), or it can arise as a complication of another primary glomerulonephritis (membranous GN/C3 GN).

Fifty to 80% of cases are involved with the anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). The ANCA is either directed against myeloperoxidase (MPO), proteinase 3 (PR3), or both. When MPO and PR3 are both involved, it usually suggests drug-induced pathogenesis. The precise mechanism by which ANCA arises is not clear, but it is evident that autoantibodies activate neutrophils to injure the glomerular capillary wall. There is the activation of local as well as systemic complement, mainly through an alternative pathway. Cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor alfa, also play a significant role in the pathogenesis. Also, there are the production of anti-plasminogen and plasminogen activator autoantibodies, which can inhibit fibrinolysis and predispose to fibrinoid necrosis and thrombophilia.

Ultimately, there is the proliferation of parietal and visceral epithelial cells, polymerization of fibrin, infiltration of monocyte/macrophages and t-cells, and myofibroblast cell invasion from the interstitium forming glomerular crescents. The interleukin-1 (IL-1), TNF- alfa, macrophage chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), macrophage inflammatory factor (MIF), Tumor growth factor-beta production play a role in the whole process.