Obtaining thorough details in history and performing a comprehensive physical examination is important in determining whether the infection was acquired before admission or whether it is a hospital-acquired infection. Important pieces of history, such as subjective fever, chills, and night sweats, may indicate that the infection was not hospital-acquired. Common infectious symptoms include fever, chills, altered mental status, productive cough, shortness of breath, palpitations, abdominal pain, flank pain, suprapubic pain, polyuria, dysuria, and diarrhea. Vital signs can reflect signs of systemic inflammatory response or sepsis. These include hypothermia or hyperthermia, tachypnea, tachycardia, and hypotension. Examination of external devices such as tracheostomies, endotracheal tubes, foley catheters, intravascular lines, insulin pumps, and pacemakers/ defibrillators is essential. Supplementing the examination of external devices is the information on the location and placement of the device (duration and setting).

Central lines placed hastily during emergencies need to be re-evaluated and possibly replaced within 24 hours to 48 hours, especially in the context of aseptic conditions during placement of the line or a new fever during hospitalization. Central venous catheters are considered the primary source of hospital-acquired bloodstream infections. The other sources of bloodstream infections are catheter-associated urinary tract infections and ventilator-associated Pneumonia. The surgical sites and breaches in skin integrity should be examined daily for any signs of evolving infection. Thorough and serial examinations go a long way in identifying brewing infections in early phases, containing the infections, and minimizing complications. Careful examination of abdomen and stool samples is often needed in evaluation for clostridium difficile infection.