The management of dyspnea proceeds via one or more of several broad mechanisms. Decreasing respiratory impedance and reducing hypoxemia are treatments aimed at any underlying pulmonary pathophysiology. Other interventions can target reducing the respiratory drive and reducing the resistive load on the respiratory muscles. Altering the central perception of dyspnea at the level of the sensory cortex or brainstem can decrease the intensity and discomfort. Addressing any affective components of dyspnea, such as anxiety, is an important component of treatment.

There are pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatments. Pharmacologic interventions can be thought of as disease-modifying when they treat the underlying disease that triggered the dyspnea. A symptom-based approach aims to reduce awareness of the intensity and discomfort of dyspnea.

**Disease-Modifying Medications**

Diuretics treat fluid overload in congestive heart failure, renal failure, and hepatic failure.

Beta-adrenergic agonists and muscarinic antagonists can reduce symptoms in advanced stages of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Oxygen administration can improve dyspnea but only in patients with hypoxemia.

**Symptom-Based Medications**

Opioids are considered a mainstay of treatment for dyspnea. The evidence is most robust regarding the use of immediate-release morphine. Opioids, via the mu-opioid receptors, reduce air hunger discomfort but less the discomfort of the increased effort to breathe. It is theorized that morphine decreases spontaneous respiratory drive and the sensitivity of the central breathing center. Opioids may also affect the cortical processing of dyspnea as they do in the setting of pain.

The use of benzodiazepines reduces the anxiety often associated with dyspnea, but not the sensation of dyspnea.

Nebulized furosemide has some evidence of efficacy in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is thought to activate pulmonary mechanoreceptors. In animal models, inhaled furosemide increases the activity of pulmonary vagal stretch receptors.

Nebulized lidocaine or morphine has no evidence of benefit.

Dexamethasone may be useful to improve dyspnea in lung cancer patients or those with COPD.

Mirtazapine has been shown to have some beneficial effects for patients with chronic dyspnea.

**Non-Pharmacologic Therapies**

Non-invasive ventilation may provide symptomatic improvement in those with increased work of breathing but is less helpful in situations of VQ mismatch or alveolar-arterial diffusion defects.

Cold air and the use of fans blowing air on the face can significantly improve dyspnea. Sensory afferents may mediate this effect in the second and third branches of the trigeminal nerve. Supplemental oxygen has only been shown to be useful in patients with hypoxia.

Pulmonary rehabilitation has proven beneficial, with exercise being the most beneficial component.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy and anxiety-reduction techniques can address affective components.

Caregiver education emphasizes patient positioning, a personal crisis plan, and the use of pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic options that may help reduce anxiety and provide an increased sense of control. Additionally, caregiver participation in dedicated support groups may help with coping.