**Scapholunate Dissociation**

Standard hand views (PA, lateral, obliques) should be routinely performed on any patient with a history and physical examination suggestive of a scapholunate ligament injury. The standard radiographs should be obtained by focussing the beam over the radiocarpal joint with the wrist in a neutral position (mid-position between supination and pronation).

Radiographic evaluation:

- Scapholunate interval widening (PA view)

- normally ≤2 mm
- >3 to 5 mm suggestive of SL dissociation
- can be accentuated with a clenched-fist view

- Scaphoid cortical ring sign (PA view)
- occurs with excessive scaphoid flexion causing interposition of the distal and proximal poles

- Scapholunate angle (lateral view) 

- normal is 45 to 60 degrees 
- SL angle >70 degrees indicative of SL dissociation

Sometimes, even after severe injury, the standard radiographs can be normal. In such cases of suspected wrist instability, the wrist should be subjected to maximum loading while performing the radiographs.

Wrist arthrography can also be done as it has a high sensitivity for detecting the presence of communication defects. It is recommended that the wrist arthrography should be followed by a subsequent MRI and CT examination of the wrist. If further evaluation is needed, diagnostic wrist arthroscopy can be considered.

**Lunotriquetral Dissociation**

Work-up for lunotriquetral dissociation also consists of radiography, arthrogram, MRI, and diagnostic wrist arthroscopy. Radiographs should be performed first. Isolated injury to the lunotriquetral ligament typically has normal static radiographs. Radiographic evidence for instability may only be present on stressed radiographs.

Radiographic evaluation:

- Disruption in the proximal Gilula line (PA view)

- due to proximal translation of the triquetrum and/or lunotriquetral overlap

- Lunotriquetral interval narrowing/subchondral cyst formation (PA view)

- suggestive of chronic injury

- Lunotriquetral angle (lateral view)

- normal -3 to 31 degrees
- becomes more negative (average -16 degrees) with lunotriquetral dissociation

- Radial deviation stress view (lateral view)

- increased flexion of the scaphoid and lunate without a change in triquetrum position

An arthrogram can be performed using fluoroscopy, CT scan, or MRI. This study should be interpreted cautiously as normal wrists can have "abnormal" findings, especially in patients with ulnar-positive variance wrists. Up to 13% of normal wrists can show communication of the radiocarpal and mid-carpal joints, which can also occur after a lunotriquetral ligament injury. In another study, 59% of patients with unilateral ulnar-sided pain and a suspected tear of the lunotriquetral ligament based on arthrography had similar findings in the contralateral, asymptomatic wrist.

Wrist MRI may be inconclusive, and a negative MRI does not exclude a lunotriquetral ligament tear.