**Initial Diagnosis**

18-FDG PET-CT is one of the most accurate methods for diagnosing the primary HNC lesion. The lesion cannot be assessed via visual inspection with or without concurrent vision-guided biopsy. The sensitivity and specificity of PET-CT for identifying inspection-occult oropharyngeal SCC have been measured as being over 90%. According to the NCCN, PET-CT is indicated for initial diagnosis for the following types of physical-exam occult HNC: oral cavity, oropharynx, glottic larynx, supraglottic larynx, ethmoid sinus, and maxillary sinus.

For suspected primary HNC that is occult on physical exam and is occult or indeterminate on CT or MRI that may be present in level 4 or lower 5 lymph nodes, the NCCN recommends PET-CT.

**Cancer Staging**

PET-CT can be used for cancer staging.

The NCCN recommends PET-CT as the imaging modality of choice to detect neck lymph node locoregional metastasis.

For detection of distant metastases in the setting of HNC that has clinical features suggesting it may have spread beyond the neck, the NCCN recommends PET-CT as the first-line imaging modality, except in the setting of nasopharynx cancer, where the NCCN says that chest CT with contrast is an equivalent option.

PET-CT has low sensitivity and specificity for detecting brain metastases, and therefore MRI is a more appropriate imaging modality for that indication. Additionally, PET-CT has a low specificity for differentiating distant SCC metastases from concurrent melanomas, high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas, and adenocarcinomas.

**Surveillance Using PET-CT Post-treatment/Therapy**

PET-CT can be superior to CT and MRI for distinguishing between tumor persistence/recurrence and benign inflammation in the correct clinical context.

Although some data from non-clinical trials have suggested imaging as early as 6 weeks following an attempt at definitive surgical resection for HNC, the NCCN recommends surveillance (re-staging) PET-CT 12 weeks after such an attempt. If after 12 weeks the PET-CT indicates negative results and the patient is asymptomatic, then no further imaging is recommended unless new signs or symptoms occur. If after 12 weeks the PET-CT is ambiguous, then the NCCN recommends obtaining a subsequent PET-CT or subsequent CT if no biopsy is performed.

For HNC patients initially treated with induction (also known as neoadjuvant) chemotherapy prior to an attempt at definitive surgical or other treatment, the NCCN states that either PET-CT or CT may be used to monitor for locoregional or distant metastasis progression to aid in the decision whether to offer an attempt at definitive therapy.

For locoregionally advanced HNC in which no surgery is offered, but an attempt at cure is made with radiation and chemotherapy, the NCCN recommends assessing for residual disease with PET-CT 3 to 6 months after treatment. PET-CT performed prior to 12 weeks after chemotherapy and radiation tend to result in false-positive interpretations and therefore should be avoided. In addition, if imaging is delayed after six months, PET-CT has not been found to offer a diagnostic advantage over other imaging modalities.

For post-treatment surveillance after 6 months, there is no PET-CT algorithm that has been proven to increase survival or other meaningful outcomes compared to CT or MRI. Therefore, the NCCN suggests that PET-CT could be performed at a 12 or 24-month interval post-treatment. However, if the result of a 3-month PET-CT scan is negative for cancer, then the NCCN consensus is that there is likely no value added by obtaining additional scans at longer intervals.