These spinal dysraphisms are due to incomplete closure of the posterior spinal elements and typically occur between 17 and 30 days of fetal development. The process of neuralization occurs in two phases, primary and secondary neuralization. Primary neuralization refers to the closure of the neural tube forming the brain and spinal cord. Secondary neuralization involves the formation of the caudal structures of the neural tube forming the sacral and coccygeal portion. These caudal structures develop around day 26 of gestation and closure failure of these portions results in varying degrees of spinal dysraphisms.

Defects in neural tube development are thought to be multifactorial including environmental and genetic influences. The most common environmental cause is folate deficiency with most cases deemed “folic acid-sensitive”. Programs for dietary folate fortification have been implemented across the globe which have decreased prevalence of anencephaly and spina bifida by 28%. Other environmental risk factors include maternal obesity, maternal diabetes, and teratogens such as valproic acid. Valproic acid has the highest association with the development of NTDs carrying about a tenfold increase in risk. Some genetic factors have also been correlated with poor neuralization including several chromosomal syndromes and genetic polymorphism. Research has implicated polymorphism of the gene encoding the MTHFR enzyme, involved in folate metabolism, as a likely genetic risk factor. While NTDs are typically isolated defects, some are associated with chromosomal syndromes, most often Trisomy 13 and 18.