Glomerulonephritis is associated with a systemic disease; it is mostly resolved by managing the underlying cause. Primary glomerulonephritis is managed supportively and by specific disease-modifying therapy. The outcome mainly depends on the timely intervention, which, if not done, may lead to a progressive sequence of events causing glomerulonephritis to develop into chronic kidney disease (increasing the risk for simultaneous development of cardiovascular disease), the sequence finally culminates into end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

The management of glomerulonephritis broadly follows two modalities.

A) Specific management revolves around immunosuppression, which in turn is governed by factors like:

- Histological diagnosis

- Disease severity

- Disease progression

- Comorbidities

The available options include:

- High-dose corticosteroids

- Rituximab (a monoclonal antibody that causes the lysis of B-lymphocytes)

- Cytotoxic agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide, along with glucocorticoids are of value in severe cases of post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis)

- Plasma exchange (glomerular proliferative nephritis, pauci-immune glomerulonephritis – used temporarily till chemotherapy takes effect)

B) With progression into chronicity, general management is done on the lines of chronic kidney disease:

- Keeping track of the renal function tests (RFTs), serum albumin, and urine protein excretion rate.

- By controlling the BP and inhibiting the renin-angiotensin axis through Loop diuretics, which serve two purposes; the removal of excess fluid and the correction of hypertension. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) are frequently the first choice for managing hypertension and chronic kidney disease (CKD). Angiotensin 2 receptor blockers (ARBs) have been found to halt CKD progression in diabetic or nondiabetic renal disease cases, much like ACEIs.

- For individuals with severe/refractory hypertension with/without encephalopathy, vasodilators (e.g., nitroprusside and nifedipine) can be used.

- Clinicians can manage the complications associated with progressive chronic disease, including anemia, bone mineral disorders, acidosis, cardiovascular disease, and restless legs/cramps.

- Appropriate counseling regarding diet.

- Preparation for renal replacement therapy (RRT), if needed.

**Nephritic****Glomerulonephritis**

IgA nephropathy: ACE inhibitors/ARBs (3 to 6 months) are used as they reduce proteinuria. Corticosteroids and fish oil can be prescribed if proteinuria exceeds 1 gm (provided GFR>50) even after the initial therapy. Henoch Schonlein purpura (HSP) is managed on the same lines. Steroids are also helpful for gastrointestinal tract (GIT) related symptoms here.

Post Streptococcal GN: Supportive treatment and antibiotics to get rid of nephritogenic bacteria.

Anti-GBM Disease: The available options include plasma exchange, corticosteroids, rituximab, and cyclophosphamide.

Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN): RPGN is treated with corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide.

Plasma exchange is used for anti-GBM/ANCA vasculitis.

For lupus nephritis, monoclonal antibodies, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, corticosteroids, and other immunomodulatory drugs can be used in various combinations.

**Nephrotic Glomerulonephritis**

Minimal change disease: Prednisolone 1 mg/kg (4 to 16 weeks). If relapsing, immunosuppression with greater intensity or for longer durations are options. Cyclophosphamide and calcineurin inhibitors are effective options.

Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis: Treatment is done initially with ACE inhibitors/ARBs and by controlling BP. Calcineurin inhibitors, plasma exchange, corticosteroids, and rituximab are helpful treatment options.

Membranoproliferative GN: Treatment is done initially with ACE inhibitors/ARBs and by controlling BP. Immunosuppression is useful if no underlying cause is found. Work is currently ongoing to block or modify C3 activation.