**Radiation**

As limb-sparing resections of soft tissue sarcomas began to replace amputations in the 1970s, they were associated with high local recurrence rates. Radiotherapy was seen as a means of maintaining high rates of local control while preserving limb function. Several randomized studies from the 1980s to the early 2000s demonstrated that incorporating radiotherapy with limb-sparing surgery resulted in acceptable rates of local recurrence and equivalent disease-free and overall survival.

Radiotherapy can be incorporated into any phase of treatment for STS of the trunk and extremities (i.e., pre-operatively, post-operatively, intraoperatively, and concurrently with chemotherapy).

**External Beam Radiotherapy (EBRT)**

External beam radiotherapy is the most common means of treating sarcomas. It can be delivered definitively, pre or post-operatively using a 3D conformal or intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). It can also be given concurrently with chemotherapy

The initial data supporting the use of radiotherapy for operable sarcoma is from the limb-sparing trials performed in the 1980s. While a limb-sparing approach offered a better chance at preserving function, it was at the expense of higher local recurrence rates ranging from 25% to 60%.

The dosing of radiotherapy depends on the margin status, resectability, and timing—patients with resectable high and intermediate-grade sarcomas where pre-operative radiotherapy is planned. A dose of 50Gy over 25 fractions is typically delivered. An adjuvant boost may still be needed if there is a positive margin (R1 or R2). For an R1 and R2 resection, the dose is 14 to 20Gy. Patients that receive adjuvant radiotherapy without pre-operative radiotherapy typically use doses of 60 to 70 Gy depending on margin status.

External beam radiotherapy requires the patient to undergo a CT simulation. Immobilization of the affected limb using custom casting is critical for targeting and day-to-day set-up accuracy and should also allow for as many potential beam angles as possible. This becomes important, especially if IMRT is used. For upper extremity tumors, abduction of the arm away from the body and either supinating or pronating the arm, depending on the location of the tumor, is appropriate. Alternatively, the patient is placed prone in a" swimmers position with the arm extended above the head. For lower extremity tumors, if the tumor is in the medial compartment of the thigh, then the patient can be placed supine in a "frog leg" position. This allows for a reduction in skin folds, places distance between the genitalia and the thigh, and separation with the contralateral leg. Tumors in the posterior or anterior compartment of the thigh will be more challenging to set up. One approach is to have the patient in the decubitus position with the legs separated. Of course, appropriate shielding of the genitals will be necessary, and the dose will be monitored. Fertility counseling should be offered to any patient with radiation fields in close proximity to the genitals. MRI fusion, specifically the T1 with contrast and T2 sequences, to the CT simulation is critical to ensure the volumes drawn are accurate.

For pre-operative radiotherapy, target delineation using the CT/MRI fusion is essential. The gross tumor volume (GTV) is drawn from the T1 contrast-enhanced weighted MRI. Traditionally, the clinical target volumes (CTV) are contoured, and the expansions placed on them are quite generous. The CTV includes the GTV plus a 4 cm longitudinal and 1.5 cm radial margins along with any peritumoral edema on T2 weighted MRI. The planning target volume (PTV) expansions are typically 0.5 to 1.0 cm. RTOG 0630 sought to reduce the late toxicities related to pre-operative radiotherapy using daily image guidance with cone beam CT and reduced margins based on size and grade.

Postoperative radiotherapy is more technically challenging from a planning perspective due to the surgical manipulation of the tissue. Pre-operative and postoperative imaging is required and should be incorporated into treatment planning. The GTV should encompass the original site of the tumor, excluding air and uninvolved tissue. A low and high-dose CTV volume is created. The low dose CTV consists of the GTV plus a 4 cm longitudinal and 1.5 cm radial margins, edema, drains, scars, and any surgically disturbed tissues. The high-dose CTV volume consists of the post-op GTV with a 1 to 2 cm margin in the longitudinal plane and a 1.5 cm margin in the transverse plane. The PTV is typically a 0.5 to 1.0 cm expansion of the CTVs. The VORTEX trial is a randomized trial currently investigating the use of smaller volumes in the postoperative setting using a 2 cm all-around margin rather than the conventional 5 cm longitudinal and 1 to 2 cm radial margins (NCT00423618). Due to the small number of events, it was impossible to determine if the experimental arm had inferior local recurrence.

Treatment delivery can be accomplished with various techniques, including a simple anterior-posterior/posterior-anterior (AP/PA) to IMRT, depending on the tumor's location relative to other organs at risk. Significant dose constraints include weight-bearing bone V50 < 50%, joints V50Gy < 50%, femoral head/neck V60 < 5% and no more than 50% of a longitudinal stripe of skin should receive more than 20Gy.

**Brachytherapy**

Brachytherapy (BRT) is typically utilized post-operatively as either monotherapy combined with external beam radiotherapy as a boost, as well as for recurrent disease. It offers the advantage of being highly conformal, thus limiting dose to adjacent structures through optimizing dwell-time positions. It may be delivered at a high dose rate (HDR - > 12 Gy/hr), low dose rate (LDR – 0.4 to 2 Gy/hr), or pulsed dose rate (PDR).

Patients with resected high and intermediate-grade sarcomas treated with adjuvant LDR BRT monotherapy have superior local control rates compared to resection alone (70% vs. 91%), but this was not seen with low-grade sarcomas.

Brachytherapy dosing will depend on the technique (LDR or HDR), margin status, and the use of EBRT. When used as monotherapy for high/intermediate grade sarcomas with negative margins, the dose is 45 to 50 Gy for LDR and 30 to 54Gy in 2 to 4.5Gy/fraction delivered twice daily.

High-quality imaging is essential to radiotherapy planning, especially in sarcoma patients. MRI is the preferred imaging modality as it allows for superior soft tissue resolution. Pre and postoperative imaging are needed to identify both tumor extent, involvement of neurovascular structures, and edema when done pre-operatively and to identify positive margins, close margins, and the extent of the surgical bed when done post-operatively.

If brachytherapy is planned, the patient will have the catheters implanted in the operating room along the surgical site, ideally with a spacing of 1 to 1.5cm, and should avoid drastic changes in curvature. The catheters should not be placed directed on top of critical structures, no crossing catheters, or displacement of tissue. The catheters are implanted in parallel to one another to form a single plane, but it is possible to have multiplane implants as well. The catheters will need to cover at least 2cm along the muscle and 1cm radially along the muscle and tumor bed. They should also be placed 5mm deep to muscles involved over the intact fascial plane and > 5 mm away from critical structures.

Treatment typically commences within 2 to 4 days post-op**.**The patient will undergo CT-based planning, and target delineation is guided by the operative report and MRI imaging. The clinical target volume (CTV) should encompass the entire tumor bed with a≥ 2 cm longitudinal margin and a ≥ 1cm radial margin.