**General Surgical Risks**

- Infection (antibiotics are usually given at induction with two postoperative doses)

- Bleeding

- Neurovascular injury

- DVT/PE

- Anesthetic risks

- MI/Stroke/Death

**Specific Risks**

**Infection**

Sepsis can occur in up to 20% of cases and can result from superficial or deep infection. Healthcare professionals believe the presence of hematoma increases this risk.

**Fixation Failure**

This is more likely to occur in patients with pathological bone, for example, as a result of rheumatoid arthritis or osteoporosis. It can occur as a result of technical errors while operating. Loosening or dislocation can occur following a hemiarthroplasty.

**Fracture**

It is estimated that there is a 4.5% risk of fracture in hemiarthroplasty procedures. They are most likely to occur on reduction of the hip and commonly affect the neck or greater trochanter.

**VTE/DVT/Blood clots**

**Fat Embolism**

As discussed, this is a potential complication of pressurizing cemented stems and nailing. Hypoxia may be noted during pressurization or on the reduction of the hip. The risk can be minimized by adequate lavage and drying of the femoral canal.

**Leg Length Discrepancy**

This can occur with any of the procedures. A small difference can usually be managed with a shoe lift if problematic.

**Non-Union (DHS/IM nail)**

Patients may re-present with groin or buttock pain approximately 12 months following fixation. Pain is worse on hip extension or with weight bearing. It is thought to affect up to 25% of displaced fractures and 5% of undisplaced fractures. Management is either with total hip replacement in the elderly or consideration for proximal femoral osteotomy in the young.

**Dislocation**

This is a specific complication of hemiarthroplasty. In general, THA for treating femoral neck fracture demonstrates a higher relative postoperative dislocation rate than patients undergoing an elective, primary THA procedure.

**Avascular Necrosis**

This can occur in up to 10% of undisplaced fractures and 30% to 45% of displaced fractures. Patients typically present with groin pain; there may be signs of sclerosis on radiographs. Management typically involves conversion to a total hip replacement, but alternatives such as osteotomy or core decompression may be considered in younger patients.

**Malunion**

There is an incidence of 5% to 30%. Varus malreduction following cannulated screw fixation correlates with fixation failure.

**Fixation Failure Rates**

- High early failure rates in the surgical fixation groups

- Rates stabilize by two years postoperative 
- Two-year follow-up (elderly population older than 70 years) with displaced femoral neck fractures

- Forty-six percent following surgical fixation versus 8% following reconstruction techniques (THA or hemiarthroplasty)


- Two- to 10-year follow-up

- The failure rate is approximately 2% to 4%, respectively

- Overall failure rates are still higher in arthroplasty at a 10-year follow-up

**Death**

Mortality is approximately 30% in the elderly in the first year following a fractured neck of the femur.