As a commonly used drug, researchers have conducted numerous studies on the adverse effects of indomethacin. Mentioned are adverse reactions from the product label. Indomethacin (and most other NSAIDs) can impact most body organ systems, including the gastrointestinal, neurological, renal, hematologic, and cardiopulmonary systems.

- The most common adverse reactions are headache, dizziness, dyspepsia, and nausea. It is essential to recognize that indomethacin is used for various headache disorders, and one of the most common adverse reactions is a headache.

- Hypersensitivity reactions have been noted to occur because of indomethacin, including anaphylaxis, urticaria, and angioedema.

- As previously mentioned, indomethacin is a non-selective COX inhibitor, and COX-1 produces prostaglandins to maintain the gastric mucosa. Inhibition of this process can result in dyspepsia (indigestion), nausea, constipation, and diarrhea. However, the most severe gastric side effect of indomethacin involves the formation of peptic ulcers. Peptic ulcers can present as mid-epigastric pain that is either relieved or exacerbated by eating, depending on their location- the pain with gastric ulcers is exacerbated by eating. In contrast, the pain associated with duodenal ulcers is relieved by eating. Ulcers can rupture and result in an acute surgical abdomen.

- Indomethacin can also affect the liver resulting in elevated liver enzymes and jaundice.

- Indomethacin can also impact the neurologic system resulting in tinnitus, vertigo, depression, dizziness, and headaches. Severe adverse reactions have also been demonstrated, including aseptic meningitis, psychosis, and cognitive dysfunction.

- COX enzymes are responsible for the synthesis of prostaglandins involved in renal function. Inhibition of this process can result in renal insufficiency. Indomethacin can also result in hyperkalemia and acute interstitial nephritis. Therefore, the elderly population and patients with dehydration, hypovolemia, renal dysfunction, heart failure, impaired liver function, and those taking diuretics, ACE inhibitors, or ARBs are at higher risk of developing adverse events.

- Indomethacin can have several effects on the hematologic system, including agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, hemolytic anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and thrombocytopenic purpura. Indomethacin-induced leukocytoclastic vasculitis has been reported.

- Indomethacin can impact the cardiopulmonary system and result in acute respiratory distress, pulmonary edema, and congestive heart failure.

- Arachidonic acid is the precursor to prostaglandin synthesis via the COX enzymes; inhibition of COX enzymes results in the shunting of arachidonic acid to the leukotriene synthesis pathway, resulting in the formation of nasal polyps from indomethacin. This condition can also result in respiratory difficulties. Indomethacin can also result in generalized fatigue and somnolence.

**Boxed Warning**

- NSAIDs, including indomethacin, are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction and stroke.

- Indomethacin can increase the risk of serious GI bleeding, ulcers, and perforation

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- The use of indomethacin may decrease the therapeutic effects of several medicines used to treat cardiovascular conditions (e.g., ACE inhibitors, ARB inhibitors, or diuretics).In addition, fluid retention and edema have been reported in patients taking NSAIDs.

- NSAIDs can increase lithium levels; concurrent use of indomethacin with lithium should be avoided.

- NSAIDs, including indomethacin with oral apixaban, are associated with an increased risk of bleeding. Avoid concurrent administration combination.

- Concomitant use of indomethacin and methotrexate can increase methotrexate plasma levels. Monitor for signs of methotrexate toxicity.

- Indomethacin can decrease the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazide and reduce efficacy. There is an increased risk of acute kidney injury when NSAIDs are combined with diuretics.