SLE is a multisystem disease with several phenotypes. Clinical features may vary from a very mild disease with only mucocutaneous involvement to severe life-threatening disease with multiorgan involvement. All organ systems can be involved in SLE. An autoantibody profile can sometimes help predict the disease course and clinical features. Several studies have indicated the development of serological abnormalities several years before the onset of clinical lupus. This is termed pre-clinical lupus, where a patient may have serological abnormalities consistent with SLE and may have some clinical features but still does not meet the criteria for SLE. There is evidence that a significant percentage of these patients with pre-clinical lupus, including those with incomplete lupus or undifferentiated connective tissue disease, may transition to clinical lupus and fulfill the SLE criteria later in life.

**Constitutional Symptoms**

Constitutional symptoms are seen in more than 90% of patients with SLE and are often the initial presenting feature. Fatigue, malaise, fever, anorexia, and weight loss are common. While more than 40% of patients with SLE may have lupus flare as a cause of fever, infections must always be ruled out first, given the immunocompromised state of these patients. Further, SLE is an infrequent cause of fever of unknown origin.

**Mucocutaneous Manifestations**

More than 80% of patients with SLE suffer from mucocutaneous involvement, one of the most well-known and identified clinical features. SLE skin lesions may be lupus specific, while several nonspecific lesions are also seen. Lupus-specific lesions include (1). Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ACLE) includes localized, malar, and generalized, (2) Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) includes annular and papulosquamous, and (3) Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CCLE) includes classic discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE), hypertrophic/verrucous, lupus panniculitis/profundus, lupus tumidus, chilblains lupus, mucosal discoid lupus, and lichenoid discoid lupus.

Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ACLE) may be localized or generalized. The hallmark ACLE lesion is the malar rash or the butterfly rash, an erythematous raised pruritic rash involving the cheeks and nasal bridge. The rash may be macular or papular and spares the nasolabial folds (photoprotected). It usually has an acute onset but may last several weeks and cause induration and scaling. The malar rash may also fluctuate with lupus disease activity. Other rashes in this location that must be differentiated from ACLE malar rash include rosacea, erysipelas, seborrheic dermatitis, and perioral dermatitis. Generalized ACLE leads to widespread maculopapular or macular rash in a photosensitive pattern. ACLE lesions usually heal without scarring.

Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) rash is a photosensitive, widespread, nonscarring, nonindurated rash. SCLE may be either papulosquamous resembling psoriasis or an annular/polycystic lesion with central clearing and peripheral scaling. SCLE lesions may last several months but usually, heal without scarring. SCLE rash is seen in patients with a positive Anti-Ro (SSA) antibody in up to 90% of the cases. SCLE can also be caused by some drugs such as hydrochlorothiazide.

Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is the most common form of chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CCLE). DLE may occur with or without SLE and can be localized (only head and neck) or generalized (above and below the neck). The lesions are disk-shaped erythematous papules or plaques with adherent scaling and central clearing. DLE heals with scarring and can be associated with permanent alopecia when present on the scalp. Mucosal DLE lesions can be seen in the oral cavity, and these tend to be painful erythematous round lesions with white radiating hyperkeratotic striae. Hypertrophic DLE may mimic squamous cell carcinoma histologically. Lupus panniculitis can occur above the waist and is less likely associated with SLE. The lesions result in depressed areas, and when associated with DLE lesions overlying them, they are known as lupus profundus. Chilblains lupus presents with erythematous tender plaques on fingers and toes. Lupus tumidus lesions are erythematous, edematous smooth plaques without epidermal involvement.

Oral and nasal ulcers are common in SLE, and acutely, often are painless. They may present as gradual onset erythema, macule, petechiae, erosions, or ulcers involving any part of the oral cavity. The most common locations are the hard palate, the buccal mucosa, and the vermilion border. Photosensitivity is present in SLE in more than 90% of cases. It is characterized by abnormal skin reaction on exposure to ultraviolet A/B and visible light, a reaction that may last weeks to months. These patients also experience worsening of their systemic symptoms on sun exposure. Alopecia in SLE may be due to DLE (scarring), or the brittle, easily breaking lupus hair (non-scarring) in the temporal/parietal area.

Several other skin manifestations are seen in SLE that are not specific. These include cutaneous vasculitis (leukocytoclastic or urticarial), vasculopathy (livedo reticularis, superficial thrombophlebitis, Raynaud's phenomenon, erythromelalgia, periungual telangiectasia), sclerodactyly, rheumatoid nodules, calcinosis cutis, bullous lesions, urticaria, erythema multiforme, acanthosis nigricans, lichen planus, and leg ulcers.

**Musculoskeletal Manifestations**

Approximately 80 to 90% of patients with SLE suffer from musculoskeletal involvement at some point during their disease course and may range from mild arthralgias to deforming arthritis. Lupus arthritis is typically a non-erosive, symmetrical inflammatory polyarthritis affecting predominantly the small joints of the hands, knees, and wrists, although any joint can be involved. Jaccoud arthropathy results from the joint capsule and ligament laxity, leading to non-erosive deformities of the hands, including ulnar deviation and subluxation of the metacarpophalangeal joints that may mimic rheumatoid arthritis. Usually, these deformities are reducible, although rarely, they may become fixed. Avascular necrosis (with or without steroid use) can occur in up to 10% of patients with SLE and is usually bilateral and involves the hip joints. Inflammatory myopathy with histopathological features similar to but less striking than polymyositis has been seen in less than 10% of SLE cases. Patients with SLE are at high risk for the development of fibromyalgia, with incidences as high as 20% reported. Rheumatoid nodules have been reported in patients with SLE.

**Hematologic and reticuloendothelial manifestations:**

Anemia is present in more than 50 % of patients with SLE and most commonly is anemia of chronic disease. Other causes of anemia in SLE may include iron deficiency anemia, coomb's positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia, red blood cell aplasia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, which may be associated with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Leukopenia secondary to neutropenia or lymphopenia is also very frequent and severe. Thrombocytopenia can be mild or severe and may be associated with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and autoantibodies against platelets, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, or thrombopoietin receptor. Pancytopenia is not infrequent and may occasionally be associated with myelofibrosis. Soft non-tender lymphadenopathy is common in SLE, although rare cases of histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis have been reported (Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease). Splenomegaly is common in SLE, while splenic atrophy and asplenism have been reported.

**Neuropsychiatric Manifestations**

Both central (CNS) and peripheral (PNS) nervous systems may be involved in SLE in addition to several psychiatric manifestations, although the diagnosis can be difficult. The most common CNS manifestation is intractable headaches, reported in more than 50% of cases. Focal or generalized seizures may be seen, and are associated with disease activity, although they carry a favorable prognosis. Other CNS manifestations include aseptic meningitis, demyelinating syndrome including optic neuritis and myelitis, movement disorders such as chorea and cognitive dysfunction. Patients with SLE are also at high risk for ischemic strokes. Cranial and peripheral (sensorimotor, axonal) neuropathies, mononeuritis multiplex, autonomic neuropathies, and syndromes mimicking Guillain-Barré syndrome and Myasthenia gravis are the peripheral nervous system manifestations. Psychiatric manifestations are difficult to diagnose and manage and may range from depression and anxiety to frank psychosis.

**Renal Manifestations**

Lupus nephritis is a well-known and common complication of SLE. The involvement may range from mild subnephrotic proteinuria to diffuse progressive glomerulonephritis leading to chronic kidney damage. Lupus nephritis usually occurs early in the course of SLE. New-onset hypertension, hematuria, proteinuria, lower extremity edema, and elevation in creatinine shall raise suspicion for lupus nephritis. A biopsy is crucial in staging lupus nephritis and ruling out other causes. The six classes of lupus nephritis are mentioned in the histopathology section of this article. The biopsy findings dictate the treatment of lupus nephritis. The prognosis varies for each class, with an excellent prognosis for classes I and II and poor outcomes with classes III and IV. Class V usually carries a favorable prognosis except for complications of nephritis syndrome such as thromboembolism which are common in this class. Other renal manifestations may include thrombotic microangiopathy, interstitial nephritis, lupus vasculopathy, vasculitis, and arteriolosclerosis.

**Pulmonary Manifestations**

Pleuritis is the most common pulmonary manifestation and may not always be associated with pleural effusion. Other pulmonary manifestations include exudative pleural effusions, acute lupus pneumonitis with bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, an interstitial lung disease which may be nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) or usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), diffuse alveolar hemorrhage associated with capillaritis, pulmonary arterial hypertension, pulmonary embolism (with or without antiphospholipid antibody syndrome) and shrinking lung syndrome.

**Cardiovascular Manifestations**

SLE may involve any layer of the heart, including the pericardium, myocardium, endocardium, and even the coronary arteries. Pericarditis associated with exudative pericardial effusions is the most common cardiac manifestation. Cardiac tamponade is rare. Myocarditis is rare and is associated with anti-Ro (SSA) antibodies. Hydroxychloroquine-associated cardiomyopathy shall be ruled out, and this may occasionally require an endomyocardial biopsy. Valvular abnormalities, including Libman-Sacks endocarditis involving the mitral valve, are common and may be associated with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Patients with SLE are especially at high risk for coronary artery disease, either due to coronary vasculitis or more frequently due to generalized atherosclerosis.

**Gastrointestinal Manifestations**

Any part of the gastrointestinal tract may be involved in SLE. These manifestations include esophageal dysmotility (especially the upper one-third of the esophagus), mesenteric vasculitis, lupus enteritis, peritonitis and ascites, protein-losing enteropathy, pancreatitis, and lupoid hepatitis. Further, patients with SLE and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome can develop Budd-Chiari syndrome, mesenteric vessel thrombosis, and hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

**Pregnancy Complications**

SLE patients with positive antiphospholipid antibodies are at a high risk of spontaneous abortions and fetal loss, pre-eclampsia, and maternal thrombosis. Anti-Ro (SSA) and Anti-La (SSB) antibodies can cross the placenta leading to fetal heart block and neonatal lupus presenting with a photosensitive rash, cytopenias, and transaminitis. The risk is 2% with the first pregnancy but increases to 20% if there is a history of neonatal lupus in a past pregnancy. SLE usually flares in pregnancy, especially if the disease was uncontrolled in the six months preceding pregnancy. Lupus nephritis can be challenging to differentiate from pre-eclampsia, although several clinical and laboratory features (low complements, positive Anti-Ds-DNA antibody, normal serum uric acid level, and active urinary sediment) may help. Patients with more severe SLE manifestations such as pulmonary hypertension, severe cardiovascular disease, or cerebrovascular accident are especially at a very high risk of mortality during pregnancy.

**Other Manifestations**

Eye involvement is common, and keratoconjunctivitis sicca is frequently seen in SLE in the presence or absence of secondary Sjogren syndrome. Other ocular manifestations are retinal vasculitis, optic neuritis, uveitis, scleritis, peripheral ulcerative keratitis, and episcleritis. Patients with SLE are also more susceptible to drug-induced ocular damage, including steroid-induced glaucoma or cataract and hydroxychloroquine-induced maculopathy. Ear involvement may lead to sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Adrenal infarction secondary to adrenal vessel thrombosis may be seen in patients with SLE and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.

**Classification Criteria**

American College of Rheumatology (ACR) first developed the SLE classification criteria in 1971 and revised them in 1982 and 1997. The 1997 ACR criteria were further revised by the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) group in 2012.

The 1997 ACR criteria required 4 out of 11 criteria for the classification of SLE. The 11 criteria included were malar rash, discoid rash, photosensitivity, alopecia, Raynaud phenomenon, oral/nasal ulcers, arthritis (non-erosive arthritis involving 2 or more peripheral joints), serositis (pleurisy or pericarditis), renal disease (proteinuria greater than 500 mg daily or cellular RBC, granular, tubular, or mixed casts), hematologic disease (hemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis, or leukopenia less than 4000/mm3 on 2 or more occasions or lymphopenia less than 1500/mm3 on 2 or more occasions, or thrombocytopenia less than 100,000/mm3 in the absence of medications known to decrease platelets), neurologic disease (seizures or psychosis in the absence of an alternative explanation), immunologic criteria (Antiphospholipid antibodies present based on either an abnormal serum level of IgM or IgG anticardiolipin antibodies or a tested positive result for lupus anticoagulant or anti-DNA antibody or anti-Sm antibody or false-positive syphilis test with VDRL or RPR) and antinuclear antibody positivity in the absence of drugs known to cause drug-induced lupus.

The Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) criteria made notable changes to the 1997 ACR to improve clinical relevance. It requires at least one of the four criteria to be clinical and at least one of the four criteria to be immunologic. In addition, neurologic and immunologic criteria were expanded to include new information about SLE immunology. Further, patients with biopsy-proven nephritis and positive ANA or anti-double-stranded DNA could be directly classified as SLE even if they lacked any other criteria. Compared to the 1997 ACR criteria, the SLICC criteria have improved sensitivity and are considered more valid and clinically relevant.

In September 2019, the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) and the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) published new criteria for the classification of SLE. The EULAR/ACR criteria have a specificity of 93.4% and sensitivity of 96.1%, as opposed to 93.4% specificity and 82.8% sensitivity of the 1997 ACR criteria, and 83.7% specificity and 96.7% sensitivity of the 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) classification criteria. Each criterion is assigned points, from 2 to 10. Patients with 10 or more points and at least one clinical criterion are classified as having SLE.

Table 1. EULAR/ACR Clinical Domains and Criteria for SLE

**Domain**

**Criteria**

**Points**

Constitutional

Fever

2

Hematologic

Leukopenia

Thrombocytopenia

Autoimmune hemolysis

3

4

4

Neuropsychiatric

Delirium

Psychosis

Seizure

2

3

5

Mucocutaneous

Non-scarring alopecia

Oral ulcers

Subacute cutaneous **or**discoid lupus

Acute cutaneous lupus

2

2

4

6

Serosal

Pleural or pericardial effusion

Acute pericarditis

5

6

Musculoskeletal

Joint involvement

6

Renal

Proteinuria > 0.5 g/24 h

Renal biopsy class II or V lupus nephritis

Renal biopsy class III or IV lupus nephritis

4

8

10

Table 2. EULAR/ACR Immunologic Domains and Criteria for SLE

**Domain**

**Criteria**

**Points**

Antiphospholipid antibodies

Anticardiolipin antibodies **or**

Anti-β2GP1 antibodies **or**

Lupus anticoagulant

2

Complement proteins

Low C3 **or**low C4

Low C3 **and**low C4

3

4

SLE-specific antibodies

Anti-dsDNA antibody **or**

Anti-Smith antibody

6

It must be noted that these criteria are developed for research studies for the classification of patients and may not always be valid in the clinical setting. Therefore, while they can assist a physician in suspecting a diagnosis of SLE, they alone shall not be considered enough in confirming or ruling out a diagnosis of SLE, which is still a clinical diagnosis made by an expert while considering the whole clinical presentation along with serological and histopathological testing, and imaging.