Asthma is a very common disorder that affects people of all ages. Even the most well-controlled asthma patient can rapidly develop a serious attack that can be life-threatening. The condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a pulmonologist, internist, pharmacist, nurse practitioner, emergency room personnel, and an intensivist. The key to decreasing patient morbidity is education. At every opportunity, the patient must be told to control the environmental trigger factors and remain compliant with the prescribed medications. The pharmacist should regularly ask the patient about symptoms as it may reflect poor drug compliance or worsening of the disease. The pharmacist should always check for potential drug-drug interactions or medications accidentally prescribed that can exacerbate asthma and communicate concerns to the interprofessional team managing the patient. Similarly, the nurse should carefully examine all asthmatic patients for wheezes and ensure that they follow up with the pulmonologist regularly. There are a vast number of asthma medications on the market, and thus, the pharmacist should keep a track of what the patient is taking and ensure that no adverse reactions are developing. Today, many communities have an asthma clinic staffed by a nurse, where the disorder is monitored, and the patient is educated. Finally, all members of the team should coordinate the education of asthmatics as they should be encouraged to take their daily medications, discontinue smoking, and refrain from keeping pets. (Level 1)