EH is characterized by an increase in the gland-to-stroma ratio as compared to normal proliferative endometrium. Premalignant endometrial lesions, such as AH/EIN and EIC are clonal neoplasms that arise focally and can be diagnosed using specific criteria.

The precursor lesion of type 1 EC is AH. The WHO classification of endometrial hyperplasia includes two major categories, hyperplasia and atypical hyperplasia/endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia (AH/EIN).

The glands are crowded together and have complex branching patterns. Individual cells are rounded and haphazardly arranged on the basement membrane, having lost the perpendicular orientation seen in proliferative endometrial glands. The nuclei have prominent nucleoli and open or vesicular chromatin. It may not be possible to differentiate AH from well-differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma on biopsy. Up to 50% of women diagnosed with AH may have the final diagnosis of invasive EC when the uterus is examined after hysterectomy.

The precursor lesion of type 2 serous carcinoma is EIC (serous endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma). It arises in the small atrophic uterus; and consists of malignant cells identical to those of serous carcinoma that is confined to the epithelial surface. The cells show marked cytologic atypia, including high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, atypical mitotic figures, hyperchromasia, and prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry may be helpful in the differential diagnosis of AH and EIC. Atypical hyperplasia/EIN frequently shows PTEN and/or Pax-2 negativity and low Ki-67 and differs from EIC, which shows strong diffuse p53 staining and high Ki-67 staining index.