Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides the highest soft-tissue contrast resolution of any imaging modality and is useful for the evaluation of soft tissue abnormalities and osseous lesions. There is little role for MRI in the emergent setting, as the high signal characteristics of edema and hemorrhage are nonspecific and may obscure other abnormalities. The exception to this is in the evaluation of a negative radiographic and CT evaluation of a suspected non-displaced fracture, stress fracture, osseous contusions, and osteochondral fractures, for which MRI is the gold standard. The principle utility of MRI lies in the evaluation of non-acute osseous and soft tissue lesions.

Routine MRI evaluation of the ankle is performed in the standard axial, coronal, and sagittal planes. There is significant variation in the exact name or sequences used to evaluate the angle, with imaging centers using variations in technique. However, there is typically some combination of T1 or proton density-weighted images, T2-weighted images, short inversion time recovery (STIR), or T2-weighted fat-saturated sequences. T1-weighted post-contrast sequences with or without contrast may also be added, depending on the clinical indication.

A thorough description of all pathologies within the ankle, which are evaluated by MRI, is beyond the scope of this article, but we will highlight common applications for evaluation of the ankle. The exquisite soft-tissue contrast resolution of MRI allows the evaluation of the tendinous and ligamentous anatomy of the ankle, which permits the characterization of sprains, tendinosis, tenosynovitis, peritendinosis, entrapment, rupture, and dislocation. Further, other soft tissue abnormalities such as sinus tarsi syndrome, impingement syndromes, compressive neuropathies, and synovial disorders are well evaluated with this modality. MRI has been shown to be the most sensitive and specific evaluation for musculoskeletal infections, including cellulitis, abscesses, and osteomyelitis. MRI has emerged as an important adjunct in the evaluation of inflammatory arthritides, for which it is the most sensitive modality to detect early changes. Finally, MRI is invaluable in the evaluation of soft tissue and osseous neoplasms, and other non-neoplastic masses.