The pathophysiology of myopic traction maculopathy is complex. In the eyes, having pathologic myopia and ectasia of the posterior scleral wall leads to posterior staphyloma, which is also called scleroconus. This ectasia causes a stretch in the posterior scleral wall, choroid, and the retina. Due to different stretch responses of the retina and choroid, differential stretching causes the retina to split up into layers. The elongation of the myopic eye not only occurs along the axial length but also in a plane tangential to the retina at the posterior pole.

Myopic traction maculopathy is a dynamic disease that gradually progresses over the years. The disease begins with schisis in the inner retinal layers, slowly progressing over the years, to lead to schisis in the outer retinal layers as well. With the progression of the disease, in many cases, there can be the development of an inner and/or outer lamellar macular hole.

Myopic foveoschisis is believed to be multifactorial in origin, and other causes of anteroposterior traction on the retina include internal limiting membrane (ILM) rigidity, vitreomacular traction, and presence of epiretinal membranes. Based on this etiology, some people believe that a mere peel of ILM in the temporal part of the macula might resolve the foveoschisis. However, reports on such management are quite limited.

Myopic foveoschisis is not a single entity but a broad spectrum consisting of many clinical pictures. To date, there is no single comprehensive classification available that fits all scenarios. Based on the OCT picture, four retinal "types" of MTM are recognized:

- Inner schisis or inner-outer schisis

- Outer schisis

- Schisis detachment

- Detachment

OCT also delineates features of the fovea, and 3 foveal patterns are recognized:

- Intact fovea

- Inner lamellar macular hole

- Full-thickness macular hole

There may be present, associated epiretinal anomalies, and/or outer lamellar macular hole.