# Continuing Education Activity

First described as a method of providing surgical anesthesia to the upper abdomen, the celiac plexus block (CPB) has been in practice for nearly a century. The CPB is a multimodal adjunct suitable as a diagnostic or therapeutic tool in managing abdominal visceral pain. The CPB targets visceral afferent pain fibers from the liver, gallbladder, omentum, pancreas, mesentery, and digestive tract from the stomach to the mid-transverse colon. Therefore, a CPB may treat pain in malignant and benign neoplastic disorders involving the pancreas, biliary tree, retroperitoneal organs, and other abdominal organs. The CPB is indicated in intractable abdominal pain nonresponsive to less aggressive analgesic interventions; it is particularly useful in treating abdominal pain associated with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. This activity describes the indications, contraindications, and techniques involved in performing a CPB and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with intractable abdominal pain.

**Objectives:**
- Articulate the role of the celiac plexus in the autonomic innervation of the intra-abdominal anatomy.
- Outline the use of the celiac plexus block as a therapeutic or diagnostic tool in the management of abdominal pain.
- Review the contraindications and complications associated with a celiac plexus block.
- Implement a structured interprofessional team approach to effectively and efficiently apply the techniques used in performing a celiac plexus block.

# Introduction

First described as a method of providing surgical anesthesia to the upper abdomen, the celiac plexus block has been in practice for nearly a century. The celiac plexus block is a multimodal adjunct to managing abdominal visceral pain. The celiac plexus comprises three pairs of ganglia: the celiac, superior mesenteric, and aorticorenal ganglia.

Several abdominal organs receive autonomic innervation via the celiac plexus. The celiac plexus block aims to target the afferent nociceptive fibers. It is suitable as a diagnostic or therapeutic tool for managing intraabdominal pain.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Due to its vast web of nerve fibers, the celiac plexus is also called the solar plexus. Many abdominal organs receive autonomic innervation via the celiac plexus, including the liver, gallbladder, stomach, pancreas, spleen, kidneys, small bowel, and the first two-thirds of the large bowel.

The celiac plexus comprises the celiac, aorticorenal, and superior mesenteric ganglia and is positioned anterolateral to the aortic diaphragmatic crus at the level of the L1 vertebra. The celiac plexus consists of parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves. Sympathetic innervation of the celiac plexus originates from the anterolateral horns of the spinal cord at levels T5 to T12.

# Indications

The celiac plexus block (CPB) is indicated in the setting of intractable abdominal pain that is nonresponsive to less aggressive analgesic interventions; often, these patients require high-dose opioid therapies.

The CPB targets visceral afferent pain fibers from the liver, gallbladder, omentum, pancreas, mesentery, and digestive tract from the stomach to the mid-transverse colon. Therefore, a CPB may treat pain in malignant and benign neoplastic disorders involving the pancreas, biliary tree, retroperitoneal organs, and other abdominal organs. One of the most common indications for a CPB is treating abdominal pain associated with pancreatic cancer. Using a CPB to alleviate pain secondary to chronic pancreatitis remains controversial. When choosing an injectate, local anesthetics and steroids are reserved for patients with benign pathology, whereas neurolytic celiac plexus blocks are typically reserved for cancer-related pain.

# Contraindications

Many patients who could benefit from a CPB have comorbidities and underlying processes that must be considered before performing this block. For example, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation treatments may be immunocompromised and highly susceptible to infection secondary to injection. In addition, patients may be coagulopathic or thrombocytopenic, posing an increased risk of significant bleeding. Using computed tomography guidance or fluoroscopic techniques does not eliminate the risk of vascular injury or trauma to surrounding tissues; in patients with cancer, the presence of metastatic disease must always be considered.

Contraindications to CPB include patient refusal or inability to consent, coagulopathy or anticoagulation use, ongoing infection, and abnormal anatomy obscuring the trajectory of the needle and making it difficult or near impossible to target the appropriate structures.

# Technique or Treatment

Several approaches to CPB have been described. The two most commonly practiced approaches are the posterior and anterior para-aortic approaches. The anterior approach should be considered in patients with advanced disease who may have abdominal discomfort, cannot lie prone, or have recently undergone abdominal surgery. A diagnostic block of local anesthetic should be performed before the neurolytic block to confirm pain relief attributable to the block. Within the literature, alcohol is the preferred agent for neurolytic celiac plexus blocks as it is considered to be more effective.

**Posterior Para-Aortic Approach**

Place the patient prone with support under the abdomen to increase the thoracic kyphosis. Note the following anatomical landmarks: midline spine and vertebral bodies, iliac crests, 12th rib, and lateral border of the paraspinal muscles. Disinfect the skin and drape in the usual fashion.

With radiographic tools, identify the T12 and L1 vertebral bodies. Identify and mark the inferior border of the 12th rib. A skin wheal should be placed at the inferior border of the 12th rib approximately 6 to 8 cm from the midline. An appropriate spinal-type needle should be advanced at a 45-degree angle from posterior to anterior toward the ventral surface of the T12-L1 intervertebral space until the vertebral body is contacted.

Once the vertebral body has been contacted, the spinal needle should be advanced approximately 1 cm further into the prevertebral fascial plane. Once the needle is in the desired position, confirm the appropriate location by the contrast spread under CT or fluoroscopic guidance. A diagnostic block with local anesthetic or a therapeutic neurolytic block can now be performed. The left-sided approach has been shown to be reliable in a unilateral block. A bilateral block can be performed if the unilateral block proves insufficient.

**Anterior Para-Aortic Approach**

With the patient supine, map the needle trajectory using CT or fluoroscopic guidance. Disinfect the skin and drape in the usual fashion. A skin wheal should be placed on the abdominal wall anterior to the T12 vertebral body. An appropriate spinal-type needle should be inserted and directed toward the abdominal aorta; this course will typically encounter abdominal viscera, including the bowel, stomach, and liver. The final position of the tip of the needle should be anterior to the aorta and diaphragmatic crura. Inject the neurolytic agent into the antecrural space.

This approach is often quicker than the posterior para-aortic approach and well tolerated by patients; the potential for organ injury limits its use.

# Complications

Complications from a CPB are known but rare. However, there is always the risk of an unsuccessful block. Orthostatic hypotension is the most common complication of the procedure and can be minimized with adequate hydration. Other complications that may occur, even with image-guided therapy, include but are not limited to:

- Intravascular injection of the anesthetic agent

- Injury to surrounding tissues, including nerve roots, vasculature, muscles, and nearby organs

- Paresthesias

- Intrathecal or epidural injection of the anesthetic agent

- Bleeding, including retroperitoneal hematoma formation

- Pneumothorax

- Infection with or without abscess formation

- Paraplegia

- Local anesthetic toxicity with central nervous system and cardiovascular compromise

Diarrhea is also a known complication of a CPB. Complete sympathetic denervation of the gastrointestinal tract will likely cause a patient to develop increased peristalsis due to unopposed parasympathetic nervous system activity.

# Clinical Significance

Pancreatic cancer is the second most common abdominal cancer in the United States. The pain experienced by those with pancreatic cancer has been described as substantial and often uncontrolled by medication. A CPB with neurolysis can improve the pain experienced by these patients, decrease overall opioid consumption, and improve patient satisfaction.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

It is important that a CPB be performed with some form of imaging guidance to facilitate identification of the target and surrounding structures. Most providers perform the CPB under CT or fluoroscopic guidance. However, some studies show that endoscopic ultrasound guidance has better outcomes, a longer duration of pain control, and reduced costs.

In a team setting, closed-loop communication must exist. All consents should be signed after specific risks, benefits, and expectations have been explained in detail to the patient. All patients should have a proper procedural timeout performed. The patient's name, date of birth, pertinent allergies, and procedure should be confirmed by all providers and the patient. Site verification and laterality must be confirmed. Implementing guidelines and checklists has proven to reduce the occurrence of adverse outcomes such as surgeon-anesthesiologist miscommunications and wrong-site or wrong-side regional anesthesia procedures.

All team members must communicate their concerns, responsibilities, and activities with all other team members contemporaneously and as indicated throughout the perioperative period, based on their professional discretion. All team members should respect the free flow of information and concerns among team members without allowing or producing an environment of hostility. All interprofessional team members should consider it their duty to neither disrupt the work done by other team members nor to, through their actions or inaction, create additional issues or increase the workload for other team members. [Level V]