Like all calcium channel blockers, an overdose of verapamil can lead to negative inotropic and chronotropic effects, dilation of arterial vasculature, and hypotension. Additionally, verapamil’s blockade of slow calcium channels in pancreatic beta cells can lead to inhibited insulin release, thereby causing hyperglycemia. If a patient experiences bradycardia with hypotension/metabolic acidosis and hyperglycemia is indicative of verapamil toxicity. The most serious complications from a verapamil overdose are bradycardia and hypotension, as both can lead to death if the patient is left untreated.

If a patient presents with verapamil toxicity within 1 hour, two decontamination procedures exist; gastric lavage and single-dose activated charcoal.

**Treatment of Calcium Channel Blocker Overdose**

Patients with symptoms should undergo treatment with the prioritization of first-line therapy. Determination of which treatment is first-line depends upon the desired effect to include:

- Intravenous calcium

- High dose insulin monotherapy (in patients with myocardial dysfunction)

- Norepinephrine or epinephrine if the patient is suffering from shock (norepinephrine is preferable in patients with vasodilatory shock)

Patients refractory to first-line therapies:

- Fat emulsion therapies

- Incremental doses of high dose insulin therapy – in patients with myocardial dysfunction

- Use of a pacemaker – in patients with unstable bradycardia/high-grade AV block without significant alteration in cardiac inotropy

Patients with refractory shock/precardiac-arrest:

- Incremental doses of high dose insulin

- Fat emulsion therapy

- Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (only to be used when the refractory shock contains a significant cardiogenic component)

Administration of calcium chloride or calcium gluconate in symptomatic patients is another therapeutic alternative. Calcium chloride is used in nonacidotic patients because it delivers three times the amount of calcium than calcium gluconate. In contrast, calcium gluconate is used in acidotic patients because calcium chloride could worsen the acidosis. Both calcium formulations must have IV administration.