Bupivacaine is the most commonly used local anesthetic for spinal anesthesia. Bupivacaine has a long history of safe use, a low incidence of transient neurologic symptoms (post-spinal temporary radiating pain down the buttock and thighs), and it produces a reliable block.

Intraperitoneal chloroprocaine has been used off-label to provide adjunctive anesthesia for parturients undergoing cesarean delivery under the neuraxial block. In one case series, 32 patients were administered intraperitoneal chloroprocaine as part of a multimodal approach to avoiding general anesthesia when there was an imperfect neuraxial blockade.

Epidural chloroprocaine is commonly used in the obstetric setting to provide rapid onset anesthesia for emergent cesarean delivery when an epidural catheter is in place. Chloroprocaine can be rapidly administered in large doses to provide rapid onset anesthesia without risking maternal or fetal systemic toxicity. The half-life of chloroprocaine in maternal and fetal plasma is 11.2 seconds and 15.4 seconds, respectively.

While LAST is quite unlikely with chloroprocaine due to its rapid metabolism, vigilance for signs and symptoms of LAST is always recommended. Management of chloroprocaine-related toxicity (LAST) includes prompt recognition of the signs and symptoms and an interprofessional team to manage the potential consequences. LAST is an emergency condition that requires the full attention of nurses, technicians, and clinicians to maintain the airway and treat neurologic and cardiac complications.