Ulcer infection should be treated to prompt wound healing. Soft-tissue infections can be examined clinically. Classic clinical signs of an infection are pain, swelling, heat, redness, and loss of function. Systemic symptoms include fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and chills. Laboratory work for cellulitis should include creatinine, bicarbonate, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and complete blood count (CBC) with differential.

Radiographic evaluation is also essential in the overall management of ulcers. X-rays can assist in osteomyelitis assessment or detecting gas gangrene. MR Images are useful in assessing deeper abscess collections and making definitive diagnoses. CT and bone scans can occasionally be used for visualization of bony alterations.

A proper evaluation of the vascular system must be addressed, along with wound care. A clinical vascular assessment includes evaluating the temperature, skin color, skin atrophy, hair distribution, and palpation of pedal pulses, including the posterior tibialis and dorsalis pedis arteries.

A magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), arterial duplex ultrasound, or arteriogram can be performed to assess the level and area of vascular occlusion. Clinically, arterial ulcers are painful and develop on the distal extremity. Alternatively, diabetic ulcers tend to be pain-free due to neuropathy and occur on weight-bearing surfaces. Electromyography, along with a nerve conduction velocity test, can be performed to assess peripheral neuropathy.

Radiographic Imaging is essential to rule out the structural deformities in ulcers. A plantar pressure measuring device can detect the peak pressures at specific locations and can be used to identify any underlying bony deformities. The evaluation and treatment of all three Imaging modalities are crucial since any bony deformities in the foot along with a PAD or neuropathy can place a patient at an increased risk of ulcer formation.