In human beings, the chromosomal sex combination is determined at fertilization either as female (XX) or male (XY). Early in fetal life, the embryo has both mesonephric duct (male) and paramesonephric ducts (females). Based on the presence or absence of the SRY gene (located on the Y chromosome), regression or development of one of these ducts will continue during organogenesis. The SRY gene stimulates gonadal differentiation into testicular tissue. At this early stage of development, the testes secrete three hormones that are very important in the sexual male differentiation process:

- Anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH): Function to regress the development of the paramesonephric ducts

- Testosterone: Function to stimulate the development of the mesonephric duct into internal male structures (seminal vesicle, vas deference, and epididymis)

- Dihydrotestrone DHT: Stimulate the growth of male sexual characteristics (scrotal sac maturation, increased penile length and testicular size)

Under the influence of these three hormones, the male reproductive and genitourinary systems start to develop during the late third of the first trimester (8 to 12 weeks of gestation). The human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulates the Leydig cells to secrete testosterone. Further metabolism in utero converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. High levels of fetal androgens During the second-trimester further accelerate penile growth.

- Kallman syndrome (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, osteoporosis, hearing impairment, and anosmia)

- Hypopituitarism (hypoglycemia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and growth disturbances)

- Prader Willi syndrome (hypotonia, obesity, intellectual disabilities, undescended testes, micropenis, small hands and feet)

- Growth hormone deficiency

- Androgen receptor defect and/or resistance

- Anorchia (absence of testes)

- Klinefelter (XXY)(small testicles, infertility, gynecomastia, poor coordination, and reading difficulties)

- Trisomies of the chromosomes 8,13,18 and 21

- Noonan syndrome (hypertelorism, short neck, low set ears, skeletal malformation, bleeding disorders, and pulmonary valve stenosis)

- Gonadal dysgenesis

- 5 alpha-reductase deficiency

- Rare types of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (deficiency in steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR), 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3β-HSD), 17 α-hydroxylase)

In some cases, the etiology remains unclear even after performing an extensive evaluation.