Negative pressure wound therapy is primarily utilized to treat complex wounds which are non-healing or at risk of non-healing. These can be broadly categorized into acute and chronic wounds. NPWT is indicated for acute wounds when the wound cannot be closed by primary intention due to the risk of infection, active infection, skin tension, or swelling.

Traumatic wounds such as open fractures or open lacerations are some of the most commonly observed acute wounds. Other traumatic wounds can include degloving injuries and burns, which cause partial thickness skin loss. The majority of these wounds are at high risk of infection due to contamination from exposure to the surrounding environment. Primary closure or skin grafting of such a wound in the acute setting would simply entrap the microorganisms in the soft tissue and lead to abscess formation. Additionally, retention of devitalized tissue would lead to necrosis and further tissue loss. Therefore, the successful adjunctive use of NPWT relies on a thorough surgical debridement and washout of the wound to promote healthy granulation tissue and encourage wound apposition.

NPWT would also be indicated for dehisced wounds, which can be acute or chronic wounds and often refractory to primary closure. This is because NPWT provides an interim measure to protect the wound bed and enable the resuscitation of the skin, which thereby increases the chances of subsequent successful wound closure. Similarly, NPWT can help cultivate a healthy wound bed to ameliorate the successful uptake of a skin graft for the same reasons.

Additional indications include skin breakdown due to ulceration secondary to multiple etiologies and closed wounds such as surgical incisions, including skin flaps and grafts.