The exact pathogenesis of BE remains to be elucidated; however, some progress has been made in determining the molecular alterations and primary cell type involved.  Studies have indicated that the exposure to acids induces the squamous epithelial cells to secrete inflammatory cytokines such as IL8 and IL1b, which act to mediate the inflammatory response and signal T lymphocytes and neutrophils to migrate into the epithelium.  Bile acids, specifically, have been shown to upregulate CDX2, the intestinal differentiation factor, and MUC2, the goblet cell-specific gene, within normal columnar and esophageal cancer cell lines. Up to 90% of BE patients have a detectable clonal aberration of p16. CDX2 and TP53 mutations are early molecular alterations found to be present in metaplastic columnar epithelium even before morphologic dysplasia is recognized. However, immunohistochemical staining to evaluate these markers is not currently recommended in routine diagnostic cases of BE.  A recent study described a population of possible embryonic stem cells at the squamocolumnar junction, while other studies suggest that stem cells derived from undifferentiated mesenchymal cells in the lamina propria of the esophagus or the bone marrow may be the cell of origin for BE.  It is agreed upon that differentiation of the epithelium toward an intestinal-type phenotype is multifactorial and a multi-step process.  There is evidence of a type of epithelium known as “multilayered epithelium (ME),” which shows combined squamous and columnar features, likely representing an intermediate phase within the metaplastic reaction. ME is strongly associated with GERD esophagitis and expresses a mucin and cytokeratin profile similar to BE columnar epithelium as well as intestinal transcription factors. Further studies are needed to understand the complete mechanism of the pathogenesis of BE.