Cognitive deficit is not an illness in itself but a manifestation of an underlying condition. The patient may notice these changes themselves, or most of the time, it is noticed by the caretakers and friends of the patient. The patients usually have the following:

- Trouble remembering things (frequently asking the same question or repeating the same story again and again )

- Difficulty in learning new things and concentrating

- Vision problems and trouble speaking

- Difficulty recognizing people and places. They often find new places or situations overwhelming.

- Confusion or agitation.

- Mood changes

- Change in their behavior, speech,

- Difficulty even with their usual daily tasks

Cognitive impairment can come and go or wax and wane. Cognitive impairment can be mild, severe, or anything in between. With mild impairment, there are changes in cognitive functions, but the individual can still do his/her everyday activities. Severe levels of impairment (dementia) can lead to a point where the individual is incapable of living independently because of the inability to plan and carry out regular tasks (Activities of daily living/instrumental activities of daily living) and apply judgment.

Cognitive impairment may accompany different other symptoms, depending on the underlying disorder or condition. Sometimes they may present as emergency cases and may require acute life-saving interventions.

Infective causes may present with fever, rashes, headache, nausea, vomiting, neck stiffness, malaise, seizures, and others.

It may accompany metabolic disorders and present with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, bradycardia, fatigue, muscle weakness, shortness of breath, excess thirst, urinary problems, and even loss of consciousness.

Cognitive deficits may accompany symptoms of other problems, such as head injury, stroke, or dementia. The patient might present with behavioral or personality changes, loss of consciousness, vision changes, imbalance, severe headaches, seizures, sleep pattern changes, numbness, weakness, and paralysis.

Cognitive disorder includes delirium and mild and major neurocognitive disorder, which may present as follows:

- Delirium develops very rapidly and over a short period of time. It is mainly characterized by disturbances in cognition. Other manifestations are confusion, disorientation, excitement, and also a change in consciousness. Hallucinations and illusions may be common. It also makes processing new information and situational awareness very difficult. Its onset ranges from minutes to hours and sometimes days. However, it only lasts a few hours to weeks. It can also be accompanied by inattention, mood swings, or abnormal behaviors. There is usually an underlying medical or surgical condition causing it. Delirium during a hospital stay can result in complications and long terms stay.

- Mild and major neurocognitive disorders are commonly associated with the elderly. These disorders develop slowly and are mainly characterized by memory loss in addition to cognitive impairments. There may also be psychosis, agitation, and mood changes. The difference between mild and major neurocognitive disorders is mainly based on the severity of the symptoms. Major neurocognitive disorder(previously known as dementia) is characterized by significant cognitive decline and the development of dependence. The mild neurocognitive disorder is characterized by moderate cognitive decline, and the patient is still independent. To be diagnosed, delirium and other mental disorder should be ruled out. For causes of dementia, such as age, which is irreversible, the decline of cognition and memory is lifelong.