The primary goals of the evaluation are to establish the location of the vascular lesion and determine whether acute intervention is indicated to achieve recanalization in a time-sensitive manner.

Laboratory studies have limited utility but may include a complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, international normalized ratio (INR), prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). Younger patients or patients without evidence of atherosclerosis should be investigated for the presence of procoagulant conditions. These include protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III deficiencies, lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies, and homocysteine levels. An electrocardiogram helps to screen for arrhythmias that may be suggestive of a thrombotic etiology.

Computed tomography (CT) scanning is usually the first imaging study performed. CT may be effective at identifying larger areas of ischemic insult and can highlight hemorrhagic pathology. A hyperdense basilar artery may be present on the CT scan. However, CT scanning has a low sensitivity for early ischemia and is less effective at evaluating the brainstem, cerebellum, and posterior circulation. Ultimately, one needs a high index of suspicion in the correct clinical context to diagnosis an easily missed disease. Additional evaluation with CT angiography may be considered, and a filling defect noted within the basilar artery. Catheter angiography is still a criterion for diagnosis; however, with the availability of noninvasive imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography (MRA), the role of angiography has changed. MRI/MRA is more sensitive than CT scanning for identifying early ischemia and vascular occlusion.