**I. Lab Investigations**

- 
**Sex Hormones**

Baseline measurement of testosterone in boys and estradiol in girls should be obtained. The elevation of baseline sex hormones with suppressed gonadotropins indicates precocious pseudopuberty. A significantly elevated testosterone level indicates testicular neoplasm in boys or an adrenal source in both boys and girls. In girls, estradiol levels are interpreted with reference to the tanner stage of breast development. Estradiol levels of >20 pg/mL indicate puberty. Significantly elevated serum estradiol levels (>100 pg/mL) in a girl indicates either an estrogen secreting ovarian cyst or ovarian tumor.  On the other hand, low baseline estradiol level <10 pg/ml indicates central precocious puberty.

- 
**Luteinizing Hormone (LH), Follicular Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and Human Chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) Levels**

In precocious pseudopuberty, the baseline LH and FSH levels are in the prepubertal range. Basal LH levels should be measured early in the morning. Basal LH levels < 0.2 mIU/mL indicate either precocious pseudopuberty or benign pubertal variants. Random measurements of FSH are not very useful in diagnosis. Elevated HCG levels indicate the presence of HCG secreting tumors such as embryonal cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, and dysgerminoma.

- 
**Serum Adrenal Steroids**

Measurement of serum adrenal steroid levels is useful in differentiating premature adrenarche from precocious pseudopuberty. In patients with premature adrenarche, levels of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (40-135 mcg/dL), testosterone (1.1-3.7 micromol/L), and 17 hydroxyprogesterone (115- 200 ng/dL) are only mildly elevated. Elevation of DHEAS and testosterone above these ranges indicate adrenal tumors or congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  An elevated early morning 17 hydroxyprogesterone (> 200 ng/dL) indicates non-classical congenital hyperplasia due to 21 hydroxylase deficiency. Elevated 11 deoxy cortisol and deoxy cortisone indicate 11 B hydroxylase deficiency.

- 
**Thyroid Function Test**

Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) concentration and free T4 levels should be checked in patients with signs and symptoms of primary hypothyroidism.

**II. Radiology**

- 
**Bone Age Assessment**

Radiographs of hand and wrist should be done in cases of suspected precocious puberty to assess epiphyseal maturation. A normal or slightly delayed bone age  (< 2y over chronological age) suggests benign variants such as premature thelarche or premature adrenarche. On the other hand, significantly advanced bone age (>2 standard deviations above the mean for age) indicates accelerated linear growth and precocious puberty. Rapidly progressive bone age should raise concern for congenital adrenal hyperplasia or tumors originating from the ovaries, adrenal glands, or germ cells.

- 
**Ultrasound/Computer Tomography**

In girls with suspected precocious pseudopuberty, a pelvic ultrasound is essential to determine if ovarian cysts or tumors are the underlying etiology. Pelvic ultrasound is also helpful in determining the uterine length and volume, which is a good indicator of the duration of estrogen exposure.

**III. Other Tests**

- Patients who have neurological symptoms or visual changes require brain magnetic resonance imaging to exclude intracranial pathology. Brain imaging is also indicated to identify HCG, producing pineal gland tumors.

- Bone scan and skeletal surveys are required in cases of suspected McCune Albright syndrome to identify fibrous dysplasia.

- Genetic testing may be required to identify mutations and confirm the diagnosis in patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia, familial male-limited precocious puberty, and McCune Albright syndrome.