Managing a patient with acute neurologic symptoms requires timely and coordinated efforts by an interprofessional team. This team might initially include a physician, nurse, pharmacist, and multiple ancillary personnel such as phlebotomists, radiography technicians, and laboratory personnel. A wide array of physician specialists such as neurologists, radiologists, interventional radiologists, internists, cardiologists, and physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians may be involved in the care of a patient with basilar artery thrombosis. With almost any acute ischemic event, not limited to basilar artery thrombosis, studies have shown that the earlier the intervention is undertaken, the better off the patient's functional outcomes might be. With the mantra "Time is of the Essence" in mind, one can recognize that the presence of an integrated multi-functional team is vitally important in providing the rapid stabilization, evaluation, diagnosis, and intervention of patients suffering from acute neurologic conditions.

The coordination of this type of specialty care has made comprehensive stroke centers (CSCs) an increasingly common part of large tertiary healthcare centers. CSCs are designated to provide more complex services, including around-the-clock availability of endovascular procedures. Many questions are worth exploring in the near future: Do CSCs offer any appreciable benefit to ischemic stroke patients? and, if so, what types? Do all patients with an acute stroke need to be referred to a CSC? Medicine looks forward to exploring these questions, and many more as the optimal outline for treating patients with ischemic intracranial pathology and basilar artery thrombosis is better defined and advanced.