The neurological exam is a practice that dates back to the late 1800s. Joseph Babinski and Wilhelm Erb were the first to discover the clinical application of a neurological exam. The practice has since become standard procedure across the world. The importance of this exam stems from its ability to determine the integrity of both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Beyond this, the utilization of a neurological exam allows for the determination of whether pain in the extremities results from peripheral or central tissue.

If reflex testing indicates the possibility of a neural insult, then further testing should be conducted, inclusive of cranial nerve assessment, the brachioradialis reflex, clonus in the upper extremity, and Hoffman’s reflex.

The brachioradialis muscle itself is a flexor of the forearm at the elbow that also participates in the supination and pronation of the forearm. It originates from the proximal two-thirds of the lateral supracondylar ridge of the humerus and inserts into the lateral aspect of the styloid process of the radius.

The brachioradialis reflex is a deep tendon reflex involving the C5 and C6 nerve roots through its innervation by the radial nerve. Babinski first introduced the testing of this reflex in 1910.

**Muscle Involvement**

The brachioradialis is superficial, on the radial side of the forearm within the superficial extensor compartment.

Anatomical variations exist within the muscle; however, there have been studies to determine the most typical presentations of motor units. The results of one of such studies showed that motor units receive innervation by a mean of four distinct endplate zones separated by a minimum of 15 mm and a maximum of 55 mm along the proximal-distal axis. Further study showed that terminal waves were present in distally innervated motor units but not in proximally innervated motor units. This finding indicates that distal motor units have tendinous termination as compared to the intra-fascicular termination of the proximal motor units. Taken together, these two findings point to the brachioradialis muscle having a series-fibered architecture composed of overlapping bands of muscle fibers. It is this organization of the muscle fibers that determines the biomechanical action of the brachioradialis muscle along with its force-generating capacity and its neural control. One postulation for the series-fibered architecture observed in the brachioradialis muscle is the allowance it makes for a significant mechanical exertion while preserving short enough muscle fibers for the effective coupling of electrical and mechanical forces.

**Innervation**

The input from C5 and C6 travels along the radial nerve to innervate the brachioradialis and cause the action of elbow flexion.

**Blood Supply**

The main blood supply of the brachioradialis muscle is the recurrent radial branch of the radial artery. This branch also provides blood flow to the supinator muscle. The recurrent radial branch comes off the radial artery just distal to the radial head. From that point, it crosses back up the arm to anastomose with the radial collateral branch from the deep brachial artery