**Composition**

Glass ionomer cement is generally supplied as a powder-liquid system that is mixed manually. The powder is mainly fluoro-aluminosilicate glass, and the liquid is an aqueous solution of polyacrylic acid. Polyacrylic acid is copolymerized with carboxylic acid, maleic, tartaric, and itaconic acid to regulate the viscosity and stabilize the liquid. The liquid exhibits a thixotropic behavior: its thickness can be reversed by shaking or warming the bottle. Other supply modes include capsules, twin syringes, and single bottle water settable form (freeze-dried polyacrylic acid added to GIC powder).

**Manipulation**

Mixing is performed on a mixing pad with an agate spatula. Stainless steel spatula is not used because its surface gets abraded by glass particles, contaminating the mixture. The powder and liquid are used in the proportions recommended by the manufacturer **(Figure 1)**. The powder is divided into two equal increments. The liquid is dispensed later to prevent increased viscosity by water loss on exposure to the environment.

The first increment is added to the liquid and mixed using a folding motion for 15 seconds within a limited area on the mixing pad **(Figure 2)**. The second increment is added to adjust the consistency. The resultant mixture should have a glossy surface**(Figure 3)**. Such a surface indicates that an adequate number of carboxylic ions are available, which are crucial for forming chemical bonds with the tooth surface. Mixtures with an opaque surface should be discarded**(Figure 4).**

Glass ionomer cement can also present as a capsule activated by vibrating it in an auto-mixer. The vibration mixes the cement, and the already mixed GIC paste can be used for the chosen clinical indication.

**Preparation and Restoration of the Tooth**

- Cleaning: A pumice slurry should be applied to the tooth surface using a prophy cup.

- Conditioning of tooth: after rinsing and drying the tooth, 10% polyacrylic acid is applied for 10 seconds to increase the surface energy and wettability of the tooth, which improves chemical bonding.

- Placement of restoration: the mixed GIC is carried to the cavity with the help of a cement carrier and adapted using a condenser. Care is necessary to avoid the cement sticking to the spatula as it is hard to remove.

- Protection of the cement: the setting cement should be covered by a matrix band during the initial setting and by varnish, cocoa butter, or vaseline after the initial set because GIC is moisture sensitive during the first 24 hours of setting.

- Finishing and polishing: initial finishing includes the removal of gross excess with a sharp hand instrument. Final finishing is done after 24 hours.

**Mechanism of Setting**

The setting of GIC is through an acid-base reaction involving the following stages:

- Dissolution and decomposition: after mixing the powder and liquid, the acid dissolves the surface of the glass particles to release SiO44-, Ca2+, Na+And F- ions.

- Initial setting: the Ca2+ released in the aqueous medium reacts with polyacrylic acid to form a three-dimensional cross-linked structure. At this time, the material has low strength, and it can be carved using sharp instruments.

- Final setting: the setting reaction continues during the next 24 hours. During this time, SiO44- forms the silica gel. The slow-moving Al3+ ions enter the aqueous medium and cross-link the polyacrylic acid chains displacing the Ca2+ ions. This increases the final strength of the set cement.

- Maturation: the aluminum and calcium cross-linked polyacrylate chains get hydrated over time by absorbing water from the aqueous medium. This process is known as maturation.

**The Role of Water in the Setting of GIC**

GIC is water-based cement because water constitutes 11 to 24% of the set cement. Water plays a crucial role during the setting of GIC. In the initial phases, it acts as a reaction medium, and in the later stages, it mediates the slow hydration of the cross-linked chains.

The water can be easily evaporated during the initial phases due to exposure to ambient air. On the other hand, water contamination during this stage can cause the dissolution of the matrix and the leakage of calcium ions.

**Indications**

**Restorative Material**

Glass ionomer cement is popularly used in pediatric restorations thanks to its easy placement and better marginal adaptation. It is also indicated for restoring permanent teeth in low stress-bearing areas like class III and class V lesions. It is the material of choice in high-caries-risk patients due to the fluoride release.

**Luting Agent**

GIC can be used for luting of indirect restorations (metal and metal-ceramic) post and core and orthodontic bands and brackets.

**Pulp Protection**

GIC is used as a liner or bases beneath metallic and composite restorations (sandwich technique).

**Pit and Fissure Sealant**

GIC-based fissure sealants offer less retention than resin-based fissure sealants; therefore, they are only indicated as a temporary sealant in newly erupted permanent teeth. The caries preventive action of GIC-based pit and fissure sealants is comparable to resin-based pit and fissure sealants.

**Atraumatic Restorative Technique (ART)**

ART is a minimally invasive procedure that involves removing carious tissue with hand instruments without anesthesia. The restoration of the cavity is done with an adhesive material like glass ionomer cement (GIC). ART is performed in those cases where routine dental treatment cannot be done because of a lack of facilities or accessibility to the dental clinic.