# Continuing Education Activity

This activity describes the evaluation and management of Salzmann nodular corneal degeneration; it also highlights the role of the ophthalmologist and interprofessional team in evaluating and improving the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the appearance of the Salzmann nodules.
- Summarize the epidemiology of Salzmann nodular corneal degeneration.
- Outline the initial treatment options for Salzmann nodular corneal degeneration.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by Salzmann nodular corneal degeneration.

# Introduction

In 1925, Austrian ophthalmologist Maximilian Salzmann reported on a nodular degeneration secondary to phlyctenular or trachomatous keratitis.

Nodule formation is most commonly idiopathic but has been associated with inflammation, trauma, and surgery.

Surgical options in refractory cases include manual excision, phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK) with or without the use of topical mitomycin-C, and lamellar or penetrating keratoplasty.

# Etiology

The most commonly cited risk factors for Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) are ocular surface inflammatory conditions such as dry eye, chronic blepharitis, long term contact lens (CL) wear, phlyctenular keratoconjunctivitis, pterygium, trauma, and vernal keratoconjunctivitis.

CL-wear appears to be a risk factor for SND, accounting for 34.2% of 152 eyes in one study.

Surgical wounds to the cornea, such as from cataract extraction, radial keratotomy, penetrating keratoplasty, or laser in situ keratomileuses (LASIK), may increase the risk for developing SND.

Although no specific gene abnormalities associated with SND have been identified, several cases report SND occurrence in consecutive generations,  with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern in two cases.

# Epidemiology

Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) is a rare disorder. It most often occurs in 50 to 60 years olds; the largest study, including 180 eyes, established a mean age of 60.8 years with a range of 13 to 92 years.

# Pathophysiology

The exact mechanism of development of Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) is unknown; however, several important events are thought to contribute to nodule formation. These include disruption of the epithelial basement membrane and Bowman layer, changes in epithelial cells, differentiation and anterior shift of stromal fibroblasts, and deposition of the extracellular matrix material.

Mechanical disruption of the barrier between the epithelium and stroma from trauma, surgery, or chronic corneal irritation from ocular surface diseases, such as meibomian gland disease (MGD) or aqueous deficient dry eye, leads to prolonged wound repair and remodeling of the epithelium thus creating the conditions for excess deposition of extracellular material.

# Histopathology

Histological examination typically shows thinning of the epithelium overlying a nodule. Disruption of the Bowman layer may be seen with duplication of the epithelial basement membrane.

The mechanism underlying the development of SND and subepithelial matrix deposition appears to involve the function of the corneal epithelium itself. The cells of the limbus differ from cells of the central cornea in structure as well as function. The limbal epithelium contains stem cells and transient amplifying cells (TAC), cells that are not completely differentiated but have a high potential for proliferation. Usually, the central cornea contains completely differentiated epithelium and should not contain stem cells. Immunohistochemical analysis has shown that the epithelium in SND shows similar markers as the undifferentiated TACs of the limbus.

High levels of staining for CK19 and enolase, markers of the metabolically more active migrating epithelium, suggests that the epithelium that overlies SND nodules is composed of cells that are not terminally differentiated and are more comparable to limbal TACs than the surrounding corneal epithelium. Healthy central corneal cells stain strongly for CK3/12, a marker for terminally differentiated corneal epithelium. Only the superficial epithelial layers overlying Salzmann nodules stain positive for CK3/12. The cellular elements of the Salzmann nodules stain positively for matrix-metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), which is characteristically expressed in the central corneal epithelium only during the remodeling phase of wound repair.

MMP-2 functions to break down type 4 collagen, the primary component of the corneal epithelial basement membrane. The expression of MMP-2 by the basal epithelial cells in Salzmann nodules appears to contribute to the destruction of the Bowman layer in an ongoing wound remodeling process.

# History and Physical

Only a minority of patients with Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) have symptoms, which, when present, are foreign body sensation (FBS), irritation, tearing, or photophobia.

Nodule location influences patients' primary complaint, whereby more central nodules are associated with decreased or distorted vision and more peripheral nodules with FBS. Visual distortions are caused by the involvement of visual axis by the nodules, irregular astigmatism, hyperopia, or mechanical tear film disturbances.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) is usually made clinically by the slit lamp exam. It may be supported by high-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM), in-vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM), optical coherence tomography of the anterior segment (AS-OCT), or corneal topography and tomography. Slit-lamp exam reveals nodules that are typically smaller than 2mm, but as large as 4x2.5 mm.

Another common pattern is the 3 and 9 o'clock location of the nodules in patients with a history of contact lens wear.

In one study, each nodule was associated with an adjacent neovascular anterior stromal pannus that did not enter the nodule.

Typical findings have been noted with the use of diagnostic tests. UBM of peripheral nodules in a post-LASIK patient differentiated epithelium, Bowman layer, and LASIK flap, localizing of the nodules to within the margin of the flaps and revealing the destruction of the underlying Bowman layer.

Biometric values acquired through corneal topography are impacted by the presence of SND, resulting in inaccurate intraocular lens (IOL) calculations as high as 3.2 D in one study.

AS-OCT is a non-invasive imaging modality that can be helpful in the diagnosis, management, and follow-up of SND. AS-OCT shows bright, hyperreflective, subepithelial deposits above the Bowman layer that is covered by an abnormally thin layer of epithelium. AS-OCT can perform non-invasive "optical biopsies" that have been shown to correlate with the histopathology of the disease.

Utilizing IVCM allows morphological and quantitative analysis of the microstructure of Salzmann nodules. Normal epithelial cells imaged show a honeycomb-shaped arrangement with bright borders and dark bodies. The overlying epithelium nodules are shown by IVCM to have irregular morphology, consisting of elongated, polygonal cells of varied sizes.

Corneal stroma within the nodule appeared unstructured, with an increase in the hyperreflective extracellular background.

# Treatment / Management

Management choice is influenced by the size and location of nodules, as well as the severity of symptoms. Asymptomatic patients can be observed, mildly symptomatic cases typically respond to conservative management, but severe cases may require surgical intervention. The most common indication for surgery is a visual disturbance.

**Conservative Management**

In most cases, patients will respond to conservative medical therapy. The use of lubricants, warm compresses, lid massage, and lid hygiene often provides symptomatic relief, especially in the context of dry eye disease. One study found that conservative therapy was effective enough to avoid surgery in 77.3% of cases.

**Nodulectomy/Superficial Keratectomy**

The simplest method for surgical management is manual excision and superficial keratectomy.

If adhesions are present between the nodule and the limbus, typically due to a fibrovascular pannus, scissors may be used to amputate the nodule close to the limbus. After removal of the nodule, the underlying stroma is usually regular and smooth.

Some SND patients are left with significant defects in the Bowman layer. These irregularities, if present, may be treated with a diamond burr or PTK.

One study utilized superficial keratectomy followed by AMT; however, the nodule recurred, the operation repeated, but the nodule recurred once again. Published data of other cases are limited.

Mitomycin-C (MMC) is an alkylating agent that interrupts DNA synthesis inducing apoptosis in fibroblasts.

**Keratoplasty**

Rarely, lamellar keratoplasty (LK) is required for sufficient resolution of SND. A comparison of automated lamellar keratoplasty (ALK) to PTK for treatment of SND found that the overall change in VA was comparable between the two groups; however, PTK had a lower rate of complications.

**Additional Considerations**

For most accurate biometric data to be obtained, SND should be removed before cataract extraction. SND induced refractive sequelae may adversely affect biometry measurements, K values, and consequently IOL power calculations.

# Differential Diagnosis

Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) resembles many conditions related to cornea. It is essential to differentiate it from these. Following differential diagnosis should be considered when making the diagnosis of SND.

- Bullous Keratopathy

- Usually associated with Descemet membrane folds, corneal stromal edema, raised intraocular pressure. Bullae may be differentiated from Salzmann nodules at the slit lamp by the presence of water.

- Climatic Droplet Keratopathy

- Golden-yellow or translucent droplets in the intrerpalpebral area bilaterally.

- Corneal Amyloidosis

- Primary amyloidosis, gelatinous drops like dystrophy or primary familial amyloidosis, presents with a bilateral raised multinodular mound of amyloid in the central cornea. These deposits are typically subepithelial.
- Secondary amyloidosis present in the area of past trauma as a yellow-white to the pink waxy nodular lesion.

- Corneal Keloid

- These are typically seen in younger age groups, with a history of inflammation, trauma, or in association with the Lowe syndrome.

- Hereditary Hypertrophic Scarring

- Nodular scaring after minor trauma or surgery. Difficult to differentiate from SND at the slit lamp.

- Peripheral Hypertrophic Subepithelial Corneal Degeneration

- Salzmann-like corneal opacities localized to the palpebral aperture.
- Typically bilateral and involve nasal as well as temporal cornea.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is good with the treatment of underlying factors. Though asymptomatic cases may be observed without progression, cases of spontaneous regression have not been reported. Varying rates of recurrence have been reported.

# Complications

Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) causes some serious complications. These include

- It may irritate the ocular surface leading to photophobia

- Tearing

- Blepharospasm

- Secondary recurrent corneal erosions

- Salzmann’s nodules cause a flattening of the cornea, leading to astigmatism in many cases.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most frequently cited factors in the development of Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND) are meibomian gland disease (MGD), dry eye, and extended contact lens wear.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Assessment of corneal pathology may involve optometrists and ophthalmologists to ensure that patients have adequate access to eye care. This can help prevent vision deprecation due to Salzmann nodular degeneration (SND).