The primary mechanism of injury to human tissue in frostbite typically involves a prolonged, progressive insult to peripheral tissues. As the body cools, the first adaptive response is to maintain thermal homeostasis through vasoregulatory mechanisms to essentially shunt warmer fluid circulation to the body’s critical internal organs, referred to as the “core,” while restricting the cooled peripheral flow from reaching the core. Maximal peripheral vasoconstriction occurs at skin surface temperatures down to 15 C (59 F), reducing cutaneous flow from about 200 ml/min to 250 ml/min to 20 ml/min to 50ml/min. At temperatures lower than this, vasoconstriction must be interrupted to preserve metabolic function in the soft tissues. This occurs through a physiologic mechanism referred to as the hunting response, also known as the Lewis reaction, where a reflex vasodilation occurs in rhythmic bursts about three to five times per hour and lasts for about 5 to 10 minutes. Below 10 C (50 F), neuropraxia of the sensory nerves occurs, resulting in loss of cutaneous sensation (numbness). With dropping temperatures, blood viscosity increases causing a "sludging" of erythrocytes and thrombus formation. This leads to endothelial inflammation and the resulting cascade of chemotactic factors, including increased release of prostaglandins (PGF), thromboxane (TXA), cellular adhesion molecules (CAMs), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Leukocyte adhesion is observed, indicating the initiation of endothelial inflammatory response and eventually the metabolites of arachidonic acid which are implicated as mediators of progressive dermal ischemia. Further congestion and stasis lead to circulatory collapse and endothelial plasma leakage with downrange tissue ischemia.

Up to this point, these tissue changes are considered reversible; however, as cooling progresses below 0 C (32 F), negligible cutaneous flow occurs. Without circulation, skin temperature drops at a precipitous rate (more than 0.5 C per minute) and dermal tissues freeze. As would be expected, smaller blood vessels freeze before larger vessels and venous circulation freezes before arterial. Further cooling initially leads to ice crystal formation in the extracellular fluid, then in the intracellular fluid, creating an osmotic fluid shift to the extracellular space. This leads to eventual cell death, which occurs from a combination of metabolic disinhibition from tissue hypoxia, compounded by cellular dehydration from the fluid shift, and likely further compounded by physical tissue destruction from possible abrasive mechanical forces exerted on the crystal-laden tissues.