Authors have proposed various theories to explain the origin and progression of syringomyelia.

- Gardner and Angel publicized the "hydrodynamic theory." Hindbrain hernias obstruct the normal CSF egress. Therefore, the fluid swerves into the central spinal canal pulsating into the central spinal canal with each heartbeat ("water-hammer" effect).

- Williams found pressure gradients of over 100 mg Hg across foramen magnum during Valsalva maneuvers in hindbrain hernia patients and postulated that this cranial spatial pressure differential creates a suctional force ("suck") that pulls the ventricular CSF into the syrinx. The fluid drawn into the cavity would then impact-and-bounce off ("slosh") the caudal and subsequently rostral walls of the syrinx,

- Ball and Dayan argued that CSF drives through the spinal cord surface along para-vascular Virchow-robin spaces because of increased spinal CSF pressure (coughing, sneezing) in patients with foramen magnum obstruction.

- However, there are no compelling large-scale physiological studies to refute or confirm any of these three proposals.

- Oldfield et al. proposed that a CSF pressure wave generated because of systolic "piston-like" caudal displacement of tonsils, contracted the cord forcing fluid into the syrinx cavity from the spinal subarachnoid space.

- Gretiz

Although the pathophysiology concerning the origin of syringomyelia remains an elusive Gordian knot, the pathophysiology underpinning progressive syrinx enlargement may have a common theme.

**Clinicopathological Correlation**

The basic pathology in syringomyelia is a progressively expanding cavity in the central spinal canal. This expanding CSF filled "syrinx" compresses the spinothalamic tract neurons decussating in the anterior white commissure. However, the posterior columns are spared as they are located distally. This results in loss of pain and temperature sensation with preserved touch and vibratory sense (segmental dissociated sensory loss). The upper limbs are preferentially involved in a "cape-like" distribution (sensory loss predominantly in the shoulder area).