**Cavernous Sinus Syndrome**

Cavernous sinus syndrome results from obstruction, inflammation, or increase in pressure in the cavernous sinus. Some of the causes include thrombophlebitis, which can be caused by bacteria or fungus spreading from the nasal mucosa, paranasal sinuses, or after a skull fracture. A thrombus can form in any person with a hypercoagulable state, such as protein C or S deficiency, factor V Leiden, or use of combined oral contraceptive pills. Tumors can cause it as well, such as a locally extensive pituitary adenoma. Additionally, an internal carotid artery aneurysm can cause a similar syndrome. Should the aneurysm rupture, a carotid-cavernous fistula can form, causing increased pressure in the sinus. The symptoms of cavernous sinus syndrome reflect the effects on surrounding structures and the cranial and sympathetic nerves passing through the sinus. Involvement of the sympathetic plexus can result in a partial Horner syndrome. Since CN III, IV, and VI are affected, ophthalmoplegia can be expected. Notably, in a carotid artery aneurysm, CN VI is affected first, as it lies in closest proximity to the artery. Proptosis and even pain when pressing on the globe can also occur due to the increased pressure behind the eye. Diagnosis is usually through head imaging showing occlusion, thickening, or swelling of the sinus, often with engorgement of the ophthalmic veins as a result. Treatment involves treating any underlying infection or surgery to decompress the sinus.

**Venous Sinus Thrombosis**

Thrombi occluding the dural sinuses are rare and typically associated with local trauma or a hypercoagulable state. The occlusion prevents drainage of any tributary veins and results in ischemic damage and increased intracranial pressure. Symptoms depend on the size of the occluded vessel and the area involved but can include focal neurologic deficits, gradually progressive headache, nausea, vomiting, visual disturbances, seizures, and other signs and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure, such as papilledema. Imaging with a CT scan is typically negative, although often an area of absent perfusion is seen in the posterior superior sagittal sinus in the shape of an empty triangle or ‘empty delta sign.’ Magnetic resonance venography is preferred and will show a lack of venous blood flow, confirming the diagnosis. Treatment involves anticoagulation.

**Subdural Hematoma**

A subdural hematoma forms when blood collects beneath the dura mater in the skull; this most commonly occurs due to rupture of the bridging veins that connect the superficial cerebral veins to the major dural sinuses, especially the superior sagittal sinus. The venous blood then leaks out and presses against the brain parenchyma. Since the dural folds do not bind the blood, it is free to extend beyond the suture lines, producing the classic image of a ‘crescent-shaped’ collection of blood between the dural and the brain. This expanding pocket of blood can exert pressure on the brain, causing midline shift or even herniation. This condition can result from head trauma or even by rapid change in velocity (such as a fall that does not result in head trauma), this method of injury is seen most commonly in adults over 80 years of age. Subdural hematomas classically present in the elderly and other patients with cerebral atrophy in whom the bridging veins are already stretched, such as chronic alcoholics. It is also seen in abused infants (the ‘shaken baby syndrome’) as they have especially fragile vessels and is a recognized complication of antiplatelet therapy, anticoagulation, and long-term hemodialysis. The presentation is varied, from absolute loss of consciousness in massive bleeds following severe head trauma, to nearly asymptomatic. An asymptomatic subdural hematoma will delay presentation, and in the case of a sufficiently large bleed, may cause progressive memory loss, weakness, impaired gait, headaches, nausea, and vomiting. In this case, a patient may exhibit a further predisposition to falls and a recurrent acute subdural hematoma on top of the preexisting chronic case. A chronic subdural hematoma is primarily a disease of the elderly. Findings on imaging demonstrate a collection of blood surrounding part of the brain that can stretch around the suture lines, but not into the cisterns or ventricles; a midline shift and ventricular obliteration can accompany this condition. Treatment for subdural hematomas varies from conservative watchful waiting to burr hole surgery or craniotomy with drainage. The determinants of the exact course are patient factors and the size and extent of the hematoma.

**Developmental Venous Anomalies**

Developmental venous malformations (DVAs), also known as cerebral venous angiomas, medullary venous malformations or cerebral venous malformations are an aberration of a venous structure in the cerebrum. The structure of DVAs is typically a single dilated cerebral vein with surrounding tributary veins draining into it, as opposed to several small separate veins. Simply put, it is a vein draining more than its fair share of parenchyma. DVAs affects approximately 3% of the population and are believed to be caused by aberrant development of a particular segment of a cerebral vein in utero, with compensation to allow the DVA to drain its watershed areas properly. DVAs are typically asymptomatic and pose no problems by themselves. However, they may be associated with a myriad of cerebral vascular pathology, including regional brain atrophy, white matter lesions, nearby bleeding, or calcifications. Additionally, in a study of 11 patients with Sturge-Weber syndrome found cerebral venous abnormalities, including developmental venous abnormalities, in each case. This finding is perhaps unsurprising, as Sturge-Weber is a disease of vascular development and is defined by leptomeningeal angiomatosis, causing an absence of subcortical veins which could lead to dilated deep medullary veins compensating for the additional drainage. Treatment of developmental venous abnormalities is conservative, due to their generally benign course and the risk of infarction in the vessels should surgery be attempted.

**Facial Venous Plexus Anastomosis**

The facial venous plexus primarily drains the skin over the nose and of the upper lip. This venous network is valveless and drains to the facial vein. However, it also anastomoses with the pterygoid plexus, along with the veins draining the nasal mucosa. As these vessels are valveless, this allows for free communication between the nasal mucosa and epidermis of the face and the cavernous sinus and from there, the surface of the cerebral cortex. This arrangement is the rationale behind the term ‘danger triangle of the face’ comprising the nose and upper lip, where a pimple or blemish that is ruptured or irritated may cause pathogens to reach the cavernous sinus or cortex, potentially causing infection or cavernous sinus syndrome.