The third leading etiology of pleural effusion in the pediatric population is malignancy. Malignant pleural effusion develops as a result of the following:

- Direct invasion of the pleural wall

- Impairment of lymphatic drainage from the pleural cavity

- Obstruction of the bronchial tree with the development of bronchial obstruction and atelectasis

Pleural effusion secondary to malignancy can be unilateral or bilateral.

**Pleural Effusion Secondary to Malignant Tumor**

Malignancy as a cause of pleural effusion in children can be primary malignancy or metastatic malignancy.

Lymphoma

Lymphoma is the most common malignancy associated with pleural effusion. About 13 % of all childhood malignancy is attributable to lymphoma. Lymphoma is also the most common cause of anterior mediastinal mass in children. Approximately 60% of lymphomas are non-Hodgkin lymphoma, while the remaining 40% are Hodgkin lymphoma. Patients with lymphoma will usually present with an anterior mediastinal mass. About 5% of patients with Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphoma will develop pleural effusion.

Leukemia

T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia can also cause a malignant pleural effusion. In 50% to 70% of lymphoblastic leukemia, pleural effusion will develop. Bone marrow biopsy is necessary to differentiate between the 2 types of malignancy.

Germ Cell Tumor (GCT)

GCT accounts for about 6% to 18% of mediastinal masses. Close to 20% of GCT are malignant. They include seminomas and non-seminomatous tumor-like teratocarcinoma, embryonal carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, yolk sac tumor, and mixed types. Encroachment into adjacent structures in the mediastinum can cause respiratory symptoms. Compression of the tracheobronchial tree and obstruction of lymphatic flow by these tumors can result in the development of pleural effusion.

Neurogenic tumor

Neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma make up about 90% of the posterior mediastinal mass. Growth and expansion can cause mass effect, respiratory distress, and cord compression. Neurogenic tumors generally do not cause pleural effusion.

Chest wall and pulmonary malignancy

These tumors can be primary and metastatic, but it is very difficult to differentiate between the 2. Examples are carcinoids tumor, pleuropulmonary blastoma, and Askin tumors.

Carcinoid tumor

This type of malignancy is common in older children and adolescents. Reportedly it accounts for about 80% to 85% of primary malignant tumors in children. They can cause compressive atelectasis and pneumonia that can lead to the development of an effusion.

Pleuropulmonary blastoma

This is a rare tumor in pediatrics. It is an embryonal, mesenchymal tumor originating from the lung and pleural cavity. Diagnosis of this malignancy is often late. Three types are histologically recognized.

- Macro cystic

- Mixed cystic

- Solid

This tumor can invade adjacent structures causing pneumonia, spontaneous pneumothorax, and effusion.

Askin tumor

This is a rare form of Ewing Sarcoma or primitive neuroectodermal tumor that can arise from the bones of the rib or chest wall, or lungs. Prognosis is poor in patients with Askin tumors. The tumor can invade adjacent structures like muscle ribs, pleura, and the lungs. It can cause mass effects, with compression of nearby organs and the development of pleural effusion.