**Heat Stroke**

- The ambient conditions significantly impact the body's ability to release heat into the surrounding environment

- Clinicians utilize various environment heat stress indices (such as the Wet Bulb Globe Temperature [WBGT]) to predict the current hazardous potential of the surrounding environment

- WBGT combines the ambient temperature, humidity, wind speed, and solar radiation into a calculated value used to estimate the current (or anticipated) risk of heat-related illness and injury
- The relative humidity is the most significant contributing factor to the overall heat index score

- Risk factors for heatstroke include
- Obesity
- Dehydration (including predisposing risk factors such as illnesses, diarrhea)
- History of prior heat illness
- Poor physical conditioning status (sedentary lifestyle)
- Sleep deprivation
- Sweat gland dysfunction
- Medications include:

- Anticholinergics
- Antihistamines
- Stimulants 
- ACE inhibitors
- Diuretics

- If the air is 100% humidified or if the body is in water, body temperature rises any time the environmental temperature rises above 34.4 C (94 F).

- If the air is dry and sufficient convection air currents are flowing, a person can withstand many hours of air temperature at 54.4 C (130 F).

- If the person is doing heavy work, the critical environmental temperature above which heatstroke is likely to occur may be as low as 29.4 C to 32.2 C (85 F to 90 F).

- When the temperature of the body rises beyond a critical temperature into the range of 40.6 C to 42.2 C (105 F to 108 F), heatstroke is likely to develop.

- Hyperpyrexia is exceedingly damaging to the body tissues, especially the brain, and even a few minutes of very high body temperature can sometimes be fatal.

**Treatment for Heat Stroke**

After following the standard ATLS resuscitation protocol (airway, breathing, circulation), the next step is to cool the body to reduce core body temperature rapidly. Whole-body cooling units on-site should be utilized.  As long as the patient is stable, the rapid cooling protocol takes priority even before starting transportation to the local emergency department.