Cryoglobulins are proteins that precipitate from an individual’s serum or plasma at temperatures lower than 37°C. They can be a mixture of immunoglobulin (Ig) and complement components or immunoglobulins alone.

Brouet criteria classify cryoglobulinemia into three subgroups based on their immunoglobulin (Ig) composition.

**Type I Cryoglobulinemia**

It has monoclonal Igs, typically IgG or IgM, and develops in the setting of lymphoproliferative or hematologic disorders of B cell lineage (e.g., multiple myeloma, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or protein-secreting monoclonal gammopathies like monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS).

**Type II****Cryoglobulinemia**

Type I and II are mixed cryoglobulinemia and have polyclonal Igs associated with autoimmune diseases, malignancy, or infections, particularly hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.

Cryoglobulins are composed of a mixture of a monoclonal IgM (or IgG or IgA) with rheumatoid factor (RF) activity and polyclonal Ig in type II cryoglobulinemia.

These are often associated with:

- Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection

- Mixed cryoglobulinemia syndrome

- Hepatitis B virus (HBV)

- HIV

- Autoimmune diseases (mainly systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], and Sjögren's syndrome)

- Lymphoproliferative disorders.

About 10 percent of cases have no identifiable disease association, and hence the cryoglobulinemia is called "essential."

**Type III****Cryoglobulinemia**

Cryoglobulins are composed of a mixture of polyclonal IgG (all isotypes) and polyclonal IgM in type III cryoglobulinemia. These cases are often secondary to autoimmune disorders. Sometimes, they can also be associated with infections (HCV most of the time).