The management of posterior hip dislocations can be divided into into-operative and non-operative techniques. Both types of management are aimed at a reduction as soon as possible. Numerous studies have cited that time to reduction is crucial because the longer the hip is dislocated, the higher the risk of complications, specifically avascular necrosis in the native hip. Most authors recommend a reduction time of fewer than 6 hours, while there is some evidence that fewer than 12 hours may be a critical time; regardless, the rate of secondary complications increases dramatically with increased time-to-reduction.

**Non-Operative Management/Closed Reduction**

The first closed reduction maneuver for hip dislocation was described by **Bigelow**in 1870. This has been followed throughout the literature by several other techniques, each has its own merits and limitations**Allis**has described the most commonly used technique for the reduction of posterior hip dislocation. The patient lies supine and the operator holds the knee flexed at 90 degrees. With an assistant stabilizing the pelvis, the operator applies traction in line with the femur while flexing the hip up to 90 degrees by holding the patient’s knee. Originally Allis described no rotation to be performed. As the hip reduces, the operator gently extends the hip and externally rotates the leg to allow the femoral head to enter the acetabulum. The following is a list of other reduction maneuvers

In all techniques, unless stated otherwise, the patient is placed supine on a stretcher, bed or operating table. The operator stands on the side of the affected hip.

**Bigelow Maneuver**

An assistant stabilizes the pelvis. The operator holds the ankle of the affected leg with one hand and the forearm is under the ipsilateral knee. The hip is flexed to 90 degrees with the ipsilateral lower extremity adducted and internally rotated. Inline femur traction is applied along with abduction, external rotation, and extension of the affected hip.

**Lefkowitz Maneuver**

The operator puts his knee under the patient’s ipsilateral knee in the popliteal fossa and puts his own foot on the Stretcher. With one hand on the patient’s lower anterior thigh and the other hand on the lower leg flexing the patient's knee until the hip is reduced

**Captain Morgan Maneuver**

The patient is supine on a backboard on a stretcher with the pelvis strapped to the board. The operator flexes the patient’s affected leg over his own thigh, close to the popliteal fossa. Then, the operator plantar flexes his foot meanwhile applying upward traction with one hand under the ipsilateral knee and the other hand holding the ipsilateral ankle controlling rotational, abduction, and adduction movements until the hip is reduced

**East Baltimore Lift Maneuver**The operator stands on the side of the affected hip, with the assistant on the opposite side with their knees flexed. They put their arms underneath the knee of the patient’s affected hip applying upward force in line with the femur by extending their knees. Meanwhile, they support their hands on each others’ shoulders with their free hands stabilizing the pelvis. A second assistant at the foot of the stretcher applies a downward leveraging force on the ankle and controls rotational, abduction, and adduction movement to reduce the hip

**Howard Maneuver**

The operator and assistant stand on the side of the affected hip. The assistant applies a lateral traction force on the thigh of the affected side . The operator holds the lower leg by the knee flexing the hip to 90 degrees, then applies traction in line of the femur and uses internal and external rotation until reduction is achieved

**Lateral Traction Method**

The operator applies longitudinal force in line with the femur, while an assistant uses a sheet wrapped around the inner thigh of the patient to apply lateral traction until reduction is achieved. rotational movement is used as necessary

**Piggyback Method**

The patient is brought to the end of the stretcher. The operator flexes the patient's hip and places the patient's knee over his own shoulder using it as a fulcrum and applies a downward force on the tibia until reduction is achieved

**Tulsa technique/Rochester technique/Whistler Technique**

The patient lies supine with both legs flexed. The operator holds the contralateral knee with one hand so that the ipsilateral knee is flexed over his forearm. With the other hand on the ipsilateral ankle applying downward traction and rotational movement to reduce the hip

**Flexion Adduction Method**

Under general anesthesia, with the operator standing on the unaffected side and lifting the affected leg into flexion and maximum adduction whilst maintaining inline traction with the femur. An assistant stabilizes the pelvis and manually pushes the femoral head into acetabulum

**Foot-fulcrum Maneuver**

The operator sits on the bed at the patient’s feet and maximally flexes the affected hip displacing the femoral head more posteriorly in order not to get stuck at the acetabulum rim. The operator puts one foot against the anterior aspect of the ipsilateral ankle and the other foot on the posterolateral aspect of the affected hip. Next, the operator holds the ipsilateral flexed knee and leans backward, using his feet as the fulcrum and applying inline femur traction. If necessary, leaning from side to side can control rotational movement

**The Waddell Technique**

An assistant stabilizes the patient’s pelvis on the bed. The operator hovers over the patient and puts his forearm behind the patient's knee so that the lower leg hangs freely. The operator's forearm rests with the elbow on his own knee and the hand on the other knee. The operator holds the patients’ knee close to the chest with the affected hip is flexed between 60 to 90 degrees and the knee is flexed to 90 degrees. The surgeon then gently leans backward with his feet as a pivot and applying inline femur traction. Adduction and rotational movement is applied as necessary.

**Skoff Maneuver**

The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus with the affected leg upwards. The assistant applies lateral traction on the femur whilst the lower extremity positioned in 90 degrees of hip flexion, 45-degree internal rotation, and 45-degree adduction and 90 degrees of knee flexion. Meanwhile, the operator feels the deformity in the gluteal and pushes the femoral head until reduction into the acetabulum

**Traction Counter Maneuver**

The positioning of the patient and the affected extremity is similar to the Skoff method but the assistant stands within a looped strap placed around the patient’s groin and over the iliac crest leaning backward providing lateral traction. The operator stands in a separate looped strap and places it around the patient’s knee then leans back providing lateral traction in line of the femur, while manipulating the affected leg with his hands. The assistant feels the deformity in the gluteal region, and pushes the femoral head reducing it in the acetabulum

**Stimson Gravity Maneuver**

The patient is positioned prone with the lower limbs flexed 90 degrees at the hips and knees over the edge of a stretcher. The operator applies a downward force on the lower leg or popliteal fossa while using the ankle to control rotation until reduction in achieved

A notable complication of closed reduction and one that every operator must be cautious to avoid is ipsilateral femoral neck fractures. If the reduction appears to be beyond the skill range of the operator, consider consulting an orthopedic surgeon for expert reduction or advice.

Regardless of the technique used for reducing the following applies:

- Assess the stability of the hip after reduction as well as leg length comparison to ensure the hip is reduced.

- Utilize x-ray for proof of reduction.

- For native hip dislocations, obtain a post-reduction CT scan to rule out associated injuries.

- If applicable, educate the patient on protected weight-bearing for 4 to 6 weeks.

**Operative Management**

Indications for open reductions:

- Failed closed reduction attempts.

- Femoral neck fracture (even if undisplaced).

- Noncongruent reduction ( due to incarcerated bony fragment or soft tissue obstruction)

- An associated acetabular or femoral head fracture that wil require fixation.

Open reductions allows removal of associated incarcerated bony fragments or fixation of associated fractures either the proximal femur or the acetabulum. Arthroscopy can also be used in the expert hands to remove intra-articular loose bodies and assess and repair soft tissue structures.

Approaches for open reductions of a dislocated hip either Kocher-Langenbeck (posterior) approach or Smith-Peterson (anterior) approach.