Despite the implementation of the OSH Act in 1970, workplace incidents still lead to injuries and deaths, accounting for over 5000 workers being killed on the job each year.

Further limiting OSHA is the lack of resources and funding. The annual budget of OSHA is less than $600 million, compared to the annual budget of other government entities such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which boasts of a budget greater than 8 billion dollars.

The lack of stringent measures and consequences when employers/workplaces are penalized do very little to deter employers in the long-term. OSHA's weak criminal sanctions and meager financial penalties to employers have led to continued abuse of the policies and lack of adherence from the corporate level. This results in employees not having access to protections afforded by OSHA due to the regulations only being placed at the employer level.

Lastly, the structural differences in today's economy versus those in 1970 when OSHA was commissioned into law are vastly different. Today, far fewer individuals are represented actively by a union, which was more common in 1970. Furthermore, many individuals are independent contractors or self-employed, which falls outside of OSHA's jurisdiction. With the increasing number of online jobs and unique employment contracts, OSHA's standards and restrictions cannot keep up to provide coverage and policies that protect all areas of American employment. The healthcare workforce is advancing in many ways through structure and job duties afforded to mid-level providers and other members of the healthcare team as well, which limits the extent of enforcement that OSHA plays.