Travelers' should receive education concerning risk reduction before travel. Learning objectives include avoiding tap water and ice, frequent hand washing, avoiding leafy vegetables or unpeeled fruit, and avoiding street food. Bismuth subsalicylate (two tabs four times a day) can be used for prophylaxis and can reduce the incidence of travelers' diarrhea by almost half. However, children and pregnant women should avoid Bismuth due to salicylate side effects. In short high-stakes travel, it may be reasonable to start antibiotics as prophylaxis. This is not advisable for longer-term travel. Rifaximin is a commonly used chemoprophylaxis due to its minimal systemic absorption and minimal side effects.

The foundation of diarrhea management is fluid repletion. In mild cases, travelers should focus on increasing fluid intake. Water is usually sufficient exclusively. However, sports drinks, Pedialyte, and other electrolyte fluids can be substituted. Travelers' should avoid milk and juice, as this can worsen diarrhea. In more severe cases, oral rehydration salt tablets can rehydrate a depleted individual. In cases of severe dehydration, intravenous fluids are advised.

Treatment is supportive in mild-moderate cases. In patients without signs of inflammatory diarrhea, loperamide can be used for symptomatic relief.  The typical dose for adults is 4 mg initially with 2 mg after each subsequent loose stool, not to exceed 16 mg total in a day.

Also, travelers can be prescribed antibiotics to take as needed at the onset of symptoms. Ciprofloxacin is commonly used for treatment, though there are concerns with resistance with Campylobacter species.  For this reason, fluoroquinolones are not the drug class of choice for travelers to Asia. Azithromycin is preferred, especially for pregnant travelers and children. A standard regimen is 500 mg daily for three days, though evidence suggests that a single dose of 1000 mg may be slightly more effective. Parents can be given azithromycin powder with instructions to mix with water when needed. Rifaximin is a minimally absorbed antibiotic that is also available and is safe for older children and pregnant travelers.