To support widespread vaccination efforts and increase the global prevention of diseases and dysplastic lesions caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58, clinicians must increase patient awareness during wellness visits on the importance of obtaining HPV vaccination. Physicians should also educate their patients on the different cancers and avoidable precancerous lesions when immunized with 9vHPV. Also, it is imperative to urge patients to complete the recommended three-dose sequence of 9vHPV. Clinicians can increase vaccine completion rates by the in-person scheduling of the next follow-up visits.

Furthermore, to increase patient safety and avoid syncope-related injuries, healthcare professionals should monitor patients for 15 minutes when administering 9vHPV. Further, clinics, pharmacies, and hospitals should implement standard operating procedures to avoid serious injury, such as safe vaccine administration space. Similarly, all the healthcare providers should report Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFI) by VAERS (Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System), which would enhance patient safety.

Interventions that include healthcare education, tailored systems changes, feedback, and early initiation of the human papillomavirus vaccine administration may improve patient adherence and completion of vaccination schedules.****Moreover, healthcare professionals should be aware of and attentive to the acute onset of symptoms of an anaphylactic reaction. All healthcare team members should receive training in the administration of epinephrine auto-injectors. Interprofessional strategies can help achieve better outcomes with fewer adverse reactions while increasing vaccine-completion rates and increasing public awareness of the importance of HPV vaccination with 9vHPV.