Spontaneous coronary artery dissection poses major therapeutic challenges given limited evidence to guide management. Therefore, the choice of medical treatment, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), fibrinolytic therapy, mechanical hemodynamic support, and heart transplantation is largely dictated by the clinical presentation and the degree of compromise to coronary flow on the angiographic study. Conservative therapy, rather than revascularization, is the preferred strategy for most patients. Patients should be admitted for 3-5 days to monitor for the early hazard of dissection extension or new recurrent SCAD.

**Revascularization**

PCI/CABG

Patients presenting with acute myocardial infarction who have symptoms of ongoing ischemia or hemodynamic compromise should be considered for revascularization with PCI or CABG. However, revascularization in patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection is technically challenging and associated with higher failure rates or complications. Until further evidence is available to guide therapy, a conservative approach is recommended in patients with non-critical luminal obstruction, normal TIMI grade 3 flow, and a stable clinical situation.

**Fibrinolytic Therapy**

Fibrinolytic therapy in spontaneous coronary artery dissection is avoided because of risks of dissection, expansion, or even rupture leading to cardiac tamponade.

**Medical Management**

There are currently no clinical trials to guide optimal medical management following spontaneous coronary artery dissection. Patients should be considered for long-term aspirin and beta-blocker therapy. Dual antiplatelet therapy followed by antiplatelet monotherapy is usually indicated in patients who have undergone PCI with stenting for spontaneous coronary artery dissection. The indication is unclear in patients without stents. Anticoagulant therapy is not recommended due to the risks of dissection extension/expansion.

Statin therapy should be considered for patients with dyslipidemia. In patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction following spontaneous coronary artery dissection, the addition of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi), angiotensin receptor antagonists (ARB), and aldosterone antagonists are recommended.

**Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator (ICD)/Mechanical Left Ventricular Assist Devices (LVAD)/Heart Transplantation**

Extreme cases of significant myocardial injury, hemodynamic instability, and cardiogenic shock may require LVAD as a bridge to transplantation. ICD placement should be considered for secondary prevention in patients with severe left ventricular function impairment.