In addition, the terminal nerve or cranial nerve zero****has been identified as a separate cranial nerve in the human brain dating back to 1914 but is overlooked by most current anatomical textbooks.

Functionally it has been regarded as pheromones processing unconsciously by regulating autonomic responses through hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), possibly via the kisspeptin neuronal network. Clinically, a disruption of the normal embryological migratory pathway of GnRH neural crest cells of the olfactory placode and basal forebrain can result in Kallman syndrome, a genetic condition characterized by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with partial or total anosmia, also resulting in abnormal sexual development in both sexes.

The canonical descriptions of the cranial nerves serve as an overview of the current medical literature, but research advances continuously reveal new information leading to riveting debates regarding the original classification of some cranial nerve fibers. For instance, it has been found that the nervus intermedius, known for carrying taste fibers from the tongue and associated with cranial nerve VII, has visceral efferent connections with the vestibulocochlear nerve in the internal auditory meatus.

Also, the classification of the cranial accessory nerve as a portion of either vagus or accessory nerves is continually disputed. In the majority of cases cranial accessory nerve, with its fibers originating in the nucleus ambiguus of the medulla, has no connections with the spinal accessory nerve and its fibers originating in the spinal accessory nucleus of the spinal cord.

However, the sensory function and modulation of the hypothalamic endocrine and autonomic systems make it physiologically and clinically relevant.