Retroperitoneal hematoma is a heterogeneous entity caused by a variety of etiologies, as noted above. Regardless of the cause, retroperitoneal hematomas must be evaluated and managed aggressively as they are associated with high morbidity and mortality.

Management of retroperitoneal hematoma does not come in a “one size fits all” approach.  Therefore, an interprofessional approach to these patients is paramount in providing adequate care. Coordinating and mobilizing multiple specialties and resources is vital to provide life-saving treatments.

In the case of the trauma patient, the diagnosis of retroperitoneal hematoma by the radiologist should trigger a cascade of events that goes on to involve multiple specialties. Trauma or general surgery, interventional radiology, orthopedics, and blood bank all may need to be involved acutely in the management of the patient. Constant communication between specialties may be necessary to determine the adequate plan of care (i.e., between diagnostic radiology, surgery, and interventional radiology).

Similarly, in non-traumatic retroperitoneal hematoma, interprofessional team care and coordination are essential. By definition, these patients have no history of trauma and are often medical admissions being managed by medical clinicians. Recognition of retroperitoneal hematoma based upon CT scan imaging should trigger the same cascade as above. The clinician should involve surgery and interventional radiology as well as diagnostic radiology to have a collaboration regarding the most appropriate treatment course.

For all of the above reasons, it is imperative that there be a team-centered working relationship between all parties. This relationship should be fostered on a regular basis and not just at a time of emergency. By having an amicable relationship between specialties on a daily basis, there is a greater chance for effective and unhindered teamwork when a critical patient or crisis arises. [Level 3]