The cardiologist, specifically an electrophysiologist, is generally responsible for starting the patient on antiarrhythmic medication. Still, the primary care provider (clinicians, including MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurse, and pharmacist must monitor the patient. These medications are not benign, and all healthcare workers who look after patients on antiarrhythmic agents should be very familiar with the different antiarrhythmic agents. Cardiology specialty nurses are beneficial in monitoring since they have the training to recognize adverse events, understand treatment goals, and inform the specialist or other clinicians of any concerns. The pharmacist can also be a board-certified cardiology specialist and assist in agent selection, ongoing monitoring, checking for drug interactions, and maintaining communication with the prescriber. All interprofessional team members must report any changes in patient status to the rest of the team; this can include changes in the patient's condition, potential drug interactions or adverse effects, and signs of therapeutic failure. In such instances, any team member must promptly document their findings in the patient's medical record and notify other team members; in this way, appropriate corrective measures can be implemented, and all team members will have access to the same patient data. These examples of interprofessional team dynamics can drive positive outcomes for patients. [Level 5]

Each agent in the revised Vaughn-Williams classification includes distinctive side effect profiles that require individual monitoring. If there is a doubt about the medication, the clinician should seek a cardiology consult. Nurses and allied health professionals have a substantial role in managing arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation. The European Society of Cardiology guidelines (2016) for managing atrial fibrillation suggest collaborative care in managing atrial fibrillation.