Nontunneled central venous catheters are usually placed at the bedside. Informed consent needs to be obtained before the procedure in most cases. In an emergency, however, consent is implied. The proceduralist should convey the procedure indication, plan, benefits, and potential complications (e.g., pneumothorax) to the patient and legal guardian. The need to perform another procedure, such as placing a chest tube for pneumothorax, should also be conveyed while taking consent for the procedure. An appropriate position of the patient for the selected site is necessary. In the case of the internal jugular and subclavian access, a 15-degree Trendelenburg position should be obtained if feasible according to the clinical situation. This position also minimizes the risk of venous air embolism during the procedure.

Precannulation vein assessment via bedside ultrasonography is recommended to help identify relevant anatomy before the procedure and to help select the most appropriate site for the patient.

A strict aseptic technique for site preparation and the operator is required. Surgical antiseptic hand wash, long-sleeved sterile gown, surgical mask, gloves, and head covering are required for the operator.

The patient should be covered in a sterile drape large enough to cover the entire patient, exposing only the cleaned access site. The ultrasound probe and gel should be placed in a sterile sheath with the help of a bedside assistant in a sterile fashion. By the end of the procedure, a timeout should be called with the assistant to confirm the patient, procedure, and site of the procedure.

SICSAG and HPS first published the central venous catheter placement insertion bundle and associated tools in May 2007. This bundle has five key aspects that minimize the risk of catheter-related bloodstream infection if addressed.