**Auscultation**

Murmurs are identifiable through auscultation using a manual or electronically enhanced stethoscope

Location

- Aortic valve: second intercostal space at the right sternal border.

- Pulmonary valve: second intercostal space at the left sternal border.

- Tricuspid valve: fourth intercostal space at the left sternal border.

- Mitral valve: fifth intercostal space at the left midclavicular line.

- Radiation: Murmurs may radiate, allowing auscultation at remote locations

Quality: Intensity

- Grade I: faint murmur, barely audible

- Grade II: soft murmur

- Grade III: easily audible but without a palpable thrill

- Grade IV: easily audible murmur with a palpable thrill

- Grade V: loud murmur, audible with stethoscope lightly touching the chest

- Grade VI: loudest murmur, audible with stethoscope not touching the chest

Quality: Pitch

- High or low frequency

- Other descriptive terms: blowing, harsh, musical, rumbling, squeaky

Quality: Profile

- Crescendo: a murmur which increases in intensity

- Decrescendo: a murmur that decreases in intensity

- Crescendo-decrescendo: a murmur that initially increases in intensity, peaks, and then decreases in intensity

- Plateau: static intensity

Timing

- Systolic: occurs at or after S1, finishing before or at S2

- Diastolic: occurs at or after S2, finishing before or at S1

- Can be described as early, mid, late

- Other murmurs: systolic murmurs can be holosystolic, throughout systole; continuous murmurs begin in systole and terminate after S2

**Maneuvers**

Most murmurs will increase or decrease in volume when the patient performs certain maneuvers. This dynamic quality of murmurs is used as a clinical tool during the patient's physical exam to aid in diagnosing a specific murmur

- Handgrip: Increases afterload. Hand gripping increases the strength of aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, and ventricular septal defect murmurs. It decreases the intensity of murmurs due to hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and mitral valve prolapse.

- Squatting: Increases preload. Squatting increases the intensity of aortic stenosis, mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation, and mitral regurgitation. It decreases the strength of murmurs due to hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and mitral valve prolapse.

- Valsalva: Decreases preload. Valsalva increases the strength of murmurs due to hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and mitral valve prolapse. It decreases the intensity of aortic stenosis, mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, and ventricular septal defects.

- Standing abruptly: Decreases preload and has the same effects as Valsalva. Sudden standing increases the intensity of murmurs in hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and mitral valve prolapse. It decreases the strength of aortic stenosis, mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, and ventricular septal defects.

- Amyl nitrate: Decreases afterload. Amyl nitrate increases the intensity of aortic stenosis, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and mitral valve prolapse. It decreases the severity of aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, and ventricular septal defects.

**Imaging**

Symptomatic patients presenting with new murmurs are always investigated with imaging. An echocardiogram is preferred to evaluate cardiac structure and function because of its practicality, sensitivity, and specificity for detecting valvular diseases. It also dynamically evaluates the heart, allowing for the diagnosis of disease otherwise unseen on nondynamic imaging. Echocardiography and a chest X-ray are recommended by several major organizations such as the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart Association, and the European Society of Cardiology as the first imaging studies to perform to evaluate symptomatic murmurs.

Several types of echocardiography are available. The least invasive is trans-thoracic echocardiography. Trans-thoracic echocardiography allows for the accurate diagnosis of valvular diseases, embolism, endocarditis, and aortic dissection. It is the simplest echocardiographic method, but in some patients, images may be obstructed by the rib cage or excess tissue in obese patients. For these patients, another more invasive technique, trans-esophageal echocardiography, may be appropriate. Trans-esophageal echocardiography eliminates image obstruction by visualizing the heart via a transducer introduced into the esophagus.

Finally, cardiac catheterization can be utilized for identifying pathologies. The catheter is used to measure pressure and flow in the heart, providing valuable information to the provider. This is the most invasive form of identification and thus is typically reserved if other modalities fail.