**Closed Reduction- K-wire Joystick Technique**

- Insert a 1.6 or 2.0 mm K-wire percutaneously and push the radial head to an appropriate position. Use II to assist K-wire insertion and confirm fracture reduction.

**Closed Reduction and Internal Fixation - Elastic Stable Intramedullary Nailing (ESIN)-(Métaizeau technique)**

- There are 2 possible entry points that can be used:

- **Distal lateral entry point:**This is the lateral side of the radius and 1.5 cm proximal to the physis. The incision should be made at this point and extended 2 cm distally.
- **Dorsal entry point:**This is 1.5 cm proximal to the growth plate in the metaphysis, in line with the Lister tubercle, which lies in the physis in children. A transverse skin incision should be made.

- If II is unavailable, either entry points can be utilized by making an incision 3-4 cm proximal to the wrist joint laterally or dorsally.

- Use a surgical clip or scissors and small retractors to dissect down to bone under direct vision. Be aware of the superficial radial nerve, and the cephalic vein will be in this region and should be retracted radially.

- Place the drill or awl directly onto the bone and ensuring the drill or awl is perpendicular to the bone, perforate the proximal cortex under direct vision. Do not use a hammer with the awl as there is a risk of perforation of the distal cortex.

- Once in the medullary canal, lower the drill or awl to 45 degrees to the medullary axis and advance.

- The nail has a blunt tip making it difficult to enter the hard epiphysis, and it can sometimes displace the radial head. So, next, contour the nail tip by cutting the inner end.

- Attach the nail into the inserter.

- With the tip perpendicular to the medullary axis, insert the nail till the distal cortex is felt. Rotate the nail 180 degrees so that the curved side of the nail tip can be used to glide the nail and advance up the canal to the fracture site using an oscillating maneuver.

- Using II, rotate the arm to achieve a maximal displacement of the fracture. Then point the nail tip to the radial head fragment.

- If the head is too displaced for the nail tip to enter it, reduction techniques should be used, such as traction or by applying pressure over the radial head under varus stress.

- If unsuccessful, the nail should be removed, recontoured to give a more distinct bend, and then reinserted.

- If the nail still cannot advance into the head, the blunt end of a K-wire can be inserted percutaneously through a stab incision, and this can be used to push the radial head in order to reduce the fracture.

- The fragment may be too small, and, in such cases, the sharp end of the K-wire may need to be used as a ‘joystick.’ Care must be taken to preserve the blood supply via the metaphyseal branches to the radial head.

- In cases where II is unavailable, or the displaced radial head cannot be reduced, you should proceed with open reduction.

**Open Reduction**

- A lateral skin incision can be used by placing the elbow at 90 degrees and palpating the lateral condyle. Make a 5-6 cm gently curved skin incision over the lateral condyle.

- Alternatively, a posterolateral incision may be used by making an incision behind the supracondylar ridge to the lateral border of the ulna.

- To avoid potential vascular damage, attempt reduction through a closed capsule and, if unsuccessful, then perform a dorsolateral arthrotomy.

- Use a K-wire or dental hook to manipulate the radial head.

- Advance the nail into the radial head.

- Disimpact the head with light taps using the hammer at the nail end.

- Achieve anatomical reduction by rotating the nail either anticlockwise or clockwise.

- If a lateral nail entry point was used:

- Carefully withdraw the nail by 1 cm in order to cut the nail outside the skin. 
- Cut the nail near the bone using a nail cutter.
- Reinsert the nail to its original position using an impactor
- Check that the nail tip is not going to cause irritation of the superficial radial nerve.


- If a dorsal nail entry point was used:

- The nail should be left long or covered with an end cap to prevent tendon rupture (extensor pollicis longus at risk).


- Close the wound.

**Open Reduction Techniques- K-wire Fixation**

- Follow the above steps in the open reduction section to achieve anatomical reduction at the fracture site.

- Stab incisions should be made over the entry point. An oscillating drill should be used to avoid thermal damage; if unavailable, a standard drill should be used slowly and/or cooled with irrigation fluid. A drill sleeve can be used to protect soft tissues and stabilize the K-wire.

- K-wires should be inserted from the free fragment into the main fragment.

- Ensure that the K-wire entry points are such that the K-wires are well apart at the fracture site. This will ensure rotational stability.

- Confirm the position of the K-wires on both AP and lateral views using II and adjust as appropriate.

- Trim the K-wires and bury them or allow them to protrude through the skin for removal under local anesthesia at a later stage. If left protruding, there is a risk of pin site infection.

- Close the wound.

- K-wire fixation provides minimal stability, and additional immobilization is needed to avoid secondary fracture displacement. Immobilize the arm using a cast or splint with the elbow in 90 degrees of flexion.

- Protruding K-wires should be removed after follow-up X-rays at 3 to 4 weeks post-operatively.

- Buried K-wires can be removed under anesthetic as a day case.