To understand the pathophysiology of deep neck infections it is essential to have a thorough understanding of the cervical compartments and interfascial spaces. The cervical fascia can be divided into superficial and deep fascia. The superficial fascia is the subcutaneous tissue of the neck and contains the platysma. This layer completely envelops the head and neck. The deep fascia of the neck is divided into superficial, middle, and deep layers. The superficial layer of the deep fascia covers the submaxillary and parotid glands, the trapezius, sternocleidomastoid, and strap muscles. It is also termed the investing layer. Infections of odontogenic and submandibular origin affect this space, which includes the submandibular and masticator spaces. The middle layer encloses vital parts of the neck including the pharynx, larynx, trachea, upper esophagus, thyroid, and parathyroid glands. Infections of pharyngeal, tonsillar, and laryngeal origin affect this space, which includes the parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal spaces. This space can also become involved by odontogenic infections of the 2nd and 3rd molars, where infection can spread inferior to the dentate line of the mandible to penetrate the middle layer of deep cervical fascia. The deep layer of the deep cervical fascia, also called prevertebral fascia, covers the vertebral column and muscles of the spine. There is an alar fascia present in this space that forms the terminus of the retropharyngeal space and lies between the middle layer fo deep cervical fascia and the prevertebral fascia proper. The space between this alar layer and the prevertebral fascia is the so-called "danger space," as it is in continuity with the mediastinum and infections of upper aerodigestive origin can spread freely to cause mediastinitis. True retropharyngeal infections can involve the deep layer of deep cervical fascia, but the hematogenous spread of other infections (i.e. in IV drug users) can lead to vertebral and prevertebral abscesses.

Infections in any of these spaces can lead to clinical lymphadenopathy in the appropriate lymphatic chains, most commonly in the anterior and posterior cervical lymphatic chains. Host factors such as immunocompromised state, the presence of comorbid conditions such as diabetes, trauma, recent instrumentation in the area such as surgery or dental work, and IV drug abuse can further influence the spread of infection to deeper layers.