A pressure vessel and 100% oxygen are the tools to provide the benefits of hyperbaric oxygenation to the body. There are 2 types of pressure vessels, mono-place chambers, and multi-place chambers. Mono-place chambers which can hold only one person. They are usually made of a transparent acrylic tube with patient access through a metal door on one end. In mono-place chambers, 100% oxygen is used to pressurize the tube while the patient is breathing the chamber's ambient oxygen. Some of those mono-place chambers are equipped with a separate breathing mask to provide air when air breaks are used. Mono-place chambers can be outfitted with ventilators, infusion pumps, and physiologic monitoring capabilities to provide high acuity care. Mono-place chambers can fit into a standard hospital room and get piped into the hospital oxygen and air supply.

Multi-place chambers are made of steel with acrylic viewing ports and can fit 2 to more than 20 people. They are pressurized with air while the patients breathe oxygen through either a tight-fitting mask or a special hood that is sealed around the neck with a rubber neck dam. For any potential air breaks the patients will breathe the chamber air. These multi-place chambers are often large complexes with large compressors and reserve air and oxygen tanks.

Both chamber types require special manufacturing and installation guidelines which are governed by special fire protection codes such as NFPA 99 in the United States. Facility accreditation of hyperbaric programs is recommended and available through the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society in the United States and some international locations.

A transcutaneous oximeter can be helpful in determining the level of tissue oxygen tension on room air and during hyperbaric treatments and have been shown to have a positive predictive value of 0.88 for healing when a level over 200 mm Hg is reached during the treatment.