Menstrual irregularities and weight gain are the most common adverse effects of MPA.

Both genders reported experiencing changes in breast and sexual function. Females who used the medroxyprogesterone contraceptive injection reported breast pain (2.8%) and a decreased libido (5.5%). Post-market reports with the injection usage determined other adverse effects such as breast lumps, changes in breast size, nipple bleeding, galactorrhea, dyspareunia, lactation suppression, and changes in libido.

Angioedema, anaphylactic shock, and dermatologic reactions have been reported in users. Between 1 and 5% of the medroxyprogesterone users reported hot flashes and acne vulgaris. Alopecia was reported in 1.1% of patients who received the contraceptive injections. Postmarketing reports of contraceptive injection recipients indicated the following adverse effects: angioedema, dry skin, increased body odor, hyperhidrosis, axillary swelling, melasma, scleroderma, and urticaria. In women who used medroxyprogesterone in addition to estrogen for hormone replacement therapy, the following adverse effects occurred: chloasma or melasma after discontinuation, erythema multiforme, erythema nodosum, and alopecia.

Patients utilizing medroxyprogesterone contraceptive injections  have reported dizziness (5.6%), insomnia (1% to 5%), nervousness (10.8%), depression (1% to 5%), anxiety or irritability (1% to 5%) and headaches (9% to 16.5%). If a patient experiences a headache or migraine with focal features consistent with cerebral ischemia, then discontinuation of medroxyprogesterone is recommended.

Women utilizing the IM depot contraceptive injection reported gastrointestinal effects such as abdominal pain, nausea, and bloating. Recipients of the subcutaneous contraceptive injections

Progestins stimulate the respiratory center and, as a result, during pregnancy and the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle in women. In addition, MPA can cause women to hyperventilate and become hypocapnic due to elevated levels of endogenous progestins.

A study conducted in Thailand reported that pregnant women who took MPA had infants with polysyndactyly. The study also determined that the infants of these mothers were at an increased risk of having chromosomal abnormalities.