Once the diagnosis of a retrobulbar hematoma is confirmed, ophthalmology should be emergently consulted. However, if optic nerve ischemia is suspected and intraocular pressure is greater than or equal to 40 mmHg, the attending physician should not delay definitive management.

If possible, the surgical area should be prepped sterilely and cleaned with povidone-iodine solution. Otherwise, saline irrigation may be sufficient in this emergent situation. Adequate anesthesia (1 to 2 milliliters of lidocaine 1% to 2% with epinephrine 1 to 100,00) should be administered into the cutaneous and deep tissues of the lateral canthus. Care should be taken to point the needle away from the globe when injecting. Next, the surgical area must be irrigated with sterile water to visualize important landmarks and flush away any foreign debris that may be present. Once there is adequate visualization, a hemostat can be used to clamp horizontally across the lateral canthus for approximately one minute to aid in hemostasis and create a physical marker for cutting. After this, forceps should be used to raise the skin of the lower eyelid, and the lateral canthus should be cut 1 to 2 cm with Wescott scissors.

The canthotomy will expose the lateral canthal tendon, which can also be identified with a strumming motion using scissors. The lateral canthal tendon can be further exposed by pulling down on the lateral lower lid with a hemostat or forceps. The tendon’s inferior crus should be cut by pointing the scissors inferoposteriorly. At this point, the lower eyelid should be completely mobile. LOCC helps alleviate the increased intraorbital pressure by freeing the lower eyelid from the orbit. The lateral canthal incision may need to be repaired at a later date.

Mild cases of RBH without signs or symptoms of optic nerve compromise should be managed by observation and/or medical treatment.

Reports have shown these to help lower intraocular pressure. Acetazolamide is another well-studied drug that can be administered orally or intravenously to successfully lower IOP.

In cases of postoperative RBH, prevention may be an effective form of management. Although specific risk factors for postoperative RBH have not been well-established in the literature, surgical optimization may be preventative. Case series have reported the development of RBH in patients using anticoagulants at the time of orbital wall fracture repair and orbitotomy. In light of this, it may be advisable to inform patients to stop non-essential anticoagulants before surgical repair. Perioperatively, adequate hemostasis should be achieved. The prevention of Valsalva maneuvers during the procedure may also be helpful.