The following steps are used in performing the supratrochlear nerve block:

- First, identify landmarks as presented and discussed above in the anatomy section.

- 3 mm medial to the vertical line drawn from the apex of the lacrimal caruncle along the supraorbital margin

- Use an aseptic solution to cleanse the area in preparation for the injection of the anesthetic. Aseptic solutions may include but are not limited to alcohol, chlorhexidine, or betadine. Betadine, especially on the forehead, can be more irritating than other options noted.

- Next, draw up the desired amount of anesthetic into a syringe, using a 25 gauge (in adults) or a 30 gauge (in pediatrics) hypodermic needle. For most patients, we recommend having 3 to 5mL of anesthetic available for the procedure. Please note, however, that care is necessary when treating pediatric patients, especially infants with this procedure, and it requires attention regarding weight-based toxic dose for the various anesthetic agents.

- We recommend inserting the needle at the site where the supratrochlear nerve emerges. After inserting the needle just under the dermis, the provider should perform a test aspiration to ensure no vascular structures have been breached. Following confirmation of proper positioning, the provider should continue to inject 0.5 to 1.0 mL of anesthetic and create a wheal.

- Next, the provider should advance the needle closer to the supratrochlear nerve. Perform a second test with aspiration and continue to inject another 1.0 to 3.0 mL of anesthetic.

- Lastly, the needle should be removed and pressure applied to avoid bleeding complications. Providers can also gently massage the area to aid in hemostasis and dispersing the anesthetic, respectively.