In acute Q fever, the white cell count can be normal or elevated; the platelet count can be elevated or decreased. A frequent finding is an elevation in liver enzymes, while serum bilirubin can be normal. CSF reveals mononuclear pleocytosis with elevated protein levels. Chest x-ray reveals opacities that are multiple, rounded, can be segmental or nonsegmental, or pleural-based, along with hilar adenopathy. An echocardiogram may reveal vegetations, but often in only half of the cases of chronic Q fever. Diagnosis is confirmed by serology or PCR.

Tissue samples obtained from Q fever patients should be handled under biosafety level 3 for culture as they are highly infectious. The serological test of choice to diagnose acute and chronic Q fever is an indirect immunofluorescent test. In this test, two different IgG antibodies are detected: Anti phase I IgG antibody and anti-phase II IgG antibody. Seroconversion typically occurs in the second week, and most patients have detectable antibodies in the third week.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is employed to diagnose patients in whom acute infection is suspected, but initial serologic testing does not support the diagnosis.

Due to extreme infectivity, C. burnetii must be cultured in a biosafety level 3 containment setting.

A positive blood culture, PCR, and or anti-phase I IgG antibody titer ≥ 1:800 (>1:1024 in the U.S.) is diagnostic of chronic Q fever (endocarditis).

Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography can help support the diagnosis. Some case reports also suggest that 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) imaging is found to help establish the diagnosis of Q fever prosthetic joint infections and endocarditis.