A history of smoking, alcohol consumption, and a diet low in fruits and vegetables accounts for almost 90% of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in the United States. In developing countries, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma risk factors are less certain but may include poor nutritional status, a low intake of fruit and vegetables, and drinking beverages at high temperatures. Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection has been correlated with an increased incidence of squamous cell cancers of the upper esophagus. Preexisting anatomical diseases such as achalasia, caustic strictures, gastrectomy, and atrophic gastritis are associated with an increased risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. A patient's current or previous squamous cell carcinoma of the aerodigestive tract may be related to synchronous or metachronous squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Tylosis, a rare autosomal dominant syndrome associated with non-epidermolytic palmoplantar keratosis (or Howel-Evans syndrome), has a strong association with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and carries a 40% to 90% risk of developing cancer by age 70. The gene TEC (tylosis with esophageal cancer) has been linked to a region on chromosome 17q25, which has been implicated in sporadic squamous cell carcinoma as well. Bloom syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive syndrome associated with leukemia, lymphomas, and Wilms tumor (or chromosomal breakage syndrome), may include esophageal squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed at an early age. Bloom syndrome is caused by a mutation in the BLM gene at 15q26 with elevated chromatid exchanges that may develop multiple malignancies. Fanconi anemia, an autosomal recessive disorder with congenital malformations, pancytopenia, and risk for hematologic malignancies, also contributes to an increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma. In post-marketing surveillance, oral bisphosphonates have been linked to esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.

Most esophageal adenocarcinomas in the United States arise from Barrett metaplasia, of which 80% of cases are attributed to a history of smoking, high body mass index, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and a low fruit and vegetable diet. Alcohol intake has not been associated with adenocarcinoma. Barrett esophagus metaplasia has been associated with epidermal growth factor polymorphisms and other conditions which increase esophageal acid exposure, including Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, scleroderma, lower esophageal sphincter relaxing drugs, and procedures. Familial Barrett esophagus may be associated with rare autosomal inherited dominant susceptible alleles. It should be suspected in a patient with esophageal/GEJ adenocarcinoma, particularly in a white male, with GERD and older than 40 years. A high fiber diet, antioxidants, fruits and vegetables, folate, vitamin C, proton-pump inhibitors, and NSAIDs can protect against the development and progression of Barrett esophagus, and hence, esophageal adenocarcinoma, but despite these associations, none has been confirmed to be a preventive intervention.