Fluphenazine is contraindicated for use in patients with hepatobiliary disease or hepatic insufficiency as it can precipitate or worsen cholestatic jaundice.

The drug should be discontinued if ANC is less than 1000, and discontinuation should be considered if there is an unexplained decrease in the patient's WBC count.

This medication carries a black-box warning regarding its use in elderly patients with psychosis associated with major neurocognitive disorder and other dementia-related illnesses for increased risk of cerebrovascular accidents and death in these populations. Meta-analyses have revealed 1.6 to 1.7 times increased risk of death in elderly patients with a major neurocognitive disorder and associated psychosis prescribed antipsychotics versus placebo.

The risks and benefits of prescribing fluphenazine should be weighed against possible side effects guiding use. Caution is necessary for patients with comorbid cardiac electrophysiological conditions due to possible alterations in cardiac conduction and electrocardiogram changes. Patients with impairments in gastrointestinal functioning, especially motility disorders or urinary retention, should be closely monitored for exacerbations in these conditions after starting fluphenazine; this is related to the drug's anticholinergic properties. Clinicians should exercise caution using this drug in patients with coexisting ocular conditions such as narrow-angle glaucoma, motor disorders such as parkinsonism, renal insufficiency, or seizure disorders.

In pregnancy, clinicians should consider avoiding this medication during the first trimester, and caution is advised in the third trimester. There is no human safety data on fluphenazine in lactation and breastfeeding, so it is best to seek alternative therapy.