The maximum dosage of pancrelipase is as follows:

**Adults**

The recommendation is a maximum of 10,000 lipase units per kg per day orally (PO) or less than 4,000 lipase units per gram of dietary fat per day.

**Geriatric**

The recommendation is a maximum of 10,000 lipase units per kg per day PO or less than 4,000 lipase units per gram of dietary fat per day.

**Adolescents**

The recommendation is a maximum of 10,000 lipase units per kg per day PO or less than 4,000 lipase units per gram of dietary fat per day.

But at no time should the maximum dosage exceed 2,500 lipase units per kg per meal.

**Infant Dosage**

Infant dosages are product-specific. But the maximum dosage is not to exceed 4,000 lipase units per gram of ingested fat per day or 10,000 lipase units/kg per day.

**Neonates**

Neonatal dosages are product-specific.

There are no dosage adjustments required for renal and hepatic impairment.

**Drug Interactions That May Require Dosage Adjustments**

- Antacids: The efficacy of gastrointestinal enzyme replacement therapy becomes reduced in the presence of antacids. Calcium and magnesium cations exert their effect by forming poorly soluble calcium and magnesium soaps and precipitation of glycine-conjugated bile salts based on in-vitro studies.

- Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors: Concurrent administration of gastrointestinal enzyme replacement therapy reduces the efficacy of alpha-glucosidase inhibitors. Ideally, the administration of each drug should be at different times. But this may not be possible, considering both drugs are to b administered around mealtime.