With intraperitoneal bleeding, trauma, or abscess, the physiologic response of inflammation and swelling can be held responsible for intra-abdominal hypertension. In the setting of intestinal obstruction, the dilated loops of bowels can cause compressive symptoms within the abdominal cavity. As abdominal pressure increases, the syndrome may begin to involve other organ systems due to further compression.

Intra-abdominal hypertension is graded from I to IV:

- Grade I: IAP 12-15 mm Hg

- Grade II: IAP 16-20 mm Hg

- Grade III: IAP 21-25 mm Hg

- Grade IV: IAP >25 mm Hg

Any evidence of continued intra-abdominal hypertension with organ failure is defined as ACS. However, the incidence of organ failure is highest in patients with grade IV IAH. Organs typically affected include the heart, lungs, and kidneys.

Physiologic cardiac sequelae include decreased cardiac output and increased central venous pressure (CVP) due to inferior vena cava (IVC) and portal vein compression, increase systemic vascular resistance (SVR), leads to hypotension. Pulmonary involvement can present as decreased thoracic volumes and elevated peak pressures from compression of the diaphragm, a decrease in P/F ratio, and hypercarbia. Renal compression can lead to decreased GFR and low urine output. Visceral blood flow is also reduced.  Neurologic symptoms can include increased Intra-cranial pressure (ICP) from the elevated CVP due to IVC compression, contributing to a decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP).