The clinical picture of measles can be divided into three stages:  prodromal, eruptive, and convalescent and should be suspected in patients with the classic triad of the three “Cs”:  cough, conjunctivitis, and coryza. The primary or prodromal phase lasts four to six days and is characterized by the presence of high fever, malaise, coryza, conjunctivitis, palpebral edema, and dry cough.  Most cases show the characteristic Koplik spots of the disease, located in the buccal mucosa at the height of the second molar, and appear two to three days before the rash and disappear on the third day. The second phase, the eruptive, is characterized by the appearance of a maculopapular rash, initially fine that subsequently becomes confluent. The rash begins behind the auricle and along the hair implantation line, and extends downward to the face, trunk, and extremities. The third phase or convalescence occurs after three to four days when the rash begins to disappear, in the same order in which it appeared, leaving brown spots and producing a thin peeling of the skin. The fever disappears two to three days after the rash begins, as does the general malaise.

In atypical measles, the onset is acute, with high fever, headache, abdominal pain, and myalgia. The rash may be minimal in children with measles modified by the vaccine.  In addition, they may not have one or more of the classic triad - cough, coryza, or conjunctivitis. Unusual manifestations of measles include pneumonia, otitis media, myocarditis, pericarditis, and encephalitis.