On arrival at the ED, the first test should be a CT head without contrast to rule out hemorrhagic stroke. In the meantime, quickly gather information including blood pressure, blood glucose level, the time of last known normal (LKN) or onset of stroke signs/symptoms (s/s), National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS), use of anticoagulants/antiplatelets, past medical and surgical history, renal function, and if indicated run the alteplase (tPA) checklist. If the CT head is negative for bleed and there is a concern for basilar artery occlusion (BAO), subsequent intravenous access and CT angiogram of the head and neck are advised to rule out an LVO. If a CT angiogram is unobtainable, an MR angiogram can be used to evaluate cerebral vessels, provided no contraindication. MRI brain without contrast can be done later to characterize the stroke further, but it should not delay the revascularization treatment with intraarterial thrombolysis (IAT) and mechanical thrombectomy (MT).

In the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequence of the MRI scan, the nerve density of the tracts in the pons may appear "SMOGGY" or "hazy" due to the diffusion restriction in the axonal tracts. This **"smog sign"**is a predictor of a good predictor of neurologic outcomes after mechanical thrombectomy.

**Target mismatch:**An initial infarct size of <70ml and a ratio of ischemic tissue to infarct volume of ≥1.8. This is recently found to be a possible candidate selection standard for endovascular therapy.

An extended Thrombolysis In Cerebral Infarction (eTICI) grade of 2c/3 may be a target for successful reperfusion after EVT in patients with acute BAO.

After the initial management, a stroke workup should be done to evaluate the cause to guide the goal-directed treatment. After the evaluation of vertebral and basilar circulations, other workup includes a transcranial doppler (TCD to find out the stability of plaque), transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE or TEE to rule out the clot, valvular abnormalities, wall motion abnormalities, and PFO), electrocardiogram, telemetry, event monitor or loop recorder (to rule out arrhythmias), and blood workup (HbA1c, lipid panel, homocysteine, and other workup based on etiology: antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, verify-now for platelet function, malignancy workup, etc.).