The urogenital system arises from the intermediate mesenchymal tissue (intermediate mesoderm forms kidneys and ureters) and forms the urogenital ridge on both sides of the aorta.

Development of the urogenital ridge begins with three sets of tubular nephric structures, from cranial to caudal: pronephros, mesonephros, and the metanephros.

**Pronephros**

- This is the most cephalad, or cranial most, set of tubes

- Mostly regresses

**Mesonephros**

- Located in the midsection of the embryo

- It eventually develops into the mesonephric tubules and the mesonephric duct or Wolffian duct.

**Metanephros**

- Gives rise to the adult kidney

- Development occurs from an outgrowth from the caudal mesonephric duct (ureteric bud) as well as from the condensation of the metanephric blastema.

**Metanephric Blastema - Derivatives**

- Distal convoluted tubules

- Proximal convoluted tubules

- Podocytes - glomerular capillaries

- Ascending thick limbs of Henle

- Descending thick limbs of the loop of Henle

- Thin limbs of the loop of Henle

- Epithelial cells lining the Bowman's capsule

**Ureteric Bud - Derivatives**

- Ureters

- Major and minor calyces

- Collecting tubules

- Collecting ducts

**Steps in Renogensis**

- Retinoic acid-dependent reciprocal induction process

- the metanephric blastema forms from the cranial-caudal patterning in the tail of the embryo within the intermediate mesoderm

- The ureteric bud form from growth factors secreted by metanephric blastema at the caudal portion of the mesonephric duct.

- The proliferation of the ureteric bud occurs, resulting in differentiation of the metanephric blastema. Once differentiation occurs, the glomeruli and tubules of the kidney form.

- If there are any perturbations in any of these events (i.e., any mutations of either metanephric or ureteric factors or retinoic acid signaling disruption), inhibition of the ureteric bud growth and renal hypoplasia/agenesis may occur. If there is overproliferation or even duplication of these structures, a gain of function of the inductive factors may occur.

The urethra is a part of the urogenital system, urethra develops from the endoderm of the urogenital sinus.

**Some Potential Malformations that may occur with errors during development:**

- **Bladder exstrophy**
- Cause: Ventral abdominal wall defect during embryogenesis - overdeveloped cloacal membrane
- Clinical Findings: herniation of bladder and urethra, incontinence, widely separated pubic symphysis, for males, the penis may become shortened with a dorsal curvature and possible epispadias, for females there may be a bifid clitoris with labia that is separated anteriorly as well as possible epispadias. 

- Associated malformations may also consist of omphalocele, low set umbilicus, anteriorly displaced anus, indirect inguinal hernia, possible hip dysplasia, cardiac dysplasia, and bicornuate uterus. 


- Diagnosis: primarily clinical, although prenatal ultrasound can provide visualization of the abnormality.
- Treatment: surgery.

- **Epispadias**
- Cause: Malformation due to malpositioning genital tubercle, which then causes urethral tubularization to be incomplete on the dorsal penis (when associated with exstrophy of the bladder). May also result from chronic pressure (i.e., transurethral indwelling catheter that eventually erodes the urethra)
- Clinical Findings: division and exposure of the urethra of the dorsal surface and associated with a curvature of the penis; Urinary incontinence.
- Diagnosis: clinical
- Treatment: surgery

- **Hypospadias**
- Cause: Ectopic location of the urethral meatus from a failure of urethral foreskin and folds to fuse on the ventral surface of the penis.
- Genetic, endocrine, and environmental factors have been implicated; Occurs in 1 in 250 newborn males.
- Clinical Features:'hooded' abnormal foreskin, ventral penile curvature with two possible mental openings
- Diagnosis: clinical
- Treatment: Depends on the severity; may be treated surgically.

- **Posterior Urethral Valves**
- Cause: males- malformation where membranous folds obstruct the membranous and prostatic urethra 
- Clinical Features: urinary tract obstruction in newborn male (most common), pulmonary hypoplasia resulting in respiratory distress, bladder distention causing abdominal distention; if the presentation is late: UTI leading to urosepsis, failure to thrive, diurnal enuresis, and difficulty voiding
- Diagnosis: voiding cystourethrogram
- Treatment: first-line is primary valve ablation; second-line- vesicostomy

- **Webbed Penis**
- Cause: malformation with the growth of the scrotum; the urethra is typically unaffected 
- Clinical Features: during erect, there is webbing between the tip of the penis and scrotum; potential erectile dysfunction 
- Diagnosis: clinical
- Treatment: surgery