Antibodies have been revolutionary in the field of medicine. They are often mandatory in an emergent response, such as in the case of Clostridium botulinum. Upon exposure, patients receive antibodies that confer immunity against the bacteria. Substantial harm can incur before the body naturally carries out an adaptive immune response; therefore, this intervention is essential; this is a form of passive immunity in which preformed Igs are given to the patient. In contrast, active immunity is one's body naturally producing antibodies in response to a pathogen, as seen in, for example, the seasonal influence virus. Patients with immunodeficient conditions such as Bruton agammaglobulinemia or selective IgA deficiency lack an innate ability to produce the entire set of antibodies required to maintain a healthy immune system. Again, the antibodies are passively introduced into the individual to sustain an immune system.

Monoclonal antibodies are widely popular in treating autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or Crohn disease. Synthetically formed antibodies bind and prevent the functioning of inflammatory mediators such as TNF-alpha and limit the progression of the disease. Monoclonal antibodies have also been useful in cancer therapies where the Immunoglobulin is used to mount an immune response against the cancerous cell line.

Another application is the use of antibodies to determine the presence of a previous infection. For example, the presence of certain antibodies against the hepatitis virus signifies whether the patient has had a previous infection or if they are currently combating the infection. The same principle is applied to determine immunity against certain diseases, with the presence of antibodies indicating previous infection and a currently immune patient. They can also be used to determine if an individual will be subject to a certain disease in the future. Coombs test is used to detect the potential for future hemolytic anemia by determining whether the antibody will bind the epitopes found on the red blood cell surface. This screening is important for blood transfusion reactions and to determine the likelihood of hemolytic disease of the newborn during pregnancy. It is also useful in home pregnancy tests as antibody binding to human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) will elicit a response that can be displayed by the meter.

A major medical application of antibodies is with immunodiagnostic tests, such as enzyme-linked immunofluorescent assay (ELISA), immunoelectrophoresis, and western blot. These, amongst many others techniques, rely on the principle that the antibody will bind the protein of interest and transmit a signal that can be detected and quantified, to determine the presence and quantity of certain proteins/protein complexes and often used for disease detection purposes.