The use of new and high-throughput techniques, such as HPLC and capillary electrophoresis for hemoglobin quantification and PCR, next-generation sequencing (NGS), etc., for screening and accurate diagnosis of various types of thalassemias, is feasible.

**High-Performance Liquid Chromatography**- The HPLC system is a cation resin exchange system. It has a silica gel column. Different types of hemoglobin molecules are separated due to their interaction with a hydrophobic matrix, largely based on Hb polarity. Elution is done using inorganic phosphate buffers, and the sequence of elution is from low to high polarity. The chromatograms show the retention time (RT), peak, and percentage of different fractions.

**Capillary Electrophoresis system**- Hb components are separated using silica capillaries in an alkaline buffer medium. Hb being a negatively charged molecule at an alkaline pH, migrates to the anode. The structural variants of Hb, having different charges on the surface, will separate. It is then read using the photometry technique at a wavelength of 415 nm. This can be used for both pre-and post-natal diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies. As an added advantage, these two systems can also detect Hb H, Hb Bart’s, and Hb CS in Hb H and Hb H-CS diseases.

**Allele-specific PCR**- This technique utilizes two primers identical in sequence except at the 3′-terminus base. One of the primer 3’base is complementary to the wild-type, and the other is for the mutant base. A common primer for the opposite strand is used as well. Taq polymerase is used, which needs perfect matching of the primer 3′-end with the DNA template. In a normal individual, PCR product is observed only in the reaction where the wild-type primer set is present. A heterozygote will produce a band using both mutant and wild-type primer sets. An individual having a homozygous mutation will be negative with the wild-type and positive with the mutant primer set.

**Reverse Dot Blot analysis**- For better identification of a suspected mutation, the PCR product is transferred on a membrane filter sheet as a dot. This PCR product can then hybridize with an allele-specific oligomer (ASO) DNA probe. This probe can be radiolabeled with P for autoradiography or other reporter groups like biotin or an enzyme such as horseradish peroxidase) can be attached. This can be visualized using a chemiluminescent or colorimetric reaction. A normal person will show positive dots with each wild-type probe but not with any of the mutant probes. Heterozygotes show a mixed pattern by showing a positive hybridization with one mutation dot and the normal dots. On the other hand,  homozygotes will show a positive dot with the mutant probe only and not with its corresponding normal sequence in addition to the positive spots for the remaining normal probes.

**Real-Time PCR with melting curve analysis**- Real-time PCR can be considered better than conventional PCRs as they are less time-consuming and less labor-intensive. It is now widely used to detect, characterize, and quantify nucleic acids. It also has a low risk of post-PCR contamination. Currently, its application for thalassemia diagnosis is mainly based on two approaches; A) Intercalating dye assays and B) Probe-based assays. A fluorescent signal is obtained from the synthesis of the product in PCR. Dyes like SYBR-Green are used here. The melting curve analysis is useful in distinguishing α-thalassemia 1 heterozygotes, α-thalassemia 2 homozygotes, Hb H disease, and α-thalassemia 1 homozygotes (Hb Barts).

**Direct DNA sequencing**- The sequencing of the product of PCR can help in identifying the specific gene mutations in alpha-thalassemia. The method usually employed is Sanger’s dideoxy termination method.

**Multiplex Ligation-dependent probe amplification**- It is a multiplex PCR method that detects any duplications or deletions in the screened region. The extra advantage of this technique is that it can find known and unknown deletions in unsolved cases after the conventional techniques fail. It is easy to use, and only a thermocycler and electrophoresis equipment are needed.

**Next Generation Sequencing**- NGS technology is a big step toward advancing sequencing technology. It can sequence the entire human genome in an ultra-high throughput manner at high speed. The target NGS approach can be used to analyze entire globin genes coding regions, the key regulatory regions, and modifier genes. NGS may be more accurate than conventional thalassemia diagnostic methods like CBC, Hb analysis, and Hb typing. It increases the capacity of gene sequencing from a few hundred bp to several thousand in a single analysis.