**Rotator Cuff Injuries**

The rotator cuff is a group of four muscles: supraspinatus, subscapularis, infraspinatus, and teres minor. They arise from various points on the scapula and insert on the proximal humerus. The main function of this unit is to stabilize the glenohumeral joint, which causes them to be under great strain most of the time. Millions of Americans are affected per year by shoulder pain, most of which are caused by rotator cuff conditions. The etiology is most likely multifactorial; degeneration, overuse, and trauma. The anterior humeral circumflex artery may be associated with this condition as a cause of pain, specifically, night pain, which as a particularly troublesome symptom in patients with a rotator cuff tear, disturbing sleep, and as a result affecting the quality of life. A recent study demonstrated, using Doppler ultrasonography, that night pain was related to hemodynamics of the anterior humeral circumflex artery.

**Poor Posture**

It is an established fact that poor posture is a significant cause of back pain, demonstrating a strong relationship with scapular kinematics and shoulder diseases. A recent cadaveric study aimed to discover how the blood flow of the anterior humeral circumflex artery changed when the scapula in internal rotation (“hunched”). It was found that the anterior humeral circumflex artery was attached to the subscapularis tendon as well as located under the subdeltoid bursa, while the posterior humeral circumflex artery was located between the deltoid muscle and the bursa. These anatomic differences determined the degree of movement during scapular motion, causing the anterior humeral circumflex artery to be more limited and the posterior humeral circumflex artery to be freely mobile. As a result, it was shown that internal rotation of the scapula decreased the blood flow of the anterior humeral circumflex artery, which might relate to several shoulder pathologies.

**Proximal Humerus Fractures**

Proximal humerus fractures account for around 6% of fractures in the Western world. Depending on patient demographics, the fracture can occur as a result of trauma or pathologic in nature; it is the third most common osteoporotic fracture. As mentioned before, it was once thought that the anterior humeral circumflex artery was the main blood supply of the proximal humerus, but recently it has been shown that the posterior humeral circumflex artery also plays a major role. This explains the low incidence of avascular necrosis when there is a proximal humerus displaced fracture.

**Anterior Shoulder Dislocations**

Anterior shoulder dislocations are quite common, making up to 50% of all dislocations. However, a vascular injury is a rare entity in fracture-dislocation and even more rare with isolated dislocations. The pathognomonic triad for arterial disruption includes a dislocated shoulder, diminished or absent radial pulse, and palpable axillary hematoma. These findings should prompt referral to vascular and orthopedic consult.