The intestinal immune system is key to the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The intestinal epithelium prevents bacteria or antigen entry into the circulation by sealed intercellular junctions. In IBD, these junctions are defective from either a primary barrier function failure or as a result of severe inflammation. Additional protective mechanisms include mucus production by goblet cells and Paneth cells secretion of a-defensins with intrinsic antimicrobial activity. Excessive inflammatory reactions lead to continued deterioration of the epithelium and further exposure to intestinal microbes thereby furthering worsening the inflammation.

In ulcerative colitis, there is always mucosal inflammation that leads to edema, ulcers, bleeding, and electrolyte losses. The inflammation in ulcerative colitis usually starts in the rectum and progresses in an uninterrupted fashion to the proximal colon. In Crohn disease, there are skip lesions. In close to 20% of patients with UC, the disease remains confined to the rectum. Pancolitis is seen in about 15% of patients. As the disorder becomes chronic, the colon becomes more rigid and short with a loss of the haustral markings leading to a 'lead-pipe appearance on a barium enema.

Crohn disease can affect any segment of the GI tract; the disease may induce strictures, inflammation or lead to the development of fistulas. The key feature of Crohn disease is that it involves all layers of the bowel (transmural). During the later phase of the disease, the mucosa will reveal a cobblestone appearance due to the linear ulcers between the normal mucosa. Crohn disease most affects the colon and ileum and only 5% of cases affect the gastroduodenal segments. Sparing of the rectum is typical of Crohn disease but anorectal complications like fistulas and abscesses are very common.

UC predisposes patients to the extraintestinal involvement of the skin, eyes, and bones. Most commonly these include inflammatory arthropathies and primary sclerosing cholangitis. CD preferentially attacks the ileum and colon but can involve the esophagus, duodenum, or stomach. Pediatric-onset cases have greater upper GI tract involvement. As in the case of UC, CD predisposes patients to extraintestinal manifestations including arthritis, aphthous stomatitis, uveitis, erythema nodosum, and ankylosing spondyloarthropathy.

In Crohn disease, the incidence of kidney disease and gallstones is high because of malabsorption of bile salts and fatty acids. Patients with Crohn disease who undergo resection of the ileum but intact colon are also more likely to develop calcium oxalate renal stones.