**Technique**

To inspect the right ear, the examiner holds the otoscope with their right hand and the ear with his left. The otoscope is held with three fingers, like a pen, between the thumb, first, and second fingers. The fifth finger rests on the patient's head to stabilize the otoscope. The EAC travels in a “sigmoid” fashion; therefore, the recommendation is to manipulate the pinna to allow for proper visualization of the TM. For adults and older children, the pinna is gently retracted in a posterior and cephalad vector. For neonates, the examiner pulls the pinna posteriorly and inferiorly. It is essential to use a fully charged otoscope, as low light may produce a yellow tint on the TM, which is subject to misinterpretation as middle ear effusion.

**External Auditory Canal (EAC)**

Examiners inspect the EAC for cerumen impaction, foreign objects, canal edema, erythema, and otorrhea.

**Tympanic Membrane (TM) and Middle Ear**

The TM separates the external ear from the middle ear. When inspecting the TM, the examiner takes note of color, bulging, perforation, and the presence or absence of normal landmarks. The cone of light, handle of malleus, umbo, pars tensa, and pars flaccida make up the normal landmarks. The cone of light originates at the umbo and extends anteriorly (this allows the viewer to determine a right from left ear based solely on an otoscopic view). The TM is normally gray-colored, and its translucency allows for visualization of the incus and stapes, though the degree of translucency can vary from patient to patient.

**Pneumatic Otoscopy**

Pneumatic otoscopy helps determine the mobility of the TM. With an adequate seal, air enters the EAC and increases pressure. A normal TM will respond by concaving into the middle ear cavity. The most common cause of decreased TM mobility is middle ear effusion. Therefore, pneumatic otoscopy aids in the diagnosis of acute otitis media (AOM) and otitis media with effusion (OME). Recent clinical practice guidelines report that AOM should not receive a diagnosis without evidence of middle ear effusion shown by pneumatic otoscopy. Other causes of decreased TM mobility are tympanosclerosis, TM retraction, and TM perforation.