**DNA Viruses**

**Herpesviridae**

****Primary Herpetic Gingivostomatitis (PHGS) and Herpes Labialis****

The worldwide infection rates for herpes simplex viruses range between 60 to 90%.

The infection is usually acquired in childhood by asymptomatic shedders.

**Chicken Pox**

The widespread vaccination for varicella has significantly reduced the incidence of chickenpox and its associated morbidity.

**Shingles**

The lifetime incidence of shingles is estimated to be about 30% for the general population, increasing slightly in patients above the age of 85.

**Infectious Mononucleosis**

Acquisition of the Epstein-Barr virus usually occurs early in childhood and leads to latent infection. It is estimated that greater than 90% of the global population has acquired EBV.

**Oral Hairy Leukoplakia**

Oral hairy leukoplakia caused by EBV is almost exclusively seen in patients with immunocompromised states, such as those with HIV.

**Cytomegalovirus**

The reported rate of seropositivity to CMV in the United States is estimated to be 50%. A higher prevalence is seen with increasing age, particularly in developing countries where rates may be as high as 100%.

**Kaposi Sarcoma**

Four variants of Kaposi sarcoma are recognized, each with specific disease prevalence amongst different patient populations. A classic variant is often seen in males of Mediterranean or Eastern European descent. Patient-specific risk factors, such as chronic steroid use and diabetes, may place them at higher risk.

As its name suggests, immunosuppression-related Kaposi Sarcoma is seen in patients with chronic immunosuppression, particularly solid-organ transplant recipients.

**Papillomaviridae**

**Human Papilloma Virus**

****Verruca Vulgaris, Oral Squamous Papillomas, Condyloma Acuminatum, and Heck's Disease****

The estimated global prevalence of HPV infection is approximately 10%. It is considered the most common sexually transmitted disease, and the highest infection rate is observed in women in their twenties. The prevalence of the disease subsequently decreases with age.

The majority of HPV infections of the oral cavity lead to benign lesions. Squamous papillomas or common warts are most frequently observed in children. Additionally, adults between 30 to 50 years old may also develop oral papillomas. Specific syndromes, such as Down syndrome and Cowden syndrome, have been associated with multiple oral papillomas.

It is worth noting that focal epithelial hyperplasia is associated with a genetic predisposition and is considered an autosomal recessive condition often seen in Native American populations.

**Poxviridae**

**Molluscum contagiosum**

Molluscum contagiosum mainly develops in pediatric patients.****Infection in adults has also been described and, in most cases, occurs in the genital region; therefore considered to be acquired by sexual transmission. It most often occurs in immunocompromised individuals. The infection rate in HIV patients is estimated to be 20%.

**RNA Viruses**

**Enteroviruses**

**Herpangina, Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease, and Acute Lymphonodular Pharyngitis**

Enteroviruses are responsible for various clinical conditions, including HFMD, herpangina, and acute lymphonodular pharyngitis. The patient's age may affect the infection's severity and associated complications. The majority of infections are seen in pediatric patients.Enterovirus infections occur most often in the summer and fall; however, they may happen sporadically year-round too. A higher incidence of viral infection is seen in tropical regions.

**Paramyxoviruses**

**Measles or Rubeola**

The prevalence of measles has reduced significantly since implementing routine childhood vaccination with the MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella) jab. This resulted in disease eradication in 2000.