Laboratory evaluation for factor V deficiency should be initiated when a bleeding disorder is suspected based on the history obtained and/or physical exam findings. Studies that will yield the appropriate diagnosis include coagulation tests, factor assays, inhibitor screening (e.g., mixing studies), and molecular genetics.

- **Coagulation tests:**Factor V is part of the common pathway within the coagulation cascade, and deficiency of factor V will prolong the PT and aPTT. Thrombin time, on the other hand, will be normal.

- **Factor assays:**When measured, factor V activity levels will be reduced and can be categorized into mild (>10%), moderate (10%), or severe (<1%). All factor levels should be measured to identify if a co-existing deficiency exists, such as combined factor V and factor VIII deficiency.

- **Inhibitor screening:**Common non-specific inhibitors used for screening include lupus anticoagulant and ELISA testing against beta-2 glycoprotein and cardiolipin antibodies. Their presence will support the diagnosis of an acquired form of factor V deficiency. The Bethesda assay is performed to confirm this, which measures the level of inhibitors against a specific factor in the blood.

- **Molecular genetic analysis:**The F5 gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 1q24.2, spans 25 exomes, and is composed of six domains (A1, A2, A3, B, C1, and C2). DNA extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes can be sequenced to identify mutations within the F5 gene to identify an inherited cause of factor V deficiency. Missense mutations are most commonly identified (61.5%) and frequently occur at domains A2 and C2, while an additional 20% of mutations occur at the B domain. A single heterozygous mutation can lead to factor V levels around 50%, whereas homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations commonly lead to factor V levels less than 10%. The combined factor V and factor VIII deficiency noted above is due to mutations in the MCFD2 and LMAN1 genes, which are responsible for transporting the coagulation factors.