The approach to any trauma patient is multi-faceted, which requires interprofessional collaboration amongst physicians, nurses, ancillary staff, and sub-specialty providers. On a larger scale, the specialty of Traumatology is a collaborative effort amongst the experts of the field to develop and provide guidelines that are accepted as the standards in the treatment of diagnoses as they relate to trauma. Whether blunt or penetrating, Traumatic diaphragm injuries require the same standardized approach in the initial assessment and work up. The challenge to these patients is a missed injury lending to the necessity for repair months to years later, which increases morbidity and mortality. To minimize the risk of a missed injury, it requires astute awareness in part by the trauma surgeon in understanding or reconstructing the mechanism of injury to anticipate potential injuries. For this to occur, the appropriate and detailed handoff from EMS providers is essential.

Because it has been shown that the initial evaluation is crucial to favorable outcomes, a point of controversy is an agreed-upon standard approach to assess for reliable diagnostic signs on MDCT. Although it has been shown that MDCT has improved the identification of these injuries, the sensitivity and specificity are still highly variable, and the sample size is small. Further, the radiologist's ability to correctly identify imaging signs suggestive of TDI is reviewer-dependent.

Because the incidence of traumatic diaphragmatic injury is low, an abundance of large randomized control trials lacks in the contribution to gold standards for workup, diagnostic imaging, and management strategies. In a combined effort of centers across the nation, The American College of Surgeons National Trauma Data Bank has contributed to the largest study known to date establishing injury patterns associated with traumatic diaphragm injuries.