Abnormalities of the arches of the foot lead to various clinical consequences.

**Pes Planus / Flat Foot**

Decrease or absent longitudinal arch of the foot so that the whole foot touches the ground. When weight bearing arch disappears, and while the foot is not bearing weight, it reappears as the normal arch is referred to as flexible pes planus. Flexible flat feet can be differentiated by toe raise/ jack test.

The forefoot is supinated, while the midfoot is in neutral or abduction. The hind foot is usually valgus/everted, with the Ankle in plantar flexion. The fundamental anomaly in flexible flatfoot (FFF) is excessive ligamentous laxity, while bone abnormalities constitute a secondary abnormality. Conditions that look like flat feet, like a bulky fat pad in pediatric patients, foot edema, or any benign or malignant neoplasm of the foot; should be excluded.

It may occur secondary to dysfunction of the posterior tibial tendon, trauma to the hindfoot or midfoot, midtarsal joint dislocation or subluxation, injury to ligaments like spring ligament/long and short plantar ligaments, or plantar fascia. Usually, rest, proper footwear, and NSAIDs are sufficient for management. Surgery can be considered in resistant cases.

The weight-bearing anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique radiographs are required for the planning and diagnosis of this pathological entity. The center of rotation of angulation (CORA) is measured to determine the apex of deformity via the talo-first metatarsal angle, as shown in the illustration. The collapsed medial arch is measured by a calcaneal pitch, and the increased talocalcaneal angle depicts hind foot vagus deformity.

**Pes Cavus / High-arched Foot**

In this deformity, there is an abnormally increased height of the longitudinal arch of the foot. The higher arch decreases shock absorbing ability, so more pressure is exerted on the ball of the great toe and heel. The most common causes of pes cavus include neurological disorders, injury, neglected clubfoot, or idiopathy.

In pes cavus, weakness of intrinsic foot muscles and overpowering of sling muscle peroneus longus and tibialis posterior muscle causes elevation of the arch of the foot. Surgical intervention should be done as early as possible as deformities may worsen and lead to muscle imbalance, and joints may undergo degeneration or arthritic changes. Surgical measures may include various tendon transfers.

**Plantar Fasciitis**

It is also known as plantar fasciopathy or fasciosis. It commonly affects athletes, especially runners.

Overuse injury caused by repetitive strain leads to microtears in the plantar fascia. Predisposing factors for this condition are pes cavus, pes planus, and excessive supination or pronation.

It is primarily managed by conservative methods like NSAID, stretching, weight reduction, and shoe modification, but if not responded to, invasive measures like shock wave therapy, ultrasound-guided various injections of autologous platelet-rich plasma, steroid, or prolotherapy. Surgical measures (fasciotomy, open surgical release, endoscopic release, nerve decompression, or calcaneal drilling) are considered as last resort for managing plantar fasciitis when not responding to other measures.