The type and severity of the injury dictate the management approach. The injury can be an open or closed type. In open injuries, the injury would be surgically explored to test the nerve status (injury in-continuity, nerve discontinuity-sharp laceration, or nerve discontinuity-blunt injury). In sharp transecting nerve injuries, surgical exploration with end to end repair must be performed within 72 hours to avoid retraction of the proximal and distal stumps.

The approach to closed nerve injuries is mainly a conservative one, as most lesions are still in continuity. However, urgent intervention is necessary if there is compartment syndrome and threatening permanent nerve injury. A suspected neuropraxia or axonotmesis injury can have monitoring with serial electrodiagnostic and clinical evaluations for signs of recovery with no need for surgical intervention. By 3 to 4 months post-injury, if there is no evidence of reinnervation, neurotmesis should be suspected, and exploratory surgery must take place with intraoperative electrodiagnostic testing. Failure to record nerve action potential across the lesion would indicate neuroma resection and repair with or without grafting.

Several surgical techniques can be implemented in a stepwise fashion depending on the intra-operative findings. Neurolysis is scar dissection from around the injured segment. The scar is removable from the outer covering of the nerve (external neurolysis). On certain occasions, the scar can be within the nerve, and the release should take place between nerve fascicles (internal neurolysis). The surgeon usually uses intraoperative nerve stimulation to record nerve action potential (NAP) across the injury segment in this type of surgery.  If NAP remains after neurolysis, this indicates that neurolysis is enough for nerve recovery.

In case no NAP is recorded, or the nerve discontinuity is obvious, then nerve repair is required.

Several measures merit consideration during the postoperative period to achieve the best outcome from the surgical intervention. In certain circumstances, when the nerve repair occurs with the joint in flexion, immobilization may be required for three weeks to avoid sutures disruption. Additionally, a bulky dressing around the surgical area can be used as a cushion and as a reminder for the patient to minimize the movement around the joint. Early physiotherapy to restore joint mobility without disruption of the coapted nerves is mandatory. Physical therapy and occupational treatment are necessary to maintain the range of joint movement, preserve the elasticity of the affected muscles until the time of effective reinnervation, and to keep the strength and bulk of the unaffected muscles. The patient should understand that the recovery and hence, the rehabilitation program may take several months and maybe years until a meaningful and effective movement is achievable. Yet, it is usually incomplete. Tinel’s sign can be useful as an indicator of nerve regrowth. Needle EMG exam can be used to assess motor unit recruitment during the follow-up period.

Early pharmacotherapy for control of neuropathic pain is essential. Literature reports medications such as tricyclic antidepressants, anticonvulsants (e.g., carbamazepine, gabapentin or pregabalin), or serotonin reuptake inhibitors as appropriate choices.