Anesthetic gas use is chiefly the purview of the anesthesiologist, anesthesia nurse, and emergency department physician. However, to ensure the patient's safety, the practice of anesthesia is best done with an interprofessional team that also includes anesthesia nurses, recovery room nurses, and anesthesia assistants. Since there is no antidote to an anesthetic gas, the patient requires close monitoring during anesthesia. A dedicated nurse should monitor the vital signs continuously during induction and maintenance to ensure that the patient is not only sedated but has no pain. There are standard protocols for patient monitoring during anesthesia established by all hospitals.

Pharmacy is responsible for the delivery of the proper agents and ensuring that dosing and administration are correct, providing a "second set of eyes" to assist the anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist.

After completing the procedure, the patient must be monitored by the recovery room nurses until the patient is fully awake and hemodynamically stable. The anesthesiologist should receive immediate notification if there are problems with the vital signs, oxygenation, and respiration in the recovery room. More crucially, resuscitation equipment should always be available when using anesthetic gases. Ultimately, the anesthesia nurse is responsible for ensuring that the gas canisters are full and that all the monitoring equipment is in working order. Any deficits require the attention and input of the entire interprofessional healthcare team; this is the only way to ensure patient safety. [Level 5]