Inadequate sleep can have physical and psychological effects that may impact daytime functioning and contribute to comorbidities. The Sleep Heart Health Study reported that insomnia or poor sleep, as evidenced by less than 6 hours of sleep on polysomnography, is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Short sleep duration has been associated with a 29 percent higher cardiovascular disease.

A meta-analysis showed that short and long sleep duration is associated with an increased risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, and stroke, with the lowest risk noted at around 7 hours of sleep. A 1-hour reduction in sleep compared to 7 hours per day was associated with a 6% increase in all-cause mortality.

Fragmented sleep, measured by an increased arousal index, sleep efficiency, and wake after sleep onset (WASO), has been associated with obesity risk.

Increased food intake is an adaptive mechanism to maintain the energy needs for additional wakefulness, and sleep recovery can result in a reduced energy intake

Insufficient sleep is associated with poor academic performance.

Chronic insufficient sleep may also impair neurobehavioral reaction time and increases attention lapses.

Sleep deprivation may result in a higher risk of impulsive behavior and may subsequently increase the risk of unplanned suicide.

As evidenced by night shift workers, drowsiness resulting from insufficient sleep is a risk factor for motor vehicle accidents.

Daylight saving time utilizes turning clocks forward by one hour in spring and backward by one hour in autumn. More than 1.5 billion people undergo the transitions involved twice each year, reducing sleep duration by 60.14 minutes and a 10% reduced sleep efficiency.

A meta-analysis of 6 studies showed a 4 to 29% higher incidence of acute myocardial infarction in the spring daylight saving shift.

Medical trainees are exposed to extended duration work hours. A systemic review by Levine et al. showed evidence that eliminating shift hours exceeding 16 hours improved patient safety and the residents' quality of life.

Studies have also shown an association between reduced speed and accuracy with simulated laparoscopic surgery performance and taking night calls.

More recent studies also confirm that resident physicians performing extended shifts of 24 to 28 hours slept significantly less compared with a rapid cycling work roster where continuous shift hours were limited to 16 hours. When adjusted for workload, the residents on rapid cycling work rosters had significantly lower rates of attentional failures and reduced risk of serious medical errors compared to extended duration work rosters.