Bile acid sequestrants, including colesevelam, colestipol, and cholestyramine, are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in combination with restriction of dietary saturated and trans-fatty acids to manage hypercholesterolemia. They are indicated for patients with hypercholesterolemia without hypertriglyceridemia.

- Bile acid sequestrants are beneficial therapy in statin-intolerant patients (myalgia and myopathy).

- They can be used in combination with niacin and the cholesterol absorption inhibitor, ezetimibe, to achieve target goals in patients in both primary and secondary prevention.

- They can lower LDL-C between 15 to 30% if patients tolerate it at full doses.

- Some bile acid sequestrants are also FDA approved for adolescents (10 to 17 years of age).

**Cholestyramine:**It is used as adjunctive therapy to diet to reduce elevated serum cholesterol in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia (elevated LDL) who do not respond adequately to diet and to treat pruritus associated with partial biliary obstruction. The National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) studied the effects of cholestyramine on coronary atherosclerosis. The study looked at 116 people with type II hyperlipoproteinemia and coronary artery disease. Patients were all on a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet and assigned either placebo or 6 g of cholestyramine four times daily. Cholestyramine decreased LDL-C by 26% after randomization. Coronary artery disease progressed in 32% vs. 49% of patients in cholestyramine vs. placebo, respectively. The cardioprotective effects of cholestyramine appear to be largely due to reducing LDL-C.

Studies have assessed the use of cholestyramine in children with type II hyperlipoproteinemia (12 g/day), and while most patients had normal cholesterol blood concentrations after six months, adherence was often poor. Only 55% of children were still on treatment at six years, and 48% after eight years. Adherence plays a critical role in this population since this group will likely require lifelong lipid-lowering therapies.

As an off-label use, cholestyramine can treat chronic diarrhea due to bile acid malabsorption. They can also help treat pruritus resulting from elevated concentrations of bile acids and as adjunctive therapy to Graves disease hyperthyroid patients.

As monotherapy in the Lipid Research Clinics-Coronary Primary Prevention Trial (LRC-CPPT), they reduced low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C)  by 20 % and cardiovascular events.

**Colesevelam:**Three double-blind, placebo-controlled trials with the use of colesevelam HCL (COL) in patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2D) patients showed reductions in LDL-C and hemoglobin (Hb)A1c. These results led to the FDA approval of COL as an adjuvant to exercise and dietary restriction for improving glycemic control in patients with T2D. Therefore, COL therapy is effective for patients with diabetes who have not met their HbA1c goal of below 7% or LDL-C goal of under 100 mg/dL or 30 to 49 %  or over 50 % reduction in LDL-C.

**Colestipol:**In an early study assessing bile acid sequestrants' use in Type IIA hyperproteinemia, subjects were randomized to a low cholesterol diet with either placebo or colestipol (30 mg) over seven years. The colestipol group decreased LDL-C from 331.1 +/- 22.8 to 188.1 +/- 13.8 mg/dL. Diet plus placebo group showed no improvement.