# Introduction

Pneumoconiosis is any lung disease caused by the inhalation of organic or nonorganic airborne dust and fibers. Patients usually encounter these inhalants in the workplace environment, and therefore it is known as an occupational disease. The most frequently encountered types of pneumoconiosis are asbestosis, silicosis, and coal miner’s lung. These particles cause inflammation and fibrosis in the lung resulting in irreversible lung disease. Prevention relies on workplace exposure management and health management regulations.

# Issues of Concern

Pneumoconiosis is among the most common occupational diseases in the world, in particular in developing countries. There was an 81.1% increase in the number of cases from 1990 to 2017 for both sexes. The age-standardized prevalence rate was significantly higher in males. The incidence also increased with age, and significantly more so in males.

# Causes

Pneumoconiosis results from the accumulation of fine inhaled particles that cause an inflammatory reaction within the lung. Fibrotic pneumoconiosis predominates, and its cause is the inhalation of particles like silica, asbestos fibers, beryllium, talc, and coal dust.

# Anatomical Pathology

Lung biopsy is not typically performed. For coal workers, dust is found throughout the lungs but tends to collect around respiratory bronchioles. In and around these spots, the airspaces become dilated.

In silicosis, the histology characteristically demonstrates lightly pigmented nodules with smooth borders and a central area of whorled, acellular fibrosis. Fibrotic lesions usually appear in the upper zones of the lungs. They are known as "onion skin lesions" due to their characteristic concentrically arranged fibers of collagen. The inside of the nodules contains dust-laden macrophages and lymphoid cells that result in hyalinization.

In asbestosis, asbestosis bodies or fibers appear on histology. The term ferruginous bodies is a more generalized term associated with the inhalation of other inorganic dust. Both asbestos and ferruginous bodies definitively demonstrate macrophage ingestion of the inorganic fiber with fibrotic reaction and deposition of ferrous materials. On biopsy, subpleural honeycombing and fibrosis are visible.

# Clinical Pathology

The diagnosis is made in the background of long-term exposure to one of these inhalants at high doses, in addition to radiological evidence of pulmonary fibrosis. The three major criteria are exposure to inhalants, characteristic chest X-ray, and the absence of an illness that may be mistaken for pneumoconiosis.

The symptoms of pneumoconiosis tend to be nonspecific and may overlap with other pulmonary comorbidities such as chronic bronchitis, COPD, and emphysema. A thorough occupational history should be taken, exploring both the exposure and duration to harmful inhalants. Patients may complain of shortness of breath, decreased exercise tolerance, gradual onset of a nonproductive cough, or might be asymptomatic with only an abnormal chest X-ray. In the case of coal workers’ pneumoconiosis, black-pigmented sputum may be produced.  On physical exam, tachypnea and end-inspiratory crackles may be noted. Friction rubbing or wheezing may be heard when auscultating lungs.

Pulmonary function tests may show a typical restrictive pattern with chronic airflow obstruction, reduction in forced vital capacity (FVC) but the preservation of the FEV1-to-FVC ratio. The diffusion capacity is often reduced and may precede the reduction in lung volumes. Patients’ forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume in one second are proportionally reduced, and their forced expiratory flow is between 25% and 75% of the FVC.

There has been evidence to show that certain serum and urinary markers are elevated in pneumoconiosis. Researchers found that SMRP and fibulin-3 were elevated in subjects with pneumoconiosis and suggestive of asbestos exposure. They are hopeful that a combination of measuring serum SMRP and fibulin-3, CEA, and urinary 8-OHdG could be used to screen workers.

# Biochemical and Genetic Pathology

As these inhalants enter the lung, particles that escape mucociliary clearance (under 5 microns) deposit in the terminal bronchioles and alveoli. Alveolar macrophages then take up the smaller particles via phagocytosis. During this process, inflammatory cytokines (IL-1 and TNF-alpha) and lysosomal enzymes are released, free radicals are generated, and there is an increase in cell signaling. Macrophages containing these particles may collect in the interstitium along the perivascular and peribronchiolar regions. Once the inflammation process is complete, the fibrotic process initiates via stimulation of growth factors. Type 1 pneumocytes can then grow over them and enclose them in the interstitium. Fibroblasts then become stimulated to cause fibrosis and tissue remodeling by producing ECM and matrix metalloproteinases. Fibrocytes can induce chemotaxis and attract inflammatory factors and chemokines to amplify the immune response.

# Morphology

The diagnosis of pneumoconiosis is usually determined by radiologic evidence and history. A biopsy is rarely needed. Overall, a radiological review of pneumoconiosis demonstrates widespread opacities throughout the lung, but predominantly in the upper zones of both lungs.

Coal worker pneumoconiosis biopsies show coal macules and progressive massive fibrosis. The fibrosis is characterized by 1cm of fibrotic mass with anthracosis. These macules contain pigment laden macrophages in the bronchioles. Coal macules can range in size from 1 to 5mm but have dark pigmentation lacking fibrotic tissue.

The presence of asbestos bodies characterizes histopathologic analysis of asbestosis, a single asbestosis fiber coated in segmented protein-iron in intra-alveolar macrophages. Radiologically, asbestosis is similar to other diffuse interstitial pulmonary fibrosis. Chest radiographs are characterized by small irregular opacities with a fine reticular pattern.

# Mechanisms

Pneumoconiosis starts with an inflammatory response to foreign particles that the patient inhaled. The inhaled dust trigger macrophages, lymphocytes, and epithelial cells. These cells then release interleukin-1 beta, TNF-alpha, matrix metalloproteinases, and transforming growth factor-beta. Fibroblasts then become stimulated to replicate and grow and surround the dust forming nodules. These nodules then lead to massive fibrosis, as seen in coal workers' lung disease and silicosis.

# Clinicopathologic Correlations

Pneumoconiosis can lead to more severe complications. Asbestosis is also related to benign pleural effusion and plaques, malignant mesothelioma, and bronchogenic carcinoma.

# Clinical Significance

There is no cure for pneumoconiosis, and the prognosis is poor in the fibrotic phase of disorders. It is important to note that not all individuals exposed to inhaled dust develop lung pathology. Individuals with pneumoconiosis are at higher risk for respiratory morbidity and premature death. First, the patient must avoid further exposure to the inhalant. Patients with pneumoconiosis also tend to have superimposed emphysema or COPD. Those who smoke tobacco should be encouraged to quit. The treatment is community-based or home-based pulmonary rehabilitation to treat symptoms and enhance exercise tolerance. Most pulmonary rehabilitation programs include breathing re-training, low or high-intensity exercise training, endurance training, and strength training. These programs may also include health education, psychosocial support for mood symptoms, and education on nutrition. Most pulmonary rehabilitation programs last for eight weeks. Clinicians and the healthcare team should monitor patients should be monitored for progression and to provide symptomatic treatment.