For optimum accuracy and precision of the test results, timely calibration as per the laboratory’s quality policy should be done. Calibration is routinely done while introducing the parameter for the first time in the instrument, change of the reagent lot after major maintenance of the instrument, replacing the light source, replacing the wavelength filter, violating quality control rules, etc.

After installation and calibration of the parameter, a quality check is done using commercially available internal quality control materials of different levels. Results of this quality control material are inserted in Levey-Jennings Charts, and these charts are observed for compliance with Westgard rules. Prompt suitable action should be taken upon violating any of the Westgard rules. Participation in External Quality Assurance Scheme (EQAS) should be encouraged as it helps laboratory physicians to evaluate the accuracy and bias of the results and provide confidence regarding the stability of the laboratory testing method.

Caution must be taken while handling the reagents. Protective gear, such as hand gloves, an apron, eyeglasses, etc., should be used while handling the patient’s samples and reagents. None of the reagents or samples should be mouth pipetted. In case of exposure of the patient’s sample or reagents to the eye, skin, or mucosa, the contacted part should be thoroughly rinsed with water. Medical consultation of the exposed person should rule out the effects of infectious agents present in the patient’s sample or toxic/irritant chemicals in the reagents.