As with many medical conditions, history is key in assessment and will guide further evaluations. The first question posed to the caregiver is whether the event was a seizure or some other type of transient event. A sudden alteration in consciousness with associated motor movements is the common description of a convulsive seizure. For generalized seizures with associated motor movements, the convulsion typically has a stiffening or tonic phase followed by clonic movements - rhythmic phased motor movements. There may be a noise or cry at the onset of the seizure. Some patients will describe a prodrome or aura before the event. Urinary incontinence may or may not be present. Tongue biting, if present, is most frequently lateral. Following a generalized tonic-clonic seizure, patients will have some transient alteration consciousness referred to as the postictal state. There are many types of seizures other than generalized convulsions, and any transient alteration of consciousness or unusual behavior or individualized perception might conceivably represent a type of seizure.

Key historical points include history with attention to the history of seizures, medication use, past medical history, and social history, especially any history of alcohol or illicit drug use. Any history of immunosuppression or malignancy is critical to discover. Frequently there will be a history of unresponsive spells that, in retrospect, might be seizures. Events leading up to the seizure are quite important, and friends, family, or coworkers may have crucial historical information. For the patient with known epilepsy, an obvious question would be to ask if there has been any irregularity with medication use.

Physical examination should include a general physical examination and a neurologic examination with attention to the detection of any focal deficits. If someone observes the convulsion, they may see open eyes, no response to verbal or painful stimulation during the event, and rhythmic in-phase motor movements are consistent with a generalized tonic-clonic seizure.

For patients with a suspected seizure and persistent alteration in consciousness, the possibility of transformed status epilepticus should merit consideration. Sometimes termed subtle status epilepticus, the motor movements of this type of nonconvulsive status epilepticus may only be nystagmic eye movements, facial twitching, extremity twitches, or in some cases, no motor movement at all.