One of the most common and devastating Hirschsprung disease-related complications is Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis (HAEC), which is defined as an inflammatory disorder of the bowel. In order to obtain the diagnosis of HAEC, which is the most challenging, a combination of clinical signs and symptoms should be considered. It will result in an inevitably over and under-treatment of patients. The underlying causality of HAEC is still ill-defined. Several hypotheses, including dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiome,

The severity of clinical manifestations in HAEC might vary, and several scoring systems have been designed in an attempt to classify the gastrointestinal and systemic presentations, including a Delphi method to make a consensus among a panel of pediatric gastroenterologists and surgeons, and a clinical grading system based on a prospective trial. The former utilized 16 items, while the latter is based on three main components of diarrhea, abdominal distention, and systemic manifestations to define the grading of HAEC.

The preferred management of each patient affected with HAEC is based on the corresponding clinical grade. In grade I or possible HAEC, outpatient management with oral metronidazole accompanied by fluid and electrolytes might be considered. The more severe cases, including definite and severe HAEC, should be admitted to the hospital and treated with intravenous fluid resuscitation and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Rectal irrigation to remove the retained stool and decrease the bacterial load might be considered in those with abdominal distention, irrespective of the HAEC grade. Surgical intervention with a proximal colostomy might be considered in those children with severe HAEC who fail to respond to primary medical management with bowel rest, intravenous fluid resuscitation, rectal irrigations, and broad-spectrum antibiotics.

Several other less frequent postoperative complications in Hirschsprung disease might occur, including an anastomotic leak in up to 1.5% of the patients, anastomotic stricture, wound infections, bleeding, and perianal excoriations.