Managing the administration of luspatercept to patients with anemia from lower-risk myelodysplastic syndrome with ring sideroblasts and beta-thalassemia requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes nurses, laboratory technicians, pharmacists, researchers, and several clinicians trained in different specialties. After diagnosis, prompt admission into medical and adherence/retention in that care is fundamental to the administration of effective erythropoietin stimulating agent therapy, like luspatercept. Improvement of anemia and less blood transfusion requirement is the top factor of favorable treatment outcomes. Common obstacles to successful results are limited clinical trials in treating anemia resulting from other conditions.

The emphasis on monitoring hemoglobin and transfusion requirements is important. Clinicians such as primary care doctors, hematologists, nursing staff, and clinical pharmacists must all engage in open communication, educate the patient, and monitor labs and treatment outcomes. For instance, if a patient undergoing treatment of beta-thalassemia has not achieved a reduction in transfusion burden by two doses of luspatercept, the clinicians should increase the dose to no more than 1.25mg/kg. Just like in the treatment of lower-risk MDS, the dose should not exceed 1.75mg/kg. The patient should also be monitored for another two consecutive doses to ensure the transfusion burden has decreased. The clinical pharmacist is also a valuable professional needed for medication consultation and verifying dosing parameters and administration. On follow-up visits, the nurse team must verify hemoglobin levels and do so by asking about signs and symptoms of anemia and lab results. Failure to comply with all aspects of administration and monitoring can lead to detrimental effects on patient's health.

The interprofessional team must communicate, support, and monitor the patient to ensure the best chance for therapeutic success with the fewest adverse events. [Level5]