An arteriovenous fistula is a surgical connection between an artery and a vein. Dialysis fistula maturation is a dynamic process called venous arterialization in which structural and functional remodeling of the venous wall is facilitated by the release of nitrous oxide and the breakdown of elastin to permit enlargement of the outflow vein.

The KDOQI’s “Rule of 6’s” is used to assess fistula maturation and states that 6 weeks after creation, an arteriovenous fistula should achieve a blood flow rate of at least 600 ml/min, a diameter of at least 6 mm, an access length of 6 cm for cannulation, and a depth of 6 mm or less from the skin surface.

A thorough understanding of the upper extremity vascular anatomy is paramount to successful AVF creation.

- **Brachial Artery:**A continuation of the axillary artery that courses medially down the arm to the antecubital fossa, where it branches into the radial and ulnar arteries.

- **Radial Artery:**A branch of the brachial artery that runs laterally down the forearm to the wrist, and terminates in the hand anastomosing with the ulnar artery to form the deep palmar arch.

- **Cephalic Vein:**A superficial vein that arises from the venous network of the hand, courses up the lateral flexor side of the forearm and the anterolateral arm, and terminates in the deltopectoral groove joining the axillary vein.

- **Basilic Vein:**A deep vein that arises from the venous network of the hand, courses posteromedially up the arm deep to the brachial fascia, and empties into the brachial vein before joining the axillary vein.

- **Central Veins:**Large diameter vessels that empty directly into the superior vena cava. The cephalic vein joins the axillary vein to become the subclavian vein. The subclavian vein then joins the internal jugular vein to become the innominate vein (brachiocephalic).