The presenting symptoms, as well as the anatomic location of gastrointestinal stromal tumors, will likely impact the diagnostic workup involved. In all patients regardless of the presenting symptoms, a history and physical should serve as the starting point for the diagnostic work-up. For patients presenting with an abdominal mass, contrast-enhanced CT using oral and intravenous (IV) contrast is the preferred modality for assessment. On a CT (computed tomography) scan, GISTs will be viewed as a solid, contrast-enhancing mass with smooth margins. In patients with a high degree of concern for radiation exposure, or unable to receive iodinated contrast, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is an alternative option for imaging.

Endoscopy is the preferred method of evaluation for patients presenting with gastrointestinal bleeding. On the endoscopic exam, GISTs most commonly appear similar to other sub-epithelial lesions (SEL) with a smooth bulge covered with normal-appearing mucosa. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has proven to be an important tool to help differentiate GISTs from other SELs. On EUS, a GIST will appear as a hypoechoic solid mass originating from the second (muscularis mucosa) or fourth (muscularis propria) layers of the wall of the GI tract.

The definitive diagnosis of GISTs is based on the pathologic characteristics of the tissue sample and incorporates both the morphologic and immunohistochemical characteristics.

The tumor sample used for pathology can be obtained via biopsy or following surgical resection. For tumors that appear easily resectable and in which preoperative therapy is not required, it may not be necessary to obtain a preoperative tissue biopsy, and surgical pathology can be used to confirm the diagnosis of GIST. In this way, the risk of tumor dissemination or bleeding with biopsy will be eliminated in these friable tumors. In cases where biopsy is needed to make the diagnosis and/or to plan preoperative therapy for tumors not easily resectable, the choice of biopsy method is EUS with fine-needle aspiration (FNA).

Due to the conferred resistance of certain gene mutations to the standard of care, such as imatinib, mutational analysis is recommended for all GISTs.