The majority of patients with bleeding angiodysplasia present to the emergency department, and hence the nursing staff and triage need to be aware of the management of these patients. Because the diagnosis is not simple, numerous specialists may be involved, along with other healthcare providers, as part of the interprofessional team approach to care. For those who are unstable, resuscitation is vital. Once stable, imaging studies are required to locate the angiodysplasia for more definitive treatment. Acutely bleeding patients must be monitored in an intensive care setting and be aware of the potential complications.

When choosing medical treatment, the specialist should work closely with a board-certified pharmacotherapy pharmacist to optimize drug selection and dosing. A gastroenterology specialty nurse can also verify patient compliance, provide patient counsel, and evaluate therapeutic effectiveness, irrespective of the treatment path chosen. Close communication and collaboration between specialists and all members of the interprofessional team are vital for improving outcomes; this includes ED physicians, specialists, pharmacists, and nursing. [Level 5]

A recent case-control study with 270 patients diagnosed between 2010 and 2015 with angiodysplasia and 5594 controls demonstrated that the risk factors for incidental angiodysplasia are anticoagulants, autoimmune disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, male gender, and thyroid dysfunction. They showed that risk factors related to symptomatic angiodysplasia are advanced age, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and valvular heart disease. The risk factors for symptomatic angiodysplasia are different and more significant than incidental angiodysplasia, which may help in a proper treatment plan of a patient with angiodysplasia.