Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) has increased dramatically over the years and continues to do so at an alarming rate.  It is a disease characterized by insulin resistance, meaning the insulin produced by the body is not enough to meet the glucose transport demands, leading to an elevated amount of glucose remaining in the body’s circulating plasma.  This chronic state of hyperglycemia can lead to a multitude of long-term complications, such as retinopathy, neuropathy, renal disease, and most lethally - heart disease. Insulin resistance has also been found to be a key component in obesity and metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension).  GLUT4 expression is severely disrupted in individuals with T2DM and heavily contributes to insulin resistance disease pathophysiology as it obstructs glucose transport from extracellular to intracellular uptake for storage and metabolism. Potential causes for resistance to insulin-stimulated glucose transport may be because of defective intracellular signaling of GLUT4 translocation in skeletal muscle from stored intracellular vesicles to active components of the plasma membrane, which may be due to an inherent impairment in the muscle cells as T2DM is a heritable disease. It may also be due to glucose toxicity from chronic hyperglycemia, or elevated levels of free fatty acids or TNF-alpha in the serum.  As a result of GLUT4 expression downregulation, adipocytes also exhibit impaired insulin-stimulated glucose uptake.

Research shows that increasing intracellular concentrations of GLUT4 can improve or even reverse T2DM.  A non-pharmacological method of doing so is by incorporating exercise into an individual’s lifestyle. Skeletal muscle contractions activate exercise-responsive GLUT4-containing vesicles for exocytosis to the cell surface via a mechanism that functions independently from that of the insulin-stimulated pathway.  Individuals at high risk of developing T2DM may decrease their risk by regularly incorporating exercise into their routine. One study found that females who exercised at least once per week had a 33% decrease in the risk of developing T2DM than sedentary women.

From a pharmacologic standpoint, drugs such as metformin,  thiazolidinediones, and sulfonylureas may be used to ameliorate glycemic control in T2DM individuals.   Sulfonylureas stimulate the release of insulin from pancreatic beta cells by inhibiting potassium-channels responsible for insulin uptake into the cell, thus blocking this process increases insulin availability in the serum.  Metformin is a biguanide which functions to primarily decrease hepatic glucose production, as well as decrease intestinal glucose absorption. Thiazolidinediones improve insulin sensitivity by inhibiting a nuclear receptor primarily in adipocytes, known as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR-gamma) which alters gene transcription involving glucose and fat metabolism.  Part of its mechanism of action is that it improves GLUT4 translocation by decreasing the level of TNF-alpha.