1. MCNs have a substantial risk for malignancy. Treatment of MCNs is surgical resection.

- Symptomatic MCNs irrespective of size

- MCNs of size > 4.0 cm

- MCNs with suspicious features irrespective of size

If there is no suspicion of carcinoma, a spleen preserving or parenchyma sparing procedure (non-oncologic resection) can be performed. Minimally invasive procedures involving laparoscopic and robotic distal pancreatectomies are equally acceptable with similar oncologic outcomes and with the benefits of laparoscopy.

MCNs with suspicious features should undergo standard oncologic resection, mostly involving distal pancreatico-splenectomy and lymph node dissection.

For asymptomatic MCNs of 3 to 4 cm, treatment must be individualized considering the patient's age, surgical risk, and patient's preference. Since determining the nature of a <3cm cystic lesion is difficult, the recommendation is for surveillance.

2. Surveillance recommendations include MRI, EUS, or a combination of both every 6 months during the first year. If no changes are noted, then imaging can be done annually during their lifetime as long as they are deemed fit to undergo surgery.

The American College of Gastroenterology guidelines suggest an imaging schedule based on the size of the cyst.

- <1 cm - MRI in 2 years.

- 1-2 cm - MRI in 1 year.

- 2-3 cm - MRI or EUS in 6 to 12 months

During surveillance, if a patient develops jaundice, acute pancreatitis, elevated serum CA19-9, mural nodules, or an increase in the size of the lesion, they will need EUS with FNA and multidisciplinary panel referral.

3. Cyst ablation with ethanol or paclitaxel injection and radiofrequency ablation has been studied but is not the standard of care at present.

In summary, the patient's risk of developing a malignancy needs to be assessed against the risks of undergoing surgery.