# Definition/Introduction

Patients not ready for a regular diet due to elective or emergent procedures or who experience irregularity in gastrointestinal function, dysphagia, a transition from prolonged fasted periods, etc., are typically placed on a restrictive diet.

# Issues of Concern

The use of any modified diet, including a full liquid diet, can be a potential issue for patients if used long-term. For example, in patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia, this type of modified diet can lead to poor nutrition. The use of modified diets, including full thickened liquid diets in long-term care patients, has correlations with higher BUN and creatinine levels as well as higher rates of dehydration over time. The use of certain types of full liquid diets can also affect drug absorption. Studies have shown that using full thickened liquid diets to take medications can affect the rate of absorption by delaying drug dissolution. Finally, full liquid diets can affect a patient's quality of life over time due to patient dissatisfaction with taste when supplemented with nutrients, patient discomfort with the texture of diet lacking solid food, and increased thirst depending on what full liquids the patient receives.

# Clinical Significance

Even with the concerns associated with modified diets due to poor nutrition, full liquid diets have historically been more likely than clear liquid diets to be supplemented with commercial formulas that provide a higher caloric intake for patients.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The main indication for a full liquid diet is in the perioperative period.