As a muscle that forms part of the glenohumeral joint, the infraspinatus is susceptible to rotator cuff tears, usually due to anterior dislocations. In anterior shoulder dislocations, a Hill-Sachs lesion is common. The lesion is on the posterior head of the humerus resulting from the translation of the humeral head back into the glenoid cavity. In the repair of these types of lesions, the infraspinatus is used to fill the defect.

A rotator cuff repair can be managed surgically or conservatively. Surgery is commonly recommended when symptoms have lasted 6 to 12 months, the tear is more than 3 cm, significant weakness or loss of function, or recent acute injury.

If surgical treatment is pursued, various approaches can be used, including open repair, arthroscopic repair, and mini-open repair.

Surgeons use the plane between the infraspinatus and teres minor as the posterior approach for shoulder arthroscopy. This posterior approach is also used for repairs of glenoid fractures and osteotomy. When preparing for an arthroscopic repair of a rotator cuff repair, it is common to begin by outlining key landmarks, including the acromion, clavicle, coracoid process, and portal placement. The posterior portal is placed distal and medial to the lateral acromion. The anterior portal is placed between the acromioclavicular joint and the coracoid process. The lateral portal is placed in line with the clavicle. During the operation, the surgeon will investigate the anatomy of the shoulder, including all four rotator cuff muscles. During the operation, the surgeon may elect to perform a subacromial bursectomy or acromioplasty. Before repairing the tendon, a debridement will be performed, and the footprint will be prepared for insertion of anchors.