IPC catheter is a 66 cm catheter made of soft silicone. It has fenestration on either side on the insertion end up to 24 cm and a one-way valve on the drainage end. There is a soft polyester foamy cuff at the junction of proximal two-thirds and distal one-third. This cuff promotes tissue ingrowth to provide stability to the catheter against accidental pull-out or entanglement. It usually comes in a packet containing the catheter, a metal catheter introducer, a regular dilator, and a peel-off dilator with the inner regular dilator, local anesthetic, sutures, scalpel, scissors, and artery forceps.

**Step 1**

Have the patient rest on his or her back and then raise the head of the bed to 45 degrees. Expose the lateral chest wall by raising and folding the arm at the elbow over the head. If the patient can not hold his arm for the duration of the procedure, then use tape or a sling to secure it against the bed.

**Step 2**

Use bedside ultrasound to assess the size of pleural effusion, and a suitable site should be selected. The site is selected, preferably, in the safety triangle around the four intercostal space in the mid-axillary line.

**Step 3**

Clean the area with antiseptic, and use surgical drape to ensure aseptic technique. Use surgical gowns, gloves, and mask just as placing the central venous catheter.

**Step 4**

Give local anesthesia at the pre-selected site (site-1). Start by injecting into the skin and the subcutaneous tissue, and finally, puncture the pleura and confirm the easy flow of fluid. Ensure that there is no resistance from puncturing the skin to the pleura. In other words, the path of the needle should be completely unrestricted to allow easy dilatation of the tissue later. Remove the syringe and insert guidewire. Then remove the needle. Give 1 to 1.5 cm incision at site-1; the guidewire should be in the middle of the incision (incision-1).

**Step 5**

Next, select another site (site-2), 5 cm below and inferior to site-1. Give local anesthesia. Make 1 cm vertical incision (incision-2). Now give generous local anesthesia in the area between the 2 incisions. This is to anesthetize the "tunnel" for the IPC. Take the metal introducer and attach the proximal end of the catheter to its distal end, which has grooves to hold the catheter and avoid slipping during insertion.

**Step 6**

Insert the metal introducer from incision-2 toward incision-1. Apply gentle pressure and rotating motion to create a percutaneous tunnel. Once the introducer is out from incision-1, pull the catheter out and adjust in a way that the polyester cuff is in the subcutaneous tissue approximately 1cm from the incision-2. Remove the introducer from the catheter.

**Step 7**

Dilate the catheter tract like central line insertion using the Seldinger technique. Now use the dilator with the detachable outer core and a regular inner dilator. Insert this dilator till the edges touch the skin. Remove the inner dilator and the guidewire. There will be a gush of pleural fluid. Insert the proximal end of the IPC through the dilator into the pleural cavity. Once all the fenestrations are inside the pleural cavity, then start peeling off the outer dilator and simultaneously pushing the remaining catheter. Once the catheter is fully inserted, make sure that there is no kinking of the catheter. Lastly, suture both the incisions and apply a dry dressing. Sutures can be removed in 1 week.