A thorough history and physical is of vital importance since this condition is primarily a clinical diagnosis. Subacromial bursitis usually presents with pain in the anterolateral aspect of the shoulder. Patients may report sustaining trauma such as a fall with direct impact to the shoulder. A history of repetitive overhead activities such as overhead sports, lifting boxes, etc. may also clue the clinician towards the diagnosis.

Impingement syndrome is a common cause of subacromial bursitis. It results when the area of the subacromial space is decreased, mainly due to overhead activities. Abduction of the arm elevates the humerus, bringing it closer to the acromion, which effectively reduces the space under the acromion where the subacromial bursa and the supraspinatus muscle lie. The subacromial bursa serves its function by protecting the underlying supraspinatus muscle from attrition wear between the humeral head and the acromion. However, repetitive activity can lead to irritation and inflammation of the bursa, causing it to get inflamed. When considering impingement as a cause for subacromial bursitis, it is, therefore, essential to also include tendon pathology in the differential since concomitant supraspinatus tendinitis or tendon tear may be present.

On physical exam, the patient will have point tenderness at the anterolateral aspect of the shoulder below the acromion. The pain is localized and does not typically radiate to other parts of the shoulder or the arm (if the pain does radiate, one must include cervical spine pathology in the differential). The skin may also be warm or boggy at this site, although erythema is generally not seen. Pain is also elicited on resisted abduction of the arm beyond 75 to 80 degrees since during this arc of motion the subacromial bursa is compressed at the undersurface of the acromion.