HIV-associated progressive polyradiculopathy often has diagnostic ambiguity due to two reasons. First, the clinical syndrome in all infectious, non-infectious, and neoplastic causes is identical and may pose difficulty in early diagnosis; at the same time, the usually concomitant distal peripheral neuropathy is present as a part of disease progression or adverse drug reaction. In most cases, radiculopathy is seen in the advanced late stage of HIV, but sometimes it may be the presenting complaint of HIV. The presentation of polyradiculopathy can be observed in the clinical examination; however, imaging and lab evaluation are essential for etiological specificity.

While the infectious disease physician is almost always involved in caring for patients with HIV and complications of HIV, it is essential to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists to help optimize clinical outcomes. The nurses are vital members of the interprofessional group as they can assist with the management as well as the education of the patient and family. During the treatment period, for symptomatic relief and monitoring and treatment of drug interaction, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics. Every interprofessional team member must maintain open communication channels with the rest of the team, particularly if there are any changes in the patient's condition. All caregivers are responsible for maintaining accurate and updated patient records so everyone can access the same patient data. The outcomes of radiculopathy associated with HIV depend on the etiology and appropriate therapy. However, to improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists coordinating with all caregivers is recommended. [Level 5]