Informed consent must be obtained before the procedure. A urinalysis and urine culture is commonly performed before cystoscopy. The AUA best practice policy statement on antimicrobial prophylaxis does not recommend antibiotic administration for routine diagnostic cystoscopy in the absence of patient-related risk factors. The risk factors that require antimicrobial prophylaxis include:

- Advanced age

- Anatomic anomalies of the urinary tract

- Chronic corticosteroid use

- Colonized endogenous or exogenous material

- Distant coexistent infection

- Immunodeficiency

- Poor nutritional status

- Prolonged coexistent infection

- Smoking history

Prophylaxis lasting less than 24 hours with either a fluoroquinolone or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is recommended for therapeutic procedures. Two-line alternatives include an aminoglycoside with or without ampicillin, a first or second-generation cephalosporin, or amoxicillin/clavulanate.

Prior to the procedure, the skin should be prepared with an antiseptic agent. Both chlorhexidine gluconate and alcohol-based solutions can be damaging to mucous membranes and are therefore not recommended for use on the genitalia. Aqueous-based iodophor-containing products such as Betadine are safe on all skin surfaces and are most commonly used for preparation

After application of the antiseptic agent, a lubricating gel is injected into the urethra. A plain or lidocaine gel may be used. One meta-analysis of four randomized trials found that patients who received lidocaine gel were 1.7 times less likely to experience moderate to severe pain during the procedure.