Even though the use of digoxin has declined over the past 2 decades, toxicity from this medication still is quite common. Because of the numerous risk factors and varied presentation of digoxin toxicity, the management is best done by an interprofessional team that includes a cardiologist, emergency department physician, intensivist, nephrologist, neurologist, ICU nurses, and a toxicologist. Most patients with digoxin toxicity are at risk for arrhythmias and need ICU monitoring. Nurses looking after these patients need to be fully aware of the potential problems associated with digoxin toxicity and notify the team when there is a deviation from normal parameters. More important, the pharmacist needs to educate the patient on the prevention of another episode by knowing the dose he or she is supposed to take. In addition, the pharmacist has to ensure that the correct dose of digoxin has been prescribed by the physician. Patients should be warned not to start or change the dose of any medication without first consulting with the primary care provider. The parent should store the medication safely away from the reach of children. For patients with an intentional overdose, a mental health nurse consult is recommended before discharge.  Only through an interprofessional team approach with open communication can the morbidity of the disorder be lowered.

**Outcomes**

The outcome following digoxin toxicity depends on the patient age and other comorbidities. Seniors tend to have worse outcomes as they often develop recalcitrant arrhythmias and advanced degree heart block. While death rates have started to decline, digoxin toxicity is also associated with high morbidity. The key to preventing digoxin toxicity is patient education. Patients need to be educated about the signs and symptoms of toxicity and when to return to the ED.