Lymphoma is the most prevalent hematologic malignancy worldwide, with Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma being the most common subtype. According to the National Cancer Institute statistics, NHL is the seventh leading cause of cancer in the United States and accounts for 4.2 % of all cancers. HL accounts for about 0.4% of all cancers.

Some risk factors associated with the development of lymphoma include older age (HL also occurs in younger age groups), family history of lymphoma, autoimmune diseases, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV), and occupational exposure to chemicals like insecticides and radiation exposure.

For the optimal management of these patients, it is crucial to stage and monitor the disease with a high level of accuracy. FDG PET/CT has proven to be the imaging modality of choice in managing patients with aggressive lymphomas. FDG PET/CT is far better than CT in detecting extranodal lymphomatous disease involving bone marrow, liver, spleen, bowel, lungs, head, and neck.

Extranodal disease is indicative of a poor prognosis. Baseline PET/CT also provides prognostic information as a high level of metabolic activity is associated with an elevated LDH level and is indicative of a poor prognosis. PET/CT changes treatment staging in about 30-32% of the cases.

FDG PET/CT is also superior to conventional imaging, like CT, in monitoring the therapeutic response as metabolic response occurs earlier than tumor size shrinkage. Good response to treatment on the interim PET/CT is associated with complete remission at the end of the treatment.