**Risk Factors Associated with Chronic Inflammation**

Several risk factors promote a low-level inflammatory response. These include:

- Age: Increasing age is positively correlated with elevated levels of several inflammatory molecules. The age-associated increase in inflammatory molecules may be due to mitochondrial dysfunction or free radical accumulation over time and other age-related factors like an increase in visceral body fat.

- Obesity: Many studies have reported that fat tissue is an endocrine organ, secreting multiple adipokines and other inflammatory mediators. Some reports show that the body mass index of an individual is proportional to the amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted. Metabolic syndrome typifies this well.

- Diet: Diet rich in saturated fat, trans-fats, or refined sugar is associated with higher production of pro-inflammatory molecules, especially in individuals with diabetes or overweight individuals.

- Smoking: Cigarette smoking is associated with lowering the production of anti-inflammatory molecules and inducing inflammation.

- Low Sex Hormones: Studies show that sex hormones like testosterone and estrogen can suppress the production and secretion of several pro-inflammatory markers and it has been observed that maintaining sex hormone levels reduces the risk of several inflammatory diseases.

- Stress and Sleep Disorders: Both physical and emotional stress is associated with inflammatory cytokine release. Stress can also cause sleep disorders. Since individuals with irregular sleep schedules are more likely to have chronic inflammation than consistent sleepers, sleep disorders are also considered as one of the independent risk factors for chronic inflammation.

**Symptoms of Chronic Inflammation**

Some of the common signs and symptoms that develop during chronic inflammation are listed below.

- Body pain, arthralgia, myalgia

- Chronic fatigue and insomnia

- Depression, anxiety and mood disorders

- Gastrointestinal complications like constipation, diarrhea, and acid reflux

- Weight gain or weight loss

- Frequent infections