There are many ways to perform a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, and an example is provided below. Different techniques and the data to support them will also be discussed in each section.

**Entrance and Set Up**

Entrance into the abdomen begins in the left upper quadrant, and the technique utilized is at the surgeon's discretion. The abdomen is insufflated to a pressure of 15 mmHg, and the abdomen is visually explored with a laparoscope. Trocar placement will be as follows:

- 5 mm trocar in the left upper quadrant, anterior axillary line (assistant port)

- 5 mm trocar in the left upper paramedian midclavicular line (camera port)

- 5 mm trocar in the right upper paramedic midclavicular line

- 15 mm trocar placed at or just superior and to the right of the umbilicus (should be parallel with the lesser curvature of the stomach)

- Liver retractor placed in the subxiphoid area

- The two 5mm ports on the left side will be used by the assistant, the two right-sided ports (15mm and 5mm right paramedian) will be used by the primary surgeon. Once all ports are in and the liver is retracted, the patient is placed in reverse Trendelenburg.

**Mobilization of the Greater Curvature**

Dissection begins by dividing the greater omentum 5 cm proximal to the pylorus near the incisor angularis.  The gastroepiploic vessels are divided using an energy device along the greater curvature toward the short gastric vessels. Division of the short gastric vessels should be done with a bipolar cautery device.  This dissection is continued to completely divide the gastrophrenic ligament and mobilize the angle of His to identify the left crus of the diaphragm.

- Length from the pylorus - there is debate on the starting point for the first staple load in terms of distance from the pylorus. Distances from 2-6cm are practiced today, and the amount of retained antrum determines its clinical significance. With a distance of 2 cm, more antrum is resected, and the gastric remnant is relatively smaller. This, in theory, will produce an increase in excess weight loss but may lead to more complications from the increase in distal intragastric pressure. Studies comparing 2cm distance and 4-6cm distance have shown mixed results. One showed equal outcomes when considering weight loss and complications

**Identification and Repair of a Hiatal Hernia**

After exposing the left crura of the diaphragm, one should determine if a hiatal hernia is present.  If so, it is recommended to reduce the sac and repair the hernia with crural approximation utilizing interrupted sutures posterior to the esophagus.

**Posterior Mobilization**

The omentum has been separated from the greater curvature allowing access into the lesser sac. The stomach is grasped and lifted anteriorly to expose its posterior wall. All adhesions to the lesser sac are taken down up until the most medial aspect of the stomach at the lesser curvature.

**Bougie Placement**

The orogastric tube is removed and a 32 to 40 French Bougie is placed under laparoscopic visualization and is directed to a point distal to the divided omental attachments.

- Size of bougie - the thought behind choosing a size of the bougie to create the sleeve gastrectomy around stems on two outcomes, proximal staple line leaks, and percent estimated weight loss. Historically it was shown that with smaller french bougie this would lead to an increase in leak rate and weight loss. A meta-analysis in 2013 has shown that there is a leak rate reduction of 66% when using a bougie of 40 French or higher without a statistically significant alteration in the effectiveness of weight loss.

**Creation of a Stapled Sleeve Gastrectomy**

A 60mm long endoscopic stapler is used for this. Firing is begun at a point approximately 5 cm proximal to the pylorus along the bougie and with an angle that is parallel to the lesser curvature. One must ensure that the stapler encompasses equal lengths of the anterior and posterior stomach to avoid “spiraling” of the sleeve. The staple lines are sequentially fired along the bougie toward the angle of His and divide the fundus at a distance of .5 to 2 cm lateral to the esophagus. The remaining cardia will be inverted at the GE junction utilizing interrupted Lembert sutures. The amputated stomach is then removed through the 15mm port.

- Reinforcement of staple line - the main objectives of support of the staple line are to reduce the staple line leak and hemorrhage rates. There are many techniques to do this and two main categories, oversewing and buttressing. In a recent meta-analysis in 2016, when comparing reinforcement to no reinforcement, there was no statistically significant difference in leak rate; however, it did show a decrease in overall complications, including staple line bleeding. When comparing oversewing to buttressing, sewing revealed weaker benefits with longer operative times and a higher complication rate.

- Staple height - on average, the wall thickness of the antrum, body, and funds are 3.1, 2.4, and 1.7mm, respectively.

**Endoscopy**

A flexible endoscope is carefully inserted into the esophagus, and the staple line is visualized for integrity and hemostasis. The remaining stomach may be submerged in irrigation fluid and then insufflated with the endoscope to check for a staple line leak.

- Intraoperative leak test - this is up to the surgeons' discretion as it has had inconsistent results. A multicenter retrospective analysis in 2017 demonstrated a poor sensitivity of intraoperative leak test to predict postoperative leaks.  They demonstrated that the intraoperative leak test was negative in 91% of patients who eventually developed a staple line leak.

**Closure**

A fascial closure is done at the 15mm port site, and skin closure is done at all sites.