The iris is a natural light-transmitting diaphragm with an opening at the center called the pupil. The iris comprises a capillary vascular network, connective tissue, and melanocytes framework. The iris is a sensitive and delicate ocular structure that can be damaged due to blunt, penetrating, or iatrogenic trauma. Traumatic injury to the iris can manifest with varied symptoms depending on the extent of injury, site of injury, and severity of symptoms. The manifestation can be dilated atonic pupil, sluggishly reactive pupil secondary to sphincter damage. Iris root can also be damaged, leading to iridodialysis. Full or partial-thickness defects can occur at the stromal level, leading to iris transillumination defects. The traumatic damage can be managed non-surgically as well as surgically. The non-surgical treatment modalities can be miotics and the use of contact lenses. Surgical repair techniques can be corneal tattooing, laser iridoplasty, iridopexy, closed globe single-armed or double-armed peripheral approach, cross pupil approach, lasso technique, open globe approach, and prosthesis insertion. This activity describes the anatomy and physiology, indications, contraindications, equipment, technique, complication, and role of the interprofessional team in managing traumatic iris reconstruction.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the anatomy related to traumatic iris reconstruction.
- Review the techniques for traumatic iris reconstruction.
- Summarize the complication associated with traumatic iris reconstruction.
- Explain the clinical significance of traumatic iris reconstruction.