Trendelenburg sign is a physical examination finding seen when assessing for any dysfunction of the hip. A positive Trendelenburg sign usually indicates weakness in the hip abductor muscles consisting of the gluteus medius and gluteus minimus. A positive sign is defined by a contralateral pelvic drop during a single leg stance. Named after a German surgeon, Friedrich Trendelenburg, the Trendelenburg sign was first described in 1897 to identify hip abductor weakness in individuals with congenital dislocation of the hip and progressive muscular atrophy.

**Anatomy/Physiology**

Gluteus medius and minimus muscles are the primary abductors of the hip. These muscles are essential in providing stability of the hip and pelvis to maintain a mid-line center of gravity. Both muscles receive their innervation from the superior gluteal nerve arising from contributions from the L4-S1 nerve roots.

The Trendelenburg sign is most apparent during the gait cycle. When the leg supports the weight of the body on the lesioned side, the pelvis rises ipsilaterally. This presentation is more accurately a dipping of the pelvis towards the contralateral side. Because the pelvis cannot be maintained in a level plane by the lesioned abductors, the patient falls towards the good side and simultaneously leans the torso towards the lesioned side in an attempt to maintain balance. This type of gait is known as the Trendelenburg gait.

**Methods of Evaluation**

**Prerequisites of Testing**

- The patient can stand on the affected side for more than 30 seconds

- The patient can understand commands

- The patient has intact coordination

- The patient has free abduction movement; no fixed adduction deformity

**Standing Test**

The patient stands on the affected leg in a single leg stance for up to 30 seconds. The provider stands behind the patient at the hip level and places their hands on the iliac crests on either side of the pelvis observing to see if it stays level during the single-leg stance. Repeat the test on the opposite side. A positive Trendelenburg sign is when the pelvis drops on the unaffected side.

**Gait Test**

The examiner asks the patient to walk a short distance. In a normal gait, the body shifts the weight to the stance leg, allowing the center of gravity to shift as well, which stabilizes the body. In a patient with positive Trendelenburg sign constituting of abductor weakness, when they lift the unaffected leg, the shift does not occur; therefore, the patient is unable to maintain balance, leading to instability.

**Bottom Line**

The Trendelenburg sign alone cannot be used to diagnose hip conditions but is essentially a physical exam assessment used to aid in the diagnosis of various hip pathologies. A health care provider should still complete a full history and physical and order appropriate lab and imaging tests to assist in the final diagnosis contributing to a positive Trendelenburg sign. Other diagnostic tests can include X-rays, ultrasonography, computed tomography scans, and magnetic resonance imaging to diagnose the primary condition.