Identify the anatomical landmarks once again before insertion of the spinal needle. The spinal needle should be inserted with the stylet in place and with the bevel in the sagittal plane. The bevel should face the ceiling if the patient is in the lateral decubitus position. This will spread the fibers of the cauda equina instead of cutting them during insertion. The fibers of the cauda equina run parallel to the spinal axis. Insert the needle in the midline at the superior aspect of the inferior spinous process. If inserting the needle in the L4-L5 interspace, the needle should be inserted along the superior aspect of the L5 spinous process. The needle should be inserted at an angle of approximately 15 degrees. It may be helpful to imagine aiming the needle towards the patient's umbilicus.

The needle should be inserted smoothly in a singular direction. There may be some minor resistance when passing through the ligamentum flavum, which may result in a "popping" sensation. After passing the ligamentum flavum, advance the needle in 2 mm increments each time removing the stylet to see if there is any CSF fluid draining. A standard Whitacre spinal needle will be inserted to approximately 2/3 depth before reaching the ligamentum flavum.

CSF fluid will flow once the subarachnoid space has been reached by the needle. If obtaining an opening pressure, ensure the patient is in the lateral decubitus position to ensure the readings will be accurate.

Dispose of all sharps in the appropriate containers.