This type of osteopathic approach is indicated not only for vertebral release but also for muscle relaxation. Very often, the deep muscles of the cervical tract can be a source of pain, not only local but also in the head, stimulating trigeminal pain. In fact, the sub-occipital muscles (3 out of 4) have a myodural bridge, the latter of which is innervated and rich in proprioceptors. A contracture of these muscles or the presence of triggers points can trigger migraines and headaches. In the acute phase, METs can be performed and relieve symptoms.

The technique stimulates correct intervention of the parasympathetic system and facilitates the restoration of the passage of fluids (blood and lymph).The MET approach can improve the function of the respiratory accessory muscles of the cervical tract, increasing the ventilatory capacity of patients with fibromyalgia.

Chronic neck pain can result from previous trauma; in these cases, the contractile content of the muscles decreases, while the adipose tissue increases. In this clinical context, local inflammation (pain) increases, and the proprioceptive capacity of the muscular districts decreases with consequent deterioration of the neuromotor coordination (pain). MET can help restore not only proper spinal joint space but improve the ability of muscles to stretch and shorten comprehensively. This last point will allow the neck muscles to implement their function, reducing the causes of the pain.

MET can improve the morphology of the cervical tract (curvature); it could be a strategy for faster recovery from trauma such as whiplash.

If the patient's cervical tract is very painful and not very mobile, it is possible to start using METs, using the eye muscles in conjunction with the small movements of C0-C2. Or, involve the lingual complex and movement of the cervical tract, up to C4.