Grossly, SGR is a gelatinous, crescent-shaped, grey matter structure situated at the apices of the posterior spinal column corresponding to Rexed Lamina II of the spinal grey matter. In humans, laminae II may further subdivide into the outer (lamina IIo) and inner (lamina IIi) zones.

Contrary to popular dogma, the SGR does not contribute a significant number of second-order neurons to the anterolateral system (which are instead located primarily in Lamina I and III-V). Rather, the SGR serves as a major synaptic site between first- and second-order neurons with an abundant population of interneurons modulating communication. The neurons and axodendritic synapses of lamina II exhibit an abundance of receptors and neurotransmitter classes, a full review of which is in Merighi 2018.

Moreover, SGR integrates inputs from multiple sources. The first of such inputs are from the primary afferent fibers (PAFs) of the dorsal root ganglia (DRG). Different classes of PAFs transmit sensory information to the SGR; however, the most abundant are C (slow, dull pain, heat, itch), A-delta (sharp pain, cold), and A-beta (crude touch, mechanoreceptive) fibers.

The common neurotransmitter released by all PAFs is glutamate, either alone or in conjunction with others, with one of the most clinically significant being substance P, responsible for mediating noxious stimuli. Lastly, the SGR receives modulatory input via descending pathways from higher-order central nervous structures including the periventricular grey matter, periaqueductal grey matter, locus coeruleus, gigantocellular reticular nucleus, and nucleus raphe magnus; these structures mentioned above contribute predominantly serotonergic, noradrenergic, GABAergic, and glycinergic neurons that amplify or attenuate the spinal transmission of nociception to the ascending pathways.

Following sensory modulation, the SGR projects to other subdivisions of the ipsilateral SGR, contralateral lamina II, ipsilateral lamina I, III-V, other regions of the dorsal horn, and the anterolateral system.