There is a complex interplay of neurobiology, genetics, and the environment --nature and nurture-- that play into the development of addiction, alcohol, and other drug use disorder(AODUD). Reward activity is a piece of known evidence that supports the neurobiological underpinnings of addiction. However, observations implicating the dopamine reward system may not exclude or downplay the potential contribution of learning and memory in the hippocampus and emotional regulation in the amygdala as possible etiologies in the development and maintenance of an addiction.

The implication of genetics across addictive behaviors was suggested via the transcription factor Delta-FosB. Delta-FosB may be among the mechanisms by which the abuse of drugs can produce changes in the brain and contribute to the addiction phenotype. Delta-FosB, a member of the Fos family of transcription factors, accumulates within a subset of neurons of the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum after multiple administrations of illicit drugs. Studies also found a similar accumulation of Delta-FosB in the brain after compulsive running, a finding that suggests that Delta-FosB may accrue in many types of compulsive behaviors.

Furthermore, how individuals handle stress psychologically, physically, and biochemically plays significant roles when seen in the context of parental use, psychological or cognitive deficits, and level of stress.

Preclinical research has shown that stress exposures – especially in early life with child maltreatment and regular adversity – enhance drug self-administration and are the precipitating factors to many relapses in former or current individuals with addiction. Specifically, there are notable changes in the corticotropin-releasing factor and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (CRF/HPA), and autonomic arousal.

Studies in Latin American laboratories highlight the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in stress-related genes and addiction.  SNPs may interact with stress hormones, transcription factors, and cytokines. This interaction may be a potential pathway to identify reliable biomarkers of vulnerability to drug abuse and relapse. Other studies also suggest that CRF receptors in the lateral septum (LS) and the ventral tegmental area (VTA), specifically the CRF2-alpha-R isoform, as a potential therapeutic target for drug addiction. The Wnt family of secreted glycolipoproteins -Wnt/beta-catenin pathway may be a critical neural substrate for the interaction between stress and addictive behavior. Researchers also studied the cannabinoid system as a  promising target for stress-induced relapse on drugs.

In summary, addiction consistently finds its roots in stressful contexts, particularly when prolonged throughout early childhood. Environmental risk factors such as impulsivity, inadequate parental supervision, and delinquency also are common across chemical and behavioral expressions of addiction. Studies suggest that individuals who engage in one problem behavior are likely to engage in another problem. Sociodemographic risk factors related to poverty, geography, family, and peer groups can also influence the onset and course of both substance addiction and non-substance addiction.