**Principles of Western Blotting**

The principles of western blotting are equal loading of proteins, separation of proteins by molecular weight, electrophoretic transfer to a suitable membrane, and probing of antibodies.

**Equal Loading of Proteins**

Proper sample preparation for subsequent electrophoresis is crucial for downstream analysis. Western blot samples are first prepared by protein extraction with specialized cell lysis buffers and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (PPIs). There are numerous extraction methods, and proper selection is determined by the sample type. For example, most tissue preparation is by homogenization or sonication; however, osmotic shock or detergent lysis is more suited for easily lysed cells such as erythrocytes or cultured cells. Furthermore, the cell lysis buffer used in extraction should align with the target protein cellular localization.

Although rare, some antibodies will not be able to detect denatured samples. As such, gentle buffers without detergents are required. PPIs are used to maintain the structure and phosphorylation status of the target protein from the activity of endogenous phosphatases upon cell lysis and exogenous phosphatases in the lysis microenvironment. Collectively, this information underscores the need to tailor protein extraction to the sample type and the target protein.

There must be an equal concentration of proteins per western blot sample. Intuitively, this is imperative for a valid experiment, as unequal proteins per lane can skew the analysis. Protein concentration is quantifiable by conducting a Bradford assay, a colorimetric protein assay that exploits the interaction of a dye with a protein.

All western blot samples have three elements: protein extract, cell lysis buffer, and Laemmli (sample) buffer. Protein extract is normalized with cell-lysis buffer to the desired protein concentration, and an equal volume of Laemmli (sample) buffer is added. Therefore, a western blot sample always has a 1-to-1 volume ratio of normalized protein and Laemmli buffer. Laemmli buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8; 20% glycerol; 2% SDS; 4% beta-mercaptoethanol; 0.01% bromophenol blue) is unique to western blot sample preparation as each reagent is purposeful for SDS-PAGE.

Bromophenol blue (BPB) is a nonreactive reagent that serves as a dye front for electrophoresis. Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) is a potent anionic detergent that coats denatured proteins with an equal anion-to-mass ratio; this masks proteins' charge, shape, and size characteristics and renders them solely a function of molecular weight.

**Separation of Proteins by Molecular Weight**

The separation of proteins by weight is possible due to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) due to its combinatory use of a detergent and a discontinuous buffer system.

Typically, PAGE is an analytical biochemistry method used to separate contents such as nucleic acids and proteins by electrophoretic mobility in a chemically inert gel; however, by adding SDS, a potent anionic detergent, all denatured proteins will be coated with an equal charge to mass ratio. Therefore, the rate of protein migration is proportional to weight. Indeed, larger proteins travel slower than smaller proteins due to retarding properties of the porous gel. A gel matrix is formed from the polymerization of acrylamide and the crosslinking of N, N'-methylenebisacrylamide. This matrix creates a molecular sieve that imbues retarding properties. The pore size of this sieve is alterable by adjusting the percentages of polyacrylamide and N, N'-methylenebisacrylamide as they are inversely proportional.

Two different-sized sieves are used in PAGE: a stacking gel and a resolving gel. As the name suggests, the stacking gel stacks proteins into a narrow band to allow proteins to enter the resolving gel simultaneously, which is made possible due to its bigger pore size and acidity. With its much smaller pore size and basicity, the resolving gel is where the separation of proteins occurs.

The Laemmli discontinuous buffer system is most commonly used in SDS-PAGE. This system utilizes running buffer (25 mM Tris; 192 mM glycine; 0.1% SDS; pH~8.30) as electrode buffer and tris-HCl to buffer an acidic stacking gel (pH~6.80) and a basic resolving gel (pH~8.80). The deliberate use of varied pHs exploits the charge properties of glycine.

In contrast, chloride from the tris-HCl buffer disassociates from its counter ion and migrates quickly to the anode. Proteins lie between a trailing front of glycine and a leading front of chloride; this results in all proteins arriving at the resolving gel simultaneously, a vital component for subsequent separation.

The samples run in their respective lanes alongside a molecular weight marker, often called a protein ladder. For example, a typical setup would have the ladder in the first lane and the samples in the remaining lanes. The ladder establishes standard molecular weight bands that are then used to read the relative weight of proteins.

**Electrophoretic Transfer (Blotting)**

Blotting is the electrophoretic transfer of gel contents onto a suitable membrane; in a western blot, the contents are proteins. There are multiple methods of blotting in addition to numerous types of membranes. Although various transfer systems exist (wet, semi-dry, fast), the main principle of electrophoretic transfer remains the same. Like electrophoresis, negatively charged samples migrate toward an anode; in blotting, a transfer sandwich with a slightly modified electrode buffer is used. Towbin buffer (25 mM Tris; 192 mM glycine; 20% methanol; pH 8.3) is the standard transfer buffer, although small tweaks to this buffer are possible for the target protein.

Methanol is important in blotting as it increases the hydrophobicity of proteins and facilitates the release of SDS, both of which increase the adsorption of proteins onto the membrane. From cathode to anode, the sandwich organizes as filter paper, polyacrylamide gel, membrane, and filter paper.

Equilibration of sandwich contents in transfer buffer is crucial for increasing transfer efficiency; it prevents the drying of both the gel and membrane, washes electrophoretic contaminants off the gel, and reforms the original gel size.

Each transfer system has advantages, and selecting one largely depends on the target protein and lab workflow. Among various transfer apparatuses, the two most commonly used are wet and semi-dry.

Semi-dry systems are also time-efficient as blotting usually finishes within an hour, but a low voltage gets applied overnight in a wet transfer. While semi-dry transfer seems to be the better option as there is a significant reduction in both the volume of transfer buffer and length of transfer time, it has its limitations.

When Drs. Burnette and Towbin published their seminal studies, electrophoretic transfer was carried out on nitrocellulose membranes. They remained the gold standard until the advent of polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes. Concisely, PVDF membranes outcompete nitrocellulose membranes in their protein binding capacity, chemical resistance, and enhanced transfer efficiency in the presence of SDS.

Methanol in transfer buffer can shrink nitrocellulose membranes and precipitate out large proteins. Both membranes come in different pore sizes, and membrane pore size is directly related to protein weight.

**Antibody Probing**

Upon completing the electrophoretic transfer, proteins are now on the membrane, and two antibodies serve for probing and analysis. The primary antibody that binds a specific region on the target protein is used to detect its presence on the membrane. The secondary antibody conjugates with a component used for analysis.

Since membranes have a high affinity for protein, before probing, membranes are incubated in a buffer to coat the remaining surface area. This ‘blocking’ buffer includes a protein with a minimal binding affinity to the target protein and, consequently, the antibody. Typically, blocking buffer proteins include either casein from powdered milk or bovine serum albumin (BSA). Although casein is cheaper and suitable for most proteins, BSA is a better choice when the target protein is phosphorylated; there is a cross-reactivity between casein and phosphorylation-specific primary antibodies.

Probing of primary and secondary antibodies is done by incubating the membrane in a probing buffer of either the primary or secondary antibody in TBS-T. The membrane is first incubated in the primary probing buffer, typically overnight in a cold room, and washed again with TBS-T.

As mentioned earlier, the secondary antibody conjugates with a component specific to the type of analysis. Autoradiography was a common way to visualize bands but has declined in its popularity due to hazards associated with this method. It uses a radiolabeled isotope conjugated to the secondary antibody.

The enzyme-mediated reaction produces light that is then recorded with an imaging system. More recently, secondary antibodies have been conjugated with fluorophores that can be detected without the need for substrates.

The visualization of bands can serve different analytical purposes. Simply, the presence of bands can verify the expression of a protein, whereas the density of bands can show comparative relative protein expression. A housekeeping protein is also probed to evaluate relative protein expression.