# Learning Outcome

- Recall the causes of wheezing

- Describe the risk factors for wheezing

- Summarize the treatment of wheezing

# Introduction

Wheezing is the symptomatic manifestation of any disease process that causes airway obstruction. Rene Laennec's development of the stethoscope in 1816 has enabled a better appreciation of wheeze at the bedside, in comparison to the previously established practice of ear-to-chest auscultation. Wheeze is a musical, high-pitched, adventitious sound generated anywhere from the larynx to the distal bronchioles during either expiration or inspiration. Modern-day computerized waveform analysis has allowed us to characterize wheeze with more precision and given us its definition as a sinusoidal waveform, typically between 100 Hz and 5000 Hz with a dominant frequency of at least 400 Hz, lasting at least 80 milliseconds. Wheeze may be audible without the aid of a stereoscope when the sound is loud, but in most cases, wheezes are auscultated with a stethoscope.

The presence of wheezing does not always mean that the patient has asthma, and a proper history and physical exam are required to make the diagnosis.

# Nursing Diagnosis

- Difficulty breathing

- Rapid breathing

- Cyanosis

- Chest discomfort

# Causes

Wheezing is commonly experienced by people who have asthma; although, it can be heard in people with foreign bodies, congestive heart failure, a malignancy of the airway, or any lesion that causes narrowing of the airways. The presence of wheezing during expiration indicates that the individual’s peak expiratory flow rate is less than fifty percent compared to normal. The quality and duration of wheezing also depend on where in the airways the obstruction is located. In asthma, the wheezing is due to narrowing of the lower airways, whereas, with malignancies, the obstruction is usually in the upper, more proximal airways. In rare cases, wheezing may be heard both during inspiration and expiration. In severe asthma, no wheeze may be heard as the airflow will be so severely reduced, and chest auscultation will be silent. Since any process that reduces airway caliber generates wheeze, below are some of the many conditions that can cause wheezing.

- Respiratory infections (croup, laryngitis)

- Obstructive airway diseases (asthma,

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

- Anaphylaxis

- Bronchiolitis

- Pulmonary peribronchial edema (congestive heart failure)

- Vocal cord dysfunction (paradoxical vocal fold motion [PVFM], vocal cord paralysis)

- Postnasal drip

- Airway compression: Intrinsic or extrinsic (squamous cell carcinomas, goiter)

- Hyperdynamic airway collapse (tracheobronchomalacia)

- Carcinoid tumors

- Foreign body inhalation

- Forced exhalation by normal individuals

# Risk Factors

The reported prevalence of wheezing amongst young children between 2 to 3 years of age is 26% in the United States. The global prevalence is lower in the adolescent age range, approximately 12%. Global surveys reveal a similar prevalence in adults, with European and Australian surveys reporting the highest prevalence rates, up to 17%.

# Assessment

History should be targeted toward the various etiologies of wheezing listed above. For example, patients who have had head and neck cancer surgery and/or radiation may develop vocal cord paralysis. Additionally, a prior history of endotracheal intubation can alert one to the possibility of tracheal subglottic stenosis.

Physical examination of the trachea and thorax will identify wheeze. Wheeze associated with asthma is most commonly heard during expiration; however, wheeze is neither sensitive nor specific for asthma, so the wheezes can certainly extend into inspiration also. Upper airway obstruction from tonsilar hypertrophy can be evaluated with an oral examination, and palpation of the neck could identify a goiter.

# Evaluation

When wheezing is heard, some workup is required because it is an abnormal sound. The first imaging test of choice in a patient with wheezing is a chest x-ray to look for a foreign body or a lesion in the central airway. In the non-acute setting, if asthma is suspected, the next step is to obtain baseline pulmonary function tests with bronchodilator administration. Following this, it may be necessary to perform an airway challenge test with a bronchoconstrictive agent such as methacholine. If the wheezing resolves with a bronchodilation agent, a tumor or mass as the cause is a much less likely consideration. If there is no resolution after a breathing treatment, and a tumor or mass is suspected, then a CT scan of the chest and bronchoscopy may be required if possible malignancy is suspected on CT.

# Medical Management

Treatment predominantly revolves around the suspected etiology of wheezing. The ubiquitous approach to ensuring Airway, Breathing, and Circulation (ABCs) are stable is the priority. Those with signs of impending respiratory failure may require either noninvasive positive pressure ventilation or invasive mechanical ventilation following endotracheal intubation. In cases of anaphylaxis, epinephrine would be required. Nebulized, short-acting, b2 agonists such as albuterol and nebulized short-acting muscarinic antagonists are often administered while further workup is being performed.

# Nursing Management

- Listen to the chest for wheezing

- Assess for respiratory distress

- Administer bronchodilators

- Moisturize the air

- Provide oxygen if saturation is low

- Encourage oral hydration

- Urge patients to quit smoking

- Take medications as prescribed

- Keep away from second-hand smoke

- Do not keep pets if you have persistent wheezing

# When To Seek Help

- If severe dyspnea

- Unresponsive

- No air entry in the chest

- Unstable vital signs

- Respiratory distress

# Coordination of Care

Wheezing is a common sign encountered in clinical practice by the nurse practitioner, primary care provider, internist, cardiologist, and pulmonologist. When wheezing is heard, some workup is required because it is an abnormal sound. The first imaging test of choice in a patient with wheezing is a chest x-ray to look for a foreign body or a lesion in the central airway. In the non-acute setting, if asthma is suspected, the next step is to obtain baseline pulmonary function tests with bronchodilator administration. Following this, it may be necessary to perform an airway challenge test with a bronchoconstrictive agent such as methacholine. If the wheezing resolves with a bronchodilation agent, a tumor or mass as the cause is a much less likely consideration. If there is no resolution after a breathing treatment, and a tumor or mass is suspected, then a CT scan of the chest and bronchoscopy may be required if possible malignancy is suspected on CT.

# Risk Management

Wheezing is a common sign encountered in clinical practice by the nurse practitioner, primary care provider, internist, cardiologist, and pulmonologist. When wheezing is heard, some workup is required because it is an abnormal sound. The first imaging test of choice in a patient with wheezing is a chest x-ray to look for a foreign body or a lesion in the central airway. In the non-acute setting, if asthma is suspected, the next step is to obtain baseline pulmonary function tests with bronchodilator administration. Following this, it may be necessary to perform an airway challenge test with a bronchoconstrictive agent such as methacholine. If the wheezing resolves with a bronchodilation agent, a tumor or mass as the cause is a much less likely consideration. If there is no resolution after a breathing treatment, and a tumor or mass is suspected, then a CT scan of the chest and bronchoscopy may be required if possible malignancy is suspected on CT.