Glucose metabolism plays a key role as the primary source of energy for humans. Its dysregulation is associated with cancer, resulting in the loss of control of proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is a radiolabeled glucose analog used in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-glucose (18F-FDG) based positron emission/computed tomography (PET/CT) is known as the most popular glucose-based radiopharmaceutical in molecular imaging. It is the only glucose-based radiopharmaceutical that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration worldwide.

Nuclear medicine imaging is defined by the visualization, characterization, and biological process measurements at the molecular level. Medical imaging with PET utilizes short-lived isotopes which emit positrons in a process known as beta plus decay.

The basic concept used in FDG imaging is that tumor cells consume more glucose than other tissues because of the increased intracellular glycolysis, also known as the Warburg effect. Despite the chemical and structural differences between FDG and glucose, FDG is processed in human cells identical to glucose. FDG enters the cell via facilitated transport mediated by the glucose transporters known as GLUTs. The most common GLUT transporter in humans is GLUT1 which is also most commonly overexpressed in cancers. Further, it has been found that GLUT1 overexpression correlates with tumor development and, thus, a more unfavorable prognosis.

After FDG has entered the cell, it is phosphorylated to form FDG-6-Phosphate, which, unlike glucose, can only exit the cell if it is dephosphorylated by glucose-6-phosphatase. Tumor cells express reduced levels of glucose-6-phosphatase, which subsequently leads to the accumulation of FDG-phosphate in cancer cells. Like tumor cells, cells with high glucose turnover such as sites of infection can also accumulate FDG, thus making increased radiotracer uptake not specific for cancer.

Although cancer cells are known to consume more glucose, several factors influence radiotracer uptake that is important to keep in mind when evaluating PET imaging. Tumors without adequate vascularization will result in insufficient delivery of glucose and oxygen and thus tumor hypoxia. Areas of hypoxic and occasionally infarcted tissue appear as tumor necrosis and are often associated with increased malignancy and a poor prognosis.

The uptake of FDG on imaging is measured as the standardized uptake value (SUV), and if properly corrected, PET images are quantitative. This means each radioactivity value in each voxel correlates with the concentration of absolute radioactivity in vivo. Studies have shown a positive correlation between the standardized uptake value of a tumor with its GLUT1 expression.

PET/CT images are viewed and interpreted using specialized software to evaluate abnormal areas of uptake with corresponding CT anatomy.  The CT images themselves are nonenhanced and are somewhat limited for evaluation and characterization of pathology.