The brainstem is composed of the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla oblongata, situated in the posterior part of the brain. It is a connection between the cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the spinal cord. Embryologically, it develops from the mesencephalon and part of the rhombencephalon, all of which originate from the neural ectoderm. The brainstem is organized internally in three laminae: tectum, tegmentum, and basis. Gray matter in the brainstem is found in clusters all along the brainstem to forming mostly the cranial nerve nuclei, the pontine nuclei, and the reticular formation. White matter in the form of various ascending and descending tracts can be found mainly in the basis lamina, which is the most anterior part.

The blood supply to the brainstem is mostly from the vertebrobasilar system. The blood supply can be divided into a group of arteries supplying each region:

- Midbrain:

- Anteromedial: supplied by the posterior cerebral artery. 
- Anterolateral: supplied by the posterior cerebral artery and branches of the anterior choroidal artery.
- Lateral: supplied by the posterior cerebellar artery, the choroidal artery, and the collicular artery. 
- Posterior: supplied by the superior cerebellar artery, the posteromedial choroidal artery.

- Pons:

- Anteromedial: supplied by the pontine perforating arteries, branches of the basilar artery. 
- Anterolateral: supplied by the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. 
- Lateral: supplied by the lateral pontine perforating arteries, branches of the basilar artery, anterior inferior cerebellar artery, or the superior cerebellar artery.

- Medulla oblongata:

- Anteromedial: supplied by the anterior spinal artery and vertebral artery. 
- Anterolateral: supplied by the anterior spinal artery and vertebral artery. 
- Lateral: supplied by the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. 
- Posterior: supplied by the posterior spinal artery.

Brainstem infarction is an area of tissue death resulting from a lack of oxygen supply to any part of the brainstem. The knowledge of anatomy, vascular supply, and physical examination can be life-saving in the setting of an acute infarct and provide precise diagnosis and management. Time becomes an essential factor in management. Early intervention has shown dramatically reduced morbidity and mortality.