Several contraindications exist for the use of isosorbide.

- Allergic to nitrates

- Concomitant use of isosorbide with PDE inhibitors such as sildenafil and tadalafil

- Concomitant use of isosorbide with riociguat, a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator used for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension

- Right ventricular infarction

- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

PDE inhibitors such as tadalafil and sildenafil work by inhibiting the phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzyme, which is involved in breaking down the cGMP. Concomitant use of isosorbide with PDE inhibitors will cause increased cGMP, resulting in life-threatening hypotension.

Isosorbide releases NO, which stimulates the soluble guanylate cyclase. Therefore, the concomitant use of isosorbide with riociguat (a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator) will cause an increased level of cGMP resulting in life-threatening hypotension.

Patients with right ventricular infarction are preload sensitive. Isosorbide decreases the preload and worsens the right ventricular output causing severe hypotension.

In patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, isosorbide decreases the preload and, hence, the left ventricular volume, worsening left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.

Isosorbide use requires caution in the following conditions:

- Elderly patients with autonomic dysfunction due to a high risk of orthostatic hypotension

- Patients on diuretics will be volume depleted and can develop severe hypotension

- Patients who are taking other vasodilators due to the risk of severe hypotension