Chondrocytes are mainly responsible for the production of collagen and the extracellular matrix that will lead to the maintenance of cartilaginous tissues within joints. Initial cartilage is composed of the mesenchyme during the fifth week of development. The mesenchyme activates in areas of chondral development and condenses to make chondrification centers. The mesenchymal cells develop into prechondrocytes, which later become chondroblasts; chondroblasts secrete collagenous fibrils and extracellular matrix. Consequently, collagenous and elastic fibers are stored within the intercellular matrix. The type of matrix composed contributes to cartilaginous typecast; there are mainly three types of cartilage:

- Hyaline cartilage: This type of cartilage is the most widespread and is usually present within joints.

- Fibrocartilage: This type of cartilage is part of the intervertebral disc.

- Elastic cartilage: This type of cartilage is in the Eustachian tubes.

Endochondral ossification is crucial for skeletal development, specifically in preexisting cartilaginous models. The primary ossification center in long bones first appears in diaphysis (a portion of a long bone between two ends) that develops into the shaft of a bone. Chondrocytes undergo hypertrophy and enlarge at the sites of ossification. At these sites, the matrix becomes calcified and cellular necrosis appears. Osteochondral ossification is further regulated by the SOX9 transcription factor and the CARM1 (coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1). Long bone elongation takes place at the diaphyseal-epiphyseal junction. Elongation directly correlates to cartilage plates made out of chondral matrix and collagen that proliferate and participate in endochondral osteogenesis and postnatal development.

**Mechanism**

Articular cartilages (AC) obtain very few blood capillaries; chondrocytes, therefore, usually function under low oxygen tension. Whereas most body cells utilize aerobic respiration to produce energy for cellular work, hyaline chondrocytes use lactic acid fermentation for energy production. Hyaline chondrocytes metabolize glucose through anaerobic glycolysis and generate lactic acid at the terminal level. The nutrients required for glycolysis cross the perichondrium to the deeply stored chondrocytes. Two main mechanisms influence the transfer of nutrients: 1) diffusion; 2) intermittent cartilage compression and decompression pumping. These mechanisms set a limit to maximum cartilage width.

Proper endocrine balance is also crucial for chondral functioning. The hypophyseal growth hormone, known as somatotropin, mainly dictates cartilage growth. This hormone indirectly contributes to chondral growth by stimulating the production of somatomedin C in the liver. Somatomedin C directly promotes chondral growth. Testosterone, growth hormone (GH), and thyroxin expedite the production of chondral proteoglycans comprised of sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAG production can become inhibited via hydrocortisone, estradiol, and cortisone.