Treatment of cerebral edema is two-fold: prevent further injury from the cerebral edema and remediate the original insult causing the cerebral edema if able.

Remediation of the original and ongoing insult can include correcting metabolic derangements, controlling hypertension, removing intracranial lesion(s) or shunting hydrocephalus depending on the etiology of the cerebral edema.

The edema should be controlled to prevent further injury, and complications such as increased ICP should be mitigated.  Glucocorticoids have shown potential benefit in cerebral edema secondary to vasogenic edema but have limited utility in other forms of edema and should be avoided altogether in the face of trauma.

In the management of malignant middle cerebral artery stroke presenting with severe cerebral edema, osmotic agents can be used to create an osmotic gradient across blood thereby drawing fluid intravascularly and decreasing cerebral edema. Mannitol is the primary agent used at doses of 0.25 to 1 g/kg body weight and is thought to exert its greatest benefit by decreasing blood viscosity and to a lesser extent by decreasing blood volume. Side effects of mannitol use are eventual osmotic diuresis and dehydration as well as renal injury if serum osmolality exceeds 320 mOsm. Three percent hypertonic saline is also commonly used to decrease cerebral edema and can be administered as a 5 ml/kg bolus or a continuous infusion, monitoring serum sodium levels closely. It is considered relatively safe while serum sodium is < than 160mEq/dl or serum osmolality is less than 340 mOsm. A decompressive craniectomy is a neurosurgical procedure wherein a part of the skull is removed, and dura lifted, allowing the brain to sell without causing compression. It is usually considered as a last resort when all other ICP lowering measures have failed. When considered it is a good idea to do this procedure sooner rather than later.

Hypertonic saline has also been used to treat cerebral edema and is preferred over the diuretics.

Other supportive treatments include

1.Extraventricular drainage of the CSF

2.Avoiding straining and coughing

3. Inducing paralysis in patients who are intubated

4.Keeping the neck straight and elevated to allow for the brain to drain with ease

5.Inducing coma with barbiturates

6.Minimizing the use of PEEP

7. Inducing hypothermia to suppress cerebral metabolism. This is often done for several days but extended hypothermia makes the patient susceptible to systemic infections and hypotension.