**Amendments**

Since its original enactment, the CSA has had many amendments. These amendments have notably included the 2010 Secure and Responsible Drug Disposal Act, allowing pharmacies to create take-back programs for controlled medications, and the 2017 Protecting Patient Access to Emergency Medications Act, including registration for Emergency Medical Services to allow administration of controlled substances.

Another important amendment came in the form of the federal Analogue Act, which treats any substance “substantially similar” to a controlled substance of Schedule I or II as if itself were listed in Schedule I if intended for human consumption. This amendment applies mostly to what is often regarded as designer drugs, an analog of a controlled substance designed to mimic its effects but often avoid detection by standard drug testing.

**Employment of Convicted Individuals**

The CSA mandates that a person with any felony related to a controlled substance or a person who has had an application for registration denied for cause may not be employed by a pharmacy in a position that will allow access to controlled substances. “For cause” in this case is defined as a DEA registration denied or revoked/surrendered resulting from an investigation regarding an individual’s handling of controlled substances. There is a waiver to this rule should a registrant apply for an exception from an administrator of the DEA, who will collect all relevant information, review, and determine a person’s status.

**Reporting Significant Theft or Loss**

Under the CSA, any registered dispensary (pharmacy) or manufacturer must immediately report theft or loss of a significant amount of controlled substance to the DEA and the local police.