Clomipramine is available in generic formulations.

Clomipramine is routinely administered orally, per os (PO), although open trials have taken place with intravenous (IV) clomipramine in treatment-resistant OCD.

The initial dose for adults and children is 25 mg per day. The dose is titrated in increments of 25 mg per day every 4 to 7 days to a target dose between 100 mg to 250 mg per day, with a max dose in the first week of 100 mg per day the first two weeks. For children (aged ten and older) and adolescents, the typical daily dose is 1 to 3 mg per kg. The maximum daily dose for both children and adults is 250 mg per day. Prescribers may give clomipramine in single or split doses, with the largest dose given at bedtime due to sedation risk. Due to gastrointestinal side effects, patients may take it with meals, although absorption is not affected by food. Patients with trouble swallowing can open the capsules and mix the contents with soft foods such as applesauce or pudding (swallow the mixture without chewing).

For off-label indications, the dosing is between 25 and 100 mg at bedtime, with variations depending on the specific indication.

The onset of action of clomipramine is usually between 6 to 12 weeks for OCD; it may treat anxiety or insomnia immediately. If the patient achieves OCD remission with clomipramine, treatment should continue indefinitely.

For non-responders or those with side effects, clomipramine may require discontinuation; to taper clomipramine, reduce the dose by 50% every three days until reaching the lowest dose of 25 mg per day and then discontinue.

Prescribers often augment clomipramine therapy with buspirone, lithium, atypical antipsychotics, or fluvoxamine for OCD.