Pulsus paradoxus is a clinical exam finding that may be seen in a variety of disease processes. It is a key exam finding in pericardial effusion as it may herald cardiac tamponade. In pericardial effusion, the presence of pulsus paradoxus has a greater than 80% sensitivity for tamponade, and strongly increases the likelihood that tamponade is present. However, the absence of pulsus paradoxus does not exclude a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade. If present, pulsus paradoxes may be an indication that hemodynamic collapse is imminent; thus, all patients with suspected tamponade and pulsus paradoxus should be evaluated for urgent or emergent pericardial drainage.

Disease states in which cardiac tamponade may occur WITHOUT pulsus paradoxus include the following:

- Intracardiac shunts or moderate to severe valvular insufficiency

- Co-existing disease that significantly increases left or right ventricular diastolic pressure such severe systemic hypertension, aortic stenosis, or cor pulmonale

- Aortic dissection resulting in pericardial effusion/tamponade

- Cardiac tamponade in hypovolemia

Pulsus paradoxus may be seen in constrictive pericarditis, though with a frequency less than that seen in tamponade. A notable exception to this is constrictive pericarditis with pericardial effusion (effusive-constrictive pericarditis) in which a severe pulsus paradoxus is likely to be seen.

As noted above, there are many disease states aside from pericardial pathology that may lead to pulsus paradoxus. The most common of these is severe asthma or COPD. In these disease states, the negative intrathoracic pressure generated is greatly amplified compared to healthy individuals, sometimes close to 40 mm Hg below atmospheric pressure. These wide pressure swings will increase left ventricular transmural pressure and effectively increase LV afterload. Additionally, the pressure will be transmitted to the intrathoracic aorta and downstream vessels. This may manifest as pulsus paradoxus.

An important thing to keep in mind when considering pulsus paradoxus while discerning between pericardial and non-pericardial disease is the following: pulsus paradoxus in non-pericardial disease will usually manifest with a drop in systolic and diastolic pressures. This is in contrast to pericardial disease in which the drop is mainly in systolic pressure, diastolic pressure is usually minimally affected, and thus pulse pressure will be narrower.