**What is the function of SANE?**

**SANE**is an acronym for sexual assault nurse examiner.  These individuals have specific training in victim and evidence handling.  Many communities across the United States have this service.  They work closely with law enforcement and follow a chain of custody to ensure that evidence collected is admissible in court.

**What if a SANE is not readily available?**

SANE availability varies by jurisdiction, and thus may not be present at every healthcare location. Some nurse examiners are contracted through community-based approaches and can respond to calls of sexual assault within a certain radius. Others operate by hospital-centered care in which sexual assault cases transfer to those facilities with the proper training in place. Police officials and EMS should be aware of these procedures and should transport the patient to the facility with SANE availability. Providers should be cognizant of the established procedures within their practice in case the patient presents on their own, and a SANE is not available. A SAEK is typically accessible through the Emergency Department or local health department and can be completed by providers with proper training. However, an evidence collection kit completed by a SANE demonstrates superiority in terms of accuracy and completeness when compared to those performed by non-SANE nurses and physicians.

**What can examiners do to limit contamination and aid preservation?**

Two ways to limit contamination include wearing disposable gloves and changing those gloves after collecting each article of clothing. Providers should limit the number of people that go into the exam room to ensure both a lack of disruption and patient privacy during evidence collection.

Examiners should not place the patient’s clothes in a plastic bag as this can contribute to bacterial and fungal growth.

**What if a patient does not want to report or does not want to complete a SAEK?**

All sexual assault cases must be reported for patients who are 17 years old and younger as well as for elderly or disabled patients.