**CN I**

Traumatic injury, especially “whiplash” from automobile collisions, can sever the olfactory projections through the cribriform plate, resulting in anosmia, which has been associated with the development of depression.

**CV VIII**

Damage to the vestibular component of this nerve causes dizziness, while damage to the cochlear part causes peripheral or sensorineural hearing loss. The internal auditory meatus is a narrow canal of the temporal bone through which these nerves course and schwannoma of the vestibular or cochlear nerves in this meatus easily compresses and impinges these nerves. Early signs and symptoms are progressively worsening hearing loss with tinnitus, and imbalance, leading to a sense of pressure in the ear and facial weakness or paralysis.****However, if the condition is left untreated, it can result in potentially significant and life-threatening tumors.

**CN XI**

Central root or nuclear damage to the spinal accessory nerve results in ipsilateral flaccid paralysis of the sternocleidomastoid (with difficulty turning the head against force) and partial ipsilateral trapezius paralysis leading to shoulder drop. The trapezius is innervated by anterior horn grey matter from cervical spinal regions C3 through C4/5 in addition to the spinal accessory nerve. Thus complete paralysis of the trapezius muscle will not occur following a simple focal lesion.

**CN XII**

Damage to the nucleus or nerve fibers results in tongue deviation toward the side of the lesion, as the ipsilateral genioglossus muscle becomes weak or flaccid, reducing its ability to protrude the tongue.