"Opioid" is an umbrella term that represents all compounds that bind to opioid receptors, which includes compounds derived from poppy seeds, such as morphine and codeine, as well as synthetic opioids like fentanyl. Opioid receptors are found throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems and GI tract, regulating many body functions: pain, mood, stress, reward, gastrointestinal functions, and respiration.

There are three opioid receptors: mu, kappa, and delta. Mu receptors mediate most of the clinical and adverse effects of opioids: analgesia, sedation, euphoria, constipation, and respiratory distress. Activation of kappa receptors also leads to analgesia, dyspnea, and sedation. Research on the role of delta receptors is sparse.

Once activated, opioid receptors start a cascade that activates G proteins and inhibits adenylyl cyclase, ultimately leading to alterations in gene transcription. Opioid receptors work on both presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. On presynaptic neurons, opioids close voltage-gated calcium channels, leading to decreased release of pain neurotransmitters such as glutamate and substance P. This ultimately reduces transmission of pain signals. Presynaptic opioid receptors on neurons in the ventral tegmental area inhibit GABA release, causing dopaminergic neurons to fire more frequently and create feelings of euphoria. Postsynaptic opioid receptors open potassium channels, leading to cell hyperpolarization that inhibits cell signaling.

Most opioids are full agonists at the mu receptor. Some, such as buprenorphine, butorphanol, and nalbuphine, are partial agonists. Tramadol, a weak opioid mu agonist, also inhibits serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake.