# Introduction

The large arteries and veins directly connected with the heart are termed the great vessels, consisting of the inferior vena cava, superior vena cava, pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, and root of the aorta. These vessels are critical parts of the circulatory system, ensuring the delivery of deoxygenated blood from the periphery to the heart so it can be pumped into the lungs for oxygenation, returned to the left side of the heart, and then distributed back to the periphery. There are several congenital anatomical variations in the morphology of the great vessels, which can have significant deleterious effects on circulatory physiology requiring surgical management. Furthermore, thrombosis, stenosis, and aneurysm can affect the great vessels, which can be life-threatening conditions requiring prompt recognition and treatment.

# Structure and Function

The general function of the great vessels is the supply of blood to the right atrium (inferior and superior vena cavae), supply of blood from the right ventricle to the lungs (pulmonary arteries), supply of oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium (pulmonary veins), and the passage of oxygenated blood from the left ventricle to the arterial system (aorta). The structure of all vessels consists of the inner layer of endothelial cells, a middle smooth muscle layer, and an outer fibrous layer. These are termed the intima, media, and adventitia, respectively and are present in both arteries and veins, although the arterial wall is significantly thicker

**Vena Cavae**

The vena cavae are the terminal parts of the extensive venous networks throughout the periphery returning deoxygenated blood to the heart.

The inferior vena cava carries deoxygenated blood from the tissues below the diaphragm. It passes through the diaphragm via the caval opening at the level of T11, the most superior of the diaphragmatic openings. In the thorax, it becomes invested within the pericardial sac to drain into the posteroinferior part of the right atrium.

The superior vena cava is valveless and drains the upper limbs, thorax, head, and neck. It originates from the right and left brachiocephalic veins at the level of the right first intercostal space, and enters the right atrium variably at the level of the third, fourth, or fifth intercostal space, by this point having become invested in fibrous pericardium

**Pulmonary Arteries**

The pulmonary trunk, or main pulmonary artery, is the direct continuation of the right ventricular outflow tract carrying deoxygenated blood to the lungs and is separated from it by the pulmonary valve. The pulmonary trunk is about 5cm long and has a diameter of approximately 3cm

The right and left pulmonary arteries have slightly different relationships with their neighboring structures as they enter their respective lung hila. The left pulmonary artery lies superior to the left main bronchus and left pulmonary vein in the left lung hilum. By contrast, the longer right pulmonary artery lies anterior and inferior to the first division of the right main bronchus, which occurs just before entering the lung hilum. The right pulmonary veins still lie inferiorly within the hilum.

**Pulmonary Veins**

The pulmonary veins, as discussed above, lie within the inferior part of their respective lung hila

**Ascending aorta and aortic arch**

The ascending aorta begins at the aortic valve, approximately at the level of the third costal cartilage, as the continuation of the left ventricular outflow tract, and is usually up to 2.1cm wide

The apex of the aortic arch is where its three branches are given off: the brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery, and, latterly, the left subclavian artery. Just anteriorly to these near vertical branches, the left superior intercostal vein is draped obliquely across the aortic arch. As it travels horizontally from posterolateral to anteromedial, it first crosses over the left vagus nerve, then under the left phrenic nerve, before draining into the left brachiocephalic vein.

# Embryology

The superior vena cava is formed mainly from the proximal right anterior cardinal veins and right common cardinal vein. The inferior vena cava forms from the fusion of the remaining cardinal veins, the subcardinal veins, and later the supracardinal veins. The separation between the subcardinal vein and the right posterior cardinal vein joins with the hepatic vein forming the inferior vena cava, which delivers deoxygenated blood from the lower limbs and abdominal viscera to the right atrium

The formation of the aorta and the pulmonary trunk is dependent upon the truncus arteriosus. During development, the right and left conotruncal ridges grow in a spiral, twisted fashion forming the great vessels. This formation of the ridges is under the guidance of the combination of the mesenchymal cells that are going to create the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary semilunar valves) and the endocardial cells that are anteriorly and posteriorly conjoining to separate the ventricles. Eventually, from the fifth through eighth weeks, an aorticopulmonary septum will result in the separation of the Aorta and pulmonary trunk

The pulmonary veins become incorporated into the left atrium through the dorsal mesocardiac and mesenchymal guidance of the pulmonary venous plexus. The sinus venosus is responsible for the formation of the crista terminalis. Some of these physiological changes take place as the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction effect on the cardiac right side won't keep the fossa ovale patent, and the left atrial pressure will cause its closure alongside the degradation of the ductus arteriosus between the pulmonary trunk and aortic arch. Therefore, it results in a full separation of the four atrioventricular chambers, forming the fetal heart and great vessels

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The thoracic duct travels within the posterior mediastinum and is therefore related to the aorta here. It originates in front of the L2 vertebra as the cisterna chyli, and ascends with the aorta through the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm, where it then lies between the aorta and the azygous vein. At the level of the T5 vertebra, it continues posterior to the aortic arch before terminating as a loop arching over the subclavian artery to drain into the left internal jugular vein, jugulosubclavian angle, or left subclavian vein

# Nerves

**Innervation of the great vessels**

The innervation of vessels derives from a network of interconnected plexuses of neuronal fibers that are called the nervi vasorum, which rest upon the tunica adventitia alongside the vasa vasorum externae

**Relation of the great vessels to nerves in the mediastinum**

The heart and great vessels are traversed and surrounded by several important nerves that supply the area and continue inferiorly to the diaphragm and abdominal cavity. For this reason, the position of these nerves must be taken into consideration during surgical instrumentation of the great vessels to avoid iatrogenic injury

The left and right phrenic nerves (C3-C5) run relatively laterally through the mediastinum

The bilateral vagus nerves (cranial nerve X) also descend within the mediastinum. They are initially related to their respective aspects of the aortic arch, having emerged between the common carotid and subclavian arteries on each side. Each gives off the important recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) branch, which ascends to supply the intrinsic muscles of the trachea (expect cricothyroid)

# Surgical Considerations

There are several rare but important pathological variations of the configuration of the great vessels that may require cardiac surgery in the neonatal period or later in life as a life-saving intervention or improve quality of life. Failure of some of these procedures may ultimately lead to patients with these conditions requiring further cardiac surgery

**Transposition of the Great Arteries (TGA)**

This condition has a prevalence of 0.2 per 1000 live births. In patients with TGA, there exists a ventriculoarterial discordance; in other words, the aorta arises from the morphological right ventricle instead of the left ventricle, and left ventricle instead gives rise to the pulmonary artery**.**

**Truncus Arteriosus (TA)**

TA represents approximately 3% of all congenital heart disease, presenting with a single outflow tract from the ventricles to the pulmonary, coronary, and systemic circulation

**Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA)**

A patent ductus arteriosus estimates to occur in 1 in 2000 births

**Pulmonary artery sling**

This rare condition involves the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk in which the left pulmonary artery instead arises from the right pulmonary artery and, as a result, passes posterior to the trachea, forming a vascular sling

# Clinical Significance

Congenital heart disease involving aberrations of flow from malpositioned great vessels commonly presents in the neonatal period as, although some defects may be picked up antenatal sonography, the sensitivity of prenatal testing is highly variable

Oximetry has been demonstrated to be highly specific for congenital heart disease in the newborn