By adjusting kVp, decreasing mAs, and decreasing focal spot size, one can obtain high-quality digital radiographs with a lower radiation dose. Although a higher radiation dose leads to less noise and better image quality, one should be very cautious about the radiation dose to the patient. The radiographic systems should be optimized to obtain image quality that provides diagnostic accuracy at least possible radiation dose. The selection of radiographic projection affects the radiation dose. For example, in chest radiographs, anterior-posterior (AP) orientation has a higher radiation dose compared to the posterior-anterior (PA) view due to greater radiation exposure of breasts. In pediatric patients, the use of as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) principle is essential during radiographic studies since children are more susceptible to the effects of ionizing radiation than adults.

There is a tendency to use more radiation dose in digital imaging to reduce image noise called 'dose creep.'

The appropriate use of effective collimation and anti-scatter grid reduces the scattered radiation and improves image quality by reducing noise and improvement of SNR. The anti-scatter grid is most useful when the amount of scattered radiation is high, especially if the patient's thickness is greater than 10 cm.

For the troubleshooting of poor-quality radiographic images, the first step should be adjusting the post-processing parameters to see if the image can be reproduced with better image quality. One should optimize image acquisition and processing protocols to avoid repeat examination of the patients and unnecessary radiation exposure.

The optimal imaging protocols should be developed and established with the help of a medical physicist to obtain consistently high image quality at minimum possible radiation dose. The images should be properly compressed for transmission and storage without loss of significant clinical data. The appropriate image post-processing should be used to improve the image display. The imaging systems should comply with appropriate state and federal regulations. The imaging systems should minimize the incidence of poor-quality images and maximize clinical efficiency and continuous quality improvement.

A meticulous quality assurance program is essential for consistently maintaining high-quality performance. The image quality should be monitored by doing acceptance testing to assure safety and image quality, periodical checkups and maintenance assessment, and thorough annual inspections under the guidance of the medical physicist.

In summary, we discussed important components of the radiographic image quality and various factors affecting image quality. This knowledge is useful to obtain high-quality digital radiographs with the lowest possible radiation dose to improve the clinician's diagnostic accuracy.