Proteinuria is a result of three different pathways, including:

- Glomerular dysfunction

- Tubulointerstitial disease

- Secretory proteinuria

- Overflow proteinuria

**Glomerular Dysfunction**

This is the most common cause of proteinuria. Glomerular dysfunction alters the permeability of the glomerular basement membrane leading to albuminuria and immunoglobinuria. Glomerular dysfunction causes urinary protein excretion of more than 2 g/24-hour.

The glomerular filtration barrier is a three-layer membrane structure with the following layers (inner to outer):

- Fenestrated glomerular endothelium

- Glomerular basement membrane

- Podocyte

The basement membrane of the glomerular capillary wall is responsible for restricting protein filtration owing to the presence of type 4 collagen. This filtration restriction is weight and size-based. As a result, larger and heavier proteins like albumin (molecular weight of 69000 D) are not seen in the urine under normal circumstances. In addition to the size and weight barrier, the negative charge on the glomerular capillary wall prevents the passage of negatively charged proteins like albumin.

Glomerular proteinuria results from a damaged glomerular filtration barrier or increased hydrostatic pressure. Dysfunction of the charge barrier that consists of collagen and laminin leads to a loss of the negative charge, which manifests in the appearance of negatively charged proteins in the urine. In addition, mesangial cell growth in the glomerulus, extracellular matrix production, and infiltration with inflammatory cells can also lead to proteinuria. Podocytes are an essential barrier to proteinuria, and molecular dysfunction of nephrin and podocin at the level of podocytes can lead to the development of proteinuria. Transient receptor potential cation (TRPC) is a protein involved in calcium influx and has been shown to be associated with podocyte injury through an NFAT-mediated signaling pathway. The kidney also produces a membrane protein known as Klotho. In a recent study, klotho has been shown to suppress TRPC and hence may offer a therapeutic benefit for proteinuria in the future.

Causes of glomerular dysfunction include:

- Diabetic nephropathy (most common)

- Drug-induced nephropathy (NSAIDs, lithium, heavy metals, heroin)

- Lymphoma

- Infections (HIV, hepatitis B, and C)

- Primary glomerulonephropathies

- Amyloidosis

- Malignancies

- Dyslipidemia

- Reactive oxygen species

- Inflammatory cytokines

- Activation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS)

- Connective tissue diseases such as SLE

Chronic proteinuric glomerulopathy is defined as a sustained or permanent loss of protein filtration selectivity of the glomerulus.

**Tubulointerstitial Dysfunction**

This is due to the dysfunction at the proximal tubule resulting in the impairment of the uptake of filtered proteins. Tubulointerstitial dysfunction usually leads to less severe proteinuria than glomerular dysfunction, with 24-hour urine protein levels of less than 2 grams.

Smaller and positively charged proteins usually filtered through the glomerular capillary are absent in the urine owing to the nearly complete reabsorption by the tubular epithelial cells. Most of the protein reabsorption occurs in the proximal convoluted tubules. This reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubules has a transport maximum which, when reached, can result in proteinuria.

Causes of tubular dysfunction include:

- Hypertensive nephrosclerosis

- NSAIDs induced nephropathy

- Nephrotoxins

- Chronic tubulointerstitial disease

**Secretory Proteinuria**

Secretory proteinuria results from the oversecretion of specific proteins in the tubules, the most notable one being the Tamm-Horsfall proteins in interstitial nephritis.

**Overflow Proteinuria**

Increased production of proteins can saturate the reabsorptive channels in the proximal convoluted tubules leading to proteinuria. Overflow proteinuria occurs when the plasma concentration of low-molecular-weight proteins goes beyond the tubular capacity to reabsorb the filtered proteins.

- Multiple myeloma

- Myoglobinuria

- Amyloidosis