Due to high mortality associated with the disease and potential fulminant course, treatment should be initiated immediately when clinical suspicion is high.

**Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX)**

Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the gold standard therapy for PCP infection and prophylaxis. This medication is well tolerated in most patients and has a broad spectrum covering the major opportunistic pathogens, such as Toxoplasma gondii, Listeria monocytogenes, Nocardia species, and encapsulated bacteria. Usual regimens for prophylaxis include daily and three times a week regimen with single or double strength doses. Studies have shown no significant difference in effectivity between these regimens, and selection should be tailored to the specific patient. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the treatment of choice for PCP infection. Intravenous therapy is recommended until they are clinically stable with improvement in oxygen requirements.

The main limitation of TMP-SMX usage is hypersensitivity reactions. Usually, these hypersensitivity reactions are treated with desensitization to good outcomes. Providers must be aware of the more severe but less common side effects of TMP-SMX, such as myelosuppression, drug-induced hepatitis, interstitial nephritis, aseptic meningitis, and pancreatitis. Stevens-Johnson syndrome has also been reported secondary to TMP-SMX administration. Trimethoprim is known to inhibit potassium and creatinine in renal tubules. Therefore, patients’ renal function, cell count, and electrolytes should be routinely monitored. Due to the effectiveness and usually mild side effect profile of TMP-SMX, it remains the first line for PCP prophylaxis.

**Dapsone**

Dapsone is a second-line treatment for PCP prophylaxis. It is usually the agent of choice for patients that have poor tolerance to TMP-SMX. The most significant side effect of dapsone is hemolytic anemia, specifically in patients suffering from G6PD deficiency. When combined with pyrimethamine, it is an effective treatment for the major opportunistic pathogens affecting immunocompromised patients.

**Atovaquone**

Atovaquone has been extensively studied in the HIV population as an alternative to TMP-SMX, but data is lacking for other immunocompromised populations. It appears to be as effective as dapsone and other second-line agents for PCP prophylaxis. Atovaquone is well tolerated, with the most common side effects being diarrhea and rash.

**Pentamidine**

Inhaled pentamidine is a third-line agent for PCP prophylaxis as it appears to be less effective than TMP-SMX, dapsone, and atovaquone. The side effect profile for this medication is mild, most commonly only causing cough or bronchospasm. Intravenous pentamidine has been shown to be effective primary prophylaxis for PCP. However, more studies are needed to assess its efficacy when compared with the first- and second-line agents.

**Glucocorticoids**

For patients with moderate to severe PCP infection, the current recommendation suggests patients be initiated on glucocorticoid therapy if there are signs of hypoxemia like oxygen saturation <92 percent, partial pressure of oxygen <70 mmHg, or the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient is >35 mmHg.