Chemotherapy agents can be given per oral (PO), intravenous (IV), subcutaneous (SC), intramuscular (IM), intrathecal (IT). Most of the chemotherapy agents are IV because of the 100% absorption rate. Some compounds like paclitaxel are poorly soluble, so they need to be mixed with solvents like cremophor for better absorption. Physicians should be aware of factors that influence absorption, like surgery and gastric motility, especially in cancer patients using opioids.

Most of the chemotherapy agents are metabolized and excreted by either liver or kidney. Some of the chemotherapy drugs are toxic to the liver or kidneys. In such cases, toxic levels can build up in these leading to organ dysfunction. Therefore, it is essential to consider dose adjustments in these organ failure patients. For example, capecitabine dose needs to be adjusted for patients with renal disease.

Chemotherapy agents are generally administered using body surface area (BSA) dosing. Drug-drug interactions are expected. The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme is involved in the metabolism of various chemotherapeutic drugs. Drugs like bortezomib, docetaxel, etoposide, imatinib, sunitinib, sorafenib, vinca alkaloids are metabolized by CYP3A4/5. It is imperative to be aware of some of the common drugs with strong inducers like phenobarbital and phenytoin and inhibitors of CYP enzymes like grapefruit juice, ketoconazole since these drugs can alter the drug levels of the chemotherapy agents and can decrease efficacy or increase toxicity.

Chemotherapeutic agents are commonly associated with side effects. Usually, the side effects of chemotherapy are a reflection of their mechanism of action. Often cytotoxic chemotherapy targets DNA and proteins expression in both cancer cells and normal host cells. Hence, the therapeutic index leading to toxicity is very narrow. In addition, most chemotherapy drugs show activity in rapidly multiplying cells, so they quickly affect multiplying cells, e.g., bone marrow, GI tract, hair follicles. Common toxicities associated with such agents include myelosuppression, mucositis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, alopecia, fatigue, sterility, infertility, infusion reactions. Furthermore, there is an increased risk of infections due to immunosuppression.

Chemotherapeutic agents are commonly associated with side effects. Usually, the side effects of chemotherapy are a reflection of their mechanism of action. Most chemotherapy drugs show activity in rapidly multiplying cells, so they tend to affect rapidly multiplying cells, e.g., bone marrow, GI tract, hair follicles. Common toxicities associated with such agents include myelosuppression, nausea, vomiting, GI side effects, mucositis, alopecia, sterility, infertility, infusion reactions. Furthermore, there is an increased risk of infections due to immunosuppression.