Esmolol is administered intravenously, preferably through central venous access; however, it can also be infused peripherally. FDA approval was based on adult subjects; pediatric dosages have been experimental and are not approved by the FDA.

**Perioperative and Postoperative Tachycardia and Hypertension**

**Two Methods**

- A 1000 mcg/kg bolus over 30 seconds, followed by 150 mcg/kg per minute infusion, with a max dose of 300 mcg/kg per minute.

- A bolus of 500 mcg/kg over 1 minute, followed by 50 mcg/kg per minute infusion for 4 minutes. If the desired effect is not reached, it may increase in 50 mcg/kg per minute increments until the max dose of 300 mcg/kg per minute.

**Supraventricular Tachycardia and Sinus Tachycardia**

- Bolus loading dose of 500 mcg/kg over 1 minute, followed by 50 mcg/kg/min infusion for 4 minutes. If the desired effect is not reached, it may increase in 50 mcg/kg per minute increments until the max dose of 200 mcg/kg per minute. For rapid efficacy, follow the initial loading dose and infusion of 50 mcg/kg per minute by a second 500 mcg/kg bolus over 1 minute and increase drip to 100 mcg/kg per minute for 4 minutes.****

**Off-label Use**

**Hypertensive Emergency**

- Loading dose of 500 to 1000 mcg/kg over 1 minute (can be repeated once), followed by infusion of 50 mcg/kg per minute until the max dose of 200 mcg/kg per minute is achieved.

**Aortic Dissection**

- Loading dose of 500 mcg/kg over 2 to 5 minutes, followed by infusion of 10 to 20 mcg/kg per minute.

**Acute Coronary Syndrome**

- Loading dose of 500 mcg/kg over 1 minute, followed by 50 mcg/kg per minute infusion titrated every 5 to 15 minutes until the max dose of 300 mcg/kg per minute.

**Electroconvulsive Therapy**

- Loading dose of 1000 mcg/kg over 1 minute before administration of anesthesia.

**Thyrotoxicosis**

- 50 to 100 mcg/kg per minute

**Intubation Cholinergic Response**

- Loading dose of 1000 to 2000 mcg/kg administered 1.5 to 3 min before endotracheal intubation.

**Ventricular Tachycardia/Ventricular Fibrillation**

- Loading dose of 500 mcg/kg bolus, followed by 50 mcg/kg per minute

Esmolol should be used short-term, with a maintenance dose infusion not exceeding 48 hours. Most patients on esmolol infusions will be transitioned to other long-term agents. Once the effects of esmolol are no longer needed, it should not be discontinued suddenly.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic  Impairment:**Esmolol does not require dosage adjustment for hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**: Esmolol does not require dosage adjustment for renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Esmolol is a category C drug in pregnancy. During trials in third-trimester pregnancy and labor, Esmolol has been shown to cause fetal bradycardia, which persisted after the drug infusion was discontinued.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Esmolol has 55% plasma protein binding, < 1% renal excretion, and a short half-life of < 10 minutes; hence, infants have no risk of accumulation. As there is no conclusive data regarding milk excretion, however, it should not be used in breastfeeding mothers due to the serious potential for adverse effects.