Kyphoscoliosis increases the risk of all-cause mortality.

- In women, the severity of the kyphoscoliosis is correlated with an increased risk of vertebral fractures even in those without prior history of fractures.

- Given changes in biomechanics, patients are subject to gait changes and are at a higher risk of falls.

- Structural abnormalities frequently affect pulmonary function, resulting in reduced exercise tolerance and ventilation. Dysfunction can include obstructive disease (ex: atelectasis or excessive airway secretions due to inability to clear productions), restrictive pulmonary changes, abnormal nocturnal ventilation, or hypoxemia. Pulmonary function testing may reveal a reduction in functional residual capacity (FRC), Forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1. As above, in patients with chronic respiratory failure secondary to severe kyphoscoliosis, the treatment of choice is non-invasive intermittent positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV). The development of cor pulmonale carries a poor prognosis and a higher risk of mortality.

- Skin findings can include complications secondary to breakdown at pressure points formed by abnormal curvature.

- In cases resulting in progression, compression of the spinal cord can lead to devastating complications such as paraparesis or paraplegia as a result of neurologic compromise.

- Further, surgical complications may also lead to neurological compromise secondary to the challenge of restoring spinal stability to three-dimensional deformities.