The medical treatment is broadly grouped into two classes:

- Mild to moderate disease can be treated by oral mesalamine, immunomodulators such as thiopurines (mercaptopurines, azathioprine), methotrexate, and steroids.

- Moderate to severe disease (including fistulizing disease) will be best treated using a combination of immunomodulators and biologics (infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, vedolizumab) or biologics alone.

Biologics are immunoglobulins engineered to direct against specific cytokines or receptors involved in the inflammation process. Each biologic agent works against one specific site at a molecular level. Anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha is a monoclonal antibody that can block the TNF in circulation from their inflammatory actions. Anti-integrin agents are adhesion molecule inhibitors that bind the subunits of the MAdCAM receptors of the endothelial cells at the inflammatory sites. They halt the trafficking of lymphocytes from the circulation into the wall of the intestine, thereby stopping the inflammatory response targeted at the bowel. Examples of anti-TNF agents are infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab. Examples of adhesion molecule inhibitors are natalizumab, vedolizumab. Vedolizumab is gut-specific and has fewer systemic side effects. Many newer therapeutic agents for inflammatory bowel disease are in the pipeline.

Surgical treatments are used for complications such as bowel obstructions, abscess, fistulas, or perforated bowel.

Dietician input and nutritional supplementation are highly recommended before and during the treatment of Crohn disease.

Guidelines published by the American College of Gastroenterology for the management of Crohn disease in 2018:

- Fecal calprotectin may help differentiate between IBD and IBS

- Chromoendoscopy should be utilized during colonoscopy as it may increase diagnostic yield for colorectal dysplasia

- Avoid NSAIDs as they may exacerbate disease

- Avoid smoking

- Get mental health counseling as many patients develop depression

- Sulfasalazine is effective for mild disease

- Controlled ileal release budesonide can be used for induction of remission in patients with moderate ileocecal disease

- Avoid the use of metronidazole as it is ineffective in Crohn disease

- Mild diarrhea can be managed with antidiarrheals

- Thiopurines can be used for steroid-sparing

- Anti TNFs can be used in patients resistant to steroids

- Drain abscess radiologically if possible