The lumbar plexus (LP) is formed within the body of the psoas muscle by the four spinal nerves of L1 to L4. In 60% of people, the lumbar plexus receives a contribution from the nerve root of T12 as well.

The psoas major muscle is composed of two portions, an anterior portion that arises from the anterolateral surface of the intervertebral discs and vertebral bodies, and a posterior portion that originates from the anterior aspect of the transverse processes. These two portions of the psoas are separated by a fascia creating in effect a “compartment” between them. It is in this fascial plane that the lumbar plexus is formed from its component nerve roots alongside the lumbar ascending vein and branches of the lumbar artery. This plane extends medially, opening into a wedge-shaped space at the medial surface of the psoas muscle, the lumbar paravertebral space.

The main branches of the lumbar plexus are considered below:

- Iliohypogastric nerve: Formed by T12 and L1, it travels across the psoas muscle and arises at the upper lateral border of this muscle between the anterior surface of quadratus lumborum and the posterior surface of the kidney.

- Ilioinguinal nerve: Formed by L1, arises from the lateral border of the psoas muscle just below the iliohypogastric nerve. It follows a downward trajectory on the anterior surface of the quadratus lumborum and upper part of the iliacus.

- Genitofemoral nerve: Formed mainly by L1-L2, arises from the anterior surface of the psoas muscle along the medial border. It follows a downward trajectory on the psoas muscle within the fascia iliaca and crosses posterior to the ureter and peritoneum. This nerve provides innervation to the cremaster muscle, skin of the femoral triangle, scrotum, pubis, and labium majus.

- Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve: Formed by the posterior division of L2 and L3 lumbar nerves. Arises beneath the lateral margin of the psoas muscle and follows downward laterally deep to the fascia over the iliacus muscle and finally crosses under the inguinal ligament medial to the anterior superior iliac spine. The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve provides sensory innervation to the skin of the anterolateral aspect of the thigh, and some of its terminal branches contribute to the patellar plexus.

- Femoral nerve: Formed by the posterior division of L2, L3, L4, within the psoas muscle, and exits from the lateral border of the psoas major in the fossa iliaca roughly 4 centimeters above the inguinal ligament. From here it enters the femoral triangle, laterally to the femoral sheath, and after a short distance divides into its terminal branches.

- The femoral nerve gives motor innervation to the quadriceps muscle and sensory innervation to the knee through the peripatellar plexus and the medial aspect of the leg through the saphenous nerve.

- Obturator nerve: Formed by the anterior division of L2, L3, L4, within the psoas muscle and follows a downward trajectory within the muscle body to arise on the medial side of the psoas at the level of the pelvic brim. Upon exiting the psoas, the nerve continues in a postero-lateral direction towards the sacroiliac joint. The obturator nerve provides motor innervation to adductor muscles in the medial aspect of the thigh and sensory innervation to the hip joint and knees joint.

As the lumbar plexus is formed from the component nerve roots, it acquires a triangular shape wider at its caudal portion while fanning out medial-laterally with the femoral nerve situated in the middle, the obturator nerve to the medial, and the lateral cutaneous nerve to the lateral. MRI studies have demonstrated that the spread of local anesthetic in a psoas block is usually within the psoas muscle, most of the time along the internal fascial plane with a cephalad spread to lumbar nerve roots and around the lumbar branches.

Several studies have described the distance from the skin to the lumbar plexus specifically. In general, that distance ranges from 9 to 10 cm and is slightly deeper in males than in females.