**Thoracic Wall**

The thoracic wall has an abundant collateral blood supply.

The deep neurovascular plane of the thoracic wall is between the innermost intercostal muscle and internal intercostal muscle. Here, the posterior intercostal arteries (branches of the subclavian and aorta) travel just inferior to each rib and give off collateral intercostal branches that are smaller and travel just superior to each rib.

Anteriorly, the blood supply of the thoracic wall is predominantly from the internal mammary (thoracic) arteries, which travel deep to the costal cartilages from the subclavian artery.

Lateral thoracic wall blood supply is from branches of the axillary artery (the thoracodorsal, lateral thoracic, and thoracoacromial arteries).

Posterior thoracic wall blood supply is from dorsal branches of the posterior intercostal arteries and the dorsal scapular artery.

Inferiorly, blood collateralization is from the superficial and deep inferior epigastric arteries.

**Thoracic Cavity**

The great vessels are predominantly situated in the superior and posterior mediastinum, although they originate/terminate at the heart (middle mediastinum).

The aorta arises from the left ventricle of the heart and arches superiorly and posteriorly. Near the origin of the aorta (superior to the aortic valve), the aorta supplies the heart through the left and right coronary arteries. Three branches split off at the aortic arch that ultimately supply the head, upper limb, and thoracic wall. These arteries are the brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotid, and left subclavian arteries. As the aorta descends posterior to the heart in the left paravertebral gutter, the 3rd to 11th posterior intercostal arteries split off and supply the thoracic wall. The aorta leaves the thorax by piercing the diaphragm at the level of T12.

The venous system generally follows the arterial system apart from some differences.

The azygos venous system consists of the hemiazygos, accessory azygos, and azygos veins.

The lymphatic system of the whole body apart from the right upper limb and right side of the head drains through the thoracic duct.