Communication between all members of the interprofessional healthcare team is requisite for the successful use of erlotinib. Erlotinib has a narrow therapeutic index and typically will only be prescribed by oncology specialists. However, all healthcare team members, including primary care physicians, nursing staff, and pharmacy, should be aware of the potential for diarrhea and rash and erlotinib's other adverse effects. All healthcare team members should be mindful of the CYP enzyme interactions that can elevate or decrease blood levels of erlotinib; the patient's medication list should be frequently monitored to ensure these interactions are not occurring. This is where the services of a board-certified oncology pharmacist can be crucial; they can work with the prescriber on optimal dosing, checking for potential interactions, and counseling the patient regarding adverse events. Nursing staff also needs to be aware of these side effects as part of their monitoring, as they will likely have more patient contact than other team members. It is also essential that the entire healthcare team monitors and counsels the patient on the correct administration of this medication either before or two hours after meals. The patient's primary care team should also be aware of the recommendation that women taking this medication should not become pregnant; discussion about ongoing contraception should be encouraged. All these interprofessional team actions can help optimize therapeutic results with erlotinib. [Level 5]