The pathophysiology of PN has been controversial [vide supra]. Chronic and/or recurrent mechanical trauma or vigorous frictional assault to the skin induced epidermal hyperplasia with resultant thickening of the skin. Repetitive mechanical rubbing/scratching not only result in the formation of plaques and nodules, often with lichenification; but also give rise to dyschromic changes, typically hyperpigmentation. The itching of PN is typically episodic, severe, and uncontrollable and tends to occur at discrete points that eventually transform into hyperpigmented noduloplaques with excoriations, crusting and sometimes secondary bacterial infection.

Immunohistochemical studies have shown an increased number of dermal nerve fibres in the papillary dermis. It has been postulated that the thin, unmyelinated epidermal nerves are the transmitters of the severe prurigo.  Nerve growth factor (NGF) and its receptor, tyrosine receptor kinase A (TrkA), are overexpressed in PN lesions. They may also be associated with the increased release and accumulation of neuropeptides, such as substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide

The role of helper T cytokines, T helper 1 and T helper 2, have also been studied in the pathogenesis of prurigo nodularis using the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) 1, 3, and 6. In every case examined but three, the entire epidermis stained with anti-pSTAT 6, a marker for the Th2 cytokines interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-13. These findings suggest that Th2 cytokines play a principal role in the pathogenesis of prurigo nodularis.