Crystalloid fluids are administered parenterally via an intravenous infusion. Infusion rates depend on the clinical presentation and indication for administration.

**Fluid Resuscitation**

In an acute setting, the clinical situation may indicate a rapid infusion of crystalloid fluids. Such cases may require a pressure apparatus to the bag of fluid to achieve a higher infusion rate. In this clinical setting, larger bore intravenous cannulas should help ensure the safe administration of high fluid volumes. Fluids should be administered, preferably via large-bore peripheral lines (18-gauge or larger) or through central access, which may also be used to deliver blood products if required.

In 2012, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines recommended Early Goal-directed Therapy (EGDT) as the standard of care in managing patients in septic shock. These guidelines dictated that patients receive empirically dosed rapid volume resuscitation. Patients should receive a fluid challenge of 20 mL/kg over the first 30 minutes of treatment. Subsequent volume dosing should depend on the severity of hypovolemia and should be adjusted in increments of 500 mL, aiming for an ultimate central venous pressure of 8 to 12 mmHg.

**Maintenance Fluids**

The fluid requirements of patients were determined to be related to a patient's caloric demand by Drs. Holliday and Segar in 1957.

- 0-10 kg: +4 mL/kg/hr

- 10-20 kg: +2 mL/kg/hr

- >20 kg: +1 mL/kg/hr

Example: 100 kg patient: 20 kg (40 + 20 mL/hr) + 80 kg (80 mL/hr) = 140 mL/hr

Additional formulas for fluid administration have been developed for specific clinical scenarios (e.g., the Parkland Formula for fluid maintenance in burn patients).