The goals when treating berylliosis are to reduce symptoms and slow the progression of the disease as no cure is available. Although there is no evidence that stopping exposure to beryllium decreases the progression of the disease, they still consider it to be an accepted approach to treatment. People with early stages, without lung function abnormalities or clinical symptoms, are periodically monitored, with physical exams, pulmonary function tests, and radiography. All patients require influenza and pneumococcal vaccination and smoking cessation counseling. After the appearance of clinical symptoms or significant abnormalities appears in pulmonary function testing, oxygen and oral corticosteroids are started as well as other supportive therapy as required.

The drugs of choice to treat chronic beryllium disease are corticosteroids. It usually requires a high starting dose and the treatment duration is often for several months before they see symptom resolution. Once symptoms subside, tapering of the steroids is necessary to prevent the adverse effects. Patients who fail to respond to steroids are started on immunosuppressive agents such as methotrexate and azathioprine. Oral methotrexate at a 7.5mg weekly dose is given with folic acid 1 mg. Complete blood counts and liver function tests should be repeated 8 to 12 weeks at a time.

Once a diagnosis of CBD is made, the patient needs life-long follow up with serial arterial blood gases, chest x-ray, and pulmonary function tests.