**Injection Parameters**

As with fluid contrast, CO2 injection rates depend on the caliber and size of the vessel accepting the bolus and the size of the downstream vascular bed. The following volumes are ranges for amounts that are "usually" sufficient.

Abdominal aortogram/inferior vena cavogram

- 30 to 40 mL; up to 60 mL may be needed in the aorta

Aortic branches (celiac, superior mesenteric, renal arteries), common iliac arteries and veins

- 20 to 30 mL

Wedged portal venography via the superior mesenteric artery

- 10 to 20 mL

Common femoral arteries, second order arteries off the aorta, vessels requiring the use of a microcatheter, other veins, wedged venography (in the liver or spleen)

- 5 to 10 mL; up to 20 mL may be needed

Proximal arteries can be imaged by refluxing CO2 from a more peripheral catheter location.

Veins should be injected more gently than arteries.

In an animal model (editors Cho K, Hawkins I. 2007. Carbon Dioxide Angiography: Principles, Techniques, and Practices), a single CO2 dose up to 1.6 mL/kg resulted in no changes in cardiopulmonary parameters. This corresponds to 112 mL for a 70-Kg person, which is more than necessary for any clinical scenario.

**Time Between Injections**

CO2 tends to dissolve within a vessel in 30 seconds to 60 seconds.  If practicing caution, injections should be performed at least 2 minutes apart.  For mesenteric and advanced disease peripheral artery imaging, the interval between injections should be at least 3 minutes in asymptomatic patients and longer if there are symptoms of mesenteric flow disturbance, such as pain.  Continued visualization of CO2 beyond a 3 minute interval should be suspected to indicate a trapped CO2 bubble and/or room air contamination. Delayed absorption may also occur in persons with COPD (who have a high baseline CO2 level).

**Maintaining Image Quality**

The following techniques can optimize CO2 digital subtraction angiography:

- Reduce respiratory motion and peristalsis artifact.

- Intravenous glucagon (0.5 to 1 mg) can decrease peristalsis. 
- Obtain one or more additional mask images to perform mask imaging subtraction.

- Employ imaging software to stack multiple images of the same anatomic location to create a composite picture of the anatomy that is more accurate than an image from a single run.

- Select the artery of interest with the catheter instead of imaging with the catheter tip outside the artery of interest.

- Obtain rapid exposures (4 frames per second or more).

- Elevate the target artery 15 to 20 degrees above the level of the table.

- Improve filling of small arteries by dilating the arteries with intraarterial nitroglycerin (100-150 micrograms) therapy.