Because the pars nervosa's primary purpose concerns the regulated secretion of oxytocin and AVP, the physiologic roles that these hormones play and the circumstances surrounding their secretion serve as a relatively comprehensive depiction of its clinical importance.

Oxytocin plays an integral role in inducing uterine contractions that contribute to parturition directly and prevent excessive blood loss thereafter. During childbirth, signals caused by cervical stretching reach the hypothalamus and trigger the release of oxytocin into the systemic circulation. In turn, oxytocin acts on uterine smooth muscle inducing and strengthening contraction. Because of this phenomenon, pharmacologic forms of oxytocin are often used to induce labor. In lactation, suckling creates afferent nerve impulses that travel to the hypothalamus and trigger the release of oxytocin, which stimulates receptors on myoepithelial cells of the lactiferous ducts resulting in milk letdown. While abnormal oxytocin levels correlate in the context of various psychiatric disorders, it is not currently a treatment in this context.

AVP secretion occurs in response to changes in both blood osmolarity and pressure through two independent neurologic circuits. Small changes in blood osmolarity sensed by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus and lamina terminalis drive adjustments in pituitary vasopressin secretion, which in turn impact renal reabsorption of solute free water in the collecting tubules and ducts. Increased reabsorption of water reduces blood osmolarity, feeding back against vasopressin release. This circuit provides precise governance of overall blood osmolarity.

In tandem, significant reductions in blood pressure generate sympathetic signals that travel to the hypothalamus to trigger vasopressin release. High levels of circulating AVP cause arteriolar smooth muscle contraction to elevate blood pressure, increase water reabsorption via the aforementioned renal mechanism, and promote hemostasis through stimulation of platelet aggregation and von Willibrand’s factor release. These mechanisms work in unison to adapt and respond to a fluid-deficient state.

Pathology of the pars nervosa, regardless of etiology, relates to either inadequate or excessive secretion of neurohypophyseal hormones. While oxytocin plays a variety of physiologic roles, derangements in its secretion are rarely implicated in disease pathophysiology or treatment. With that said, abnormal oxytocin levels have been the target of research in a variety of psychiatric disorders. Disordered AVP secretion causes diabetes insipidus (DI) if inadequate, and the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) if excessive.

Diabetes Insipidus (DI) occurs when inadequate or ineffective AVP secretion results in an inability of the kidney to concentrate urine adequately. Typically, DI presents as excessive thirst, dehydration, and hypernatremia in a patient excreting abnormally large volumes of dilute urine. It can result from pituitary insufficiency, renal malfunction, or excessive consumption of water. Of these, only pituitary insufficiency is a disorder of the pars nervosa.

Pituitary insufficiency often subdivides into three etiologic categories- traumatic, infectious/inflammatory, and oncologic. Traumatic causes of pituitary insufficiency involve sequelae of hemorrhagic/ischemic infarcts and direct damage to the pituitary associated with blunt or penetrating brain injuries. Infectious/inflammatory etiologies include autoimmune hypophysitis, sarcoidosis, meningitis, encephalitis, and brain abscess. Oncologic pituitary injury results from direct mass effects of a nearby malignancy or injury during tumor resection or radiation therapy. Empty sella syndrome serves as the general diagnosis for the physical absence of a pituitary gland. Primary empty sella syndrome is often asymptomatic and typically stems anatomical abnormalities that cause elevated intracranial pressure within the sella turcica, consequently flattening the pituitary gland due to mass effect. Secondary empty sella syndrome typically presents due to the above etiologies.

SIADH occurs when vasopressin levels become abnormally/persistently elevated due to hypothalamic dysregulation or ectopic production. It presents as a hyponatremic patient with excessively concentrated urine because excess vasopressin drives the kidney to reabsorb maximal amounts of solute free water. One noteworthy consequence of hyponatremia is increased intracellular volume and consequent swelling, which has particularly profound effects on cells of the central nervous system (CNS) and can lead to neurologic dysfunction, coma, and death.

Excess vasopressin associated with SIADH can be due to a wide variety of causes that are grossly separable into those that derange the hypothalamohypophyseal pathway and those that circumvent it entirely. Pituitary dysregulation can occur secondary to central nervous system (CNS) infections of multiple etiology, hydrocephalus, trauma, and CNS diseases like multiple sclerosis, among other causes. A wide array of medications, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), chlorpropamide, carbamazepine, valproic acid, and morphine, can also cause SIADH via a variety of mechanisms involving the kidney and CNS.  Numerous cancers have demonstrated the capacity to produce vasopressin, including small cell lung cancer, mesothelioma, gastrointestinal/genitourinary cancers, lymphomas, etc. Additionally, severe pulmonary infections and sarcoidosis can trigger supraphysiologic levels sufficient to cause clinically significant SIADH. Etiology aside, the hyponatremia associated with SIADH warrants immediate treatment to prevent complications and death.