Alosetron is taken orally. It is available in 0.5 mg tablet and 1 mg tablet strength. The initial dose is 0.5 mg twice a day to minimize the risk of constipation. If constipation occurs, patients must stop taking the medication until symptoms resolve. They may be restarted on 0.5 mg once a day; however, if constipation recurs at a lower dose, alosetron should be discontinued.

Patients can maintain 0.5 mg once or twice a day dosing if they are well-controlled on this regimen. If symptoms are not controlled on this dose after four weeks, the dosage can be increased to 1 mg twice a day. If symptoms persist after four weeks despite increasing the dosage to 1 mg twice a day, alosetron should be discontinued.

**Specific Population**

**Renal Impairment**

- No dosage adjustments are necessary.

**Hepatic Impairment**

- Mild to moderate impairment (Child-Pugh class A or B): No dosage adjustments necessary. Use with caution due to extensive hepatic metabolism via CYP2C9, 3A4, and 1A2.

- Severe impairment (Child-Pugh class C): usage is contraindicated

**Adjustment for Toxicity in Adults**

- **Constipation**: Patients experiencing constipation with an initial dose of 0.5 mg twice a day must discontinue the medication immediately until symptoms resolve. The drug may be restarted at 0.5 mg once daily. If constipation recurs at a lower dose, discontinue immediately.

- **Ischemic Colitis:**discontinue the medication immediately and do not restart.

- **Geriatric Patients**: use caution due to the increased risk of complications from constipation.

- **Debilitated Patients**: use caution due to increased risk of complications from constipation.

**Pregnant Patients**: It is US FDA pregnancy category B medicine. Adverse events have not been observed in animal studies.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

- It is unclear if alosetron will transfer to breast milk.

- Consider risks versus benefits of breastfeeding the infant while the mother is on therapy with alosetron, risk of infant exposure, and treatment benefits to mother.

- Monitor the infant for constipation or blood in the stool.