Parotitis is a clinical diagnosis. If drainage from the Stensen duct is present, send a specimen for Gram stain and culture and sensitivity if bacterial parotitis is suspected. Serum amylase levels will be elevated in many cases but are nonspecific. Amylase levels are less likely to rise in Sjogren syndrome or parotid tumors. Elevated inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), are supportive but also nonspecific.

A study by Wu et al. indicated that scintigraphy might play an important role in diagnosing chronic obstructive parotitis.

Imaging is rarely necessary for the evaluation of parotitis. Ultrasonography might confirm sialolithiasis and can identify abscesses, differentiate between solid and cystic masses within the gland and identify hypoechoic areas frequently seen in punctate sialectasis.

Sialography, performed by otolaryngologists or dental specialists, is the historical “gold standard” and could provide detailed visualization of the parotid ductal system and acini; however, it is not a common procedure.

Incisional or fine-needle biopsy of the parotid tail, performed by an experienced surgeon carefully avoiding the facial nerve, can be sent for culture for suspected infectious source or histopathology useful to determine parotitis etiology. However, a biopsy is not generally needed to make the diagnosis. Lymphoepithelial cysts occur in HIV parotitis, noncaseating granulomata are present in sarcoid parotitis, and lymphocytic invasion with acinar destruction can be characteristic of neoplastic lymphoma.