Emergency providers require PPE so they can safely enter areas contaminated by hazardous materials (HAZMAT) to treat the injured. A risk-benefit analysis chooses PPE levels. The HAZMAT benefits increase with more restrictive PPE levels, but also proportionally increases the risk from physiological stress. The appropriate PPE needs to be chosen for the right task or hazard.  Equipment is based on United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards.

Level A offers the highest level of protection and is best used for unknown threats. Level A protects operators from liquids, vapors, and gases. Level A equipment encompasses a positive pressure full face mask connected to a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA), a totally encapsulated suit, outer chemical resistant gloves, inner chemical resistant gloves, and chemical-resistant boots.

Level B offers protection from liquids, gases, but not vapors. Level B consists of positive-pressure, full-faced, self-contained, breathing apparatus (SCBA), hooded chemical-resistant clothing, outer chemical-resistant gloves, inner chemical-resistant gloves, chemical-resistant boots, boot covers, and face shield.

Level C is most commonly used in healthcare facilities and consists of a full or half-face mask, air-purifying respirator, chemical hooded resistant clothing, outer and inner chemical-resistant gloves, chemical-resistant boots, boot covers, and face shield.

Level D provides the least amount of protection and entails a work uniform, gloves, boots, safety glasses, and a face shield.