Caring for patients with an elevated blood lead concentration requires the cooperation of a large number of interprofessional individuals. Even in the simplest case of an asymptomatic patient with an elevated blood lead level, identifying and mitigating the source of lead may require the participation of the patient, family, primary care physician, nurse practitioner, teachers or daycare providers (in the case of a child), the employer in the case of an adult, state or local health department officials, industrial hygienists, and abatement professionals.

It is extremely important for children with evidence of possible neurocognitive or behavioral changes to undergo formal assessments to see if they qualify for services such as speech therapy, occupational therapy or behavioral therapy and additionally, in the case of a school-age child, if they qualify for an individualized education plan (IEP) or a 504 plan.

In these cases, other ancillary professionals such as nurses and therapists might come into the patient’s care. Many patients would also benefit from formal nutritional assessments and counseling by a nutritionist or dietician. If patients are overtly symptomatic or may require chelation therapy, consultation with a medical or clinical toxicologist a strong recommendation, and patients with severe toxicity will likely require ICU level care under the direction of a pediatric or adult intensivist.

The social worker and the public health nurse should be involved when a child is diagnosed with lead toxicity. It is vital to assess the home environment and determine how the lead toxicity occurred. The biggest morbidity of lead toxicity is moderate to severe deficits in learning, cognition, and behavior, which are not reversible. Thus, open communication between the interprofessional team members is vital to ensure that patients with lead toxicity not only receive optimal care but that they are no longer at risk for additional lead exposure.