In all cases, an x-ray should be obtained before a physical exam to exclude metacarpal fractures.

The plain radiograph is the first-line imaging tool to evaluate the associated fracture and MCP joint subluxation. The avulsed bony fragment of the proximal phalanx in the plain radiograph usually indicates the distal end of the injured UCL. A displaced tear is diagnosed when the displacement of the bony fragment is more than 1 mm.

If the plain radiograph is normal, but there is a clinical suspicion of the gamekeeper's thumb, further imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or high-resolution ultrasound (US) can be performed. MRI is regarded as the gold standard to diagnose a UCL injury, with a sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 95%, but has the disadvantage of high cost and less availability. The MRI can identify a partial/complete tear, bone edema, and associated fracture.

The US is a useful diagnostic tool for UCL injuries as it is cost-effective, widely available, and capable of real-time dynamic examination. On US examination, a partial tear is depicted as a general thickening of the UCL with hypoechoic change. In a non-displaced complete tear, a well-defined defect may be demonstrated, but the proximal and distal ends of the ligament remain in its anatomic positions. A displaced complete tear is typically seen as the so-called “yo-yo” sign, a hypoechoic mass proximal to the MCP joint line, which is corresponding to the retracted proximal end of the UCL. It is reported that the accuracy of US to diagnose a Stener lesion ranges from 81% to 100%, depending on the experience of the examiner.

In some patients, stress testing may be required to confirm the diagnosis. This usually requires local anesthesia into the MCP joint and then performing the physical exam.