Insomnia is a common complaint seen in both the outpatient and inpatient setting. Melatonin is a safe first-line sleep aid that may help promote a regular sleep cycle. In addition, melatonin is one of the few over-the-counter supplements that healthcare providers can recommend for insomnia. Although not FDA-approved, melatonin is widely used for insomnia and jet lag disorders. Hence, all the pertinent healthcare providers need to know the mechanism, off-label indications, adverse effects of melatonin.

The patient often takes melatonin as an over-the-counter supplement. However, clinicians(MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) can recommend melatonin for insomnia and jet lag disorders. Pharmacists should counsel the patient regarding the adverse effect of melatonin and not combine it with other CNS depressants such as benzodiazepines and alcohol. In addition, it is important to counsel the patient that the FDA does not regulate supplements, and there is no FDA approval for melatonin. Nursing staff can monitor response to melatonin therapy.

If insomnia fails to resolve with melatonin therapy, the clinician should seek psychiatrist consultation for underlying disorders. The patient may also require sleep medicine physician consultation if the clinician suspects primary sleep disorders. As depicted above, multiple healthcare providers, including clinicians(MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), pharmacists, nurses, and specialists, can be involved in patient care related to melatonin therapy if needed. Consequently, a collaborative interprofessional team approach with patient-centered care can achieve optimal benefits related to melatonin therapy. [level 5]