An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to patient care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. Neuman developed the model from the idea that unique nursing techniques may enhance client healing with an emphasis on stress management or elimination. From this perspective, the objective of nursing is to reduce stressors (or the potential for stressors) by using primary, secondary, or tertiary prevention interventions aimed at maintaining, achieving or sustaining an optimal level of wellbeing for the client. The nurse needs to understand the impact not only of the stressor but also on the response of the system.

Once an adverse event has breached the normal defense line within the client system and the resistance lines have come into play to protect the integrity of the system, the system is faced with the task of returning to a stable state. The term reconstitution in the Neuman model of systems refers to the recovery of the system from stressors (adversity) and the return to a state of equilibrium or well being.

Nursing interventions help to target particular phases of the stress response, including primary, secondary, and tertiary response interventions to prevent it. Primary strategies aim to preserve the integrity of the client 's system by extending the flexible line of defense, including health promotion programs and risk factors recognition. Secondary interventions aim to help the client achieve system stability by identifying and implementing actions that reinforce the defense lines, which in turn promotes reconstitution and reduces the stress response.

Tertiary interventions work towards preventing recurrence by helping the customer maintain the current wellness level, offering protection from additional stressors, proper nutrition and rest, and holistic addressing of other aspects of physiology, psychology, spirituality, socio-culture, and development. The primary prevention objective is to identify the risk factors and prevent the occurrence of stressors. The secondary intervention involves acknowledging problems and interventions that address issues before the stressors become the target for the lines of resistance. Tertiary resilience-building interventions include decreasing or eliminating the stress response and promoting equilibrium maintenance, which restructures the defense lines of the nurse.

Collaboration shared decision making, and communication is key elements for a good outcome. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities.