Based on the clinical presentation, differentiation needs to be drawn between the nephrotic and the nephritic spectrum. This is important as it helps to narrow down the differentials of the underlying glomerular pathology. Also, differential diagnoses will include primary versus secondary causes depending on the age group and clinical picture.

Primary glomerulonephritis presenting as the nephrotic syndrome in young patients is likely to be minimal change disease, while in adults, membranous variety is more likely.

When nephritic syndrome is the main presentation in children, it is likely post-infectious. In adults, however, IgA nephropathy should be considered. When systemic vasculitis involves glomeruli, the cause in the younger age group is Henoch Schonlein purpura, while in adults, granulomatosis with polyangiitis should be suspected. Lupus nephritis is seen more commonly in young women (20 to 30 years).

**Differential Diagnoses**

Following are some important differentials to be considered while making the diagnosis of glomerulonephritis:

- Acute kidney injury

- Crescentic glomerulonephritis

- Diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis

- Focal segmental glomerulonephritis

- Glomerulonephritis associated with nonstreptococcal infection

- Goodpasture syndrome

- Lupus nephritis

- Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis

- Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis

- Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis

The following renal syndromes frequently mimic the early stages of acute GN:

- Idiopathic hematuria

- Chronic GN with an acute exacerbation

- Anaphylactoid purpura with nephritis

- Familial nephritis