Birth trauma in a newborn has a varied presentation depending on the type of injury sustained. The affected newborns may present with mild benign signs and symptoms to severe life-threatening signs and symptoms. Injuries occur at birth for various reasons, secondary to maternal, fetal, or external risk factors. The prognosis of the birth injuries also depends on the type and severity of the initial injury. A detailed physical exam of the newborn is warranted at birth to identify birth injuries and differentiate them from congenital malformations or birth defects. Extracranial hemorrhages typically heal well with occasional complications of hyperbilirubinemia, infections. Subgaleal hemorrhage requires careful clinical observation and monitoring due to the potential for life-threatening acute severe hypovolemia. If large, intracranial hemorrhages can result in focal neurological damage and required prompt intervention, including a neurosurgical evaluation. The prognosis of spinal cord injuries depends on the level of injury. Lesions below T4 have a comparatively better prognosis. Superficial soft tissue injuries generally heal well without any residual sequelae. The majority of brachial plexus injuries resolve within a few weeks, but physical therapy and close follow-up are mandated. Occasional cases of brachial plexus injuries can have long-lasting weakness or dysfunction (level III evidence).

A vital element in this context is the prevention of birth trauma in the first place using an interprofessional team involving obstetricians, neonatologists, pediatricians, radiologists, and specialty trained nurses. Advances in antenatal care have resulted in increased awareness of fetal malformations and malpresentation. Potential problems can be anticipated before delivery, thereby leading to improved preparation for a high-risk delivery. Hence pregnant women need to adhere to prenatal care recommendations for optimal outcomes. A coordinated educational effort involving the clinician, nurse midwife, and specialty-trained nurse reinforcing good prenatal efforts will decrease the incidence of untoward events. It is also important to acknowledge that not all birth-related injuries are iatrogenic or preventable. Infants who sustain birth injuries that place them at risk for neurodevelopmental impairment should be monitored closely by an interprofessional team to appropriately attain developmental milestones. This team should include a pediatrician, labor and delivery nurse, physical and occupational therapist, and a developmental-behavioral pediatrician supported by the clinical and nursing staff's coordination of care. [Level 5]