Initial evaluation begins with the stabilization and application of advanced trauma life support protocols. Initial evaluation of a stable patient with suspected cervical injury includes radiographs of the cervical spine which should include anteroposterior (AP), lateral, oblique, and odontoid views. An adequate lateral radiograph must include all seven cervical vertebrae as well as the C7 to T1 disc space.

The **NEXUS Low-risk Criteria**and**the Canadian C-Spine Rule**are guidelines used to determine if cervical spine radiographs are indicated.

According to the **NEXUS Low-Risk criteria**, imaging is indicated if the patient exhibits any of the following:

- Midline Tenderness

- Focal Neurologic Deficit

- Altered Level of Consciousness

- Intoxication

- Distracting Injury

Radiographs may not be needed if all of the following criteria are met:

- Absence of posterior midline cervical tenderness

- The normal level of alertness

- No evidence of intoxication

- No abnormal neurologic findings

- No painful distracting injuries

According to the **Canadian C-Spine Rule**, radiographs should be obtained based on the following algorithm:

**Step 1**: High-Risk Factors mandating radiography:

- Age older than 65 years

- Dangerous mechanism

- Paraesthesia in extremities

If yes, the patient is at risk for cervical injury, if no, proceed to step two.

**Step 2**: Low-Risk factors indicate a safe assessment of a range of motion:

- Simple rear-end motor vehicle collision

- Patient ambulatory at any time since the injury

- Delayed onset of neck pain

- Patient in sitting position

- Absence of midline cervical tenderness

If **no**low-risk factors present, radiography indicated, otherwise proceed to step three.

**Step 3**: Is the patient able to actively rotate neck 45 degrees to left and right?

If yes, radiography not indicated. If no, the patient is at risk for cervical injury, radiography indicated

**CT scan**

Due to higher exposure to radiation, CT should only be performed in high-risk patients such as those with altered mental status. If plain radiographs are normal, and the patient has no neurological deficits, flexion and extension x-rays should be obtained.

Obtain a CT scan if:

- Cervical spine radiographs are inadequate

- Concerning finding on plain radiographs

- Fracture/displacement seen on plain radiographs

- High-risk mechanism

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

Consider MRI if neurologic signs or symptoms are present and plain radiographs and/or CT scans are normal. If the radiographs are normal despite neurological deficits, MRI may be indicated. MRI can also be used to evaluate the extent of nerve compression.

The classification of cervical spine injuries is based on the location. Injuries from the occiput to C2 can be classified as occipital-cervical spine injuries. C3 through C7 are classified as sub-axial cervical spine injuries. Wedge fractures are a result of flexion. Burst fractures are the result of vertical compression. Laminar fractures can either be vertical or horizontal and are usually associated with another type of fracture. Atlantooccipital dislocation is a flexion injury involving C1 and C2. Atlanto-axial dislocation is a flexion-rotation injury involving C1 and C2. Jefferson fractures are an unstable C1 fracture as a result of compression.

**Jefferson fracture (C1)**

This is a vertebral compression fracture of C1 when the force is transmitted through the occipital condyles to the superior articular surfaces of the lateral masses of C1. It results from axial loading. The fracture pattern correlates with the position of the head during impaction

It drives the lateral masses outward, disrupting the transverse ligament and resulting in fractures of the anterior and posterior arches of the atlas. It is an extremely unstable fracture.

A widening of the predental space between the anterior arch of C1 and the odontoid or dens may be seen on a lateral radiograph.

The open-mouth view may show a bilateral offset of right and left lateral masses of C1 relative to the lateral masses of C2. If the sum of the offset distances from the right and left sides is more than 7 mm, then a fracture should be suspected.

**Hangman's Fracture (C2 Fracture)**

The "hangman's fracture" is a fracture of the pedicle of C2 caused by hyperextension of the spine due to abrupt deceleration. In this fracture, the skull, atlas, and axis function as a unit during hyperextension. Since the AP diameter of the neural canal is greatest at C2, cord damage is uncommon or minimal. A common mechanism is head-on MVCs.

Classification is based upon the amount of displacement of the fracture.

- Type I: vertical fractures with less than 3 mm of displacement and no angulation

- Type II:  more than 3 mm of displacement and angulation

- Type III: vertical fractures with a significant displacement and highest risk of neurological deficit

**Odontoid Fracture**

The typical mechanism is flexion movement

- Type I: Fracture of the odontoid process above the transverse ligaments (avulsion of the distal tip or apex) and usually stable

- Type II: Fracture at the base of the odontoid process (dens) where it attaches to C2. More common fracture and unstable; often complicated by nonunion

- Type III: Fracture extends laterally into the superior articular facet of the atlas (extends into the body of the axis) and unstable