Spinal cord injuries are most often due to either direct trauma to the spinal cord or from compression due to fractured vertebrae or masses such as epidural hematomas or abscesses. Less commonly, the spinal cord may become injured due to compromise of blood flow, inflammatory processes, metabolic derangements, or exposure to toxins.

**Primary Injury**

SCI results from initial insult such as mechanical forces to it, which is known as the primary injury. The most common mechanism of primary injury is a direct impact, and persistent compression typically occurs by bony fragments through fracture-dislocation injuries. Contrary to fracture-dislocation, hyperextension injuries usually result in less frequent, impact alone plus transient compression. The third mechanism, distraction injury, a stretch and tear of the spinal cord in its axial plane, occur by pulling apart of two adjacent vertebrae. Lastly, laceration/transection injury, which arises through sharp bone fragments, severe dislocations, and missile injuries.

**Secondary Injury**

Secondary injury is a series of biological phenomena that begins within minutes and continue to self-immolation for weeks or months following the initial primary injury.  The acute phase of secondary injury begins after SCI and involves vascular damage, ionic imbalances, free-radical formation, the initial inflammatory response, and neurotransmitter accumulation (excitotoxicity). The subacute phase follows, which includes demyelination of surviving axons, Wallerian degeneration, matrix remodeling, and formation of the glial scar.

**Immune Response Spinal Cord Injury**

Neuroinflammation can be either beneficial or detrimental following SCI, providing time-point and the state of immune cells. The first three days following SCI, inflammatory events involve recruiting blood-born neutrophils resident microglia and astrocytes to the injury site. The second phase, approximately three days post-injury, enrolls macrophages, B- and T-lymphocytes to the injury site. CD4+ helper T  become activated by antigen-presenting cells and release cytokines that subsequently stimulate B cell to synthesize and release antibodies, which exacerbate neuroinflammation and subsequent tissue destruction. Neuroinflammation is more robust in the acute phase of SCI.

Ongoing inflammation may persist in subacute and chronic phases, even for the rest of a patient's life. Inflammatory cell composition and phenotype alter according to the stage of inflammation and the signals existing in the injury microenvironment. T cells, B cells, and microglia/macrophages are capable of gaining either pro-inflammatory or an anti-inflammatory pro-regenerative phenotype.

Disruption of nerve axons running through spinal cord tracts leads to loss of motor and sensory function below the level of injury. Patterns of disability are dependent on the level of the injury and which spinal tracts are affected.

Spinothalamic tracts run within the anterior aspect of the spinal cord. These nerve axons carry sensory information for pain and temperature. Damage to these tracts leads to contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation. Corticospinal tracts run within the lateral aspects of the spinal cord. These nerve axons control motor function. Damage to these tracts leads to ipsilateral weakness or paralysis. In the cervical spine, axons leading to the upper extremities are located close to the center of the spinal cord.

In contrast, axons leading to the lower extremities are located on the periphery. The dorsal columns run within the posterior aspect of the spinal cord. These tracts carry information for tactile, proprioceptive, and vibratory sensation. Damage to these tracts leads to contralateral loss of tactile, proprioceptive, and vibratory sensation.