The incidence of uric acid nephrolithiasis is rising. The association between uric acid calculi and decreased urine pH has been observed for a long time. Currently, the relationship between uric acid nephrolithiasis and different metabolic conditions and their pathogenesis has been explained. Various conditions like metabolic syndrome, diabetes mellitus, increased dietary purine intake, inherited uric acid disorders, and diseases related to problems in ammonia formation have been found to be related to a decrease in urine pH (aciduria). Climate changes like global warming also appear to have contributed to an increased incidence of uric acid calculi.

There are three different non-surgical modalities to treat uric acid calculi: increase urinary pH, achieve adequate hydration, and manage conditions associated with higher uric acid production.

Measures to prevent the recurrence of uric acid calculi should focus on the reduction of urinary uric acid supersaturation. This includes interventions like increasing urine output to more than 2,000 ml per day, raising urinary pH to at least 6.5 if possible, reducing uric acid concentration in the urine, and using urinary alkalinizing agents like potassium citrate and sodium bicarbonate. Acetazolamide and topiramate are not generally recommended as they cause metabolic acidosis which reduces urinary citrate excretion and tends to cause calcium phosphate stone production.

Uric acid stone formers should be screened for diabetes and metabolic syndrome due to the strong association between these entities.

**Summary**

Uric acid nephrolithiasis is a growing problem that includes about 10% of all urinary calculi. It is associated with metabolic syndrome, obesity, and diabetes. High purine diets also tend to promote these stones. Presentation and initial treatment is similar to other urinary calculi.

The majority of uric acid stones are formed under conditions of excessive aciduria rather than hyperuricosuria.  Prophylactic treatment is with urinary alkalkinization which is primarily done with potassium citrate.  Sodium bicarbonate, sodium citrate, and magnesium citrate can be substituted for alkalinization if potassium citrate is not tolerated well or otherwise unacceptable due to hyperkalemia. "Cytra-2" and "Litholyte" are low potassium urinary alkalinizers that can be alternatives for potassium citrate as needed. Sufficient alkalinization can also dissolve existing stones, but urinary pH needs to be at least 6.1 and optimally at least 6.5 or more to achieve dissolution.

If hyperuricsuria or hyperuricemia is found, then allopurinol or febuxostat (Uloric) can be used.