The ureters course downward and medially, connecting the ipsilateral renal collecting system to the bladder and propelling urine toward the bladder through peristaltic contractions. The ureter is generally 22 to 30 cm in length in the adult, with variability generally, but not always, corresponding to body height.

- Abdominal: renal pelvis to the iliac vessels

- Pelvic: iliac vessels to the bladder

Alternatively, into three segments:

- Upper: renal pelvis to the upper border of the sacrum

- Middle: upper to the lower border of the sacrum, along the iliac vessels

- Lower: lower border of the sacrum to the bladder

There are three sites of anatomical narrowing along the ureter’s course that are clinically significant, as these are where calculi will most often obstruct the ureters. From proximal to distal, the sites are:

- The ureteropelvic junction (UPJ)

- The crossing of the ureter over the iliac vessels

- The intramural ureter at the ureterovesical junction (UVJ), where the ureter is the narrowest and which may require dilation before the introduction of larger-caliber instruments

The blood supply to the ureter stems from multiple vessels. Generally, the upper ureter receives its blood supply from the medial aspect, whereas the pelvic ureter receives it laterally. The upper ureter is supplied by branches of the renal, gonadal, renal polar, capsular and adrenal arteries. The pelvic ureter is supplied by branches of the common iliac, external iliac, gluteal, superior vesical, deferential, vaginal, and middle rectal arteries. In general, the most significant portion of the arterial supply comes from the renal pelvis for the upper or proximal ureter and the bladder for the pelvic or distal ureter. The venous drainage system mirrors the arterial distribution.

Of clinical significance, the iliac region of the ureter is poorly vascularized. Therefore, an incision or ureteral injury in this area may result in poor healing. All the vessels that supply the ureter anastomose to form a plexus that runs within the ureteral adventitia. Therefore, the ureter can generally be mobilized from surrounding tissues without compromising its blood supply as long as the adventitia remains intact.

The muscularis layer of the ureter was traditionally thought to be comprised of three layers: two longitudinal layers separated by a circular layer. However, more recent studies indicate a spiral arrangement of muscle fibers that generate the peristalsis. Muscle fibers along the ureter terminate over the detrusor muscles of the bladder to form the trigone.

Autonomic input does not appear necessary for ureteral peristalsis. Instead, it is likely generated from intrinsic smooth muscle pacemaker sites in the calyces of the renal collecting system and propagated in an antegrade fashion. Sympathetic nerves transmit nociceptive signals generated from mucosal irritation, tension, or distension resulting in visceral-type pain, which may be referred to the flank, groin, or scrotal/labial regions.

Lastly, a duplicated urinary collecting system is the most common urological congenital anomaly, occurring in approximately every 1 in 125 live births. Duplication of the ureters is bilateral in 20% of cases, frequently asymptomatic, and might be complete or incomplete. Duplicated ureters originate in a kidney pole. An incomplete duplication will terminate in the adjacent ipsilateral ureter, making a “Y shape” juncture at some point. Negotiating such a fork in the ureter with the ureteroscope entering only the selected renal unit can sometimes be challenging. This can be accomplished by using an angle tip guidewire to guide entry into the selected proximal ureteral segment.

A complete duplication will usually terminate in the bladder but can insert in various locations between the trigone and the ejaculatory duct in boys, or even in the vagina (where it can cause continuous, uncontrollable incontinence) in girls.