The principal cause of PDS and PG is the release of pigment in the anterior chamber that arises from the mechanical rubbing and friction created between the pigmented iris epithelium against the zonules and lens structures. Eyes with PDS and PG show structural findings, which tend to be more prone to irido-lenticular touch. Backward posterior bowing and reverse pupillary block have been reported as possible mechanisms for PDS and PG.

Moderate myopia and deep AC tend to favor these mechanisms. It has been hypothesized that eyes with PDS may have a large iris that may bow backward and touch lens structure in the presence of a deep AC, which can normally be found in patients with myopia that have elongated eyes.

In eyes at risk, physiological events like accommodation, blinking, exercise, and head movements or specific head positions can cause a reverse pupillary block, in which the irido-lenticular touch forms a flap-valve mechanism. The aqueous moves in a unidirectional manner from the PC towards the AC, but it cannot come from AC to the PC due to the valve-like mechanism. This causes high pressure within the AC, which further leads to the apposition of the iris against the anterior lens surface; this leads to elevated IOP.

The trapped aqueous in the AC lead to posterior bowing of the peripheral iris, and the posterior pigment epithelium of the iris rubs against the zonules resulting in pigment dispersion.

The effects of pigment showers and deposits in AC structures characterize the clinical features of PDS/PG. Krukenberg spindles are formed by pigment dispositions on the corneal endothelium. Histological studies have shown that the vertical spindle-shaped pigmented pattern on the inner side of the cornea could be due to melanin granules that undergo phagocytosis and not simply the effect of deposits on the endothelium surface.

Although PDS/PG may show corneal endothelial polymegathism and pleomorphism, corneal thickness and endothelial function do not seem to be compromised in these eyes.

An overload of pigment in TM cells can lead to cell death and necrosis, causing collapse and alteration of trabecular beams, which leads to elevated IOP due to a decrease in the outflow.

The sporadic nature of PG and low prevalence render heritability analysis difficult and limiting. Studies have reported familial aggregations in PDS/PG, showing an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with variable or incomplete penetrance coupled with environmental factors.

Recent studies based on 227 PG patients with 291 controls from Germany and the United Kingdom have shown PG may have heritable characteristics and similar genetic risks with myopia and iris pigmentation.

Pigmentary ocular hypertension (POHT) is PDS with high IOP in the absence of optic nerve head or visual field abnormality. POHT is more common in males. IOP higher than 21 mm Hg at presentation may denote a high risk of conversion to PG. Each 1 mm Hg IOP rise above 21 mm Hg may increase the chance of developing PG by 1.4 times.