A thorough examination of both the eyes, adnexa, and systemic assessment is of utmost importance to determine the etiology. Fluorescein staining is used to photograph the defect for serial monitoring and measuring the size, depth, and location of the epithelial defect using a slit lamp.

Deeper PEDs take longer to absorb the fluorescein into the stroma and frequently have grayish-white edges with heaped-up epithelium. Associated signs of infection, such as underlying haze and infiltrates and anterior chamber inflammation, must be actively sought. There can be associated basement membrane dystrophies, nodular degeneration, dendrites, limbal stem cell deficiency, conjunctival injection, features of superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis, allergic conjunctivitis, foreign body, and concretions. It is essential to assess dry eyes using the Schirmer test and tear-film breakup time. The Rose Bengal dye stains devitalized epithelial cells, implying impaired tear function, regardless of gross tear flow.

It is important to remember to examine the ocular adnexa. Syringing and regurgitation on pressure over the lacrimal sac (ROPLAS) are routinely performed to rule out any local source of infection. The punctum position, lid globe apposition, lid abnormalities, trichiasis, blepharitis, and meibomitis must be considered. Periorbital and facial asymmetry should be carefully evaluated to rule out facial nerve palsy. Finally, one must assess corneal sensations to exclude neurotrophic factors.

The diagnosis of PED is primarily clinical. It can be supplemented by investigations that help to quantify the lesion and track its progress. AS-OCT is a non-invasive definitive technique for quantifying epithelial thickness and loss over time, especially in areas of corneal thinning and scarring.

For systemic comorbidities, relevant systemic investigations must be conducted. For example, in patients with diabetes, fasting and postprandial blood sugar levels and HbA1C values are measured. Vitamin A deficiency can be confirmed by measuring serum retinol-binding protein and zinc levels. Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody for rheumatoid arthritis, antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), anti-Ro/SSA, and anti-La/SSB antibody for Sjogren syndrome are all autoimmune indicators.