Fibromyalgia could be confused with the presence of myofascial pain; some studies highlight an alteration of the connective tissue with the stem cells that produce adipose tissue. The latter could cause an inflammatory environment and local pain.

Another syndrome that can be poorly framed with respect to myofascial syndrome is chronic pelvic pain. The latter is a condition that must be present from 6 months onwards and not necessarily influenced by movements or the presence of menstruation (in women). It is necessary to understand if there are organic dysfunctions or only the musculature is involved through ultrasound examinations (the easiest way to make a differential diagnosis).

The temporomandibular joint could be involved in myofascial pain but could also be involved in a referred pain pattern. If trigger points do not improve after a manual or pharmacological approach, it could be a symptom of cardiac ischemia.

Throat or neck pain, if unilateral, could be caused by Eagle's Syndrome. Pain should improve with tissue treatment; if this does not happen, the causes must be investigated.

Inflammations of tendons or inflammations of purely connective formations (fasciitis, tendinopathies, and more) have a very specific anatomical area of interest that can be delimited with palpation and do not have more tense areas than other areas of the same tissue.

There are perpetuating mechanical factors such as:

- Scoliosis

- Limb dysmetria

- Joint hypermobility

- Muscle hypertrophy

- Repetitive microtraumas

- Spondylotic radiculopathy

There are systemic or metabolic perpetuating factors:

- Hypothyroidism

- Iron deficiency

- Vitamin D insufficiency

- Vitamin C deficiency

- Vitamin B12 insufficiency

Psychosocial perpetuating factors:

- Stress

- Anxiety

Other possible perpetuating factors:

- Infectious diseases

- Parasitic diseases (e.g., Lyme disease)

- Rheumatic polymyalgia

- Use of drugs such as statins

- Hyperalgesia

- Allodynia