Complications from colposcopy are likely to be related to an obscured visual field, severe atrophy, or scarring present based on the patient’s history. Overall procedural risks of significant bleeding, infection, and long-term morbidity are low.

Training and continued experience in colposcopy are necessary for competency. The false-negative rate (missed high grade squamous intraepithelial/invasive cancer) for colposcopy ranges from 13% to 69%.

**Sources of Error in Colposcopy**

Every colposcopic image is a reflection of a specific tissue pattern resulting from the interaction of surface epithelium and stroma. Misinterpretation of patterns is the most common error in colposcopy. A flat, mild acetowhite grade 1 lesion is more likely to be over-diagnosed as they mimic immature or active metaplastic epithelium in young women, regenerative epithelium, subclinical HPV infection, and congenital transformation zone. If in doubt, such lesions must be biopsied. Colposcopy should be avoided during the regenerative period of epithelium following CO2 laser ablation, cryosurgery, or trauma. Another common error is making a diagnosis without completely visualizing the cervix in cases where it is obscured by an endocervical polyp or large retention cyst, or there is a stenosed internal os, and in cases of incomplete visibility of the squamocolumnar junction.

Colposcopy can be difficult in postmenopausal women, with an unsatisfactory colposcopy in 25% of women due to the incomplete visibility of the squamocolumnar junction and vaginal atrophy. Errors may occur in association with pregnancy due to its physiological and morphological changes. Vasodilatation and congestion during pregnancy produce accentuated colposcopic patterns with more pronounced mosaics and punctations and enhanced acetic acid effect, which may mimic paraneoplastic lesions. These may be minimized by the use of a large speculum covered with a condom, quadrant wise interpretation, and remembering that colposcopic changes in pregnancy are one grade higher than the non-pregnant cervix. The colposcopic biopsy is safe if indicated in pregnancy, but endocervical curettage is contraindicated. However, the use of an endocervical brush for cytology is safe.