When the kidneys are not functioning correctly, dysfunction can occur in acid-base homeostasis, fluid and electrolyte regulation, hormone production and secretion, and waste elimination. Altogether, these abnormalities can result in metabolic disturbances and conditions such as anemia, hypothyroidism, hypertension, acidemia, hyperkalemia, and malnutrition.

Anemia associated with kidney disease is typically normocytic, normochromic, and hypoproliferative. It occurs as a result of decreased erythropoietin production by the failing kidneys. This is associated with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of less than 50 mL/min (unless the patient has diabetes, then they may have anemia at GFR less than 60mL/min) or when serum creatinine is greater than 2 mg/mL. In a study of 832 patients with diabetes, it was observed that 334 patients had anemia, which was higher than that reported in ambulatory patients. Additionally, 39% of the anemic patients had kidney failure.

The buildup of uremic toxins in the blood may additionally contribute to the development of coagulopathy as a result of reduced platelet adhesion to the vascular endothelial wall, increased platelet turnover, and a slightly reduced absolute number of platelets.

Another major metabolic complication associated with uremia and ESRD is acidosis because renal tubular cells are the body's primary regulators of acid-base homeostasis. As kidney failure progresses, there is decreased secretion of hydrogen ions, impaired excretion of ammonium, and, eventually, a buildup of phosphate and other organic acids (e.g., lactic acid, sulfuric acid, and hippuric acid). In turn, increased anion-gap metabolic acidosis may lead to hyperventilation, lethargy, anorexia, muscle weakness, and congestive heart failure (due to a decreased cardiac response).

Hyperkalemia may also occur in acute or chronic renal failure settings. This condition becomes a medical emergency when serum potassium reaches a level greater than 6.5 mEq/L. This level may be exacerbated with excessive potassium intake or use of certain medications (e.g., potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzymes (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, beta-blockers, NSAIDs, etc.).

Hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated parathyroid hormone levels may also occur due to renal failure. Hypocalcemia occurs due to decreased production of active vitamin D (1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D), responsible for gastrointestinal (GI) absorption of calcium and phosphorus and suppression of parathyroid hormone excretion. Hyperphosphatemia occurs because of impaired phosphate excretion in the setting of renal failure. Both hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia stimulate hypertrophy of the parathyroid gland and increase the production and secretion of parathyroid hormone. Altogether, these changes in calcium metabolism can result in osteodystrophy (renal bone disease) and may lead to calcium deposition throughout the body (i.e., metastatic calcification).

Declining renal function can result in decreased insulin clearance, necessitating a decrease in the dosage of antihyperglycemic medications to avoid hypoglycemia. Uremia may also lead to impotence in men or infertility (e.g., anovulation, amenorrhea) in women due to dysfunctional reproductive hormone regulation.

The buildup of uremic toxins may also contribute to uremic pericarditis and pericardial effusions, leading to abnormalities in cardiac function. Together with metastatic calcification resulting from declining renal function, these may contribute to worsening underlying valvular dysfunction or suppression of myocardial contractility.