Macrophages sense bacterial products through Toll-like receptors (TLR) and regulate the inflammatory response. TLR4 senses the gram-negative bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Downstream signaling leads to the activation of the transcription factor, nuclear factor kappa beta (NF-kB), and increased production of IL-6. IL-6 activates liver production of other acute-phase proteins. Tissue injury and trauma can also activate the acute-phase reaction (APR). The purpose of acute-phase proteins released during APR is to participate in blood coagulation, defense against infection, transport metabolites, nutrients and hormones, and maintenance of homeostasis. IL-6, IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, glucocorticoids, and growth factors are the primary mediators of acute-phase proteins (APP) gene expression.

APPs are divided into positive and negative APPs. The concentrations of positive APPs increase during inflammation, and the concentration of negative APPs decrease. Positive APPs include C-reactive protein, haptoglobin, angiotensinogen, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, serum amyloid A, lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), ferritin, alpha1-antitrypsin, hepcidin, fibrinogen, serum amyloid A, vitronectin, procalcitonin, among others. Negative APPs include albumin, transthyretin (prealbumin), antithrombin, and transferrin.

**Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)**: ESR measures the distance that red blood cells in the anticoagulated blood fall in a vertical tube after one hour. Fibrinogen reduces the charge on the red blood cell surface, which causes them to aggregate rapidly. As a result, ESR increases. ESR is used to indirectly measure the amount of fibrinogen by determining the rate at which erythrocytes settle inside a vertical tube in one hour. The ESR level starts to rise within 24 to 48 hours of inflammation. An increase in ESR can be indicative of inflammation.

**C-reactive protein:**CRP is a marker of bacterial inflammation and has a higher sensitivity than ESR, and is a direct measure of the inflammatory response. It was first discovered by Tillet and Francis in 1930 when they showed it reacted to the C-polysaccharide ofStreptococcus pneumoniae in patients with pneumococcal pneumonia. It belongs to a highly conserved family of proteins referred to as pentraxins, which are typified by five protomers around a central pore, and its half-life does not change between health and disease, making the production rate the sole determinant of plasma concentrations.

**Procalcitonin:**PCT is a 14.5 kDa peptide. IL-6, IL-1, and TNF-alpha stimulate its secretion. However, it appears that secretion is not activated by IFN-gamma (produced mainly in response to viral infections), making it a sensitive marker of bacterial infections.