In nature, ammonia exists as both NH3 and in the ionic form of ammonia as ammonium ion (NH4+). A buffering reaction: NH3+ H+ --> NH4+ is used to maintain the relative amount of each form. Under biological conditions, the pKa of this reaction is about 9.15 and this reaction occurs almost instantaneously.  As a result, the majority of ammonia under physiological conditions exists as NH4+, and only about 1.7% of total ammonia presents as NH3 at pH 7.4. Ammonia is a very small, uncharged particle. Due to this character of ammonia, it was initially believed that ammonia is highly permeable across the lipid membrane because of the maintenance of proper diffusion equilibrium. But later, after thorough and extensive studies this was refuted. Instead, it was seen that though ammonia is an uncharged particle, the asymmetrical arrangement of positively charged hydrogen ions around a central molecule of nitrogen converts this ammonia molecule into a relative polar particle. Ammonia has a molecular dipole moment of 1.47 D which denotes the degree of separation between the positively and negatively charged particles. In contrast, HCl has a dipole moment is 1.08 and the water molecule has a dipole moment of about 1.85. Due to this charged polarity ammonia has limited and minimal permeability through lipid membranes. This typical character of permeability results in the development of a transepithelial gradient of ammonia and this is demonstrated to be present in the kidneys. In the absence of specific transport proteins ammonia also have a restricted property of permeability across lipid bilayers. Due to the inability for the transport of ammonia through the lipid bilayer in the plasma membrane, the hypothesis of transporting of NH4+ by “NH4+ trapping” was introduced, although the accuracy of this concept has not been fully established. Ammonium ion (NH4+) has very poor permeability across the biological membrane in the absence of appropriate transporter. There is no detectable permeability in some tissues such as the apical membrane of collecting duct segments. However, transport of ammonium ion (NH4+) across the biological membrane can occur by specific proteins and is particularly crucial for renal ammonia excretion. Due to the particular biological character of ammonium ion in hydrated form, these proteins can be used to transport this specific ion. Ammonium ion (NH4+) and potassium ion (K+) show almost identical biophysical character when examined in aqueous solutions. This particular unique character allows ammonium ions to be effectively transported at the transport site of potassium ions.