The extensor pollicis longus muscle is an extrinsic thumb muscle that belongs to the deep group of dorsal forearm muscles. The extensor pollicis longus originates on the middle third of the posterior ulnar diaphysis, traverses laterally along the forearm, passes over Lister's tubercle, goes through the third osteofibrous tunnel and travels superiorly to the extensor carpi radialis longus, and extensor carpi radialis brevis then inserts on the base of the distal phalanx of the pollex. An osteofibrous tunnel is a passageway found along synovial joints, which has a bony floor and a fascial roof, with the fascia running in a transverse pattern to help contain neurovascular structures and tendons. These tunnels also have the name of the extensor compartments.  The EPL is the only anatomic occupant of the third extensor compartment. There are a total of six extensor compartments in the wrist.

As the extensor pollicis longus crosses the wrist, the muscle belly transitions into a tendon (surrounded by a synovial tendon sheath), which forms the medial border of the anatomical snuffbox of the wrist. The tendon splits into two different parts, the proximal and distal tendonous divisions, which are separated by a fenestra. The total length of the tendon ranges from 6.7 to 9.7 cm, and the fenestra ranges from 3.1 to 3.5 cm in length. Three tendons form the anatomical snuffbox surface, from medial (ulnar) to lateral (radial):

- EPL tendon

- The extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) tendon

- The abductor pollicis longus (APL) tendon

The floor of the anatomical snuffbox is made up of the scaphoid and trapezium bones and the extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis.

Extensor pollicis longus extends the terminal phalanx of the thumb. The abductor pollicis brevis and adductor pollicis both attach to the extensor pollicis longus tendon and can extend the thumb's interphalangeal joint to the neutral position. Only extensor pollicis longus causes full hyperextension at the interphalangeal joint.