In the life of an individual, teeth play an indispensable role. Complete loss of teeth results in loss of aesthetics as well as function. Thus, the replacement of teeth in the form of artificial dentures is an important requisite. A mucosa-borne complete denture is the conventional treatment modality adopted most commonly for edentulous patients. The patient’s acceptance of the finished prosthesis is dependent on various factors, among which retention and stability of the complete denture play a significant role. The loose and unstable denture is a persistent source of annoyance to the patient and the dentist.

The mandibular denture is usually more problematic than the maxillary denture owing to the smaller surface area coverage of the foundation tissues. The problem of retention and stability is more pronounced with mandibular denture as compared to the maxillary denture because the covered surface area is approximately half to that in the maxillary arch, and the presence of palate adding to the area against the mobile tongue on the floor of the mouth in the mandibular arch. A complete mandibular denture is said to be stable if it is entirely and continuously under the patient’s functional control. The patient should be able to eat comfortably and with minimal movement of the denture relative to its foundation area. The retentive dentures can be fabricated in the majority of the patients regardless of the condition of the ridge. It is mainly the stability of the denture that is limited by the ridge conditions. Stability is the quality of a removable prosthesis to be firm, steady, or constant to resist displacement by functional horizontal or rotational stresses.