**Pericarditis**

Inflammation of the pericardium is called pericarditis. Its origin can be infectious, immunologic, metabolic, neoplastic, traumatic, or idiopathic. A myocardial infarction can also cause localized pericarditis of the area overlying the infarct. Postinfectious fibrinous pericarditis occurs within 1-3 days of myocardial infarction, whereas Dressler syndrome occurs weeks to months after myocardial infarction. Acute pericarditis often produces fever, “pleuritic” pain in the center of the chest that radiates to the back and varies with deep breathing, and a pericardial friction rub on auscultation. The pain increases upon lying flat and is relieved by sitting upright. An electrocardiogram will show diffuse ST elevation and PR depression. The condition is usually short-lived and is treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and colchicine. NSAIDs inhibit the activity of cyclooxygenase enzymes, whereas colchicine blocks mitotic cells in metaphase.

**Pericardial Effusion**

Normally the pericardium contains only a few milliliters of fluid that act as a lubricant, but pericarditis and other conditions may lead to the pericardium filling with hundreds of milliliters of exudative or transudative fluid. This is called pericardial effusion and can be easily recognized on an echocardiogram. A chest x-ray may also show an enlarged and bag-like cardiac shadow when a significant pericardial effusion is present.

**Cardiac Tamponade**

Pericardial effusion or bleeding into the pericardium due to injury can limit the space available for the expansion of the heart. If this is severe enough to limit venous return, cardiac output falls drastically as a result of the heart not being able to fill with blood. This condition is called cardiac tamponade. Cardiac tamponade is a life-threatening condition and often requires urgent attention. It is recognized clinically by the triad of hypotension, muffled heart sounds, and jugular venous distension. Patients can also have a phenomenon known as pulsus paradoxus, which is a decrease in systolic blood pressure by more than 10 mm Hg during inspiration. Echocardiography is the first-line imaging modality used. Treatment consists of draining the pericardial fluid using a needle, placement of a catheter in the pericardium for continuous drainage, or surgical creation of a 'window' between the pericardial and pleural spaces.

**Constrictive Pericarditis**

Constrictive pericarditis occurs when long-term inflammation of the pericardium causes thickening, scarring, and often calcified pericardium, which limits the diastolic filling of the ventricles. This can be a complication of acute pericarditis, especially when the cause of pericarditis is neoplastic, bacterial, or radiational. It is also common in patients with tuberculosis and following cardiac surgery. Patients typically present with symptoms of fluid overload, including jugular venous distension, hepatomegaly, and peripheral edema. Additional findings include Kussmaul's sign, which is a paradoxical increase in jugular venous pressure during inspiration, and a pericardial knock, which is is an extra-systolic heart sound heard immediately after S1.