Bacopa monnieri has many pharmacological actions, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anticonvulsant, cardiotonic, bronchodilator, and peptic ulcer protection.Bacopa has been shown to have antioxidant effects.Bacopa are likely from the presence of a group of saponins collectively referred to as bacosides. Purified bacosides A and B, as well as bacopa alcoholic extract, may facilitate learning ability, memory, and cognitive performance.

Some possible mechanisms which may lead to cognitive improvement include modulation of acetylcholine release, muscarinic cholinergic receptor binding, and choline acetylase activity.Bacopa modulate hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis output and protect the hippocampus. Bacopa causes an anti-inflammatory effect on activated microglial cell cultures.

In one study, tea, infusion, and alkaloid extracts of Bacopa, as well as bacoside A administration, was shown to significantly inhibit the release of TNF alpha and IL-6 from activated N9 microglial cells in vitro.Bacopa have been studied.

Bacopa has been reported to protect against oxidative damage via decreased protein carbonyl levels in both cytosol and mitochondria in all brain regions.Bacopa in the prevention of lipid peroxidation in the prefrontal cortex, striatum, and hippocampus of rats.Bacopa has been reported to increase the level of reduced glutathione.

Catalase is a common antioxidant enzyme found in nearly all living organisms exposed to oxygen. The age-associated decline in the catalase activity in the lymphocytes of middle-aged and older male rats was significantly increased over those who received Bacopa treatment.Bacopa was shown to increase the adaptation responses to stressors. It normalizes monoamine levels and corticosterone in experimental models of stress.

The sedative actions of Bacopa lend an overall calming effect. Bacopa has been shown to support GABA production, which reduces neuron excitability, thereby improving rapid response decision-making.Bacopa monnieri has been shown to increase GABA by enhancing the GABA A receptor subunit and up-regulating glutamate decarboxylase.