The reduction of WMSDs is often considered the largest concern for ergonomics. Back, neck, and upper extremity injuries are some of the more common WMSDs, with studies demonstrating correlations between certain specific movements and combination of movements within work (lifting, twisting, prolonged walking/standing, squatting, prolonged standing, and repetitive motions) placing individuals at an increased risk for developing WMSDs.

The extent and type of WMSD vary widely depending on the individual and method of injury, most commonly being general discomfort and swelling/stiffness cited throughout the body; varicose veins, postural imbalance/associated weakness, and discomfort in knees/ankles/hips within the lower extremities; spondylosis, and radiculopathy in the back; and De Quervain's tendonitis, Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, and shoulder impingement syndromes in the upper extremities.

Proper implementation of ergonomics has been repeatedly proven to reduce WMSDs across multiple fields of work, thus reducing the number of associated lost workdays and loss of wages and reducing associated potential psychosocial disorders that can be developed post-WMSDs.

Implementation of ergonomics is fluid depending on workplace requirements as well as the individual completing those tasks, with females often having increased risk for WMSDs compared to their male counterparts due to smaller stature and decreased physical strength output as well as instrument size/design being geared to male stature.

Psychosocial factors require attention when addressing ergonomics as well, due to their impact on ergonomics itself and the potential fallout from WMSDs. Studies have demonstrated links between WMSDs and psychosocial work factors such as job stress, work organization, and social support. These factors can impact the ergonomic performance of an individual, thus impacting their risk of WMSDs.

Links have also been associated with the development of psychosocial disorders, including depression and maladaptive pain response, with the potential to lead to disability if not properly addressed following WMSDs.