Penile cancer is an uncommon malignancy, but when diagnosed is psychologically devastating to the patient and can pose a difficult challenge to the treating urologist. Patient’s with this condition tend to delay seeking medical attention. This delay is associated with embarrassment, guilt, fear, and denial of the patient. Patients often attempt to self-medicate with lotions or creams before seeing a doctor. The delays in treatment may also be attributable to physicians as well. Many patients receive salves and antibiotics from their primary care physicians before seeing a urologist. This delay in diagnosis is serious, as it can decrease the likelihood of survival and limits the ability to retain a functioning and satisfactory result after surgical intervention.

In the discussion of penile cancer, it is important to review benign, premalignant, and malignant conditions and to differentiate between them. The most common penile malignancy is squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), but nonsquamous penile malignant neoplasms also exist including basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, sarcomas, and adenosquamous carcinoma. This chapter will focus mainly on squamous cell carcinoma, including the etiology, epidemiology, pathophysiology, histopathology, evaluation, and treatment of this tumor. The chapter will examine the importance of the pathologic stage and histologic features of the primary tumor, as well as any presence of lymph node (LN) metastasis in determining the prognosis and treatment planning for squamous carcinoma. The treatment options and follow up will be discussed in depth.