Two systems for the classification of nerve injury severity based on histological changes are commonly employed, those of Seddon and Sunderland (see table).

Seddon's classification system is the simpler of the two, dividing injuries into neuropraxia, axonotmesis, and neurotmesis. Neuropraxia is the mildest form of nerve injury, characterized by transient conduction block from trauma to endoneurial capillaries that leads to edema and potentially focal demyelination without any axonal degeneration. This type of injury makes a spontaneous, full recovery. Axonotmesis occurs when there is an injury to the axons and potentially one or more of the internal connective tissue layers (endoneurium and perineurium).

Even though these injuries result in axonal degeneration, at least some recovery can be expected because the axons are able to regenerate within the intact epineurium. If the endoneurium remains intact, a complete recovery should occur, but if the endoneurium or perineurium is violated, the prognosis is worse. Neurotmesis is the most severe type of injury, characterized by complete transection of the nerve, including the axons and all of the connective tissue layers. With such an injury, there is a low likelihood of spontaneous recovery.

Sunderland's classification of nerve injury further characterizes injuries based on the involvement of each layer of neural connective tissue. The first degree corresponds to neuropraxia in Seddon's classification, which involves disruption of myelin sheaths, but the axons and the rest of the internal neural architecture remain intact (see figure). Seddon's "axtonotmesis" category is divided in the Sunderland system into three distinct categories.

Second-degree injury occurs when only the axons are damaged, but all the connective tissue layers remain intact; in these cases, as in first-degree injuries, full recovery is expected. The third-degree injury involves both axonal and endoneurial injuries.

Fourth-degree injury involves damage to all structures except the epineurium: the axons, the endoneurium, and the perineurium. Fourth-degree injuries, therefore, have worse prognoses than first, second, or third-degree injuries. Sunderland's fifth-degree injury is characterized by disruption of all the nerve structures, or nerve transection, which corresponds to neurotmesis in Seddon's classification. First, second, or third-degree injuries are likely to recover spontaneously; however, fourth and fifth-degree injuries are not likely to make full sensory recoveries.