The diagnosis of VPD is obtained through history, physical exam, assessment of speech production, imaging, and instrumental evaluation.

- **Instrumental assessment**provides a visual complement to perceptual speech analysis and is performed with either video-nasal endoscopy or multi-view videofluoroscopy by an interdisciplinary team of otolaryngologists, speech pathologists, and radiologists.

- **Perceptual speech analysis**is the gold standard for VPD diagnosis and is performed by a speech-language pathologist (SLP). Patients are asked to produce plosive, fricative, and affricative sounds and assessed for any hypernasal speech, compensatory facial grimacing, or misarticulation. Common phrases include “pet the puppies” and “Kathy kissed the cat”. Patients can also be asked to count from 60 to 80. A dental mirror can be placed under the nostrils to visualize any nasal air emission through fogging of the mirror.
- **Video-nasal endoscopy**uses a pediatric flexible laryngoscope to directly visualize the nasal passages, nasopharynx, adenoids, and soft palate. Live images are displayed on a video monitor for the speech pathologist who is performing the phonemic evaluation on the patient. The velopharyngeal sphincter is assessed during sucking through a straw, as well as during the production of plosives, fricatives, and affricatives. The location of VP closure, size of VP gap, and mobility of VP structures can be visualized and used to guide surgical decision-making. Nasal endoscopy can also diagnose an occult cleft palate, seen as a midline groove on the nasal surface of the soft palate, as the cause for a patient’s VPD.
- **Multiview videofluoroscopy**is commonly used in young children who may not tolerate a video-nasal endoscopy. Barium is given trans-nasally to coat the soft palate, lateral, and posterior pharyngeal walls. Serial images oriented in the lateral, frontal, and basal views are taken to assess VP closure during phonemic evaluation by the speech pathologist. The VP closure pattern is then classified as either coronal, sagittal, or circular (symmetric). Coronal closure involves only the posterior pharyngeal wall and soft palate. Sagittal closure involves only the lateral pharyngeal walls. Circular closure involves all structures equally.

- **Cephalometrics**use serial X-rays from multiple views to study VP anatomic relationships during sustained speech. The anterior insertion of the levator veli palatini muscle into the soft palate is assessed, with more anterior insertion (seen in occult cleft palates) resulting in decreased soft tissue stretch and a VP gap during speech. Abnormalities in the cervical spine or skull base (platybasia) can contribute to nasopharyngeal disproportion. Cephalometrics is a quantifiable and reliable evaluation for treatment planning in children with velocardiofacial syndrome and isolated cleft palates.

- **Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**can be used to assess levator veli palatine muscle size, insertion into the soft palate, and orientation for cases of suspected submucosal or occult clefts.

- **Nasometry**measures nasal emission and calculates a ratio between nasal and oral sound emissions (nasalance) using a sound separator placed between the nose and upper lip. The ratio is compared with normative values. Preoperative and postoperative nasalance can also be compared to determine surgery success. However, nasometry does not localize or quantify the VP gap. Large VP gaps can produce artificially low nasometric scores due to diminished high-pressure airflow.