This includes a complete clinical examination (including fundus examination) aided by routine examinations such as blood pressure measurement and lipid profile to assess systemic associations and imaging studies.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)**- This is the investigation of choice to diagnose and outline the lesion. FFA is beneficial when the aneurysm is obscured (due to hemorrhage or exudation) or when the aneurysm gets involuted. Aneurysms may appear as pulsating (seen in 10% of cases with the help of dynamic FFA) round or ovoid pooling of dye which may be seen filling rapidly in the early arterial phase in case of fusiform RAMs or minimal early filling with complete filling in the middle to late phases in case of saccular RAMs. Filling defects in the early arterial phase may be due to the formation of clots or scar formation caused by blockage of the lumen as a result of thrombosis or endothelial cell formation.

Areas of microangiopathies can leak, and lead can contribute to cystoid macular edema, which manifests as areas of fluorescein leakage from the dilated capillaries around the aneurysm.

FFA additionally gives information regarding capillary microaneurysms, nonperfusion areas, intraretinal microvascular abnormalities, and telangiectasias.

**Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICG-A)**- It is particularly significant when a hemorrhage blocks visualization of the aneurysm because of greater penetration of its near-infrared light spectrum. ICG angiography shows areas of hyperfluorescence and can suggest the accurate location of the macroaneurysm, further helping in management. It can be helpful in the presence of concomitant exudates and retinal pigment epithelial changes.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**- Spectral Domain OCT (SD-OCT) is a helpful tool in diagnosing retinal artery macroaneurysm. RAMs appear as round or oval hyper-reflective lesions in the inner retinal layers and cause shadowing of the deeper tissues by elevating the internal limiting membrane and ganglionic cell layer.

**OCT Angiography (OCT-A)**- This investigative modality can be used to demonstrate focal vascular outpouchings and delineate changes in the fluid and vasculature with time, further helping in management.

**USG B Scan**- This is helpful when the fundus is not visible or in case of dense vitreous hemorrhage. It also helps differentiate RAM from retinal tears/detachments or polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy, causing breakthrough hemorrhage.

The above-mentioned investigative modalities can also be used to identify retinal capillary and retinal venous macroaneurysms. The most important differentiating feature of RAM is direct communication with an arteriole and the presence of hemorrhage in multiple retinal layers.