The superior epigastric artery (SEA) is one of two terminal branches of internal thoracic (also known as internal mammary) artery that runs just lateral and posterior to the sternum. At the level of sixth or seventh costal cartilage, the internal thoracic artery divides into two terminal branches. The first is the musculophrenic artery supplies the muscles of the diaphragm. The second terminal branch is the superior epigastric artery which crosses the diaphragm and descends anteriorly on the abdominal wall between the anterior aspect of transverse abdominis muscle and posterior aspect of the rectus sheath. The superior epigastric artery supplies the rectus abdominis musculature bilaterally until it anastomoses with the inferior epigastric artery approximately at umbilicus level or more inferiorly depending on different variations of the human body.

The inferior epigastric artery (IEA) branches off external iliac artery above the inguinal ligament and curves upward under the peritoneum. It passes behind the spermatic cord as the vas deferens emerges posteriorly then lateral to the artery. At this level, the inferior epigastric vessels form the lateral aspect of the Hesselbach triangle. The rectus abdominis muscle and inguinal ligament make up the medial and inferior borders of the triangle, respectively. It then ascends oblique and medially along the margin of the inguinal ring while being enveloped by the lateral umbilical ligament. It pierces transversalis fascia as it continues to ascend superior and superficially until it levels posterior to rectus once it crosses the linea semicircularis. The inferior epigastric artery continues to rise superiorly until it terminates by piercing rectus abdominis musculature and branching at approximately umbilicus level to form an anastomosis with superior epigastric arteries. This variability becomes vital for surgical consideration as we will later discuss.

The superficial epigastric artery functions as its name suggests, which is to supply superficial fascia of the lower abdomen. It branches off the femoral vein about 1 cm inferior to the inguinal ligament, pierces cribriform fascia, and travels superiorly and superficially between abdominal fascia toward umbilicus and usually terminates before it reaches the umbilical level as it anastomoses with inferior epigastric artery after it pierces the rectus muscle.

Epigastric veins follow alongside its corresponding arteries. Superior epigastric veins drain to the internal thoracic vein, inferior epigastric vein to external iliac vein, and superficial epigastric vein to femoral vein distal to the femoral ring.

The regional lymphatic drainage follows the flow of veins above the Scarpa fascia. The lymph nodes that follow the superficial aspect of superior epigastric veins above the umbilicus drain toward the anterior (pectoral) group of axillary lymph nodes. Lymph nodes that follow the deep aspect of superior epigastric veins drain back to the parasternal lymph nodes along internal thoracic vessels. Lymph nodes that follow superficial epigastric veins drain toward the superficial inguinal nodes and lymph nodes that follow inferior epigastric veins drain toward the lymph nodes around external iliac veins.

While there are no nerves that follow the path epigastric arteries like veins and lymph nodes, there are nerves that are significant due to anatomical proximity. On the anterior abdominal wall, lateral cutaneous veins from T7 to T12, iliohypogastric, and ilioinguinal branches of L1 nerves run from lateral to the medial aspect of abdomen superficially near the skin, indirectly and more superficially crossing perpendicular to the epigastric arteries at respective dermatome levels. In the pelvic area, both the femoral nerve and obturator nerve travel close to the inferior epigastric artery.