Clinical suspicion should be high in patients with BMI > 30 kg/m^2 with unexplained dyspnea on exertion and hypersomnolence.

Ultimately, an arterial blood gas should show hypoventilation in complete wakefulness. The percent of total sleep time with SpO2 spent below 90% can be a useful polysomnographic variable for the evaluation of OHS patients. Moreover, patients with very severe OSA (AHI > 100 events/h) or severe hypoxia (Nadir SpO2 <60%) during sleep had increased the prevalence of OHS by more than 75%.

The American Academy of Sleep Medicine introduced criteria for the diagnosis of OHS, which include:

- Presence of hypoventilation during wakefulness (PaCO2 more significant than 45 mmHg) as measured by arterial PCO2, end-tidal PCO2, or transcutaneous PCO2.

- Presence of obesity (body mass index or BMI greater than 30 kg/m^2; more significant than the 95th percentile for age and sex for children).

- Hypoventilation is not primarily due to lung parenchymal or airway disease, pulmonary vascular pathology, chest wall disorder (other than mass loading from obesity), medication use, neurologic disorder, muscle weakness, or a known congenital or idiopathic central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome.

The recommended diagnostic approach is to demonstrate daytime hypoventilation. An arterial blood gas analysis is the most definitive diagnostic test for alveolar hypoventilation. Unfortunately, an ABG is not readily done in an outpatient setting. However, in most patients with OHS, the most common initial presentation is in a hospital setting after presenting with an acute exacerbation, where an ABG and a basic metabolic panel can be done. Polysomnography is not required for diagnosis but helps distinguish patients with coexistent OSA and those with actual sleep hypoventilation. Sleep hypoventilation is a ten mmHg increase in PaCO2 above wakefulness that is not secondary to obstructive apneas or hypopnea.

OHS is a diagnosis of exclusion that requires to be distinguished from disorders that are also associated with hypoventilation. Once hypercapnia is confirmed by ABG, pulmonary function testing should be performed to exclude other hypercapnia causes. In these patients with OHS, pulmonary function tests are usually within normal or consistent with the evidence of restrictive ventilatory defect without significant evidence of airflow obstruction.