Patients will frequently present with the initial complaint of finding blood in their socks or on their floors as they do not perform routine pedal examinations. For the ulceration itself, the history should be thorough and include the nature of the ulceration, the location, the duration and onset, as well as the course, things that both aggravate the ulceration and alleviate the associated symptoms, and any treatments or dressings used or pursued this issue.

A detailed past medical history is highly recommended. It is essential to establish the background of the disorder, including the length of time the patient has been neuropathic, if there is a diagnosis associated with the neuropathy, and all information pertinent to that disease. For instance, the patient often has diabetes, and it is vital to know the length of time they have had this disease, how their diabetes is controlled via medication and diet, and how their blood sugars have been. The laboratory value of hemoglobin A1C of the patient can help provide insight into how well their diabetes is controlled and assess their healing potential. A history of prior ulcers, amputations, or foot surgery is also helpful. The patient's listed allergies and medications are also significant here and can help guide antibiotic therapy if needed.

Past surgical history should also include a history of pedal ulcerations, possible surgical interventions such as amputation, any history of vascular surgery, and how the patient's body reacted to anesthesia. This can also help guide the decision on if the patient is a good surgical candidate or not.

Social history can provide insight into the patient's career and how often they are in a position that increases pressure on the area. Substance use history should be considered as nicotine can decrease blood flow to an area, and alcohol can be a causality of neuropathy.

The history should be taken thoroughly and include a complete review of symptoms. Frequently the ulcerations can present infected and are accompanied by nausea, fever, vomiting, or chills to some degree as well as the potential for shortness of breath and chest pain if the patient is in systemic sepsis. The systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria can help evaluate the possibility of sepsis; however, this is nonspecific. The SIRS criteria assess the body's temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and white blood cell count and correlate that with the clinical picture to evaluate the body's response to infection. The SIRS criteria have been refuted recently, but it is still used in practice in most hospital systems' protocols.

The physical exam should include all aspects of the ulceration but also the patient's vascular status, neurological status, and any musculoskeletal abnormalities that could be the causality of the ulceration. A dermatologic examination should include the appearance of the wound bed and edges, if any undermining or tunneling is present, to what layer the wound is exposing (e.g., fat, tendon, bone), if any malodor is associated with the wound, and whether or not the ulceration probes deep to the bone, and if there is any drainage, and what type of drainage is present.

The vascular examination should include palpation of pulses in the area, ultrasound doppler with an evaluation of waveforms and blood flow, as well as capillary refilling time both peri-wound and distal to the ulceration within the digits or distal foot if the digits are not present. Adequate blood flow and tissue perfusion increase healing potential and prognosis and can be used to assess for the concomitance of peripheral arterial disease and vascular insufficiency.

The neurological evaluation should include an assessment of all types of nerve fibers. This can be done by following multiple neurologic tests such as two-point discrimination, sharp versus dull sensation, vibratory sensation, and pinpoint monofilament testing. Numerous other types of testing are available as well for further evaluation. They can include nerve conduction velocity testing, but a clinical evaluation without such advanced testing can usually provide information about the patient's sensorium. The evaluation should also include whether this is asymmetric or symmetric and what type of fibers the neuropathy is affecting (sensory, motor, autonomic).

The musculoskeletal evaluation of the patient is important and often missed. The anatomical structure and biomechanical function should be fully assessed to evaluate the possibility of reducing deformity and decreasing pressure points' prominence. If lower extremity ulcerations are the issue, this should include a gait exam, shoe gear examination, and full biomechanical evaluation of the area.