Cromolyn sodium was derived from furanochromone, khellin, a natural drug product extracted from an eastern Mediterranean herb called Ammi visnaga. The key active constituents of khellin were chromones; some of these chromones could delay the onset of bronchial antigen-induced distress in guinea pigs. In 1965, researcher Roger Altounyan, who suffered from asthma, discovered cromolyn sodium. He showed that the inhalation of cromolyn sodium taken before an asthmatic attack could attenuate asthmatic symptoms. Later in 1969, the first inhaled cromolyn sodium was launched in the United Kingdom for the treatment of asthma in both children and adults. Researchers had demonstrated the effectiveness of cromolyn sodium against exercise-induced asthma and the nasal application against antigen challenge in the nose at the Royal Society of Medicine symposium in 1969. Several reports were published in the early 1970s for the use of topical solutions of cromolyn in eye diseases, which later led to discovering the important benefit of cromolyn sodium for the treatment of vernal keratoconjunctivitis.

**FDA-approved Indications**

- Cromolyn sodium is an FDA-approved medication used for prophylaxis of mild to moderate bronchial asthma and adjunctive treatment of allergic rhinitis and systemic mast cell disease (mastocytosis) in pediatric patients and adults.

- Cromolyn Sodium Oral Solution (Concentrate) is used to improve symptoms of diarrhea, flushing, headaches, vomiting, urticaria, abdominal pain, nausea, and itching in some patients.

- It is also available as an ophthalmic solution for the symptomatic treatment of certain allergic eye conditions such as vernal conjunctivitis, keratitis, and keratoconjunctivitis.

- Cromolyn sodium metered spray is used to prevent and relieve nasal symptoms of hay fever and other nasal allergies like runny or itchy nose, sneezing, and allergic stuffy nose.

**Non-FDA approved Indications (off-labels)**

- Cromolyn sodium is off-labeled used for preventing serious reactions to foods.

- It is used in the management of inflammatory bowel disease.

- It's also used to treat superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis.