Salmon calcitonin (after this referred to as “calcitonin”) is an analog of human calcitonin used in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, and hypercalcemia. Its clinical importance derives from its ability to inhibit osteoclasts and increase renal excretion of calcium. Through these processes, bone matrix resorption and serum calcium are both decreased. For these reasons, it is of benefit in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget disease of bone, and emergent hypercalcemia.

**Postmenopausal Osteoporosis**

Calcitonin is currently FDA approved for use in postmenopausal osteoporosis once the patient is at least five years postmenopausal.

However, short-term use of calcitonin has also been demonstrated to significantly reduce osteoporotic bone pain compared to placebo, especially in the acute setting.

Recommended dosages are 200 units via intranasal spray once daily or 100 units once daily via intramuscular (IM)/subcutaneous (subQ) injection. The patient should supplement calcitonin with calcium, and vitamin D. BMD measurements should occur every 1 to 2 years after beginning therapy. Height, weight, serum calcium, and serum calcifediol should be measured yearly. Biochemical markers of bone turnover can also be useful to assess therapeutic response.

**Paget Disease of Bone**

Calcitonin is an FDA-approved second-line treatment for Paget disease, indicated when bisphosphonate tolerance is a problem. Clinically, it can relieve bone pain, reverse neurologic deficits, reduce blood flow to diseased bone, and may even improve Pagetic hearing loss.

In a study of 24 patients with untreated Paget’s disease, treatment with calcitonin showed reduced skeletal blood flow to Pagetic bone, which may lower disease activity and reduce bleeding during surgery. Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and urine hydroxyproline, markers of bone remodeling and turnover, were also reduced.

Paget disease of bone is a chronic illness; therefore, calcitonin therapy can be of indefinite duration. Patients are initially given 50 to 100 units of calcitonin daily via IM or subQ administration and then given either 50 units daily or 50 to 100 units every 1 to 3 days. Serum alkaline phosphatase should be measured at 3 to 6 months to assess for a response to therapy. After serum ALP has normalized, it can be measured every six months to one year. If ALP once again begins to rise, the formation of calcitonin antibodies should be suspected, and ordering an antibody titer may be warranted. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are also recommendations, and their serum levels should be intermittently measured. If the patient has bone pain refractory to calcitonin therapy, a CT scan or MRI can help to define the lesion better and determine whether surgical management should be a consideration.

**Hypercalcemia**

Calcitonin is FDA approved for the treatment of hypercalcemic emergencies. Complications of hypercalcemia include confusion, coma, dehydration, polyuria, kidney stones, nausea, constipation, pancreatitis, hypertension, and cardiac arrhythmias. Calcitonin addresses this problem by decreasing bone resorption of hydroxyapatite and increasing renal excretion of calcium. Since calcitonin is fast-acting, it is a viable therapeutic choice when a rapid decrease in calcium is needed.

Calcium initially lowers via rehydration with a saline solution, followed by co-administration of a bisphosphonate and calcitonin. Calcitonin administration is via IM or SubQ injection at a rate of 4 units/kg every 12 hours.