Specific clinical tests may also be useful for the diagnosis of lumbosacral disc injury. In a 2011 study by Suri et al., it was found that a combination of positive findings for the straight leg test and Achilles reflex test had a sensitivity of 79% for low lumbar nerve root impingement. They also reported how a positive straight leg test finding could be supplemented with a contralateral positive straight leg test, increasing the specificity (84% versus 96%) for lower lumbar disc herniations.

Evaluation of patients with low back typically includes anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the affected region of the spine. In addition, the evaluation of suspected lumbosacral disc injuries with associated “red-flags,” should result in an MRI for possible surgical planning. Examples of these red flags include:

- Cauda equina syndrome (issues controlling bowel/bladder; difficulty starting urination)

- Infection (high suspicion in intravenous (IV) drug user; history of fever; nighttime chills)

- Tumor suspected (Known history of cancer; new-onset weight loss)

- Trauma (fall; assault; collision)

It is worth noting that most patients presenting with classic symptoms consistent with an acute paraspinal or low lumbar muscle strain do not need radiographic imaging.  Persistent imaging or concerning examination findings can first begin with the aforementioned radiographs, with the possible addition of flexion/extension radiographs if segmental instability and/or spondylolisthesis are suspected.  An MRI should not be ordered at initial presentations of suspected acute disc herniations in patients lacking “red flags.” These patients will initially trail a six-week course of physical therapy and frequently improve, an MRI likely is an unnecessary financial and utilization burden in the initial presentation. If at follow-up the symptomology is still present, then an MRI can be obtained at that time. The focus should be directed to the T2 weighted sagittal and axial images as these will illustrate any compression of neurologic elements (**Figure 1**).

Over time, both symptomatic and asymptomatic disc herniations will decrease in size on MRI. The finding of disc disease (degeneration or herniation) on MRI does not correlate with the likelihood of chronic pain or future need for surgery.