**Simulation and Treatment Volumes**

Patients are simulated in the supine position with their arms raised above their head. Immobilization devices, such as a wing-board with a vacuum bag, can be used to support the arms and neck and replicate the same position during daily treatments. The head is turned up and away from the treated breast to remove the chin from the beam divergence.  The mastectomy scar is often delineated with a radio-opaque marker to make sure the entire scar is included in the radiation plan. The medial, lateral (mid-axillary line), superior (caudal edge of the clavicle), and inferior (1 to 2 cm below the inframammary line) field borders also can be delineated with a radio-opaque marker to guide initial beam placement. For patients with left-sided breast cancer, deep-inspiratory breath hold, a technique in which patients are instructed to hold their breath for 20 to 30 seconds at peak inspiration, can often increase the distance between the heart and chest wall, thus lowering the cardiac dose. If considering this technique, testing a patient’s ability to perform this exercise should be done at the time of simulation.

Several contouring atlases are available for chest wall and nodal delineation including the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)

**General volume delineation guidelines for the chest wall**

- The chest wall clinical target volume (CTV) should be contoured to the muscle-rib interface to include the pectoralis muscles and the entire scar plus margin. The cranial border extends to the caudal border of the clavicular head, and the caudal border is clinically determined based on markers placed at the time of simulation and using the contralateral breast as a guide. The lateral border typically extends to the mid-axillary line and medial border to the sternal-rib junction to avoid crossing midline.

-  If using image guidance during treatments, the chest wall planning target volume (PTV) is created by expanding the CTV by 0.5 cm. Otherwise, the CTV to PTV expansion ranges from 0.5 to 1 cm. To ensure chest wall dose, the PTV can extend into the ribs about 2 mm.

**General volume delineation guidelines for lymph nodes**

- Axillary levels 1 through 3 are demarcated relative to the pectoralis minor muscle and axillary vessels in which level 1 lies lateral and inferior, level 2 lies posterior, and level 3 lies superior-medial.

- The supraclavicular (SCV) lymph nodes lie superior to level 3 and commence just caudal to the cricoid cartilage. SVC nodes extend inferiorly to the caudal edge of the clavicular head, laterally to the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid or junction of the one rib with the clavicle and medially it excludes the thyroid and trachea.

-  If treating the internal mammary nodes with IMRT, the first three intercostal spaces should be contoured.

-  PTV for the lymph nodes is generated by expanding the CTV by 0.5 cm when using image guidance.

**Radiation Planning Technique**

Patient anatomy, target volume, dose constraints, and physician preference are used when determining the optimal radiation technique. A description of various radiation techniques is detailed below.

**3D conformation radiation therapy (3DCRT)**

The most commonly used treatment technique for PMRT is a forward-planned technique using photons called 3D conformation radiation therapy (3DCRT). The dosimetrist and radiation oncologist often use 3 to 5 beams to treat the chest wall and regional lymphatics. The dosimetrist and radiation oncologist work together to determine the best beam angle, field size, blocks, beam energy, and weighting to create a customized plan for each patient. The radiation field setup for a typical plan is discussed below:

- The chest wall is treated with two opposing tangential fields. The superior field edge of the tangential fields is often just below the clavicular head, which will be the inferior field edge of the supraclavicular field (discussed below). The tangents should be placed at an angle to avoid the contralateral breast and minimize dose to the heart and lungs, ideally with less than 1 cm (or no heart) in the field and less than 2 cm of the lung in the field.

- The supraclavicular and Level 3 lymph node volumes are treated with a single oblique anterior supraclavicular field is often angled 10 to 15 degrees away from the midline to avoid overlapping the spinal cord and esophagus. The acromioclavicular joint and part of the humeral head will be blocked out by the multileaf collimator. The energy of the beam can be adjusted so that the 45 Gray (Gy) line reaches to the posterior edge of the lymph node volumes. An optional posterior axillary “boost” field may be added to increase deep axillary coverage or to reduce hot spots from a single anterior field.

- The internal mammary chain can be covered using a direct matched electron or photon field. Alternatively, the tangents can be partially widened superiorly to cover the top three intercostal spaces encompassing the internal mammary nodes.

-  An even, non-divergent match line between the tangential chest wall beams and the anterior supraclavicular beam is generated by using a half-beam block (one isocenter technique) or by angling the couch (couch-kick) to create a horizontal match line between the tangential and supraclavicular field edges (two isocenter technique).

**Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)**

Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is generally considered when heart or lung dose-volume constraints with 3DCRT planning are not met. IMRT is an inverse planning technique using photons. This means that after the target and normal structures are contoured, the dosimetrist will enter the goals of coverage and limits to normal structures, and the radiation treatment planning system will run to optimize the plan. IMRT typically involves a greater number of beams compared to 3DCRT. Volumetric modulated therapy (VMAT), is the type of IMRT technique that employs continuous arcs during treatment.  While VMAT can be very conformal, it does result in the expansive spread of low dose to a larger volume of normal structures compared to a 3DCRT plan, due to the exit dose of the photon beam arc.

**Intensity-modulated proton therapy (IMPT)**

Protons are heavy ions that deposit the maximum dose at a specific distance in tissue (Bragg Peak), after which no dose is deposited into the tissue. In other words, there is no exit dose when using proton therapy resulting in possibly less dose to normal tissues and therefore has the potential to reduce long-term side effects. This is in contrast to photon beams that have both an entry and exit dose

Proton treatment planning involving the chest wall and lymphatics most commonly employs two enface proton beams to cover the targets. The treatment planning system will then optimize the plan and account for uncertainties pertaining to dose calibration using Hounsfield units (HU) and proton end range.

Comparison of conventional photon versus proton radiation in comprehensive breast irradiation is an area of ongoing research.  A nation-wide randomized trial, RADCOMP (NCT02603341), is actively accruing patients with locally advanced breast cancer who require RNI after either mastectomy or breast conservation surgery to receive either photon or proton therapy. The primary endpoint of this study is a reduction in major cardiovascular events at 10 years. Other endpoints to assess include long-term disease control, survival, and quality of live endpoints.

**Radiation Dosing and Fractionation**

Conventional dosing for PMRT is 50-50.4 Gy in 1.8-2.0 Gy per fraction (25-28 total fractions) to the chest wall and 45-50 Gy in 1.8-2.0 Gy per fraction (25 total fractions) to the regional lymph nodes. Hypofractionation, which involves giving a larger daily dose over a shorter period (fewer total fractions), is an active area of research in the post-mastectomy setting to reduce treatment costs and increase the convenience for patients. The Alliance group is currently evaluating the effect of hypofractionated PMRT in the setting of breast reconstruction with the primary endpoint being two-year reconstructive complication rate (NCT03414970).  In this study, patients with stage IIA-IIIA breast cancer who have undergone mastectomy and breast reconstruction are randomized to receive either standard daily radiation therapy for 5 to 6 weeks or daily radiotherapy given over a shortened course of 3 to 4 weeks. Further dose hypofractionation for postmastectomy radiation therapy is being explored in the United Kingdom (FAST-Forward). This phase III, multicenter, randomized controlled trial (FAST-Forward) is evaluating two different 5-fraction PMRT dosing regimens (27 Gy or 26 Gy in 5 fractions) compared to standard control (40.05 Gy in 15 fractions).

Since photons require tissue interaction to build up the dose, the dose at the skin surface is lower than the dose at the target. A chest wall bolus may be used to increase the skin dose for patients who have an increased risk of chest wall recurrence (i.e., large tumors, positive/close margins, inflammatory breast cancer). In general, a 0.5 cm tissue equivalent bolus can be used every other day to increase the skin to 85% of prescription dose, or in cases of inflammatory breast cancer, a daily bolus can be used to ensure skin dose reaches 95% of the prescribed dose. Alternatively, a single sheet of brass bolus (2-sheet thickness for inflammatory/T4 tumors) can be used daily and is equivalent to 0.5 cm tissue equivalent bolus every other day.  A mastectomy scar boost to 10 to 16 Gy in 5 to 8 fractions is considered in the presence of close (less than 2 mm) or positive margins, and for inflammatory breast cancer, however, a boost is generally avoided in patients planned for reconstruction if they don’t have other risk factors for recurrence.

**Plan Evaluation**

Radiation oncologists work with dosimetrists to customize the plan to the patient’s anatomy and targets using the options listed above. The radiation oncologist then evaluates the plan to assess the adequacy of target coverage while minimizing the dose to lung, heart, and other nearby tissue using the dose-value recommendations.