Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed organ cancer in men and the second leading cause of male cancer death in the United States.

According to the American Cancer Society, relatively few patients with prostate cancer die of the disease, although this still amounts to 268,490 new cases diagnosed and an estimated 34,500 deaths in the United States in 2022.

- Prostate cancer occurs more commonly in the developed world.

- The overall 5-year survival rate is 99% in the United States.

- The overall incidence has increased, although the death rate has slowly decreased since 1992 when PSA testing became widely available.

- Ninety-nine percent of all prostate cancers occur in those over the age of 50, but it can be quite aggressive when it occurs in younger men.

- In the United States, prostate cancer is much more common in African Americans at more than double the rate of the general population.

- It is less common in men of Asian and Hispanic descent than in Whites.

The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that the countries with the highest incidence of prostate cancer are Guadaloupe, Martinique, Ireland, Barbados, St. Lucia, Estonia, Puerto Rico, France, Sweden, and the Bahamas. The incidence is highest in Guadaloupe at 184/100,000 which drops down to 98/100,000 in the Bahamas compared to the worldwide average rate of 30.7 per 100,000. The US is rated 14th. The lowest incidence is reported in Asian countries.

The highest mortality rates for prostate cancer are reported by the WHO in Grenada, Zimbabwe, Barbados, Haiti, Zambia, Jamaica, Trinidad/Tobago, Bahamas, the Dominican Republic, St. Lucia, and the Ivory Coast. Within this group, the mortality rate ranges from 80/100,000 in Grenada to 30/100,000 in the Ivory Coast. This is compared to the worldwide average mortality rate of 7.7 per 100,000. The mortality rate in the US is 11.46 per 100,000 which is ranked 126th. The lowest reported mortality rate from prostate cancer is in Nepal and Yeman at <1 per 100,000.

Prostate cancer incidence is generally higher in developed countries and is least common in Asian men living in Asia. When Asians come to live in the United States, their incidence of prostate cancer increases but it remains lower than the overall risk for the general population of American men.

- In Europe, prostate cancer is the third most diagnosed cancer after breast and colorectal.

- In the United Kingdom, it is the second most common cause of male cancer death after lung cancer, similar to the situation in the United States.

- The World Health Organization reports that Sweden, where they do very few PSA tests and tend to be less aggressive in treating prostate cancer, has a mortality rate that is about 2.5 times the rate in the United States. This makes prostate cancer the number one cause of cancer mortality in Swedish men, even exceeding deaths from lung cancer.

More than 80% of men will develop prostate cancer by age 80. However, it will probably be slow-growing, lower grade, relatively harmless, and have little impact on their survival in this age group.

In 2015, there were an estimated 3 million prostate cancer survivors in the United States. This is expected to increase to 4 million by 2025.

Prostate cancer is uncommon in men younger than 45 years (0.5% of all newly diagnosed prostate cancer cases), but the incidence is increasing in most countries worldwide. The reasons for this include prior underdiagnosis, the increase in PSA screenings, and overdiagnosis. Other risk factors that may be contributing include recent trends of increased obesity, metabolic syndrome, physical inactivity, HPV infections, substance and chemical exposures, environmental carcinogenic exposures, and changing referral patterns.

According to the National Cancer Institute (NCI), every American man has a lifetime risk of 11.6% of developing clinically significant prostate cancer (Gleason 3+4=7 or higher). For 2020, they reported 174,650 new cases of prostate cancer and 31,620 deaths in the United States.

- The majority of new cases are diagnosed in men from 65 to 74 years of age (38.2%), with a median age at diagnosis of 66 years.

- There are currently 3,085,209 men living in the United States with prostate cancer, and the overall risk of an individual male dying from prostate cancer is 1 in 39 or about 2.6%.

- The median age of death for those men dying of prostate cancer is 80 years.

- Overall, the vast majority of men with prostate cancer will die from unrelated problems.

- About 20% of men diagnosed with prostate cancer will ultimately die from cardiovascular disease.

- The cardiovascular risk appears to be increased by androgen deprivation therapy.

- In the United States, Kentucky has the highest incidence and mortality rate from prostate cancer.

**Effect of the 2012 United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Negative Recommendation on Routine PSA Screening**

Since the USPSTF recommendation against routine PSA screenings in 2012, there have been a number of consistent changes in the clinical and pathological characteristics of prostate cancer, as reported in August 2018. These findings include the following:

- A drop in the diagnosed incidence of low-grade prostate cancer. Low-grade disease (Gleason 3+3=6 or lower) dropped from 30.1% before 2012 to 17.1%.

- An increase in intermediate and high-grade disease; High-grade disease (Gleason 4+4=8 or higher) increased from 6.2% before 2012 to 17.5%.

- 24% increase in the number of patients identified with PSA levels over 10 ng/ml from 8.5% before 2012 to 13.2% after.

- Patients identified with PSA levels over 20 ng/ml increased 44% overall, from 2.4% before 2012 to 4.2% after.

- The incidence of seminal vesicle invasion, lymph node involvement, and positive surgical margins also increased after 2012.

- In particular, the incidence of lymph node involvement more than doubled after 2012 to 7.5%.

These findings are not unexpected given the reduced number of PSA screenings and the adoption of active surveillance regimens for lower-risk cancers.

**Ethnicity**

Mortality statistics for prostate cancer are very ethnic-dependent, with African Americans having the highest incidence and mortality rates, far exceeding the levels for the general population.

In the largest available study in the VA system involving almost 8 million veterans, it was found that African American men tended to have higher PSA levels, develop cancer earlier, and were almost twice as likely to have a diagnosis of prostate cancer as Whites.

According to 2022 estimates from the American Cancer Society, prostate cancer is the most common organ cancer in African American men. It accounts for about 37% of all cancers in male African Americans (41,600 individuals) and 17% of all cancer-related deaths. This rate is 72% higher in African Americans than in Whites. The overall lifetime risk of developing or dying from prostate cancer is 1:6 in African Americans compared to 1:8 in Whites. The overall prostate cancer-specific death rate is more than double in the African American male population (37.9 vs. 17.8 per 100,000). The good news is that the prostate cancer death rate is dropping even faster for African Americans than for Whites or the general population.

Prostate cancer mortality rates calculated as deaths/100,000 population from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) databases are as follows:

- 42.0: Blacks

- 20.1: General Population

- 19.4: American Indians

- 18.7: Whites (Caucasians)

- 16.5: Hispanics

-   8.8: Asians