The components of the CBP machine include the following:

- Venous cannula

- Arterial cannula

- Oxygenator

- Reservoir container

- Pumps

- Tubing

- Heat exchanger

- Cardiotomy suckers

- Cardiac Vents and

- Adjuncts such as the level detector, arterial line pressure meter, arterial line bubble trap and filter, cardioplegia line pressure meter, gas line filter, gas flow meter, and one-way valves on cardiac vents.

The circuit is constructed using the components. The CPB circuit (heart-lung machine) is a bit complex; the best way to understand it is to look at it step-by-step rather than looking at the whole picture at once (Figure 1).

- The circuit starts at the right heart side, where all/part of the venous return is drawn into the reservoir via a venous cannula(s). This happens passively by gravity, relying on the difference in height between the patient and the reservoir.

- The blood is then driven via a systemic blood pump or the main pump into the oxygenator, which oxygenates the blood and transforms it into usable blood.

- The next step is returning this blood to the patient, but not all of it will return to the same place. The blood instead is split into two. The normal (oxygenated) blood goes back to the patient via the aortic cannula, which is penetrated by the surgeon in the distal ascending aorta. The cardioplegic blood (oxygenated and with cardioplegia solution added) returns to the patient more proximal on the ascending aorta via the aortic root cannula. This portion of the blood is delivered via a separate pump (the cardioplegia pump) and separately adjusted regarding temperature and pressure.

- Later, when CPB is complete and the heart function is no longer needed to eject blood into the body, an aortic cross-clamp is applied to the proximal aorta. By separating both compartments, the heart will receive only cardioplegic blood, and the body will receive only normal blood (NB).

The rest of the circuit consists of the suckers/vents (Figure 1: violet) and the oxygenator suppliers (Figure 1: green) as follows:

**Suckers**

Cardiotomy suckers all receive blood from the patient and return it to the reservoir to support the circuit as described are

**Vents**

Left ventricular vents (aortic root, RSVP [right superior pulmonary vein], apical, pulmonary) follow the same pattern as suckers with one addition of one-way vent valves to prevent adverse pumping of air into the heart

**Oxygenator Suppliers**

This refers to a gas or water heat exchanger; the former allows the blood to be oxygenated hence substituting the function of the lung, while the latter enables the blood to warm or cool to achieve myocardial protection.

This supreme innovative design of the circuit allows a surgeon to do the following: Empty the heart, stop its beating using cardioplegic blood, stop the lungs and substitute it with the oxygenator, and perfuse the rest of the body with normally oxygenated blood. Hence one achieves a bloodless, still field suitable to perform open heart surgery.

**Arterial Cannulas**

Types:The aortic cannula must be safe to insert smoothly (atraumatic tip and surface) with no high-pressure gradient jet at the tip that could dislodge atheromatous plaques and be of the suitable size to allow sufficient flow. Various designs of arterial cannulas are available for use. There is nothing termed as the best cannula; each cannula enjoys specific features that suit a particular situation, all cannulas are used in practice, and it is up to the surgeon to assess the situation and decide which to use. The following is a brief description of some of the features and their values.

- Right-angled - prevents perforating the posterior wall of the aorta. However, it can selectively perfuse an arch branch.

- Straight - prevents selective arch vessel perfusion. However, it can penetrate the posterior wall of the aorta.

- Beveled tip - easier insertion; however, it has a higher pressure gradient delivered at the tip.

- Diffusion tip - less pressure gradient allows better perfusion of arch branches yet is slightly more difficult.

- Wire reinforced - allows higher flow for a smaller size cannula and also more immune to iatrogenic dissection.

- Flanges - hemostatic as well as act as anchor points for the purse strings.

Sites and techniques:

Arterial cannulation can be classified as one of the following:

- Central (aorta, LV apex)

- Peripheral (axillary, subclavian, innominate, femoral)

Central cannulation has plenty of value, making it the most commonly used site in practice (Table 1); however, unfortunately, it becomes less favored in certain circumstances, such as the following brief examples:

Aortic arch surgery - Surgeons in the past cannulated the ascending aorta first to achieve a hypothermic circulatory arrest. They then would take out the cannula and reinsert it into the carotid artery to provide antegrade cerebral perfusion. Auxillary artery cannulation can accomplish both with the same cannula hence reducing manipulation and time.

Aortic Aneurysm surgery - Sometimes the aorta is dilated or aneurysmal, and there is a risk of rupture during a sternotomy; thus, using peripheral cannulation first on bypass before opening the chest could be a safer option.

Aortic Dissections - The whole aorta could sometimes be obscured by the false lumen.

Redo Surgeries - Again, sternotomy could entail risks. Thus peripheral cannulation is safer in some circumstances

Minimal invasive surgeries - Avoid the need for standard midline sternotomy altogether.

(Table 1: Sites of arterial cannulation)

(Table 2: Peripheral cannulation sites)

**Venous Cannulas**

Types:Venous cannulas must be easy to insert, of sufficient size to enable acceptable drainage, pliable, and resistant to kinking. Various types of cannulas have been designed to achieve this purpose. Unlike the aortic cannulas, where the different types of cannulas serve more or less the same purpose and could be used almost in all sites, venous cannula designs were made to serve different sites/techniques of venous cannulations.

- Two-stage is used in cavoatrial venous cannulation.

- One stage is used in selective bicaval cannulation indirectly.

- One-stage right-angled is used in selective bicaval cannulation direct (avoids back wall abutting and block).

- Ross basket is the safest regarding IVC tear, has maximum drainage, and is used for right atrial venous cannulation.

Sites and techniques:(Table 3: Venous cannulation)

**Normal Blood**

Selective cannulation has the following values:

- In right-side surgery (tricuspid, pulmonary), complete total CPB is a must.

- In mitral valve surgery, complete decompression of the right side is a must.

- In CABG decompressing the right heart, better visualization, and better protection (controversy).

Cavo-atrial cannulation has the following values:

- Easiest, fastest

- Least liable for complications

- Few studies suggest partial CPB is more protective of the lungs as compared to total CPB (controversy)

**Oxygenators**

The role of the oxygenator is by far the most important. It enables stopping the lung and consequently stopping the heart. Essentially, there are two types of oxygenators (Table 4).

**Reservoir Container**

The reservoir enables managing the chemical and electrolyte contents and allows direct and accurate assessment of the drainage. Two types of containers exist (Table 5).

**Pumps**

See Table 6: Two Types of Pumps

**Tubes**

All tubes are made of PVC (polyvinyl chloride), which is non-allergic, non-mutagenic, non-toxic, and non-immunogenic. Also, it must be pliable, flexible, and transparent. The venous tube is 1/2 inch (12 mm); the arterial tube is 3/8 inch (8 mm); the vents and suckers are 1/4 inch (6 mm).