There exists a dearth of studies on the prognosis of patients suffering ongoing manganese exposure and of patients who have successfully removed themselves from exposure after the development of toxicity. What little literature exists suggests that, with removal from source exposure, recovery in some neuropsychiatric arenas is possible while improbable in others.  Bouchard et al. followed a group of workers exposed to Mn over the course of a decade and a half and observed signs of recovery approximately 14 years after their documented exposure. Specific deficits that remained included poor performance on simple and alternating movements, drawing ability, and diminished hand stability.

As previously mentioned, older patients who are exposed to Mn often develop more significant toxicity than younger patients, owing to possible pre-exposure neurological degenerative changes. This is postulated to lead to the observed age-related cognitive deficits that persist after Mn exposures cease. Research by Bouchard et al. in 2005 showed that individuals who were exposed that were at least greater than or equal to 45 years old had persistent cognitive deficits after cessation of toxic exposure to Mn.

In another follow-up study by Roels et al., workers from a battery manufacturing plant were followed for eight years after cessation of Mn exposure. Variables measured included hand steadiness and reaction time. Analysis of their cohort yielded no improved steadiness of the hands and no improvement in reaction time.  The group did, however, observe an improvement in hand-forearm movements beyond that of their baseline, which suggested some partial recovery from their toxicity.

The trend following cessation of Mn exposure appears to be that of mostly recovery, with residual deficits remaining in the behavioral and neurologic domains. This lends credence to the mainstay of therapy, which is to abstain from any further activity, which puts individuals at risk for further toxicity. Overall, the prognosis is more related to morbidity than mortality and is overall favorable once removed from the exposure setting. More research will be needed to further delineate the expected course, especially with the addition of new treatment modalities such as supplementation and chelators.