Primary bone cancer is a malignant tumor of the connective tissue with mesenchymal origin. The World Health Organisation (WHO) determined six categories: chondrogenic, osteogenic, notochordal, vascular, other malignant mesenchymal, and miscellaneous (including Ewing sarcoma). The pathophysiology varies considerably between groups and, in some cases, is poorly understood.

Osteosarcoma is a highly malignant osteogenic tumor that can develop in any bone. It tends to develop near the metaphysis of long bones in young patients. The most common sites are the distal femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus, with high bone turnover. In adults, the axial skeleton is more common, where previous irradiation or metabolic disease of the bone is often associated. Common genetic changes are not present to explain the growth of this tumor type; however, 70% of cases demonstrate some level of chromosomal abnormality. Alterations in p53, Rb1, and DNA repair/surveillance genes are present in patients with Li-Fraumeni, Bloom, and Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, all linked to increased rates of osteosarcoma.

Chondrosarcoma is primarily a disease of adults, most frequently diagnosed between 30 to 60 years. They are generally slow-growing chondrogenic tumors of intermediate malignancy, rarely metastasizing. Chondrosarcoma arising de novo are classified as primary (>85% of cases), with those arising from pre-existing benign osteochondromas or enchondromas as secondary. The most common site for diagnosis is in the long bones of the appendicular skeleton. Flat bones can also be affected, including the pelvis, ribs, and scapula. The exact pathogenesis of chondrosarcoma is not known, though multiple genes are implicated. Cytogenic studies have identified structural and numerical chromosomal abnormalities. Gene mutations in EXT1/2, TP53, Rb1, and IDH1/2 have also been linked to malignant transformation in benign lesions.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive tumor of childhood and adolescence, most commonly occurring in the bone but also seen in soft tissues. The peak incidence is at 15 years, and the male to female ratio is 1.5:1. The most frequent sites involved are long bones in the lower limb, pelvic bones, and the axial skeleton (ribs and vertebral column). Ewing sarcoma characteristically develops at the diaphysis, in contrast to the pattern seen in osteosarcoma. Ewing sarcoma is genetically well described, with characteristic chromosomal translocations identified. The translocation leads to fusing a FET protein to an ETS transcription factor, most commonly FLI1 (>85% of cases). The result is the formation of fusion proteins that act to deregulate downstream genes, altering cell behavior.