Computerized tomography (CT) is usually the initial investigation.

In the subacute phase, the hematoma may be isodense to brain tissue, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be necessary. The volume of the hematoma can be measured by the formula AxBxC/2, where A and B are the largest diameter and the diameter perpendicular to that.

Extravasation of contrast in CT angiogram (CTA) indicates ongoing bleeding associated with fatality.

Certain imaging characteristics help in the differentiation of the underlying disease.

- Multiple hemorrhages of different ages in parieto-occipital lobes are seen in cerebral amyloid antipathy.

- Hemorrhage in an arterial territory indicates hemorrhagic infarction.

- Multiple stages of bleed in the same hematoma with a fluid level are seen in anticoagulation-induced hemorrhages.

- A combination of small ischemic and hemorrhagic lesions indicates vasculitis.

- Hemorrhage in the presence of occlusion of arteries is the feature of Moyamoya disease.

Four-vessel digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is necessary in the case of SAH. A repeat study is needed to confirm if the DSA is negative for an aneurysm. Repeat angiography is advisable at 1-week and 6-weeks intervals.

Vascular abnormalities need to be suspected if the following findings are present on a plain CT scan:

- Subarachnoid hemorrhage

- Enlarged vessels or calcifications along the margins of the ICH

- Hyperattenuation within a dural venous sinus

- A cortical vein along the presumed venous drainage path

- Unusual hematoma shape

- Presence of edema out of proportion to the time of presumed ICH

- An unusual hemorrhage location

- Presence of other abnormal structures in the brain (like a mass)

An additional MRI scan will be beneficial in the following circumstances to identify a secondary cause for ICH:

- Lobar hemorrhage location

- Age <55 years, and

- No history of hypertension

Magnetic resonance venography or CT venography is indicated based on the following conditions that suggest cerebral venous thrombosis:

- Hemorrhage location

- Relative edema volume

- Abnormal signal in the cerebral sinuses

Blood investigations such as bleeding time, clotting time, platelet count, peripheral smear, prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial thromboplastin time(aPTT) will detect any abnormality of bleeding or coagulation and any hematological disorder which can cause hemorrhage. Liver function tests and renal function tests are also needed to exclude any hepatic or renal dysfunction as a cause. The investigations to rule out vasculitis are the quantitative evaluation of immunoglobulins, thyroid antibodies, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA antibodies), Histon antibodies, complement, anti-Ro [SS-A] and anti-La [SS-B-] antibodies, cytoplasmic staining and perinuclear staining antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c- and pANCA), and anti-endothelial antibodies.