There is a concern among clinicians of the accuracy of the Rule of Nines pertaining to the obese and pediatric populations. The Rule of Nines can be best used in patients greater than 10 kilograms and less than 80 kilograms if defined by BMI as less than obese. For infants and obese patients special consideration should be take as outlined below:

**Obese Patients**

- Patients that are defined as obese by BMI have disproportionately large trunks compared to their non-obese counterparts.

- Obese patients have a closer approximation to 50% TBSA of the trunk, 15% TBSA for each leg, 7% TBSA for each arm, and 6% TBSA for the head.

- Android-shaped patients, defined as a preferential trunk and upper body distribution of adipose tissue (abdomen, chest, shoulders, and the nape of the neck), have a torso that is closer to 53% TBSA.

- Gynecoid-shaped patients, defined as a preferential lower body distribution of adipose tissue (lower abdomen, pelvis, and thighs), have a torso that is closer to 48% TBSA.

- As the degree of obesity increases, the degree of underestimation of truncal and leg TBSA burn involvement increases when adhering to the Rule of Nines.

**Infants**

- Infants have proportionately larger heads which alters the surface area contribution of other major body segments.

- A "Rule of Eights" better approximates infants weighing less than 10 kg." This rule dictates approximately 32% TBSA for the patient's trunk, 20% TBSA for the head, 16% TBSA for each leg, and 8% TBSA for each arm.

Despite the efficiency of the Rule of Nines and its penetrance into the surgical and emergency medicine specialties, studies show that at 25% TBSA, 30% TBSA, and 35% TBSA, percentage TBSA is overestimated by 20% when compared to computer-based applications. Overestimation of TBSA burned can lead to excessive intravenous fluid resuscitation giving the potential for volume overload and pulmonary edema with more cardiac demand. Patients with pre-existing comorbidities are at risk for acute cardiac and respiratory decompensation and should be monitored in the intensive care unit (ICU) during the aggressive fluid resuscitation phase, preferably in a burn center.