**X-Ray Basics, Design and Function**

The basics of the C-arm fluoroscopic machine include an X-ray tube mounted below an image intensifier which is connected via a supportive C arm-shaped structure, hence its name. This allows for the apparatus to be situated directly above the patient and generate accurate anatomic images. It also allows the imaging apparatus to be mobile and easily change positions, facilitating its functionality in a fluoroscopic suite. Providers may obtain necessary views in any anatomic plane in a relatively simple manner. Ionizing radiation is utilized to generate a functional image in real-time during fluoroscopic procedures to guide diagnostic and therapeutic intervention.

An electrical current is used to generate X-rays from the X-ray tube via the creation of electrons directed at a tungsten anode which then converts the electrical energy and emits X-rays.

However, increasing amperage (mA) darkens the image and improves contrast but directly correlates with X-ray production and subsequent exposure.

Radiation exposure comes from 3 major sources in the fluoroscopic suite, including the primary X-ray beam and leakage and scattered X-ray beams.

Manufacturers are aware of the elevated risk of exposure to harmful emitted X-rays and have considered this during the development of their machinery. Several mechanisms and structural designs exist to help decrease the risk of exposure. For example, the primary X-ray beam is relatively focused and controlled off of the tungsten anode from which it is emitted since the anode is properly angulated and positioned. However, to further control and direct the primary beam, metal filters usually made of either copper or aluminum are utilized to absorb low-frequency X-rays before exiting the X-ray tube.

Collimation is also utilized to design the X-ray fluoroscopic machine, which helps to narrow and direct the primary X-ray beam out of the X-ray tube, usually via an iris-shaped lens. This decreases the amount of patient tissue exposed to scattered radiation, decreases occupational exposure to scattered radiation to healthcare personnel, and improves image quality.