Over the years, a gradual paradigm shift has occurred from placing sepsis on the shoulders of clinicians to the incorporation of more objective parameters. While it is unquestionably a clinical diagnosis and cannot be defined by merely diagnostic assays without the clinician's recognition of signs, prompt identification of uniform clinical criteria became increasingly important.

As newer inroads were made at the end of the 20th century in the complex pathophysiology, etiology, and pharmacotherapy targets, the need for early diagnosis and intervention became obvious to make an impact on mortality and morbidity. The recognition of the continuum from early inflammation to multiorgan dysfunction added more incentive. Thus was born the necessity to diagnose systemic inflammatory response syndrome both in the backdrop of infection and in noninfectious stress where the body later becomes susceptible to a secondary infection.

The establishment of clinical criteria was where the initial endeavor lay. Thus were born APACHE score, SIRS score, SOFA and q SOFA score, LOD score. Each one of them evolved with an intent to find a simpler, easily applicable prompt scoring system that can be used in any clinical setting to predict

- Identification of sepsis

- Risk of organ dysfunction

- In-hospital mortality

If the etiology of SIRS is identified early, investigations are individualized to the organ in focus. In the absence of an apparent source, a time-sensitive search for infectious sources becomes a priority. Health care facilities across US and society guidelines endorse a routine collection of specimens from blood, sputum, urine, and any other obvious wound for culture within the first hour of assessment and before initiation of antimicrobial therapy.

Depending on the severity of the presentation, routine investigations involve periodic evaluation of basic metabolic panel and lactic acid level to assess the extent of end-organ injury and perfusion impairment.

With time, there has also been an emerging discussion in the community about the importance of distinguishing sepsis earlier in SIRS with the help of biomarkers, even before microbial cultures come positive.

Biomarkers also become important in identifying SIRS due to secondary infection in patients who were initially admitted with a noninfectious etiology, e.g., trauma or burns, or for a planned surgical intervention. Mere clinical criteria are not enough to capture the change in etiopathogenesis midway through hospitalization.

**Procalcitonin (PCT)**

A glycoprotein precursor of calcitonin, procalcitonin is produced by C cells of the thymus and also from leukocytes, liver, kidney, adipose, and muscle tissue.

Research has mostly focused on the utility of procalcitonin in differentiating infectious from an infectious cause of SIRS and its value in serial assessment to determine the duration of antimicrobial therapy. Kibe et al. showed a favorability for procalcitonin over CRP in the diagnosis and prognosis of sepsis but only in conjunction with clinical parameters.

Selberg et al., in their study, demonstrated that plasma concentrations of procalcitonin (PCT), C3a, and IL-6 obtained up to 8 hours after the clinical onset of sepsis or SIRS were significantly higher in patients with infectious etiologies. PCT, IL-6, and C3a were more reliable in distinguishing SIRS from sepsis.

**Lactate**

Lactic acid elevation can be a**type A lactic acidosis**with excessive production from tissue hypoperfusion-related anaerobic metabolism or**type B lactic acidosis**from inadequate clearance due to liver dysfunction. The use of epinephrine as a vasopressor agent can also lead to excessive lactate production due to the alteration of the pyruvate cycle.

**Interleukin 6**

An IL-6 level of greater than 300 pg/ml correlates with an increased incidence of MODS and death. Similarly, a reduction in level by the second day of antimicrobial therapy has been shown to be a positive prognostic sign.

**Leptin**

Serum Leptin levels above a cutoff of 38 mcg/L correlate serum levels of IL-6 and TNF-alpha and help in differentiating between infectious and noninfectious causes of SIRS with a sensitivity of 91.2% and a specificity of 85%.

**Endothelial Markers**

Angiopoietin 1 and 2 are ligands for the Tie-2 receptor in endothelial cells. There is increased binding of Angiopoietin 2 (Ang-2) with Tie-2 receptor, triggering microvascular thrombosis and capillary permeability during acute inflammation. The circulating levels of Ang- 2 appear to correlate with 28-day mortality in SIRS and severity scores like APACHE and SOFA.

**Emerging Biomarkers**

Other emerging biomarkers in research to distinguish septic and non-septic etiology of SIRS include triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1 (TREM-1), Decoy receptor 3 (DcR3) (belongs to the tumor necrosis factor family), and suPAR (soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor).

**Transcriptome Analysis**

There has been an emerging idea behind SIRS pathophysiology in recent years suggesting immune dysregulation as a key phenomenon than a mere inflammatory surge in SIRS and sepsis. Utilizing high-throughput sequencing of cDNAs from mononuclear cells, a genetic profile of endotoxin tolerance (called endotoxin tolerance signature or ETS) has been identified, which is expressed more often in septic patients and was more commonly associated with organ failure and disease severity. Thus, it may provide an opportunity to identify a subpopulation of septic patients early for ICU admission and intensive therapy impacting mortality and morbidity.