Three modes of the disease have been described for ocular tuberculosis:

- Direct ocular infection from an exogenous source, e.g., contact with the lids or conjunctiva (primary ocular TB).

- Hematogenous spread of M. tuberculosis from a pulmonary focus or extrapulmonary site (secondary ocular TB).

- Hypersensitivity reaction in structures of the eye after exposure to TB antigens.

The most common form of ocular involvement is hematogenous spread from pulmonary TB. Seeding may occur from primary infection or the reactivation of a dormant lesion.

M. tuberculosis spreads by aerosolized droplets. Airborne bacteria are inhaled into the respiratory alveoli, where they encounter alveolar macrophages. About 90% of these infected individuals never develop clinical disease and remain asymptomatic (latent TB). In the remaining 10%, about 5% will develop the disease within the first few years of exposure. The last 5% may develop symptoms several years later as host immunity wanes.

Alveolar macrophages phagocytize the bacteria and release cytokines to recruit circulating monocytes to the site of infection, but M. tuberculosis escapes eradication by inhibiting fusion of the macrophage phagolysosome. This allows the bacteria to proliferate in nonactivated and partly-activated macrophages. Eventually, bacteria-laden macrophages disseminate into the lymphatics and venous circulation through erosions in the alveolar epithelium and migrate to oxygen-rich regions of the body, such as the lung apex, various organs, and the eye.