Initial post-cholecystectomy syndrome workup would usually include:

- Complete blood count (CBC) to eliminate infectious etiologies

- Complete metabolic panel (CMP), amylase, lipase, and prothrombin time (PT) to evaluate for possible hepatobiliary or pancreatic diseases

- A blood gas analysis if the patient is acutely toxic appearing

If the above are within reference ranges, repeating these studies when symptoms are present should be considered. Also, other laboratory studies may be indicated to rule out other etiologies including gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), hepatitis panel, thyroid function, and cardiac enzymes.

Radiographic studies should also be pursued with chest radiography to screen for pulmonary and mediastinal conditions. Abdominal films should also be obtained in most cases. An abdominal ultrasound is a quick, inexpensive and noninvasive method to evaluate the hepatobiliary system, pancreas, and surrounding areas. Common bile duct (CBD) dilation of up to 10mm is normal, while dilation exceeding 10mm, in most cases, is diagnostic of obstruction distally suggestive of retained stone, CBD stricture, or ampullary stenosis. Computed tomography (CT) can assist in identifying pancreatitis or complications from pancreatitis such as pseudocysts. Nuclear imaging such as a hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan may demonstrate a biliary leak or help identify sphincter of Oddi dysfunction as a potential cause although differentiation between stenosis and dyskinesia is difficult. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is a valuable tool for determining which patients would require endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP); the use of EUS aided in reducing the number of patients who received ERCP by 50% and may be useful in identifying cystic remnant stones.