**FDA Indications**

- Cytokine release syndrome (Severe or life-threatening, CAR T-Cell therapy)

- Chimeric antigen receptor T cell-induced, patients ≥2 years old

- Giant cell arteritis

- Adult patients
- 
Stone JH et al. conducted a clinical trial where 251 patients were randomly assigned treatment with tocilizumab weekly or every other week given subcutaneously at a dose of 162 mg, which was combined with a 26-week tapering of prednisone, or placebo combined with a tapering of prednisone over 26 weeks or 52 weeks. The primary outcome of the clinical trial was the measurement of prednisone-free remission at week 52 in each tocilizumab cohort which was compared with the placebo cohort undergoing the 26-week tapering of prednisone. The secondary outcome of the clinical trial was the rate of remission in each tocilizumab group compared with the placebo group that participated in the 52-week prednisone taper. Long-term use of prednisone can cause undesirable side effects, e.g., Cushing syndrome. Therefore, drugs that can maintain immunosuppression of the disease while decreasing the need for prednisone could help treat patients with giant cell arteritis. The researchers observed sustained immunosuppressive activity at 52 weeks in weekly treatment of tocilizumab in 56% of the patients and 53% of patients treated with tocilizumab every other week. Not surprising the placebo cohorts had much less sustained remissions. In the 26-week of prednisone tapering cohort receiving placebo, 14% of the patients demonstrated sustained immunosuppressive activity, and in the 52-week of prednisone tapering cohort receiving placebo, 18% of the patients demonstrated sustained immunosuppressive activity. Tocilizumab versus placebo in both the 26- and 52-week treatment cohorts were found to be statistically significant. Stone JH et al. concluded in the study that tocilizumab sustained immunosuppressive activity while tapering the dose of prednisone was clinically better than prednisone tapering receiving placebo.

- Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis

- Patients ≥2 years old
- 
Brunner H. et al. conducted a 2-year clinical trial on patients (ages: 2 to 17) with systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis with tocilizumab treatment who did not respond to methotrexate therapy. The trial was divided into three parts. In part 1 (N = 188), patients received tocilizumab every four weeks at a dose of 8 or 10 mg/kg depending on body weight. In part 2 (N = 166), patients who responded well to treatment (based on JIA-ACR30 response, i.e., 30% improvement) at week 16 were randomly assigned continued tocilizumab treatment or placebo until week 40. In part 3 (N = 160), all patients received treatment with tocilizumab. At week 104, tocilizumab efficacy was assessed using the JIA-ACR50/70/90 response criteria, i.e., 50%, 70%, or 90% improvement. Brunner H. et al. concluded that tocilizumab provided therapeutic efficacy.

- Rheumatoid arthritis (Moderate to severe)

- Adults experiencing poor management with disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) treatment
- 
Finzel S. et al. conducted a prospective observational clinical trial that was not randomized in 66 patients with rheumatoid arthritis who received either combination therapy of methotrexate/adalimumab (N = 33) or monotherapy of tocilizumab (N =33). Bone erosion volumes were measured in metacarpal heads and the radius by CT scan at baseline and after 52 weeks. Methotrexate/adalimumab and tocilizumab treatments both reduced bone erosion in the metacarpal heads and radius. In fact, Finzel S. et al. concluded that tocilizumab monotherapy demonstrated better repair of existing bone erosions as compared with the combination treatment of methotrexate/adalimumab.

- Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis

- Patients ≥2 years old

- Systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease

- Decrease the rate of decline of pulmonary lung function in adults

**Non-FDA Indications**

- SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)

- The Infectious Diseases Society of America recommends treatment with tocilizumab and a glucocorticoid, e.g., dexamethasone, in hospitalized adults with declining blood oxygen saturation levels, e.g., pulse oximetry ≤94%, and patients on mechanical ventilation or oxygenation with signs of increased systemic inflammation, e.g., C-reactive protein.
- The National Institutes of Health recommends treatment with tocilizumab and a glucocorticoid, e.g., dexamethasone, in hospitalized patients with rapidly declining pulmonary function. For example, hospitalized patients who are candidates for intensive care unit (ICU) admission and require mechanical ventilation or oxygenation, or hospitalized patients with a rapidly declining pulmonary function requiring ventilation or oxygenation with signs of increased systemic inflammation.
- A clinical trial by Gordon et al. observed that ICU COVID-19 pneumonia patients had improved clinical outcomes, including survival with Tocilizumab treatment.
- A clinical trial by Salama C. et al. observed that hospitalized COVID-19 pneumonia patients who were not on mechanical ventilation, Tocilizumab treatment reduced the risk of progression to mechanical ventilation or death. However, it did not increase patient survival.

- Cytokine release syndrome (Severe or life-threatening, BiTE therapy)

- Tocilizumab may effectively treat adult and pediatric patients with cytokine release syndrome caused by bi-specific T-cell engaging (BiTE) cancer therapy.