Managing diphenoxylate/atropine overdose requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes nursing, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and clinicians/mid-level practitioners in different specialties. Without proper management, the morbidity and mortality from diphenoxylate/atropine overdose are high. The moment the triage nurse obtains a history of suspected diphenoxylate/atropine overdose, the emergency department clinician and the assigned nurse are responsible for coordinating the care, which includes the following:

- Ordering and obtaining drug levels in the serum and or urine

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression.

- Consider treatments to help limit the absorption of the drug in the body.

- Consult with the pharmacist about the use of activated charcoal and naloxone.

- Consult with a toxicologist and nephrologist on further management, which may include dialysis.

- Consult with the radiologist about imaging tests to ensure that the patient has not swallowed any drug packages.

- Consult with the intensivist about ICU care and monitoring while in hospital.

The management of diphenoxylate/atropine overdose does not stop in the emergency department. Once the patient stabilizes, one has to determine how and why the patient overdosed. Consult with a mental health counselor if this was an intentional act and assess risk factors for-self harm. Further, the possibility of addiction and withdrawal symptoms have to be a consideration. Only by working as an interprofessional team can the morbidity of diphenoxylate/atropine overdose be decreased. Initial short-term data reveal that the use of naloxone can be life-saving. The long-term outcomes for detoxification and drug rehabilitation remain guarded.