Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have few contraindications. Either a previous hypersensitivity to any 4-aminoquinoline compounds or the underlying presence of retinopathy is the only absolute exclusions to these medications. Patients also should be tested for a G6PD deficiency before starting chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine. Patients with a G6PD deficiency are at increased risk for hemolysis when given these drugs. Both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are safe to use throughout pregnancy.

Primaquine is contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding and in patients with severe G6PD deficiency and acutely ill patients with a tendency to develop granulocytopenia (rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, etc.). Use also is strongly discouraged in conjunction with medications that can cause hemolytic anemia or myeloid bone marrow suppression.

Atovaquone-proguanil is not intended for use in patients less than 5 kg or pregnant or breastfeeding women. It should not be used in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCl less than 30 mL/min) because proguanil gets excreted in the urine.

Artemether-lumefantrine is contraindicated only if a patient has a previous hypersensitivity reaction to either medication or in the concurrent use with strong CYP3A4 inducers such as rifampin, carbamazepine, or phenytoin.

Contraindications for doxycycline and tetracycline include pregnant women, children less than eight years of age, or previous hypersensitivity to any tetracycline antibiotics. Clindamycin’s only true contraindications are a prior history of hypersensitivity reactions to it or lincomycin and to avoid use when less toxic antibiotics are appropriate due to the increased risk of severe and possibly fatal colitis.

Contraindications for mefloquine use include known hypersensitivity to the drug, history of seizures or major psychiatric disorder, and a recent history of depression or anxiety. Mefloquine correlates with sinus bradycardia and QT interval prolongations. It should be used with caution in patients with cardiac conduction disorders or using antiarrhythmic agents. Mefloquine is safe for administration during all trimesters of pregnancy.

Contraindications for both quinine and quinidine include thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopenic purpura, myasthenia gravis, any heart block greater than first degree, QT prolongation, or in combination with medications that can also cause QT prolongation.