**Patient Selection**

The patient should be thoroughly evaluated clinically to grade the cataract assess pupillary dilatation and tear film status, and rule out significant anterior and posterior segment disorders. Any dry eye or ocular surface disorders should be addressed adequately before cataract surgery. The patient is clearly explained about the surgical procedure and what to expect on the day of surgery. Informed written consent is obtained from the patient.

**Steps in Preparing For Toric IOL Implantation**

- Computing total corneal astigmatism

- Spherical power calculation

- Pre-planning of incision and IOL alignment

- Phacoemulsification/ FLACS for implanting IOL

- Post-surgical care

**Computing Total Corneal Astigmatism**

Preoperative estimation of anterior and posterior corneal astigmatism is essential to calculate the IOL power. It can be calculated using one of the abovementioned devices or the Baylor toric nomogram to estimate corneal astigmatism.

**Spherical Power Calculation**

Intraocular lens power calculation should consider the posterior corneal curvature, effective lens position, and surgically induced astigmatism.

The Barrett toric calculator has better predictability since it considers both estimated lens position and posterior corneal power.

**Pre-Planning of Incision and IOL Alignment**

Axis marking is essential to implant the toric IOLs in the desired axis and achieve optimal visual outcomes. It helps in planning the incision and in the intraoperative alignment of the IOL. The marking can be done manually or using advanced technologies like intra-operative marking systems and intraoperative aberrometry-based methods. Various online calculators and formulae are available for calculating the IOL power and axis of implantation. They include AcrySof online toric calculator, iTRACE calculator, TECNIS calculator, and the Hollday formula.

Various commercial brands of toric IOLs are available, and a choice of a particular IOL depends on availability, financial considerations, and surgeon preference refraction. The IOL with the least amount of residual astigmatism is chosen. Overcorrection of corneal astigmatism leads to postoperative residual astigmatism acting in an axis perpendicular to the preoperatively measured axis, termed as flipping of the axis.