**Low Flow Administration**

- Nasal cannula - a thin tube, often affixed behind the ears and used to deliver oxygen directly to the nostrils from a source connected with tubing. This is the most common method of delivery for home use and provides flow rates of 2 to 6 liters per minute (LPM) comfortably, allowing the delivery of oxygen while maintaining the patient’s ability to utilize his or her mouth to talk, eat, etc.

- Transtracheal catheters - these are used in chronic maintenance therapy and represent a method of oxygenation in which a catheter is surgically inserted through the anterior neck to deliver oxygen directly to the trachea, thus bypassing the upper airway.

- Face masks - facemasks can be generally divided into simple facemasks, air-entrainment masks, and non-rebreathers. A simple facemask is a mask with no bag attached, which delivers oxygen at 5 to 8 LPM. An air-entrainment (also known as venturi) mask can provide a pre-set oxygen to the patient using jet mixing. As the percent of inspired oxygen increases using such a mask, the air-to-oxygen ratio decreases, causing the maximum concentration of oxygen provided by an air-entrainment mask to be around 40%. A disadvantage of this and other full face masks is the inability of the patient to eat, drink, or easily communicate while using such a device.

- Non-rebreathing masks have a bag attached to the mask known as a reservoir bag, which inhalation draws from to fill the mask through a one-way valve and features ports at each side for exhalation, resulting in an ability to provide the patient with 100% oxygen at a higher LPM flow rate.

- A reservoir bag is an attachment to an oxygen administration device that allows for the concentration of oxygen and thus increased percentage administration. By allowing the collection of 100% O2 in a reservoir bag, the patient may receive a higher concentration of oxygen by reducing the percent of inhaled gas made up of atmospheric oxygen.

**High Flow Administration**

- High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) is a nasal cannula with the capability of humidifying oxygen and capable of flow rates that exceed the inspiratory pressure of the patient. This setup allows delivery of 100% Fi02 while maintaining the patient’s ability to utilize the mouth to talk, eat, etc. HFNC may also be used to lengthen times of apnea in preparation for intubation.

**Positive Pressure**

- Continuous positive airway pressure, or CPAP, is a mask that delivers continuous positive pressure to the patient.

- Similarly, bilevel positive airway pressure or BiPAP is also positive pressure delivered via mask but has an inhale and an exhale pressure set at differing levels.

- Bag-mask devices, or BVM’s, are masks operated by hand for resuscitation when patients cannot breathe on their own and can connect to oxygen sources for increased levels of oxygen delivery.

- Ventilators are machines that breathe for a patient, either through a tracheostomy or endotracheal tube. The ventilator can have oxygen delivery titrated to specific patient needs and delivered through positive pressure. Endotracheal tubes possess the added advantage of occluding the airway, thus preventing aspiration of blood, secretions, etc., in patients unable to protect their own airways.

**Other**

- Neonatal incubators also provide oxygen supplementation and do so by increasing the concentration of oxygen in the interior chamber without directly applying oxygen to the patient. This differs from other forms of oxygenation in that the atmosphere in a controlled environment is changed rather than oxygen administered to the patient. However, more traditional forms of oxygenation may also be an option.