**History and Physical Examination**

Detailed history and clinical examination are pivotal in evaluating a patient with ventricular tachycardia. All patients undergoing evaluation for ventricular tachycardia should be asked about the risk factors for atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases, prior history of palpitations, syncope, or ventricular tachycardia, and history of inherited cardiac conditions in the first-degree relatives.

**Electrocardiographic Evaluation**

The first step in evaluating presumed ventricular tachycardia is a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG).

**Echocardiogram and Other Non-invasive Imaging**

In patients with ventricular tachycardia and possible structural heart disease, an echocardiogram is recommended to evaluate the cardiac structure and function.

**Invasive Evaluation**

For patients presenting with cardiac arrest due to ventricular tachycardia due to presumed myocardial ischemia, an invasive coronary angiogram is recommended to evaluate coronary artery disease and guide the revascularization strategy.

**Genetic Testing**

Genetic testing is not recommended as a routine test in patients presenting with ventricular tachycardia. However, in selected patients with suspected inherited cardiac channelopathies, genetic testing can be done to confirm the diagnosis.

**Other Investigations**

Serum levels of potassium, magnesium, and calcium are essential investigations for diagnosing and managing patients with ventricular tachycardia. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin is required for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction. While natriuretic peptide is an excellent prognostic marker in patients with structural heart disease who present with ventricular tachycardia and have the risk of sudden cardiac death.