**Testicular Developmental Disorders**

**Cryptorchidism**

Congenital undescended testes (cryptorchidism) is a very common congenital urogenital malformation with a prevalence among normal birth weight boys varying between 1.8 to 8.4%.

By definition, cryptorchidism is a condition where either one or both of the testes do not descend into the scrotum.

- Cryptorchid – This refers to a testis that is not in the scrotum and cannot be manipulated so that they enter the scrotum.

- Ectopic – This refers to a testis that has not followed the regular developmental route of testicular descent. This condition can be femoral, pubopenile, crossed scrotal, or perineal.

- Gliding – This refers to a testis that can be manipulated to enter into the upper scrotum, but with the removal of manipulation, they retract.

- Retractile – This refers to the testis, which can be manipulated to enter into the scrotum; they do not retract when tension is released.

- Acquired – This refers to the testis, which initially had normal descent that ascends spontaneously.

The diagnosis of cryptorchidism is by manual palpation; this is an essential part of the newborn physical examination and should be diagnosed during infancy.

**Anorchia**

Anorchia occurs in 1/20,000 males and is also associated with 1/177 of those with cryptorchidism.

It is crucial to distinguish anorchia from cryptorchidism by examination of the abdomen and inguinal canal. Furthermore, as congenital adrenal hyperplasia can present similarly, plasma 17a-hydroxylase levels should be determined to rule out CAH. The diagnosis of anorchia can be made through undetectable plasma levels of AMH and inhibin B associated with raised plasma levels of FSH.

**Monorchism**

Clinically, it is not always possible to determine the exact etiology of monorchism as a child presenting with monorchism may have cryptorchidism, testicular agenesis, or VTS. Further investigation, such as laparoscopy or imaging techniques, may be performed. However, the accuracy of imaging techniques and the invasive nature of diagnostic laparoscopy means are not optimal methods for determining the cause of monorchism.

**Polyorchidism**

The majority of patients with polyorchidism are asymptomatic.

**Testicular Torsion**

The prevalence of testicular torsion in males below the age of 25 years is between 2.9 to 3.8 patients per 100,000 people.

Testicular torsion is diagnosable using a color doppler ultrasound; this is the gold standard for the evaluation of the acute scrotum.

**Swyer Syndrome**

Swyer syndrome has an incidence of 1 in 80,0000.

**Klinefelters Syndrome**

In Klinefelter's syndrome, the primordial germ cells fail to develop appropriately such that by puberty, no germ cells remain, resulting in insufficient spermatogenesis.

- Small firm testes

- Above-average height

- Erectile issues

- Sparse male-pattern body hair

- Bilateral gynecomastia

- Infertility

**5-ARD Deficiency**

The phenotypical presentation of 5-ARD deficiency does not tend to match the genotypical presentation such that patients with the same genotype may present with different phenotypes.

**Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia**

A deficiency in 3B-HSD accounts for between 1% and 10% of CAH cases.