**Physiology of Nerve Conduction**

Neurons are responsible for receiving, integrating, and propagating the summation of excitatory and inhibitory electrical potentials from other cells. Neurons are composed of dendrites, bodies, and axons. Dendrites receive information from other neurons and serve a critical role in neuroplasticity. The body of neurons contains the euchromatic nucleus and organelles responsible for producing proteins and chemicals essential for proper neurotransmission at the synapse. Polyribosomes are clustered and can be seen under electron microscopy as Nissl bodies. Axons serve as the conductor and transmitter of information to other individuals or networks of neurons, glands, and muscles. The axonal fibers terminate at the synapse with the electrochemical activation of a complex and diverse quantity of ligand-gated or G-coupled receptors that can vary according to the effector organ.

Let us briefly review the physiology of nerve conduction for completion. At rest, neurons have an intracellular resting membrane potential of -70 mV, reflecting a steady-state concentration of sodium (Na+) and potassium (K+) ions intracellularly and extracellularly. This is maintained through passive and active energy (ATP) expending receptors in the cells. During depolarization, there is an influx of Na+ ions (given higher concentration extracellularly) via partial voltage-gated sodium channels that, once they reach a positive voltage potential, open and lead to a propagating stimulation. At the peak of the action potential, voltage-gated Na+ channels close, and voltage-gated potassium K+ channels open, leading to the exit of ions from inside to outside the cell through a concentration gradient. This leads to the hyperpolarization of cells. A Na+/K+ ATPase in the neurons brings the ion gradient back to baseline (to resting potential) by expending energy to expel 3 Na+ out of the cell for 2 K+ inside the cell. The nerve conduction is coordinated with directionality and propagation of depolarization throughout the entire axon, with ultimate activation or neurotransmitters' inhibition into the synaptic cleft.

Unmyelinated fibers conduct in the range of 1 to 5 m/sec. On the other hand, myelinated motor and sensory nerve axons have conduction velocities up to 150 m/sec. This process is called saltatory conduction. Myelin is produced by Schwann cells, which are concentrically wrapped around axons. These myelin sheaths have gaps called nodes of Ranvier, where action potentials occur and propagate quickly until the next node is met. Therefore, current flows passively and jumps from node to node.

**Anatomy of the Ulnar Nerve**

The anatomy of the ulnar nerve makes it susceptible to compression. It is the second most common nerve entrapment in the upper extremity after carpal tunnel syndrome. The most common site of entrapment is at the elbow in the cubital tunnel as the nerve is superficial at this location. Entrapment at the elbow can be caused by leaning on the elbow for prolonged periods, medial epicondyle fractures, chronic subluxation, arthritis within the ulnar groove, and bony deformity. Approximately 75% of medial epicondylar fractures occur in male pediatric patients, with 10% to 15% of those resulting in ulnar nerve dysfunction.

**Martin-Gruber Anastomosis (MGA)**

It is a common variant, almost strictly (exceptions if the main median trunk crosses over, some sensory innervation can be expected) motor fibers of the median nerve from the anterior interosseous nerve crossover to the ulnar nerve in the forearm. It is thought to run in families in an autosomally dominant fashion. Depending on the variant subtype, it can innervate the first interosseous muscle (FDI), hypothenar, or thenar (adductor pollicis and the flexor pollicis brevis) muscles. It can affect the electrodiagnostic study interpretations.

**Riche-Cannieu Anastomosis (RCA)**

A common anatomical variant is an anastomosis distally of the recurrent branch of the median nerve and deep branch of the ulnar nerve. It does not affect electrodiagnostic study interpretation. In extremely rare cases, the ulnar nerve may innervate all the muscles in the digits of the hand (ulnar nerve) after a traumatic lesion. This could lead to exaggerated weakness in muscles normally innervated by the median nerve or vice-versa.