The lipoprotein lipase gene is mapped to human chromosome 8p22, divided into ten exons and encodes the enzyme lipoprotein lipase, which is expressed in the adipose tissues and muscles. Lipoprotein lipase (LPL), a 475-aminoacid enzyme, is involved in the hydrolysis of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, mainly chylomicrons and very high-density lipoproteins (VLDL). The catalytic center of the enzyme has three amino acids, namely, Ser132, Asp156, His241.

LPL activity is regulated by several factors, such as hormones, non-esterified fatty acids, and apolipoproteins. Apo AV, apolipoprotein C-II, insulin, acylation stimulating protein increase the LPL activity, while apolipoprotein C-III and TNF-alpha decrease the LPL activity. After LPL is produced in adipose tissues and muscles, which are the two most important sites of production, it is secreted and translocated to the luminal surface of capillary endothelial cells of extrahepatic tissues. The dietary fat absorbed in the intestines is transported in the form of triglycerides by large lipoproteins, known as chylomicrons. Once the chylomicrons are released into the bloodstream, they receive a lipoprotein known as apolipoprotein C-II from high-density lipoproteins.

Apolipoprotein C-II is a cofactor for the lipoprotein lipase enzyme. The lipoprotein lipase recognizes apolipoprotein C-II and gets activated, which results in the breaking down of the chylomicrons and VLDL triglycerides to nonesterified free fatty acids and 2-monoacylglycerol to be stored as triglyceride in adipose tissues or used as an energy source in muscles.

Most of the mutations in the lipoprotein lipase gene are located on exons 2, 5, and 6. The well-known mutations include the following

- Asn291Ser, located on Exon 6, AAT-->AGT. It is the most common mutation in Whites. It is present in 2 to 5 percent of the heterozygote carrier population among the Whites. It is associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer disease.

- 93T-->G, located on the promotor. The G allele is the most common mutation seen in South African Black ethnicity (76.4 percent). The T allele is seen in Whites (1.7 percent).

- Asp9Asn, located on Exon 2, GAC-->AAC. It is less common. (1.56 to 4.4 percent of the population). The homozygous mutation causes only a 20 percent decrease in lipoprotein lipase activity.

- Gly188glu, located on wxon 5, GGG-->GAG. (0.06 percent of the population).

- Ala221del, located on exon 5, 916gCT-->CT. It leads to homozygote chylomicronemia. It is the most common mutation in Japanese ethnicity, also known as LPL Arita.

- Carriers of Asn291Ser or the combined mutation Asp9Asn/T93G are known to have an increased risk of preeclampsia.

- Ser447sto, located on exon 9, TCA-->TGA. This is a gain of function mutation leading to an increase in LPL activity. It is associated with a 0.8 fold reduced risk of ischemic heart disease, maximum benefit to those using beta-blockers.

A reduction or elimination of lipoprotein lipase enzyme activity prevents the break down of triglycerides. Therefore, there is an accumulation of the triglycerides in the blood and tissues, leading to the clinical manifestations of lipoprotein lipase deficiency.

According to many studies, Lipoprotein lipase deficiency is known to have no atherogenic potential because it causes a low level of low-density lipoproteins. But some studies show that a defect in lipolysis can be a risk factor for premature atherosclerosis. These studies were based on other metabolic disturbances, which have been described as follows. Lipoprotein lipase deficiency also leads to increased serum triglycerides and low high-density lipoproteins. Also, the postprandial clearance of triglycerides is delayed, exposing them to lipoproteins, thus leading to oxidative damage. Even reverse cholesterol transport is impaired as the high-density lipoprotein has structural changes, leading to increased and faster clearance.

Thus the lipoprotein profile of the patients of lipoprotein lipase deficiency is similar to the postprandial profile in which atherogenic particles are produced, predisposing to atherosclerosis.