The initial evaluation of a geriatric patient begins with the standard trauma primary survey of the airway, breathing, circulation, disability, etc.  Supportive immediate resuscitative care such as intubation may be required to stabilize the patient before a thorough evaluation of potential head trauma can be started. Then, a detailed history is necessary to determine if head trauma has occurred.  An occult presentation of head trauma is much more likely to be present in geriatric patients.

Besides a history that explicitly states a traumatic head injury has occurred, other significant historical factors that may indicate a traumatic head injury are headache, nausea/vomiting, changes in vision, decreased sensation, weakness, and reported confusion.

A thorough examination of older patients with traumatic injuries is of particular importance.  Subtle bruising may be the only indication of traumatic injury, especially in demented patients with non-specific complaints.  On the other hand, the physical examination is often less reliable with older patients.  Acute focal neurological deficits may be difficult to differentiate from chronic neurological findings. Even the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) has been found to be less accurate when assessing older patients with a traumatic head injury.

Furthermore, signs of increased intracranial pressure should also undergo evaluation when head trauma is suspected.  These include abnormal pupillary responses, decorticate or decerebrate posturing, seizures, and the classic "Cushing Triad" (hypertension, bradycardia, irregular respirations).