The urine analysis is the first test done in the evaluation of nephritic syndrome. Exercise, food, or medicines can cause discoloration of urine. There is normal excretion of a small amount of blood in the urine. The upper limit of normal excretion of blood in the urine is 3 RBCs/HPF.

In nephritic syndrome, the urine has greater than 5 RBCs/ HPF along with acanthocytes, dysmorphic RBCs, and red blood cells (RBCs) casts and in a few cases white blood cells (WBCs) casts.

The proteinuria usually ranges in the sub nephrotic range (less than 3.5 g/day), but it can go up to the nephrotic range. A 24-hours urinary protein assay is required if the attendant nephrotic syndrome is suspected.

The renal functions should be assessed by measuring plasma creatinine and urea levels. Plasma creatinine levels can estimate GFR to determine the stage of chronic kidney disease.

The kidney biopsy will provide the definite underlying cause for the nephritic syndrome. The histopathological findings of kidney biopsy are described in the histopathology section above.

Following serological tests should be carried out to rule out the underlying immunological renal disease.

- ANA: Anti-nuclear antibodies to rule out autoimmune disorders

- Serum C3 and C4 Complement Levels: The complement levels are low in diseases in which there is an activation of the inflammatory cascade resulting in deposition of immune complexes in the glomerulus. The conditions include post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis, infective endocarditis, and SLE.

- ASO Titers: High levels of anti-streptolysin O, anti-DNase B antibody titers indicate a recent streptococcal infection

- ANCA: Both cytoplasmic and peripheral anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) levels are assessed to rule out systemic vasculitis (i.e., granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic polyangiitis)

- Anti-dsDNA Antibodies: Highly sensitive for the diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus

- Anti-glomerular Basement Membrane Antibodies: To rule out Goodpasture syndrome

- Hepatitis B Surface Antigen and HCV Antibodies: To rule out hepatitis B and C infection

- Serum Protein Electrophoresis and Serum Immunofixation: To identify plasma cell disorders and levels of monoclonal proteins

- Rheumatoid Factor: To screen for cryoglobulinemia in suspected patients