**Patient History**

It is important to obtain a thorough patient history, especially about thoughts and self-destructive behavior. Even though many individuals talk about suicide, they rarely follow through with it, but the opposite is true. It is established that a threat of suicide can be followed with a completed act, and the presence of suicidal ideation is closely associated with suicidal behavior.

**What are Signs Suggestive of an Impending Suicide?**

Over the years, experts have compiled a list of signs that may be indicative of impending suicide, and they include the following:

- Constantly talking about suicide or death: Many people planning suicide often have a plan in mind and may have made arrangements to buy a weapon.

- Individuals who indicate that they may not be around much longer. This may be by saying goodbye to family or friends, arranging a funeral plan, making a will, or writing a suicide note. The suicide note is often left in an open place and rarely hidden.

- Some of the individuals will have a strong family history of suicide. The risk of suicide is highest when one is approaching the anniversary of such a death or sometimes the age at which the family member committed suicide.

- If the individual is known to possess a weapon, especially a gun.

- Is the individual under the influence of alcohol, prescription medications, or other illicit mind-altering drugs?

- Is the individual abusing drugs like analgesics or antidepressants?

- Has there been a sudden negative event in life, like losing a job, divorce, or the death of a family member or spouse?

- Is the individual living alone, isolated, and has no support? Does he or she have any friends or family members?

- Is the individual depressed? Is he or she haunted and dominated by hopelessness and helplessness?

- Is the individual experiencing paranoia, delusions, or hallucinations telling him or her to die?

- Has the individual just been discharged from a mental health facility? Sometimes people who are discharged after a long stay in a mental health facility often have difficulty transitioning to normal life or appear to lose control because they do not feel safe.

- Is the individual anxious? Is he or she constantly worried about death or having a sense of doom and gloom? Does the individual show any emotion in the presence of others?

- Is the individual exhibiting no sensation of pleasure (anhedonia)?

- Focusing on the past. Is the person dwelling on past losses and defeats and anticipates no future? Does the person voice the notion that others and the world would be better off without them?

- Has the individual lost the ability to cope with stress? Feels that no one or nothing can help him or her?

- What is the general clinical impression? In the end, it is the clinical impression that can help determine if the patient wants to kill him or herself, and there is no other substitute for clinical judgment.

**What Activities are Associated with an Intent to Commit Suicide?**

Several activities that have been associated with an intent to commit suicide include the following:

- Buying a weapon like a gun, rope, or chemicals

- Getting all the house and family affairs together

- Going to the emergency room or visiting a healthcare provider

- Making a will

- Seeing friends and family unexpectedly.

- Writing a suicide note.

- Visiting a primary care physician. A significant number of people see their primary care physician within 3 weeks of committing suicide.

From an analysis of past suicide cases, it appears that a number of individuals go to the emergency department or visit their primary health care provider a few weeks before committing suicide. At this visit, they rarely mention suicidal directions but may have vague physical complaints. Thus, the healthcare provider must try to obtain a good mental health history beyond just the chief complaint.

**Factors That May Protect Against Suicide**

The healthcare worker should also try to ascertain protective factors against suicide such as:

- Is the individual involved in a social network of family, friends, or colleagues? Does he or she speak to them, and how often?

- Does the individual have any long-term plans? Is he looking forward to his/her job?

- Does the individual have any children, and what does he/she think about them?

- Does the individual have a pet? Often pets provide comfort and unconditional love?

- Is there a therapist involved? Individuals who remain incommunicado with therapists are less likely to have suicidal thoughts.

- Is there something in the future, like the birth of a child, graduation, wedding reception, or a vacation planned?

- Is the individual religious? In many cases, people who have faith believe in the sanctity of life.

- Does the individual have children who are dependent on him or her?

- Is the individual involved in a relationship?

- Is the individual against guns or weapons in the home?

- Is the individual calling the crisis hotlines?

- Is he or she already on treatment for depression?

- Does he or she have someone to speak to when there is a problem?

**Mental Status Assessment**

In some cases, assessing the mental status may provide a clue to the individual’s potential for self-harm.

- Appearance: Depressed patients will often tend to appear unclean and unkempt. The clothing may not be ironed or dirty.

- The physical exam may reveal scars or rope burns on the hands, wrist, or neck. Often these people may have multiple injuries to their body, so one has to look at the entire body for scars and marks of self-harm.

- Affect: The risk of suicide is often high in people who appear very anxious or depressed. The patient may exhibit a flat affect or no emotions at all.

- Thoughts: Individuals intent on self-harm may have several types of abnormal thoughts, which include the following:

- Hallucinations: Some depressed patients may develop hallucinations that may be telling them to kill themselves. The majority of these hallucinations are auditory.
- Delusions: Sometimes, an individual may develop a false belief (delusion) that everyone hates them or wants them dead. And if they die, the family will be better off.
- Obsessions can sometimes be quite intense and can lead the individual to take his or her own life.

- Judgment, insight, and intellect: Assessing the individual’s judgment is critical. One should try and determine how the individual can handle stress. Does he or she have an impairment in decision-making? Does the individual know that jumping in front of a train is dangerous?

- Assess for memory and orientation, which are often abnormal in patients with self-destructive behaviors.

It is vital that the healthcare professional not only rely on the screening tools to identify patients at risk for suicide. It is important to conduct a patient interview at the same time to reflect the following:

- Reflect empathy and concern

- Offer a hand to help.

- Understand the individual’s desire to die to relieve excruciating pain, severe mental anguish, or major depression

- Provide the patient with confidence that he or she can overcome the issues

- Determine why the patient has come to the stage of wanting to kill him or herself

**Management**

**Immediate Treatment**

Once the patient is deemed to be at risk for suicide, intervention steps must commence right away.

- The individual must not be left alone.

- All weapons or instruments that can be used to harm or hurt must be removed. If the weapons are not removed, they should be locked in a cabinet. One may even want to disable the gun.

- Enlist the help of a support person while at home.

- The suicidal individual must be treated in a safe and secure place. Also, the place has to be monitored.

- In-patient care is an ideal place for patients intent on committing suicide, but this is only possible for extremely high-risk cases. Admitting all patients that are at risk for suicide is not realistic or practical.

If the patient is sent home, then the following additional safety measures must be established:

- Help develop internal coping strategies (e.g., exercise, journaling, reading, developing a  hobby).

- Promote social support. Call a family member, social worker, or friend to check up on the individual.

- Utilize the help of healthcare professionals to follow up on therapy.

- Provide the individual with the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline.

- Tell the individual to call 911 if he or she develops the desire to die.

- As a last resort, tell family members to bring the individual to the emergency department if there is decompensation at home.

Once the individual is safe as an inpatient or outpatient, a formal treatment plan should be established. The next step is to refer all patients deemed to be at higher risk for suicide to a mental health counselor as soon as possible. Every state has laws and procedures regarding this process which must be incorporated into the clinical practice when addressing individuals at high suicide risk.

**Pharmacologic Therapy**

If the individual has acute psychiatric symptoms like paranoia, hallucinations, extreme anxiety, or depression, pharmacological therapy may be necessary. After the patient’s acute symptoms have been managed, the choice of further treatment depends on the specific mental illness. In most cases, psychotherapy is recommended to remove the thoughts about self-harm. However, it is important to note that despite these interventions, many patients do commit suicide. Hence it is important to involve the patient’s family, friends, and social worker in the long-term management of these patients.

**Psychotherapy**

While drug treatment is useful for managing acute symptoms like hallucinations, psychosis, or depression, psychotherapy is essential for long-term management. Cognitive behavior therapy and other related therapies like problem-solving therapy, dialectical behavior therapy, and developmental group therapy have all been used to lower the risk of suicide. A psychiatrist or psychotherapist usually administers these treatments. The problem is that these therapies require regular sessions spread over many months or even years. The other problem is the cost which can be high for those not covered by medical insurance.

**Moving Beyond Screening**

Some experts suggest an alternative approach to preventing suicide other than identifying individuals at risk. The reason is that the present medical model of screening has not been shown to be effective in suicide prevention. Suicide has been strongly linked to social problems. The rates are generally much higher in local communities that lack a cohesive social fabric or when individuals are left out of mainstream society. Thus, the social factors should be targeted like improving housing, providing opportunities for jobs, making it easy to access mental health care professionals and prescription medications. Unfortunately, many social factors go way beyond the ability of most primary health care providers to manage. Plus, there is also a significant cost that comes with making changes in the social structure.

**What is an Effective Follow-up?**

Experts say that if a screening program for suicide prevention and depression is to be started, there must be effective follow-up and treatment. Once an individual has been diagnosed with depression and is at high risk for suicide, then there must be a system in place for treatments such as psychotherapy and/or antidepressant medications. If close follow-up and treatment are not available, the clinician can recommend a referral and follow-up.

**Is There Evidence that Screening for Suicide Can Improve Outcomes?**

Evidence shows that when the screening tools are used appropriately, there can be useful in helping healthcare workers recognize depression. When a commitment to follow-up and treatment accompanies the screening tools, better outcomes are achieved. However, screening tools are only to be used by healthcare workers committed to using the information from the screening test and providing enhanced care. The current evidence on screening for suicide risk in primary care is insufficient, and the balance of benefits and harms of screening cannot be determined.

At the moment, there is little evidence to support screening the population at large. In fact, in people without any psychiatric history, the role of screening remains debatable. Thus, healthcare workers are being urged to first identify patients with risk factors for suicide and those with high levels of mental stress and refer them for further evaluation. So far, each hospital or organization has its protocols for the use of suicide prevention tools. No study has ever shown that one tool is better than the other.