The artery of Adamkiewicz is considered a watershed area in the spinal cord and susceptible to infarction following episodes of severe hypotension. This area supplied by this artery is prone to ischemia and infarction because it is the last major artery feeding the lumbar spinal cord and makes a classic “hairpin loop” upon entry to the anterior spinal artery. There are generally no communication or anastomoses between the anterior and posterior spinal arteries thus making the artery of Adamkiewicz similar to an end artery. This vascular anatomy can often lead to anterior spinal cord syndrome within the region of the lumbar spinal cord leading to loss of motor function and sensory function carried by the anterior columns including pain and temperature (sparing proprioception within the dorsal column which is supplied by the posterior spinal artery). Diagnosis is made by MRI which can show classic “owl’s eye” hyperintensity on T2 axial images.

Vertebral artery dissection is a rare origin of stroke but occurs more often in the younger population age less than 45 years old. They can occur from blunt trauma to the neck, chiropractic manipulation or connective tissue diseases. Tearing of the intimal layer leads to blood dissecting through other layers and forming hematomas within the arterial connective tissue and creating stenosis thus restricting blood flow to the brain. The prognosis is generally good with 80% of patients making a full recovery.

The Batson venous plexus of the pelvis is a well-documented route of metastasis where carcinomas of the pelvis, namely the prostate, can hematogenously spread to the spinal cord, vertebral column and brain because of the valveless structure of the Batson plexus.