Therapy should be directed based on the offending agent causing the urethritis.

Gonococcal urethritis: the recommended treatment of choice is a single dose of ceftriaxone 500 mg intramuscular injection. If chlamydia has not been excluded, treatment with doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 7 days is added. Neisseria meningitides urethritis is treated the same.

Nongonococcal urethritis: the recommended treatment:

Chlamydia trachomatis: The treatment of choice is a single dose of 1 gram of oral azithromycin or 100mg doxycycline twice a day for seven days. Alternative treatment options are ofloxacin 300mg orally twice daily for seven days or levofloxacin 500mg orally once a day for seven days.  If coinfected with gonorrhea, treatment with one dose of 500 mg ceftriaxone intramuscular injection in addition to 1 gram oral single dose azithromycin.  In pregnant females, 1 gram orally of azithromycin is the recommended treatment. If pregnant females are unable to tolerate recommended treatment, these patients should have treatment with one of the following regimens:

- Amoxicillin 500 mg orally three times daily for seven days

- Erythromycin base 500 mg orally four times daily for seven days

- Erythromycin base 250 mg orally four times a day for 14 days

- Erythromycin ethyl succinate 800 mg orally four times daily for seven days

- Erythromycin ethyl succinate 400 mg orally four times a day for 14 days

In females who are pregnant or lactating, the following medication treatment options are contraindicated: levofloxacin, ofloxacin, erythromycin estolate, and doxycycline. All patients should undergo repeat testing three months after treatment, and reinfection should receive therapy with azithromycin.

Mycoplasma genitalium: the recommended antibiotic of choice is azithromycin 1 gram orally as a single dose, similar to treating Chlamydia. For those patients' infections resistant to treatment with azithromycin, moxifloxacin is a treatment alternative.

Trichomonas vaginalis urethritis, including pregnant patients, should be treated with seven days of metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day. Tolerance in pregnancy may be reduced due to significant nausea or vomiting, so the length of treatment may be allowed to vary from five to seven days.

The treatment regimens for the more common causes of urethritis are stated above. For the less common causes, the therapy still depends on the etiology. An example of urethritis caused by irritants from clothing, the therapy would include changes in soap and the reduction of friction with less tight-fitting clothing. Another example is that adenovirus is treated with supportive care involving hydration, NSAIDs, and bed rest due to no current medical therapy approved, and is a self-limiting illness.