# Definition/Introduction

Ciliospinal reflex is characterized by rapid dilation of the ipsilateral pupil (by 1 to 2mm) with a painful or startling stimulus.

Other names of the reflex are

- Pupillary skin reflex

- Cutaneous pupillary reflex

- Pupillary reflex dilation

- Pupil dilation response

- Reflex pupillary dilation

- Cutaneous pupil reflex or

- Skin pupillary reflex.

The name denotes the involvement of the ciliary body and the spinal cord. As the mediation of this reflex is by the cervical sympathetic fibers, it is absent in Horner syndrome.

# Issues of Concern

The interplay between the parasympathetic nervous system, which constricts the pupil, and the sympathetic nervous system, which dilates the pupil, determines pupillary size.

The ciliospinal reflex is absent in

- Horner syndrome

- Propofol-induced anesthesia.

The exaggerated ciliospinal reflex may lead to bilaterally dilated pupils which remain dilated for 1 to 6 minutes with minimal or no response to brief exposure to light (seemingly non-reactive pupils) or in pupillometry. However, the pupil constricts on prolonged exposure (30 to 45 seconds) to light, and there is the preservation of the consensual pupillary response. Exaggerated ciliospinal reflex must be ruled out before suspecting a non-reactive pupil due to pathologies like increased intracranial tension, third nerve palsy, or midbrain compression in a comatose patient.

An exaggerated ciliospinal reflex may be present in

- Asymptomatic patients with a cluster headache - may be due to mechanisms 'proximal to the third-order sympathetic neurons'

- Barbiturate-induced coma - ciliospinal reflex may be present after routine nursing care of critically ill patients.

The presence of ciliospinal reflex during and after cardiopulmonary resuscitation may denote a positive prognostic sign for regaining consciousness.

# Clinical Significance

**Pathway of the Sympathetic Innervation of the Pupil**

The sympathetic efferent pathway has three neurons and is ipsilateral.

- The first-order (central) neuron arises from the posterior hypothalamus and descends through the brainstem on the same side close to the trigeminal nucleus. It descends dorsally and rostrally to the red nucleus and lies at the lateral tegmentum of the midbrain, pons, and medulla. It synapses at the ciliospinal center of Budge, located at C8 to T2 in the intermediolateral (IML) horn of the gray matter of the spinal cord.

- The second-order (preganglionic) neuron originates from the ciliospinal center and goes to the superior cervical ganglion in the neck. It exits the spinal cord through the dorsal spinal root and enters the paravertebral sympathetic chain. The second-order neuron passes near the apex of the lung and may suffer damage in surgeries of the neck or bronchogenic carcinoma (Pancoast tumor), causing Horner's syndrome.

- The third-order (postganglionic) neuron passes on the surface of the internal carotid artery and joins the ophthalmic nerve at the cavernous sinus. The sympathetic postganglionic fibers pass through the nasociliary nerve and long ciliary nerve and reach the ciliary body and the dilator pupillae muscles, which are radial muscles of the iris.

**Pathway of Ciliospinal Reflex**

Afferent inputs of this reflex are carried by the trigeminal nerve or cervical pain fibers (lateral spinothalamic tract). The efferent branch of the reflex consists of sympathetic fibers from the upper thoracic and lower cervical spinal cord.

Yang and colleagues evaluated the role of the sympathetic nervous system on ciliospinal reflex using topical dapiprazole drops (alpha 1-adrenergic antagonist).

During recovery after cardiopulmonary resuscitation, pupillary light reflex recovers earlier than the ciliospinal reflex.

The pupillary dilation may correlate with the intensity of pain or stimulus.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

During eliciting this reflex, it is always beneficial to have the presence of a nurse who can help with exposing the neck of the patient and can provide the desired level of lighting to examine pupils.