Currently, the degree of histologic severity of LHBT disease states does not correlate with the degree of pathology demonstrated on either MRI or from direct intra-operative inspection. Furthermore, other studies suggest that the duration of symptoms does not correlate with histologic severity. Additionally, the more proximal zones of the LHBT (i.e., the intra-articular and bicipital groove portions) consistently demonstrate higher histologic grades of tendinopathy compared to tissue specimens examined from more distal LHBT zones.

**Grading**

While histologic grading of the severity of tendinopathic changes remains separate from the clinical presentation and MRI and/or intra-operative findings, some noteworthy pathologic patterns are associated with increasing grades of severity of tendinopathy.

**Grade 0**

- Tenocytes are normal in appearance.

- Myxoid degenerative material not present

- Collagen remains arranged in tight, cohesive bundles.

- Blood vessels arranged inconspicuously between collagen bundles.

**Grade I**

- Tenocytes are rounded

- Myxoid degenerative material present in small amounts between collagen bundles

- Collagen remains arranged in discrete bundles, but a slight separation between bundles becomes apparent.

- Capillary clustering is evident (less than 1 cluster per 10 high-power fields)

**Grade II**

- Tenocytes are rounded and enlarged.

- Myxoid degenerative material evident in moderate to large amounts

- Collagen bundles lose discrete organization as the separation between individual fibers and bundles increases.

- Capillary clustering is increased (1 to 2 clusters per 10 high-power fields)

**Grade III**

- Tenocytes are rounded and enlarged with abundant cytoplasm and lacunae.

- Myxoid degenerative material abundant

- Collagen disorganized, loss of microarchitecture

- Capillary clustering is increased (greater than 2 clusters per 10 high-power fields)

**Other Changes Associated with Tendinopathy**

**Tenosynovium**

- Irrespective of the histologic grade of tendinopathy, the surrounding bicipital sheath/synovium demonstrates varying degrees of synovial hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and proliferation.

**Low-Grade Degenerative Tendinopathy**

- Total cellularity (cell density, cells/ mm): Minimal increase

- Apoptotic index (percent relative to the total number of cells counted): Minimal increase

**Moderate Grade Degenerative Tendinopathy**

- Total cellularity (cell density, cells/ mm): Peak increase

- Apoptotic index (percent relative to the total number of cells counted): Moderate increase

**Severe Grade Degenerative Tendinopathy**

- Total cellularity (cell density, cells/ mm): Decreases

- Apoptotic index (% relative to the total number of cells counted): Peak increase

Histologic studies have consistently reported that irrespective of patient age, the severity of symptoms, and duration of symptoms, acute inflammatory changes are rarely evident upon histologic specimen analysis.