Although there is a possibility that patients with CRPS may improve spontaneously, considering the debilitating nature of this syndrome, it is prudent to institute aggressive management as soon as possible as a delay may result in an unfavorable outcome. Moreover, compared to chronic CRPS, early CRPS is less resistant to treatment and therefore has a better prognosis.

**Physical and Occupational Therapy**

Manual therapy and exercises are not the only CRPS treatments under this section. Other therapy modalities include transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, ultrasound, laser, pain education, mirror therapy, and graded motor imagery (GMI). Multiple mechanisms of action of physical therapy have been proposed with no clear definitive theory. Manual therapy and exercise improve range of motion, function and reduce disability through endorphin release as well as other central and peripheral analgesic mechanisms.

A 2016 Cochrane review found that among the different physiotherapy modalities, mirror therapy and GMI may improve pain as well as function in CRPS. However, the quality of evidence was poor. Two clinical trials each for GMI and mirror therapy have demonstrated improvement of pain and function at 6 months. Very low-quality evidence was also found for improvement of impairment in CRPS with multimodal physiotherapy.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Multiple pharmacotherapeutic agents are used in the management of CRPS. The commonly used therapeutic options in this category include anti-inflammatory medications, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, transdermal lidocaine, opioids, NMDA antagonists, and bisphosphonates. Using a multimodal pharmacologic regimen that combines several different classes may lead to superior outcomes.

**Anti-inflammatory Medications**

Oral corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been used in CRPS as inflammation is thought to play a role in disease pathogenesis. Based on three trials that compared oral corticosteroids to placebo in CRPS, a 2013 Cochrane review concluded that oral steroids do not significantly reduce pain. This was supported by very low-quality evidence. The review also found that oral corticosteroids seem to improve composite pain scores.

**Bisphosphonates**

This class of medication is used routinely in bone-related problems as it inhibits osteoclastic activity. Several mechanisms of action of bisphosphonates in CRPS have been proposed. The more commonly accepted mechanisms include inhibition of bone marrow cell proliferation and migration as well as inflammation modulation.

**Anticonvulsants and Antidepressants**

Gabapentin is the most widely studied medication in this class. It works by inhibiting the alpha 2-delta subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels. Despite its widespread use in treating CRPS, very low-quality evidence suggests that gabapentin is ineffective in the treatment of CRPS I.

**Opioids**

The effectiveness of opioids has not been studied in CRPS, and therefore no evidence-based conclusions can be drawn.

**NMDA Antagonists**

NMDA receptor antagonists like ketamine have been hypothesized to reverse central sensitization and maladaptive cortical neuroplastic changes in CRPS.

**Behavioral Therapy**

Elevated levels of catecholamines associated with depression can worsen CRPS by inducing central sensitization through adrenergic mechanisms. Reversal of this effect is one of the proposed mechanisms of action of psychotherapy in CRPS. Apart from case reports and case series, only one small trial has been done evaluating the efficacy of behavioral interventions in CRPS. Despite the lack of clear evidence supporting their use in CRPS, behavioral therapy has been recommended part of comprehensive treatment.

**Interventions**

**Sympathetic Blocks**

Sympathetic hyperactivity is believed to be an underlying pathophysiologic mechanism of CRPS.

**Spinal Cord Stimulation**

Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) involves delivering electric stimulation to the dorsal column of the spinal cord by the placement of electrodes in the epidural space. The electrodes are usually connected to an implanted pulse generator to power the electrode, but some devices use an external pulse generator. Multiple mechanisms of action of SCS have been proposed, which include inhibition of nociceptive neural conduction in the spinal cord, adrenergic inhibition, vasodilation, and reversal of cortical maladaptive neuroplastic changes. A systematic review in 2017 studied the effectiveness of SCS in CRPS. The authors concluded that a high level of evidence supports the use of SCS for improvement of pain scores, quality of life as well as the perception of pain relief in CRPS.

**Dorsal Root Ganglion Stimulation**

Targeting the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) instead of the spinal cord is a relatively new and novel neuromodulation modality for the management of chronic pain. This enables a more focused application of neurostimulation than traditional SCS. DRG stimulation was approved by United States Food and Drug Administration in 2016 for treatment of lower extremity pain in CRPS. A recent pooled analysis study concluded that DRG stimulation was safe and effective for CRPS with a 4.9-point mean reduction of pain intensity in CRPS-I.