Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) characteristically demonstrates symmetrical pain and stiffness in and around the shoulders, neck, and hip girdle. Pain and stiffness are the worst in the morning and also worsen after rest or prolonged inactivity. Restricted range of motion of the shoulder is common. Patients often complain of pain and stiffness in the upper arms, hips, thighs, upper and lower back. The onset of symptoms is rapid, usually from a day up to 2 weeks. It affects the quality of life as pain may impair sleep at nighttime and daytime routine activities like getting out of bed or a chair, taking a shower, hair brushing, driving, etc.

The pain and stiffness associated with PMR are most probably related to inflammation of the glenohumeral and hip joints and in the upper extremity the subacromial, subdeltoid, and trochanteric bursae.

Peripheral involvement is also frequent with arthritis in a fourth of patients. Other peripheral features like carpal tunnel syndrome, distal extremity swelling with pitting edema, and distal tenosynovitis can be present. Arthritis does not lead to erosions or deformities or the development of rheumatoid arthritis.

On physical examination, diffuse tenderness is usually in evidence over the shoulder without localization to specific structures. The pain usually restricts the active shoulder range of motion, and passive range of motion could be normal when carefully examined. Restriction of neck and hip movements because of pain is also common. Muscle tenderness of neck, arms, and thigh may be present. Even though the patient might complain of non-specific weakness, muscle strength is usually intact on a more thorough examination.