Atropine or atropine sulfate carries FDA indications for anti-sialagogue/anti-vagal effect, organophosphate/muscarinic poisoning, and bradycardia.Atropa belladonna which is where the drug derives its name.

**Antisialagogue**

While atropine can be used independently for anti-salivation effects, it most commonly is secondary to anticholinergic or antimuscarinic poisoning, as discussed below. It is not formally recommended for routine use in controlled airways, though it can be used off-label for minimizing secretions in the intubated patient.

**Anticholinergic Poisoning**

Acetylcholine works on three different receptors that merit attention in nerve agent poisonings. Atropine is only useful to counter muscarinic effects (pralidoxime and benzodiazepines act on the others). If there are local symptoms to the eyes or respiratory tract, atropine is not indicated. Intravenous (IV) atropine indications include patients with hypersalivation, bronchial secretions, or bradycardia. Large doses and repeat doses may be required. Ingestions especially require higher doses (up to 20 mg). Titrate to effect by monitoring the patient’s ability to clear excess secretions. Pupils and heart rate are poor indications of appropriate dosing in these patients.

**Bradycardia**

Atropine is the first-line therapy (Class IIa) for symptomatic bradycardia in the absence of reversible causes. Treatments for bradydysrhythmias are indicated when there is a structural disease of the infra-nodal system or if the heart rate is less than 50 beats/min with unstable vital signs. Approximately 20% of bradydysrhythmias are due to endogenous cardiac electrical systems. The structural disease may or may not require resuscitation and should be closely monitored with medication and pacing readily available. If there is no improvement in the clinical state after repeat doses of atropine, additional treatments with atropine are unlikely to be effective. However, transient improvements with repeat dosing are an indication to continue treatment with atropine (which may exceed standard cumulative dosing maximums). Pediatric bradycardia is rarely cardiac and often secondary to hypoxia and hypoventilation. If bradycardia persists despite adequate respiratory support, atropine is indicated.

**Rapid Sequence Intubation (RSI) Pretreatment**

Although not recommended as a routine agent, atropine may be used 3 to 5 minutes before initiation of RSI to prevent bradycardia. In the setting of post-intubation-related bradycardia, atropine is indicated. Post induction bradycardia is seen more commonly in the pediatric population due to the predominance of vagal response, even without the use of succinylcholine.

Atropine/diphenoxylate is an antimotility agent that can be useful in the treatment of diarrhea as second-line therapy by allowing the central acting opioid effect of diphenoxylate and capitalization on its anticholinergic side effect of constipation to slow motility. Subtherapeutic amounts of atropine are included in the dosage form to discourage diphenoxylate abuse. It may potentiate barbiturates, alcohol, or tranquilizers, and therefore, its use requires caution.

Under current ACLS protocols, atropine is indicated for symptomatic bradycardia and not in a pulseless patient. The AHA has removed all indications for atropine in the pulseless patient.

Atropine is not indicated in beta-blocker-induced bradycardias or hypotension, though its use is unlikely to be harmful. Glucagon is the first line to treat beta-blockade-induced symptoms.

Pregnancy Class B: It does cross the placenta and may lead to fetal tachycardia; however, it does not cause fetal abnormalities.