Thrombolytic treatment, also known as fibrinolytic therapy, dissolves dangerous intravascular clots to prevent ischemic damage by improving blood flow. Thrombosis is a significant physiological response that limits hemorrhage caused by large or tiny vascular injury. The physiological hemostatic response is well-controlled by intrinsic antithrombotic properties and fibrinolysis. Thrombus formation is supposed to be confined to localized areas of tissue injury. Any intravascular thrombus without damage that impedes the blood flow is considered abnormal. Any form of inherited or acquired hypercoagulable state may give rise to intravascular thrombus formation. Upon formation, an abnormal thrombus may propagate until complete blockage of the arterial lumen or detach and travel to block the downstream vascular lumen. Thromboembolism has the following clinical outcomes where thrombolytic therapy can be used.

- Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)

- Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)

- Pulmonary embolism (PE)

- Acute ischemic stroke (AIS)

- Acute peripheral arterial occlusion

- Occlusion of indwelling catheters

- Intracardiac thrombus formation.

- Severe frostbite(off-label use)

There are two ways thrombolytic agents can be given: systemic administration through a peripheral IV  or local release by a catheter after navigating to the clot site. Ultrasound-facilitated catheter-directed thrombolysis (USCDT) used in patients with acute massive and sub-massive pulmonary embolism improves the efficacy and safety of thrombolytic therapy.

Thrombolytic or fibrinolytic agents are often referred to as plasminogen activators. All available thrombolytic agents are serine proteases that cleave plasminogen into active plasmin. Currently, available thrombolytic agents include the following:

- Streptokinase

- Alteplase

- Reteplase

- Tenecteplase

- Urokinase

- Prourokinase

- Anistreplase(APSAC)

**Streptokinase**

Due to its relatively low cost with good efficacy and safety, it is the most widely used fibrinolytic agent worldwide. While it has lower efficacy than alteplase, the risk of intracranial hemorrhage is less. Re-administration of streptokinase within six months is not considered safe due to its high antigenicity and associated high antistreptococcal antibody titer. It is not a plasminogen activator. However, after binding with free circulating plasminogen, it forms a complex that converts additional plasminogen to active plasmin. As it is produced from streptococcus, it often exerts febrile and other allergic reactions. Dose-dependant hypotension is another potential caution for this drug.

**Alteplase**

Alteplase is the recombinant plasminogen activator and identical to native tPA, which is more fibrin­specific with a plasma half­life of 4­6 minutes. It is the most often used fibrinolytic in the treatment of acute cardiovascular events (STEMI), pulmonary embolism(PE), and acute ischemic stroke(AIS). Theoretically, alteplase should only be active on the surface of a fibrin clot. However, it exhibits systemic fibrinolysis; thus, a substantial amount of circulating fibrin degradation products has been observed with a moderate risk of bleeding. Alteplase is not antigenic and, therefore, seldom associated with any allergic manifestations.

**Tenecteplase (TNK-tPA)**

It is a commonly used fibrinolytic agent across the USA (except for ischemic stroke), Canada, and many European countries. It is as efficient as alteplase while exerting a lower risk of non-cerebral bleeding. Tenecteplase has higher fibrin specificity and a longer plasma half-life with final clearance, primarily through hepatic metabolism. Furthermore, it lacks antigenicity and is more comfortable to administer.

**Reteplase**

It is a second ­generation recombinant plasminogen activator that works more rapidly with lower bleeding tendency than the first ­generation agent alteplase. It demonstrates weaker binding with fibrin than native tPA does and allows more free diffusion through the clot rather than binding only to the surface as tPA does. Additionally, reteplase does not show competitive inhibition of plasminogen, thus allowing plasminogen to transform into clot­ dissolving plasmin. These characteristics, in sum, explain its faster clot resolution than other agents. The FDA­ approved reteplase administration of two boluses 10U 30 minutes apart for AMI management. Each of these boluses is administered over two minutes. Like alteplase, reteplase can be readministered when necessary and is not antigenic.****

**Urokinase**

Urokinase has been used most often for occluded catheters and peripheral vascular thrombus. It is considered a physiologic thrombolytic usually produced by renal parenchyma, thus purified from human urine. However, recombinant urokinase is also commercially available. In contrast to streptokinase, urokinase directly cleaves plasminogen into plasmin. Its low antigenicity allows repeated dosing without antigenic problems.

**Prourokinase**

Prourokinase is a relatively inactive precursor that necessitates the conversion to urokinase to become active. The need for such conversion provides the fibrin-specific physiologic properties of pro-urokinase. It is a newer agent that is already in clinical trials.

**Anistreplase**

Anisoylated purified streptokinase activator complex (APSAC), or anistreplase, is a complex mixture of streptokinase and plasminogen that does not depend on circulating plasminogen to be effective. Despite its many theoretical benefits over streptokinase, it exerts high antigenicity. When administered, the acyl group spontaneously hydrolyzes, freeing the activated streptokinase-pro activator complex. Like streptokinase, anistreplase does not distinguish between circulating vs. fibrin­-bound plasminogen; subsequently, it produces the systemic lytic state.