**Effects on Bone Metabolism**

In disease states associated with excess parathyroid hormone (PTH) in the blood, such as primary hyperparathyroidism, increased osteoclast activity, and accelerated bone resorption occurs. It may, therefore, comes as paradoxical that parathyroid hormone or its analogs can be a treatment for osteoporosis, a disease associated with accelerated bone loss. It turns out that the difference in PTH effects on the bone stem from differences in the dose and pattern of exposure of bone to it. When under continuous exposure to PTH (e.g., hyperparathyroidism), bone undergoes resorption more than formation, while intermittent exposure to low-dose PTH (like daily administration of teriparatide) induces bone formation more than resorption. Although The underlying molecular mechanisms undergirding this variation in effect (i.e., catabolic effect with sustained exposure vs. anabolic effect with intermittent exposure) are largely unknown, some involved molecular signaling mechanisms have been elucidated.

Teriparatide is an analog of PTH that binds through the N-terminal moiety to PTH type 1 receptors (PTH type 1R). PTH type 1R are G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) expressed on surfaces of various cells, the most important of which in respect to the classical physiological actions of PTH on calcium and phosphate homeostasis and bone metabolism are osteoblasts, osteocytes, and renal tubular cells. Following ligand binding to the receptor, both Gs–mediated activation of adenylate cyclase and Gq-mediated activation of protein kinase C (PKC) occur.

The anabolic effects of (intermittent) PTH are mediated by (1) upregulated transcriptional expression of pro-osteoblastogenic growth factors like insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2); (2) modulation of the wnt/beta-catenin osteoanabolic signaling pathway by down-regulating the synthesis of the wnt-antagonist sclerostin, and (3) increased expression and activity of Runx2 - a transcription factor essential for differentiation of osteoblasts.

To exert its catabolic effects, PTH acts on the same receptors in osteoblasts and osteocytes, increasing the expression of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines like receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

**Effects on Calcium and Phosphate Homeostasis**

Teriparatide has the same actions as endogenous PTH on calcium and phosphate homeostasis (i.e., increases serum calcium and lowers serum phosphate). These effects are generated through the well-known effects of PTH on kidneys and bone. PTH stimulates distal tubular calcium reabsorption in the kidney, inhibits proximal tubular phosphate reabsorption, and activates the 1-alpha-hydroxylase enzyme in proximal tubules, which subsequently converts the filtered 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, the most active vitamin D metabolite. In bone, it mobilizes calcium from the bone matrix into circulation.