Despite their significant efficacy, their many adverse effects limit the utility of corticosteroids. Corticosteroid adverse effects appear to be related to both their average dose and cumulative duration.

1. Osteoporosis, fractures, and osteonecrosis: Corticosteroids impair the mineralization of bone matrix by initially favoring the activity of osteoclasts (during the first 6 to 12 months of therapy) while also inhibiting the absorption of calcium in the gut.

2. Adrenal suppression: Endogenously, the production of corticosteroids is under the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The rapid induction of corticosteroids occurs in response to inflammation and other stressors, but they also follow secretion patterns associated with circadian rhythms.

3. Cushingoid features: Cushing syndrome can occur in patients taking corticosteroids through all routes of administration.

4. Diabetes and hyperglycemia: Corticosteroids are the most common cause of drug-induced diabetes mellitus. Corticosteroid treatment also increases insulin resistance in patients with diabetes mellitus.

5. Myopathy: Corticosteroids are associated with proximal muscle weakness and atrophy, which usually develop over several weeks to months. Higher doses can lead to a more rapid onset. Myalgias and tenderness of the muscles are typically not seen.

6. Glaucoma and cataracts: There is a dose-dependent risk for both glaucoma and cataracts for patients on corticosteroids.

7. Psychiatric disturbance: Corticosteroids can cause a range of psychiatric disorders, including psychosis, agitation, insomnia, irritability, hypomania, anxiety, and mood lability.

8. Immunosuppression: The desired immune-suppressing and anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids can also predispose patients to infection. A meta-analysis of 2000 patients found that the infection rate is significantly higher in patients using systemic corticosteroids when the daily dose was 10 mg/day. The immunosuppressive effect is impacted not just by the dosage but also by the patient's age, underlying disorders, and any concomitant use of biologic or non-biologic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs. In particular, patients on corticosteroids are susceptible to invasive fungal and viral infections.

9. Cardiovascular adverse effects: Corticosteroid use is associated with hypertension, hyperglycemia, obesity, and conflicting evidence exists regarding hyperlipidemia.

10. Gastrointestinal adverse effects: Multiple gastrointestinal effects correlate with corticosteroid therapy, including gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, abdominal distention, and dyspepsia.

11. Dermatologic adverse effects: Corticosteroid use induces skin atrophy, leading to thinning and fragility of the skin and striae and purpura. The striae are usually permanent, while the other changes are reversible.

12. Growth suppression: In addition to the above adverse effects, children and adolescents are also at risk for growth suppression. Oral corticosteroid therapy in children has links with delayed growth and puberty. Additionally, there is evidence suggesting that the final height of children on corticosteroid therapy may also decrease. Importantly, while reduced growth can be an independent effect of corticosteroid therapy, it can also be a marker of adrenal suppression.