The arterial supply of the proximal trachea consists of the tracheoesophageal branches of the inferior thyroid artery and small branches from the subclavian, internal mammary, and innominate artery. The distal trachea, carina, and bronchi are supplied by the bronchial arteries, which usually originate from the proximal descending aorta. Before entering the trachea, each vessel branches superiorly and inferiorly across several tracheal rings, creating a lateral longitudinal anastomosis. From this anastomosis, transverse intercartilaginous arteries enter the space between the tracheal rings and course either anteriorly or posteriorly. The anterior transverse intercartilaginous arteries will travel between the rings and eventually terminate in the submucosal capillary plexus once they reach the midline. This plexus will serve as the blood supply for the tracheal cartilage while the membranous portions of the trachea are supplied directly by secondary branches of the tracheoesophageal arteries.

The dual blood supply of the lungs includes the high-pressure bronchial arteries and the low-pressure pulmonary arteries. The bronchial arteries provide 1% of total blood flow to the lungs and supply the non-respiratory portions of the lungs, visceral pleura, intrapulmonary blood vessel walls, and lymphatic system. The pulmonary arteries provide the other 99% of the total blood flow to the lung and bear the responsibility for carrying deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle to the gas-exchange portions of the lung.

Venous drainage of the bronchi occurs in part through the bronchial veins into the azygous and hemiazygous systems. The remaining blood drains into the pulmonary veins as they return to the left heart.