Adequate nutrition is essential for any vitamin prevention. Healthcare professionals should advise patients regarding consuming vitamin B6-rich foods such as chickpea, liver, poultry, and fortified ready-to-eat cereals. B6 deficiency is generally rare due to dietary inadequacy.

Gynecologists, obstetricians, neurologists, hematologists, and dermatologists often need to diagnose, treat, and collaborate about patients with Vitamin B6 deficiency or excess. The clinical picture accompanying vitamin B6 deficiency is not uniquely characteristic to B6 deficiency, so thorough analysis and good observation skills are needed to identify the problem. Susceptible populations, such as patients with chronic diseases and poor quality diet, should be identified and managed accordingly.

Clinical use of vitamin B6 in some diseases is controversial, as no definite evidence is available for its use in those conditions. But because of the relative safety of high doses of water-soluble vitamins, no strict monitoring of the patients is needed. Some conditions require much higher doses than normally necessary, such as dependency syndromes, and observation for adverse effects is necessary.

Whether vitamin B6 is used to treat a disease or merely as a dietary supplement, all interprofessional team members, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and dieticians/nutritionists, need to operate as a cohesive unit and have access to the same clinical information so they can implement interventions that will optimize patient outcomes and minimize adverse events. [Level 5]