The administration of succinylcholine chloride is contraindicated in patients with known decreased plasma cholinesterase activity, recent burns or trauma within 24 to 72 hours, and muscle myopathies. In patients with reduced plasma cholinesterase activity, drug metabolism is prolonged, thus prolonging the duration of its paralytic and other effects. Patients with recent burns or acute trauma are susceptible to have hyperkalemic rhabdomyolysis, which is exacerbated by the administration of succinylcholine chloride and can result in ventricular dysrhythmias or even death.

Contraindications include those with undiagnosed muscle myopathies; the most frequent is Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Other conditions that pose a potential contraindication to the administration of the depolarizing neuromuscular blockade or use with caution are mastocytosis, myxedema, myasthenia gravis, muscular dystrophy, closed-angle glaucoma, severe liver and/or renal impairment or failure, cerebrovascular accident longer than 72 hours, and malignant hyperthermia. Those on aminoglycoside antibiotics or cholinesterase inhibitors should not be given succinylcholine chloride due to their ability to exacerbate paralysis or reduce the metabolism of the depolarizing neuromuscular blockade. If neuromuscular blockade is necessary for patients with these high-risk conditions, the clinician should consider using a non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent.

The use of neuromuscular blockade, i.e., paralytics, is also contraindicated in patients who are not adequately sedated. While the agent will remain effective in producing neuromuscular blockage without adequate sedation, the patient may be conscious or semi-conscious while paralyzed. For obvious reasons, this should be avoided.