First, the physician will diagnose the lumbar vertebrae by noting the position of the vertebrae's transverse processes while the patient is in a neutral position, flexed and extended based on Fryette’s Principles.

The following steps will describe the treatment for a neutral, side bent left, and rotated right diagnosis (NSlRr).

- Step 1: Have the patient sit straddling a treatment table near the end of the table such that the patient's back is to the physician, and the physician can stand beside/behind the patient. The patient should cross their arms across their chest.

- Step 2: The physician will stand behind the patient and place their left axilla on top of the patient's left shoulder. The physician's left hand will then contact the patient's right shoulder. Resulting in the physician’s left arm crossing anteriorly to the patient’s chest.

- Step 3: The physician palpates the dysfunctional lumbar segment with their right hand and maintains that position during the treatment to feel the restrictive barrier and monitor for release of the tissues in the lumbar spine.

- Step 4: The physician will induce right side bending by applying downward pressure to the patient’s right shoulder.  Next, the physician will rotate the patient to the left down to the level of the lumbar spine segment by pulling the patient's right shoulder anteriorly until a restrictive barrier is palpated. Ultimately this will yield the patient's lumbar segment being addressed being placed in a rotated left and side bent right position, which is opposite of the patient’s lumbar spine diagnosis. This places the segment being treated at its restrictive barrier, and the segment is now positioned so that the segmental restriction can be corrected.  At this point, the physician can add a slight compressive force downwards through their axilla and left hand down into the segment in question, which assists tissue release.

- Step 5: While maintaining the restrictive barrier, the physician asks the patient to  “attempt to sit in a neutral position,” or “turn your body to the right against my thumb that is placed on your back," or “push your left shoulder toward the ceiling.” These requests are intended to have the patient contract specific muscle groups and apply a gentle counterforce against the position being maintained by the physician.  In other words, the patient rotates right and side bends left against the physician’s isometric resistance created by maintaining the patient's treatment position. The patient should only utilize approximately 30 % of their force during this step. The physician asks the patient to maintain the contraction for 3-5 seconds.

- Step 6: The physician repositions the patient to the new restrictive barrier as done before in Step 4 and asks the patient to attempt to sit in a neutral position, again, as described in Step 5.

- Step 7: Repeat Steps 4 through 6 between 3 to 5 times.

- Step 8: Lastly, the physician rechecks the dysfunctional lumbar segment for improvement.

The following steps will describe the treatment for a flexed, side bent left, and rotated left diagnosis (FSlRl).

- Step 1: Have the patient sit straddling a treatment table near the edge of the table such that the patient's back is to the physician, and the physician can stand beside/behind the patient. The patient should cross their arms across their chest.

- Step 2: The physician will stand behind the patient and place their right axilla on top of the patient's right shoulder. The physician's right hand will then contact the patient's left shoulder. This position results in the physician's right arm crossing anteriorly to the patient’s chest.

- Step 3: The physician palpates the dysfunctional lumbar segment with their left hand and maintains that position during the treatment to feel the restrictive barrier and monitor for the release of the tissues in the lumbar spine.

- Step 4: The physician will induce right side bending by applying downward pressure to the patient’s right shoulder through contact with the physician's axilla. Next, the physician will rotate the patient to the right down to the level of the lumbar spine segment by pulling the patient's left shoulder anteriorly until a restrictive barrier is palpated. The physician then extends the patient’s lumbar spine by leaning the patient backward slightly until a restrictive barrier is palpated at the segment, and all three planes of motion are engaged to their restrictive barriers. Ultimately this will yield the patient's lumbar segment being addressed being placed in a rotated right, side bent right, and an extended position, opposite of the patient’s lumbar spine diagnosis. This places the segment being treated at its restrictive barrier, and the segment is now positioned so that the segmental restriction can be corrected.  At this point, the physician can add a slight compressive force downwards through their axilla and right hand down into the segment in question, which assists tissue release.

- Step 5: While maintaining the restrictive barrier, the physician asks the patient to “attempt to sit in a neutral position,” or “turn your body to the left against my thumb that is placed on your back,” or “push your right shoulder toward the ceiling.” These requests are intended to have the patient contract specific muscle groups and apply a gentle counterforce against the position being maintained by the physician. In other words, the patient side bends left, rotates left, and flexes the lumbar spine against the physician's isometric resistance created by maintaining the patient's treatment position. The patient should only utilize approximately 30 % of their force during this step.  The physician asks the patient to maintain the contraction for 3 to 5 seconds.

- Step 6: The physician will reposition the patient to the new restrictive barrier as done before in Step 4 and ask the patient to attempt to sit in a neutral position again, as described in Step 5.

- Step 7: Repeat Steps 4 through 6 between 3 to 5 times.

- Step 8: Lastly, the physician will recheck the dysfunctional lumbar segment for improvement.