The diagnosis of pityriasis rotunda usually is based on clinical examination. Skin lesions are generally asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic. Pityriasis rotunda plaques are scaly, dry, sharply defined and round with prominent hair follicles but no inflammatory erythema. Scales may be highlighted by scratching the plaques. The lesions appear hypopigmented in fair-skinned patients and hyperpigmented in dark-skinned patients. The plaques of pityriasis rotunda may be confluent. Their size is variable (1 cm to more than 20 cm), and their number ranges from one to dozens but rarely exceeds 100. Pityriasis rotunda affects mainly the trunk (back and abdomen), buttocks and proximal parts of the limbs (thighs and arms). The face, hands, and feet are usually not involved. In some patients, associated skin lesions of ichthyosis vulgaris may be observed. A familial history of ichthyosis vulgaris has been reported in certain patients with pityriasis rotunda.

Grimalt et al. proposed a classification of pityriasis rotunda. A first subtype consists of less than 30 hyperpigmented patches, occurring mainly in black and Asian persons. In this subtype, no similar familial cases are seen, but associated diseases are frequently described, for example, malignancies (solid tumors and hemopathies), systemic diseases, and infections. A second subtype is characterized by more than 30 hypopigmented patches, occurring mainly in white patients who have a familial history of similar skin lesions. There usually is no underlying disease. This classification is schematic since overlap cases have been reported.

The clinical differential diagnosis includes tinea versicolor, erythrasma, tinea corporis, nummular eczema, early-stage mycosis fungoides, fixed drug reaction, pityriasis rosea, pityriasis alba, figurate erythema, and leprosy.