Detection is the first step in evaluation and treatment. The syndrome of delirium presents over hours to days. A recent study estimated that delirium is unrecognized in up to 60% of cases. It is much easier to detect hyperactive delirium because patients will often cause a disturbance in their environment. However, hypoactive delirium is often missed as patients are less disruptive. Caregivers may provide clues to the presence of hypoactive delirium with comments such as "they are sleeping more than usual," "they haven't eaten much in the last few days," or "I'm worried they are depressed, they just stay in their room all day."

In a monitored setting, several tools have been developed to help detect delirium. One of the tools with the most widespread use is the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). It has been validated with a sensitivity of 94% to 100% and specificity of 90% to 95% in the  diagnosis of delirium, and it includes the following criteria:

The presence of delirium requires features 1 and 2 and either 3 or 4:

- Acute change in mental status with a fluctuating course

- Inattention (reduced ability to sustain attention and follow conversations)

- Disorganized thinking (problems with memory, orientation, or language)

- Altered level of consciousness (hypervigilance, drowsiness, or stupor)

The CAM has been adapted for target populations, including the CAM-ICU, which added nonverbal tasks for ventilated patients. Adaptations have also been made for the emergency department and those residing in nursing homes.

Subjecting a delirious patient to medical evaluations can be stress-inducing and perpetuate delirium. It is advised to focus on the most probable diagnostic suspicions first. As an initial step, a complete blood count, arterial blood analysis (if appropriate), complete metabolic panel, and urinalysis are often recommended. Chest radiography, electrocardiography, and bladder scan are also recommended. Additional tests such as a lumbar puncture, electroencephalography, and toxicology studies are useful in select cases. Blood cultures should be taken if the clinician suspects sepsis of an indeterminate origin. Brain imaging may be indicated in some cases but is not routinely required. It is also recommended to evaluate for untreated sources of pain, including constipation.

The diagnosis of delirium is clinically based. There have been studies looking for biomarkers to help diagnose delirium, including inflammatory markers, cortisol, interleukins, and C-reactive protein. However, none have been validated for clinical application, such as diagnosis or monitoring.