A thorough physical and neurological exam should be conducted to exclude serious medical and neurological disorders. Neurological disorders that need to be ruled out include multiple sclerosis, stroke, Guillain-Barré syndrome, myopathies, polymyositis, and myasthenia gravis. Depending on the presentation, a focused neurological exam should be performed. Described below are some tests for motor symptoms with high sensitivity and specificity for CD. A full range of neurological exams for motor, sensory, and gait are summarized by Oneal and Baslet.

Hoover's sign (63% Sensitivity & 100% specificity): This test is commonly used to separate organic from the nonorganic cause of weakness or paralysis. An examiner's hand is placed below the heel of the affected leg, and the patient is asked to flex the hip of the normal leg against resistance. In organic disorders, there should not be any pressure on the examiner's hand on the affected side, while pressure is felt in patients with FNSD/CD.

Variable Strength (63% sensitivity and 97% specificity): The weakness is inconsistent with variable force at different locations.

Inconsistencies in the exam (13% sensitivity and 98% specificity): Individuals have an inconsistent presentation of signs and symptoms when performing voluntary activity and when they are being examined.

Co-contraction (17% sensitivity and 100% specificity): When asked to flex the elbow, there is a contraction of both the triceps and biceps.

For tremors, distraction affecting the tremor (92% sensitivity and 94% specificity), tremor variability (22% sensitivity and 92% specificity), and tremor entertainment ( (91% sensitivity and 92% specificity) are commonly used.