Several muscles form and are attached to the perineal body:

- The superficial transverse muscle of the perineum: it is a thin muscular lamina, even, stretched transversely in the anterior region of the perineum, below the superficial perineal fascia. It constitutes the posterior side of a muscular triangle of the anterior perineum, and the origins are from the inner surface of the ischial tuberosity and, it ends in the central tendon of the perineum where the fibers pass to the contralateral muscles forming a criss-cross pattern,

- The bulbocavernosus muscle: In the male, it consists of two symmetrical portions, joined by a thin medial tendon. The muscular bundles originate from this raphe and from the perineal body, in which they resolve to continue contralaterally with the transverse muscle and EAS. The back beams form a thin sheet, and they insert into the body of the perineum. The middle bundles surround the bulb of the urethra and the adjacent portion of the spongy body of the penis taking on its dorsal surface of these formations where they intertwine with the lateral beams. The most anterior bundles open and embrace the cavernous bodies of the penis and the dorsal vessels of the penis. The bulbocavernosus muscle contributes to the emptying of the urethra after emptying the bladder; during the urination its beams they are relaxed, entering into action at the end of the act. The middle bundles contribute to the erection of the corpus cavernosum, compressing the erectile tissue of the bulb, while the anterior bundles concur to compress the deep dorsal vein of the penis. In the female, the bulbocavernosus muscle covers the superficial parts of the bulbs of the vestibule and the major vestibular glands, and carries anteriorly, surrounding the vaginal wall to end on the bodies of the clitoris. The muscle bundles are inserted posteriorly in the body of the perineum where they mix with those of the EAS and of the contralateral transverse muscle; by contracting they cause a narrowing of the vaginal orifice, the secretion of the vestibular glands of the Bartholin, and, compressing the deep dorsal vein of the clitoris, contribute to erection.

- The external (striated) sphincter of the anus (EAS)

- The internal (smooth) sphincter of the anus (IAS)

- The external (striated) urethral sphincter (EUS): It is an external muscular layer of the urethra arranged circularly around the smooth muscle layer. It extends upward from the base of the bladder to the perineal membrane and corresponds to the area of maximum urethral closure. In the passage through the pelvic floor, the fibers of the levator ani muscle surround the external sphincter forming the so-called peri-urethral sphincter. Some studies have shown a direct continuity between the EUS and the periurethral bundles of the levator anis muscle; others claim the two muscles are separated by a continuous band of connective tissue. In the male, we recognize three portions. The prostate portion has the form of an open back shower, formed by transversely directed fibers that embrace the anterior surface of the prostate and run out on its lateral sides. The trigonal portion constitutes a muscular ring that completely surrounds the membranous urethra in its passage through the perineal membrane. Lastly, the bulbourethral portion is a muscular lamina that originates from the urogenital triangle, surrounds the urethra and terminates posteriorly in the perineal body, enveloping the urethral bulb glands. In the female, striated circular fibers compose the external sphincter. There are three distinct parts. A complete muscular ring surrounding the smooth muscle of the urethra comprises the proximal portion of the sphincter. The middle portion, with greater development, represents the area of maximum urethral closing pressure. And lastly, the distal portion is the urogenital sphincter, placed near at the urogenital diaphragm and superiorly to the perineal membrane. Some fibers surround both the urethra and the vagina, constituting the urethrovaginal sphincter, while others go laterally and are inserted on the pubic branches, forming a ring open posteriorly: the compressor of the urethra muscle. These are the muscles in the male called deep transverse muscle of perineum.

- The deep transverse muscle of the perineum: It is a laminar muscle arranged transversely, present in men superior to the superficial layer of the perineal membrane. In males, the bundles insert laterally on the inner face of the ischium, and medially they cross over with the contralateral muscle, contributing to the formation of the perineal body, where the fibers join the deep part of the EAS posteriorly and the urethral sphincter muscle anteriorly. In the women, two muscles replace the deep transverse muscle. The compressor urethra muscle is a series of muscular bundles originating from the ischiopubic ramus go anteriorly and decussate to constitute a flat flank located anterior to the urethra, inferior to the urethral sphincter. Other fibers with a similar origin are directed medially extending to the vagina and rarely reach the perineal body to form a real deep transverse perineal muscle. The urethrovaginal sphincter muscle originates from the perineal body, runs anteriorly on the sides of the vagina and the urethra, and move contralaterally to form a thin, flat muscle layer located at the front of the urethra and inferior the urethral compressor muscle, with an essential role in urinary continence.

- The puborectalis muscle: This muscle constitutes the major portion of the levator anis muscle. At the pubic origin, it is inseparable from the pubococcygeal muscle. Its bundles are joined with the contralateral ones to form a sling around the anorectal junction; at the perineal body, it shares connections with the external anal sphincter muscle by fibrous tissue.

- The longitudinal anal muscle: It is as a vertical layer of muscular tissue interposed between the IAS and the EAS, part of the descending longitudinal rectal muscle that origins from the levator anis muscle. Its fibers have a spiral direction shortening the anal canal during contraction and contributing to continence. At the most caudal part of the muscle, smooth bundles called the “corrugator cutis ani” pass through the distal anal sphincter into the perianal skin and the ischiorectal fossa.

- The rectourethral muscle: Its placement is at the top of EAS, and it is on the link between the longitudinal muscle of the rectum coming from below and Denonvilliers’ fascia coming from above.

- The perineal lateral smooth muscles (PSMs): Covered by the skin, these are the lateral aspect of the perineal body. They receive the LAM bundles that continue anteriorly to the vestibular area of the superficial perineal fascia.