The first step in assessing someone with vaginal bleeding or indeed any bleeding is to determine if the patient is stable. Vaginal bleeding can be copious, and the medical provider should elicit history for a worrisome amount of bleeding (bleeding for greater than 7 days, bleeding through pads/tampons, the passage of clots larger than 3 cm in diameter, and symptoms of anemia). The provider should be cognizant that significant amount of blood may be lost with no change in vital signs, and so exam should carefully assess for pallor, orthostasis, or mild dyspnea. In patients with abnormal vital signs, significant hemorrhage should be presumed to be present.

In premenarchal children, history should include the maternal history of first menses, child's history of potential trauma (including abuse), endocrine symptoms (weight loss, polyuria), and history of other signs of early puberty. In children, speculum exam is not appropriate, but exam of the introitus is important to look for signs of trauma, masses, and foreign bodies. In some cases, the child may require exam under anesthesia.

In post-menopausal women, history should focus on other symptoms concerning for malignancy (weight loss, easy bruising) or endocrine disease. A physical exam will often show signs of atrophy, but may also give evidence of trauma or infection. Physical examination is not adequate to exclude endometrial malignancy in post-menopausal women.

In women of reproductive age, the provider should obtain a sexual and menstrual history, and attempt to determine if the bleeding is cyclical (menorrhagia) or non-cyclical (menometrorrhagia). Full pelvic exam, including speculum exam and bimanual exam, is appropriate.