Rifampin is a highly lipid-soluble drug, and it is available in oral or intravenous formulations. When given orally, it is rapidly absorbed and distributed throughout the body. It is excreted equally in bile and urine and has a half-life of 2.5 hours.

**Adults**

**Tuberculosis**

Rifampicin 10 mg/kg injected IV, in a single daily administration, not to exceed 600 mg/day. Rifampin is used in the treatment of all forms of tuberculosis. Usually, a three-drug regimen of rifampin, isoniazid, and pyrazinamide are given in the starting phase of short-course therapy, generally for two months.

The American Thoracic Society, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and The Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis recommend either ethambutol or streptomycin be added as a fourth drug in a regimen containing rifampin, isoniazid (INH), and pyrazinamide for TB treatment unless the likelihood of INH resistance is very low. The need to add the fourth medicine should be rechecked when the susceptibility testing results are obtained. If the community rates of INH resistance are less than 4%, an initial treatment regimen with less than four drugs can be considered. Following this initial phase, treatment should be continued with rifampin and isoniazid for at least four months. Maintenance therapy should be continued for an extended period if the patient is still culture or sputum positive, if the patient is HIV positive or if resistant organisms are present.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**It does not require dosage adjustments in renal disorders.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**It is usually avoided in patients with preexisting liver diseases since rifampin is associated with significant hepatotoxicity, but the dose can be adjusted if a potential benefit exists.

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding Considerations:**It can be safely administered during pregnancy or breastfeeding and is not associated with any congenital malformations or neonatal complications.

**Geriatric Considerations:**Cases of rifampin-induced esophagitis have also been documented, especially in the elderly population. This is why it is recommended that rifampin is taken with a full glass of water, 1 or 2 hours before meals.

Rifampin is a potent cytochrome P450 enzyme inducer. A careful review of the patient's medications should be performed in order to avoid any dampening effects of concomitant medications taken alongside rifampin.