The primary cause of significant pulmonary hypertension (PH) is almost always increased pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). Increased flow alone (i.e., right ventricle output) does not usually cause significant PH because the pulmonary vascular bed vasodilates and recruits vessels in response to increased flow. Similarly, increased pulmonary venous pressure (represented by the alveolar occlusion pressure) alone does not usually cause significant PH. However, a chronic increase of either flow and/or pulmonary venous pressure can increase pulmonary vascular resistance. Numerous medical conditions can alter all variables:

- Increased PVR may be due to conditions associated with occlusive vasculopathy (remodeling and altered vascular tone) of the small pulmonary arteries and arterioles (conditions associated with PAH), conditions that induce hypoxic vasoconstriction (hypoventilation syndromes and parenchymal lung disease), or conditions that decrease the cross-sectional area of the pulmonary vascular bed (pulmonary emboli, interstitial lung disease).

- Increased flow through the pulmonary vasculature may be due to congenital heart defects with left-to-right shunt (atrial septal defects, ventricular septal defects, patent ductus arteriosus), anemia, or liver cirrhosis.

- Increased pulmonary venous pressure may be due to left ventricular systolic or diastolic dysfunction, mitral valve disease, constrictive or restrictive cardiomyopathy or pulmonary venous obstruction (eg, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease).

PAH is a proliferative vasculopathy of the small pulmonary muscular arterioles (less than 50 microns) that is often characterized by vasoconstriction, hyperplasia, hypertrophy, fibrosis, and thrombosis involving all three layers of the vascular wall (intima, media, and adventitia). Patients with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension and heritable variants may have a genetic predisposition to PAH (bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 mutations) with additional contributing mechanisms including vasoactive mediators, potassium channel dysfunction, and abnormal response to estrogen. The pathogenesis of other forms of PAH such as drugs and toxins, connective tissue disease, congenital heart disease, human immunodeficiency virus, portopulmonary hypertension, schistosomiasis, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, or persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn is poorly understood.

TR is characterized by the backflow of blood into the right atrium during systole. Since the right atrium is relatively compliant, there are often no major hemodynamic consequences with mild or moderately severe TR. However, when TR is severe, right atrial and venous pressure rise and can result in the signs and symptoms of right-sided heart failure. In such patients, right ventricular pressure and/or volume overload frequently lead to right ventricular systolic dysfunction and a low forward cardiac output.