Investigation on the pathogenesis of sinus arrhythmia continues but three main theorized mechanisms exist at this time. These include respiratory-phasic, nonrespiratory-nonphasic, and nonrespiratory-ventriculophasic sinus arrhythmia.

**Respiratory-Phasic**

Respiratory sinus arrhythmia is a common finding. It is a normal alteration in cardiac rhythm generated from the stimulation of the vagus nerve and changes in cardiac filling pressures during respiration. Recently, there has been controversy regarding the underlying pathogenesis of sinus arrhythmia. Some studies have begun to associate sinus rhythm with obesity, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension, while others continue to support a reduction in sinus arrhythmia when these conditions are present. Some studies suggest there may be some relationship between heart failure and other systemic conditions.

One study attempted to evaluate the influences of vagal and sympathetic efferent activity on sinus arrhythmia through the administration of hyoscine butylbromide and atenolol. Administration of hyoscine butylbromide resulted in the reduction of sinus arrhythmia, while atenolol reduced vagal tone, prolonging the mean R-R and increasing sinus arrhythmia. The study suggested that mediation of sinus arrhythmia occurs through vagal stimulation.

**Nonrespiratory**

In nonrespiratory sinus arrhythmia, electrocardiograms will appear similar to the respiratory type. The two differ in that nonrespiratory sinus arrhythmia is not associated with the respiratory cycle. While it can occur within healthy individuals, more often, this type correlates with underlying pathology.

**Ventriculophasic**

The ventriculophasic sinus arrhythmia, when present, typically occurs in patients with third-degree AV block. However, they demonstrate correlations between premature ventricular contractions. Currently theorized mechanisms suggest that ventriculophasic sinus arrhythmia results due to a prolonged cardiac filling resulting in increased stroke volume. The increased stroke volume triggers a carotid baroreceptor response. On EKG, this is represented by an interval shortening between the QRS and subsequent P wave.