Evaluation begins with a comprehensive history and physical exam. A thorough neurologic exam is warranted with careful attention to the impairment of autonomic functions, myotomes, and dermatomes.

If the injury is open, it may be immediately explored to determine the extent of damage and address it with surgical intervention, if indicated. For cases with possible spontaneous recovery (lower grade axonotmesis and neurapraxia), patients should be monitored weekly for regain of function. If spontaneous recovery does not occur within a few months, surgery is warranted.

Technology is helpful to evaluate nerve injury if immediate surgical intervention is not indicated, the injury is closed, or surgery was performed, and monitoring is desirable. Although, electrodiagnostic studies may have normal results 2-3 days post-injury and may not reveal the full extent of the injury until 2-3 weeks post-injury.

Nerve conduction studies help determine the location, severity, and progression of nerve injury via motor and sensory conduction studies. When the electrodes are placed proximal to the lesion with recording distally (muscle for motor and nerve for sensory), the amplitude is decreased, velocity is decreased, and conduction is impaired or inhibited with axonotmesis and neurotmesis. Findings remain normal for these studies or slightly diminished until approximately 11 days post-injury for sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) and seven days post-injury for compound motor action potentials (CMAPs). Preserved distal responses with a conduction block over 12 days post-injury is characteristic of neuropraxia.

Compound muscle action potential (CMAP) is the summation of the response of the motor endplate potentials; the electrode stimulation is motor conduction studies. It reflects the volume of intact axons. In Wallerian degeneration, CMAP decreases significantly approximately ten days post-injury. In neurotmesis, the reading will be 0 mV when electrodes are placed proximal to the injury site. The nerve conduction block occurs at 50% to 75% amplitude reduction.

EMG is helpful 2-3 weeks post-injury for determining whether the source of weakness is from the muscle or nerves. Needles are placed intramuscularly with the observation of muscle response during placement, abnormal spontaneous activity, and motor unit potentials during contraction. In complete denervation, there are absent motor evoked potentials and low amplitude sharp waves and fibrillation during rest. The nature of abnormal spontaneous activity informs the provider about the time of injury, location, nature, and severity.

Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) and motor evoked potential (MEP) may be helpful intraoperatively to confirm the integrity of a sensory or motor nerve, respectively.

Additional modalities include ultrasound, magnetic resonance myelography, CT myelography, magnetic resonance neurography, and other radiologic studies.