**External Nose**

The external nose is a complex structure that can be divided topographically into three units: the frontal, lateral, and basal views. The upper third contains the paired nasal bones that extend from the frontal bone caudally towards the rhinion. The angle created between the nasal bones and the frontal bone is the nasofrontal angle (also called the radix, or root of the nose) which varies with gender. The nasal bones have two additional bony articulations, the lacrimal bone superolateral, and the nasomaxillary processes inferolaterally. The caudal portion of the nasal bones overlaps with the upper lateral cartilages.[1]

The middle third of the nose contains the paired upper lateral cartilages (ULC) also known as the cartilaginous middle vault region. The ULC’s expand inferiorly and laterally in a rectangular shape and approach the external lateral triangle of the piriform aperture. Superiorly, they fuse with the septum to provide support to the mid-dorsum of the nose.

The lower third of the nose is comprised of the paired lower lateral cartilage that form the lateral crus, middle crus and medial crus of the alar cartilage. The medial crurae form the columella as it adjoins the septal cartilage inferiorly and extends from the upper lip to the tip of the nose.

**Nasal Septum**

The nasal septum is in the midline of the nose and made of flat cartilage anteriorly and bone posteriorly. The anterior portion is made of irregular quadrangular hyaline cartilage that inserts into the nasomaxillary crest of the maxilla and nasal spine.  The posterior bony part is composed of the vomer, maxillary and palatine bones inferiorly, and the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone. [1][3]

**The Lateral Wall of the Nose**

Intranasally, the lateral wall of the nose is composed of the superior, inferior and middle turbinates. They are responsible for humidifying and warming inspired air. The middle and superior turbinates are extensions of the ethmoid bone, while the inferior turbinate is a single bone. They communicate with the meatus for sinus and lacrimal drainage.