HDL or good cholesterol plays an important role in preventing cardiovascular events through its main function of transmitting cholesterol from the peripheral tissues to be excreted by the liver. It has many other functions:

- It plays as an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent through the inhibition of LDL oxidation and endothelial adhesion molecules expression.

- It has antithrombotic properties.

- It can also improve endothelial function through the promotion of cells repair and promote angiogenesis.

- It helps diabetic patients to have better diabetic control.

To maintain a healthy lifestyle and to keep lipids profile within the regular limit there are many advises to be given include: regular aerobic exercise, maintaining a healthy weight, smoking cessation, and replacement of monounsaturated for saturated fatty acids raise HDL cholesterol. There are also certain types of food which are recommended for patients that are at risk for a CVS events that are rich in omega-3 fatty acids and could increase the HDL level and lower the LDL level includes; Olive oil, whole grains, beans and legumes, High fiber fruits, fatty fish, Flax and chia seeds, nuts and avocado.

Some medications, such as beta-blockers, benzodiazepines, and androgens, are associated with a decrease in HDL cholesterol. We do not stop these drugs if they are important to the treatment of other medical conditions. Also, medications that are toxic or known to cause peripheral neuropathy, such as vincristine or taxols (paclitaxel), should be used with caution.