The differential diagnosis for PRP varies greatly depending on the subtype. In general, all must be distinguished from other papulosquamous diseases, especially psoriasis.

As there are various combinations of specific signs and symptoms that occur in PRP each must be considered and differentiated. Common findings listed below along with pertinent differentials:

- Scalp: Early scalp disease of PRP can be quite variable from fine to large scale typically on an erythematous base the hallmark is the rapid progression and severity of the disease. Should be distinguished from the waxy scale seborrheic dermatitis and well demarcated, hyperkeratotic, silvery scale of psoriasis.

- Palmoplantar keratoderma: The characteristic red-orange color and variable associated edema helps to distinguish keratoderma of PRP from psoriasis, ichthyosis, hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma, and erythrokeratodermia.

- Nail changes: Yellow–brown hyperkeratotic nails with variable subungual debris in combination with skin finding often may be mistaken for with psoriasis. It is important to note that no changes involving proximal nail matrix or nail bed, such as nail pits or oil spots, occur in PRP which in many cases can assist in distinguishing one from another.

- Erythroderma: History alone may assist in distinguishing PRP from other major causes of generalized erythroderma however biopsy is often necessary. Some of the most well-documented causes of erythroderma include psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, drug reactions, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, congenital ichthyosis, paraneoplastic and graft versus host disease.

- Atypical PRP, including type II and V, both present with ichthyosiform changes and should be distinguished from other forms of acquired and congenital ichthyoses.

- Spiny follicular papules of type-IV PRP in isolation may be mistaken for lichen spinulosus and keratosis pilaris. Eventually, the clinical course should distinguish these entities.