Periapical cysts are typically not seen clinically; however, they are suspected in the presence of teeth with large carious lesions or that have been traumatized. A periapical cyst is a radiographic finding. It often presents as a unilocular lesion with a well-demarcated border, measuring less than 10 mm in greatest diameter, and located at the root apex of the tooth.

Residual cysts cannot be seen clinically and radiographically; they are similar in appearance to a periapical cyst. However, they are associated with a previously extracted tooth.

Paradental cysts occur primarily in young patients associated most commonly with an erupting or erupted first mandibular molar. They present with gingival edema, purulent discharge, and deep pockets on probing.

Dentigerous cysts are associated with the erupting or impacted tooth. There is a greater incidence of occurrence in the first and second decade of life, with the third molars and maxillary canines most affected. The cysts are asymptomatic unless they become inflamed.

Eruption cysts occur in young children or infants during the eruption of either the deciduous or the permanent teeth. They present as alveolar edema with a blueish hue.

Lateral periodontal cysts (LPC) may result in displacement of the roots interproximally. Unlike other odontogenic cysts, LPCs occur later in life, often in the 40s and 50s, and have a male predilection.

Odontogenic keratocysts are typically asymptomatic; however, they may present with intra-oral edema, pain, trismus, neurosensory deficits, and infection. Because they expand anteriorly-posteriorly within the alveolar bone, they are difficult to appreciate clinically. The mean age distribution is 20 years.

Orthokeratinizing odontogenic cysts are very similar to OKCs clinically; however, they have a much better prognosis. There is a male predilection, and the age ranges from 20 to 40 years old.

Glandular odontogenic cysts are aggressive and are predominately a radiographic finding. Clinically, however, there may be an increase in tooth mobility and cortical perforation observed. The mean age of presentation is 46 years and with a slight male predominance.