Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) almost always presents with early mucosal involvement, typically with vesicles or bullae that result in painful mucocutaneous erosions and severe stomatitis, similar in morphology to pemphigus vulgaris.

Cutaneous involvement in paraneoplastic pemphigus is typically diffuse and can exhibit considerable variation in appearance and morphology.

**Clinical Presentations of Paraneoplastic Pemphigus**

- **Pemphigus-like**
- Clinical: superficial vesicles, flaccid blisters, crusted erosions
- Histopathology: intraepidermal and or suprabasal acantholysis with surrounding mononuclear cells

- **Pemphigoid-like**
- Clinical: scaling erythematous papules and tense blisters
- Histopathology: dyskeratosis with subepidermal splitting, with or without basal cell vacuolization; sparse mononuclear infiltrate at the dermal-epidermal junction

- **Erythema Multiforme-like**
- Clinical: Scaling erythematous papules; severe, polymorphic cutaneous or mucosal lesions
- Histopathology: Dyskeratosis with or without accompanying epidermal acantholysis; perivascular infiltrates

- **Graft-versus-Host Disease-like**
- Clinical: Diffuse red, scaly, sometimes dusky, papules
- Histopathology: hyper-ortho/parakeratosis and variable dyskeratosis with or without vacuolar interface change

- **Lichen Planus- like**
- Clinical: small red to violaceous flat-topped scaly papules
- Histopathology: hyperkeratosis with a lichenoid infiltrate at the dermal-epidermal junction

In a study of 104 patients, an erythema multiforme-like presentation was most common (56%), followed by PV-like (41%), lichen planus-like (13%), and bullous pemphigoid-like (3%).

An individual patient may have various forms of coexisting cutaneous lesions and have lesions that transform to a different morphology. Blisters and erythema multiforme-like lesions affecting the palms and soles can help differentiate PNP from pemphigus vulgaris, which typically does not involve these surfaces.

**Extracutaneous Involvement**

Paraneoplastic pemphigus can affect other types of epithelia. Thus internal organ involvement is common, particularly in the eyes, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, thyroid, kidney.

Respiratory involvement can present as dyspnea, dry cough, obstructive lung disease, or secondary pneumonia, with potential for rapid progression to bronchiolitis obliterans.

In a study of 58 PNP patients, 39% experienced significant muscle weakness. Myasthenia gravis was ultimately diagnosed in 35% of these patients as they exhibited high titers of anti-acetylcholine receptor or anti-acetylcholinesterase antibodies.