The regulations provided by the FDA have assured the production of safe and efficacious medications for consumers. For instance, the Kefauver-Harris Amendment, also known as the "Drug Efficacy Amendment," required pharmaceutical companies to show evidence of drug efficacy before approval. The legislation also worked to prevent the rebranding of generic drugs as breakthrough drugs at a higher price. As a result of modern drug regulations, physicians and pharmacists can inform patients about adverse effects, safe dosages, and the proven effectiveness of medicines in treating disease. In addition, drug sponsors must monitor adverse drug reactions through the FAERS to safeguard clinical trial participants and consumers. Historically, the FDA has stopped drug trials prematurely due to high rates of adverse events in concordance with such reporting systems. Thus, patient safety is the foundation of many laws governing drug development.

Government oversight of intellectual property laws also has clinical implications. Drug manufacturers are allowed drug data exclusivity for several years, during which the manufacturer can recoup the huge costs associated with research and clinical trials. Data exclusivity promotes pharmaceutical innovation so that novel drugs are created for consumers. Privatized drug innovation is balanced by allowing cheaper generic drugs to be produced after data exclusivity ends. Clinicians are therefore able to prescribe more affordable generic drugs to their patients without compromising on drug efficacy. The regulations for generic drugs provide significantly better health care to consumers from a lower socioeconomic background.