Histology is vital in the diagnostic evaluation and work-up of cutaneous lymphoma, and unique growth patterns exist between CTCL and CBCL. The former often demonstrate atypical T-cell lymphocyte infiltration of the epidermis (epidermotropism), whereas the latter typically presents with dense dermal B-cell lymphocyte infiltrates (as described above) without significant epidermal involvement.

Six major anatomic/histologic patterns occur in CL: epidermotropic, nodular, diffuse, subcutaneous, angiocentric/angioinvasive, and intravascular. Epidermotropic infiltrates are commonly found in the initial stages of most CTCL (e.g., MF, patch, and plaque stage). In contrast, nodular and diffuse infiltrates are more common in later CTCL stages (e.g., MF, tumor stage) and CBCL. Subcutaneous growth suggests sub-dermal CL (e.g., SPTCL). Angiocentric/angioinvasive infiltrates are seen mainly in primary cutaneous gamma/delta and aggressive NK-cell/T-cell CLs but may also be present in less-aggressive CD30+ T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (e.g., LyP, Type E). Intravascular growth, finally, can be seen in intravascular anaplastic large cell, large B-cell, NK-cell, or pseudolymphomas.

Because of overlapping histologic features and growth patterns, immunohistochemistry (IHC, or immunophenotyping) is necessary for further CL subtyping. Anatomic features with respective IHC for each 2018 WHO-EORTC subtype are summarized below:

**Cutaneous T-cell Lymphoma**

MF/SS: Band-like papillary dermal infiltrate with epidermotropism (patch stage) and formation of Pautrier's microabscesses (collection of atypical lymphocytes in the epidermis), atypical lymphocytes with 'cerebriform' nuclei in the upper dermis and epidermis (plaque stage), or diffuse dermal lymphocyte infiltrate (tumor stage). Lymphocytes may tag along the dermo-epidermal junction. Reactive, inflammatory skin changes (e.g., spongiosis) are typically absent.

MF Variants

- FMF: Atypical lymphocyte infiltrate surrounding hair follicles (folliculotropism) with follicular mucinosis. Hair follicles may be intact, destructed, or have cysts with or without basaloid folliculolymphoid hyperplasia. It may be accompanied by eosinophils, granulomatous dermatitis, or perieccrine infiltrates (syringotropism).

- PR: Epidermal atypical mononuclear (pagetoid) cell hyperplasia with eosinophilic cytoplasm. A dermal mixed inflammatory infiltrate with or without CD8+ epidermotropism may also be present. IHC: variable CD4, CD8, and CD30 expression; Ki-67/MIB1 may show active proliferation but is not specific.

- GSS: Diffuse loss of elastic fibers, non-caseating granulomatous T-cell infiltrates in the upper dermis, and multinucleated giant cells may all be present.

ATL: Dermal tumor cell lymphocyte infiltrate with occasional epidermotropism. Patterns may vary from resembling MF to C-ALCL, or peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS.

Primary cutaneous CD30+ lymphoproliferative disorders

- C-ALCL: Large, irregular polygonal lymphocytes in sheets throughout the dermis. Epidermotropism with or without subcutaneous or adnexal involvement may be present. Cutaneous lymphatic infiltration may be present. The "hallmark" feature of eosinophilic cells with horseshoe nuclei is not always present. IHC: CD30+ membranous and Golgi pattern expression in over 75% of tumor cells. Cytotoxic phenotype (i.e., CD8, TIA-1, granzyme, perforin) positivity may occur in angioinvasive cases.

- LyP: (Type A) Wedge-shaped CD30+ tumor cells in scattered or clustered patterns with a mixed inflammatory infiltrate. (Type B) Epidermotropic CD30+/- tumor cells with cerebriform nuclei (resembling MF). (Type C) Sheets of large CD30+ atypical lymphoid cells with minimal reactive inflammatory cells. (Type D) Epidermotropic small- to medium-sized CD8+ and CD30+ tumor cells (resembling CD8+ AECTCL). (Type E) Large necrotic "eschar"-like lesions with angioinvasion secondary to CD8+ and CD30+ co-expressed atypical lymphocytes. IHC: CD3+, CD4+, CD25+, CD30+, CD45RO+, CD56+/-, CD2-, CD3-, CD5-, CD7-. CD8 positivity, as opposed to CD4, is more frequently seen in Type D and Type E.

SPTCL: Lobular panniculitis with atypical lymphocyte infiltrate. IHC: CD3+, CD4-, CD8+, CD56-, Ki-67+, cytotoxic granules+, EBER-ISH-.

Extranodal NK-cell/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type: Pleomorphic atypical lymphoid cells primarily limited to subcutis with angioinvasion and extensive connective tissue/blood vessel necrosis. IHC: CD3+, cytotoxic granules+, CD56+, CD43+/-, CD45RO+/-, CD4-, CD8-, CD16-, CD57-.

CAEBV infection: Cutaneous and subcutaneous adipocyte necrosis with septal atypical lymphocyte infiltrate; Reed Sternberg-like cells may be present in an NK-cell variant.

Primary cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma, rare subtypes

- PCGDTL (provisional): Atypical lymphocyte infiltrate in the dermis and subcutis with occasional epidermotropism. IHC: CD3+, CD4-, CD5-, CD8+/-, cytotoxic granules+; T cell receptor (TCR)-γδ+ (TCR-αβ-).

- CD8+ AECTCL (provisional): Marked CD8+ epidermotropism with diffuse dermal atypical lymphocyte infiltrate. IHC: CD3+, CD4-, CD5-, CD8+, CD30-, cytotoxic granules+, EBER-ISH-.

- CD4+ SMT-LPD (provisional): Nodular to diffuse atypical dermal lymphocytes without epidermotropism and surrounded by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate. IHC: CD3+, CD4+, PD-1+, BCL6+, CXCL3+, CD8-, cytotoxic granules-.

- Primary cutaneous acral CD8+ T-cell lymphoma (provisional): Diffuse dermal atypical lymphocyte infiltrate without epidermotropism. IHC: CD3+, CD8+, CD4-, CD30-, CD56-, TIA-1+, EBER-ISH-.

- Primary cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS: Remaining aggressive T-cell lymphoproliferative histologic entities which do not fit other established CTCL categories (namely CD4+ SMT-LPD, CD8+ AECTCL, and PCGDTL).

**Cutaneous B-cell Lymphoma**

PCMZL: Nodular or diffuse dermal lymphoplasmacytoid or monocytoid marginal zone B-cells with or without T-cells. Lymphoid follicles may be present. IHC: CD20+, CD79a+, BCL2+, BCL6-, CD5-, CD10-, CD16-.

PCFCL: Dense proliferation of neoplastic follicular central B-cells ("centrocytes") separated from the epidermis by Grenz zone and exhibit background dendritic meshwork. The Ki-67 proliferation index is low. It may have surrounding reactive T-cells. IHC: CD19+, CD20+, CD22+, CD79a+, PAX5+, BCL6+, CD10+/-, BCL2-.

PCDLBLC, LT: Diffuse dermal sheets of monomorphic large B-cells with open chromatin and prominent nucleoli. The proliferation lacks background dendritic meshwork and shows a high proliferation index. IHC: CD19+, CD20+, CD22+, CD79a+, PAX-5+, BCL2+, IRF4/MUM-1+, FOXP1+.

EBVMCU (provisional): EBV+ atypical large B-cells resemble the appearance of DLBCL and classic Hodgkin lymphoma. A mixed inflammatory infiltrate may be present. Reactive T-cells may surround B-cell clusters. IHC: CD15+, CD30+, CD19+, CD22+, CD79a+, PAX-5+, EBV+, IRF4/MUM-1+, CD20+/-, CD10-, BCL6-.

IVBCL: Large atypical B-cells with large nuclei and varying nucleoli demonstrating intravascular proliferation/destruction. IHC: CD79a+, CD20+, IRF4/MUM-1+, CD5+/-, CD10+/- , CD29-, CD54-.