The most common complaint associated with any AMI including PMI is chest pain or discomfort, though it is not always present. The chest discomfort is classically described as a squeezing, heaviness, or tightness. Other manifestations of PMI include shortness of breath, epigastric pain or discomfort, back pain, or shoulder pain. The pain may radiate to the arms, back, neck, or jaw. Associated symptoms often include nausea, diaphoresis, and/or lightheadedness. Symptoms brought on by physical exertion and improved with rest are highly concerning for ACS. Women, diabetics, and the elderly often have “atypical” presentations of ACS.

The physical exam is not always a reliable indicator of the presence of ACS. Patients with actively infarcted myocardium may range from mild discomfort to obtundation. Frequently, the episode of discomfort that prompts an encounter for ACS may have resolved by the time of presentation. Vital signs may range from hypertension to hypotension in the case of AMI induced cardiogenic shock with a compensatory tachycardia. However, bradycardia is also a common vital sign abnormality if the sinoatrial (SA) node is involved (most commonly in the setting of a proximal occlusion of a dominant RCA). The presence of an S3 gallop, crackles, and cold extremities may indicate acute heart failure and cardiogenic shock as a result of AMI. A new murmur may indicate papillary muscle rupture or new valve dysfunction. The patient may have a clenched fist or open hand pressed against the sternum, termed Levine sign and Cossio sign respectively.

Finally, cardiac arrest, especially with ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation as the initial aberrant rhythms is a common presentation for AMI.