Topical corticosteroids, including halobetasol cream, are commonly prescribed by dermatologists for the treatment and management of many inflammatory and pruritic conditions of the skin. They provide rapid relief to patients for a plethora of conditions, and therefore, prescriptions for these agents are very common. However, proper counseling by the physician and pharmacist is not always adequately provided to the patient. Misuse of steroids can lead to clinically serious systemic and/or local effects.

It is crucial to give patients the correct dosage form when prescribing topical corticosteroids. Solutions, foams, gels, lotions, creams, and ointments all have appropriate clinical applications. The proper frequency, amount, and duration of treatment should also be emphasized to patients to avoid overtreating an area, leading to adverse effects, or undertreating an area, leading to poor therapeutic outcomes.

Additionally, glucocorticoid potency is an essential pharmacologic factor to take into account. Sometimes it is better to prescribe a more potent steroid to provide rapid control of the disease and stop treatment quickly, rather than use a less potent steroid for an extended period, especially in cases of self-limited conditions such as acute irritant dermatitis, panderous dermatitis, etc.

Additionally, patients may have concerns about prescribed topical steroids that lead to nonadherence due to fear of harming themselves. This factor leads to a significant proportion of patients that do not receive adequate treatment. Therefore, patient education is also important to dispel fears and false notions and ensure the safe use of topical corticosteroids.

Therapy with halobetasol requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]