The current knowledge of the neural pathways responsible for the perception of the heartbeat not clearly elucidated. It has been hypothesized that these pathways include different structures located both at the intracardiac and extracardiac level. Palpitations are a widely diffused complaint and particularly in subjects affected by structural heart disease. The list of etiologies of palpitations is long, and in some cases, the etiology is unable to be determined. In one study reporting the etiology of palpitations, 43% were found to be of cardiac etiology, 31% of psychiatric etiology and approximately 10% were classified as miscellaneous (medication induced, thyrotoxicosis, caffeine, cocaine, anemia, amphetamine, mastocytosis).

The cardiac etiologies of palpitations are the most life-threatening and include ventricular sources (premature ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation), atrial sources (atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter) high output states (anemia, AV fistula, Paget's disease or pregnancy), structural abnormalities (congenital heart disease cardiomegaly, aortic aneurysm, or acute left ventricular failure), and miscellaneous sources (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome POTS, Brugada syndrome, and sinus tachycardia).

Palpitations can occur during times of catecholamine excess, such as during exercise or at times of stress.  The cause of the palpitations during these conditions is often a sustained supraventricular tachycardia or ventricular tachyarrhythmia.  Supraventricular tachycardias can also be induced at the termination of exercise when the withdrawal of catecholamines is coupled with a surge in the vagal tone.  Palpitations secondary to catecholamine excess may also occur during emotionally startling experiences, especially in patients with a long QT syndrome.

Many psychiatric conditions can result in palpitations including depression, generalized anxiety disorder, panic attacks, and somatization. However one study noted that up to 67% of patients diagnosed with a mental health condition had an underlying arrythmia.

There are many metabolic conditions that can result in palpitations including, hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hyperkalemia, hypokalemia, hypermagnesemia, hypomagnesemia, and pheochromocytoma.

The medications most likely to result in palpitations include; sympathomimetic agents, anticholinergic drugs, vasodilators and withdrawal from beta blockers.  Common etiologies also include excess caffeine, or marijuana.  Illicit drug use such as cocaine, amphetamines,  3-4 methylenedioxmethamphetamine (Ectasy or MDMA) and can also cause palpitations.