# Continuing Education Activity

The subaxial cervical spine consists of levels C3 through C7 and includes both the bony anatomy as well as the ligamentous anatomy. Injuries to the subaxial cervical spine can be bony, soft tissue, or a combination of the two. The purpose of this activity is to review the different morphologies of subaxial cervical spine fractures as well as the different approaches to management. Special topics discussed include pediatric cervical spine trauma, cervical spine trauma in athletes, and cervical spine trauma in an ankylosed spine. This activity assists the clinical team in the evaluation, treatment, and interprofessional management of these fractures.

**Objectives:**
- Review the different mechanisms of action and morphologies of subaxial cervical spine fractures.
- Outline the different imaging studies and when it is appropriate to order them in the evaluation of subaxial cervical spine fractures.
- Summarize the different treatment options for the different patterns of subaxial cervical spine fractures.
- Outline the importance of improving communication between neurosurgeons or orthopedic surgeons (specialized in spine surgery), radiologists, and the rest of the interprofessional healthcare team in regards to advanced imaging to improve outcomes for patients with subaxial cervical spine fractures.

# Introduction

The subaxial cervical spine consists of levels C3 through C7 and includes both the bony anatomy as well as the ligamentous anatomy. Injuries to the subaxial cervical spine can be bony, soft tissue, or a combination of the two.

# Etiology

Subaxial cervical spine fractures can be the result of high-energy mechanisms such as motor vehicle accidents and falls from heights to moderate energy mechanisms such as contact and non-contact sports. They can even occur lower energy mechanisms such as ground-level falls. The cervical spine is vulnerable to injury due to the vast amount of motion allowed in this region of the spine.

Vertebral body fractures can take many forms. An anteroinferior teardrop fracture can result from a flexion compression mechanism.

The anterior ligaments, along with the intervertebral disc and posterior ligaments are collectively referred to as the discoligamentous complex (DLC).

# Epidemiology

Cervical spine injuries occur in 3% of blunt force trauma patients with the subaxial cervical spine being a common location within the cervical spine; 50% of injuries occur between C5 and C7.

Cervical spine injuries due to athletic activity most commonly occur in athletes under the age of 30.

# History and Physical

A thorough clinical and radiographic evaluation is an absolute requirement when assessing a possible cervical spine injury.

The maintenance of cervical spine stability varies with the age of the patient. As a young child grows, head circumference enlarges faster than the chest circumference. When placed on an unmodified spine board, their necks get forced into flexion due to the disproportionate size of their heads.

A methodical sensory and motor exam, including reflexes of the upper and lower extremities, should be performed to identify any neurological deficits or any upper motor neuron signs that may indicate cord compression. Any deficit may also be used to help localize the level of injury in the cervical spine. It is important to remember that in the cervical spine, the numbered nerve root will exit above the associate vertebral body, i.e., the C5 nerve root exits through the foramen between C4 and C5.

A detailed history can help define the mechanism of action of the injury as well as identify any pre-existing conditions that may lead to a higher susceptibility of cervical injury, such as AS or spinal fusion either congenital or surgical.

In the setting of an athletic injury with a cervical spine injury suspected, the player needs to be evaluated and handled carefully. A full neurologic exam is a must. The cervical spine should be immobilized, and the player placed on a spine board.

# Evaluation

Alignment in a normal cervical spine should be 15 to 30 degrees of lordosis from C1 through C7.

While radiographs of the cervical spine were the standard for trauma patients and patients with suspected cervical spine injuries in the past, the popularity of computed tomogram (CT) scans has led to a change in practice. With its speed, high sensitivity and specificity, and availability, multiplanar CT scans are quickly becoming standard in patients with cervical spine injuries.

With high suspicion of an associated neural injury, ordering cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is becoming more commonplace as well. MRI is superior to CT scans for evaluating the spinal cord, nerve roots, disc, and ligamentous structures in the cervical spine.

Due to rising healthcare costs, there has been an effort to determine which patients need advanced imaging with an MRI and which do not. Risk factors of an MRI disclosing a treatment-altering injury missed on the CT scan include age over 60, polytrauma patients, cervical spondylosis, a neurologic deficit, and a patient that cannot undergo evaluation due to a low GCS or other altered mental status.

When evaluating the radiographic studies, the different fracture morphologies have different characteristics. Vertebral body compression fractures have visible height loss of the vertebral body with anterior wedging and a maintained posterior cortex. Burst fractures are also in the category of compression fractures.

Facet dislocations and fractures can be unilateral or bilateral. A subluxation of the facet can also occur; referred to as a perched facet. Distraction mechanisms, often with a rotational force, can lead to facet joint subluxations with associated disruption of the disc or capsule.

Special consideration in the evaluation of a patient with AS is that it can be challenging to identify fractures on plain films due to the fusion mass. The clinician should treat those presenting with acute neck pain or a change in postural position as though they have a fracture until proven otherwise.

Upon completing the history, physical exam, and imaging studies, the clinician must determine what the treatment plan for the patient will be. There are a couple of classification systems that have been devised to help guide the physician in this decision. The first is the Subaxial Injury Classification System (SLIC). This classification stratifies the type of fracture, the competency of the DLC, and the patient’s neurologic status with numerical values to determine the course of treatment. A score of three or less suggests conservative management; a score of five or more indicates operative management, whereas a score of four is a gray zone and left to physician judgment.

# Treatment / Management

Initially, all patients with subaxial cervical spine fractures require immobilization in a rigid cervical orthosis.

Patients with fractures deemed unstable or neurologic compromise should undergo decompression and stabilization. Intervention within 24 hours of injury leads to better improvement in ASIA scores.

True compression fractures with no posterior ligamentous or capsular involvement can be treated nonoperatively in a hard cervical orthosis. If there is posterior ligamentous or capsular involvement, surgery for stabilization is indicated.

Burst fractures with retropulsion in the canal are different than a true compression fracture. Inline cervical traction can often reduce burst fractures and decrease bony retropulsion in the canal. These fractures are often unstable and often associated with neurologic symptoms, and most of the time, require surgical fixation.

A timely closed reduction of facet dislocations with cervical traction is appropriate in an awake and alert patient who can undergo serial neurologic exams during the reduction.

When caring for a patient with AS, upon initial evaluation, they may not have a neurologic deficit. However, they require monitoring. Seemingly small fractures can lead to progressive neurologic deterioration in these patients.

# Differential Diagnosis

Subaxial cervical spine fractures include several different morphologies, including compression fractures, burst fractures, distraction injuries, or translational injuries.

# Prognosis

Patients with increased time from injury to surgery, more severe injury as graded on the Subaxial Cervical Spine Injury Classification, and larger maximal spinal cord compression exhibit a poorer prognosis.

There is a higher incidence of major neurologic complications in patients with AS, such as paresis, following a cervical spine fracture as compared to a patient without the diagnosis.

# Complications

Inadequate plain films and lack of advanced imaging can lead to a missed cervical spine injury.

Injury to the vertebral artery may occur as a result of subaxial cervical spine trauma or intraoperatively.

Secondary neurologic deterioration is a potential complication of cervical spine injuries - this manifests as a progressive motor or sensory loss at or above the level of the injury after the initial assessment. Risk factors for this deterioration include a flexion mechanism of injury and an underlying ankylosed spine.

Surgical treatment of these fractures can lead to the known complications of spine surgery, including infection, dural tears, neurologic injury, pseudarthrosis, and hardware loosening.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

In patients treated conservatively, the importance of adherence to the prescribed orthosis must be a topic of discussion. Proper discharge instructions, as well as follow-up appointments, must be arranged with the patient.

In patients that are undergoing surgical stabilization, adequate informed consent with an explanation of all the potential risks and benefits of the procedure and alternatives must take place.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Due to the high level of potential neurologic compromise, randomized controlled trials of treatment strategies with subaxial cervical spine fractures are not feasible. Continued research in the validity of a subaxial cervical spine fracture classification system can lead to a more standardized approach and even a better idea of patient prognosis.

Depending on the level of injury and the extent of spinal cord compression, these patients need a great deal of communication between multiple specialists, including the neurosurgeon or orthopedic surgeon (specialized in spine surgery), neuroradiologist, neuro-anesthetist, intensivist, neuro nurse, and physiatrist. Early intervention with rehabilitation and mobilization once the spine has undergone stabilization is important.

These injuries require open communication and collaboration among all members of the healthcare team; this could even include chiropractors, since they may be the first to encounter these patients and take in-office radiographs, and need to understand when manipulation is inappropriate. After surgery, physical therapists may play a role in the rehabilitation process. Specialty-trained neurological or orthopedic nurses will assist in management before, during, and following any procedure, whether it is a closed reduction or surgical. All these disciplines must work together with open communication to bring about the best result with minimal disability for the patient. [Level 5]