Increasing dietary fiber, fluid intake, and physical exercise are the backbone to prevention therapy. All healthcare workers who prescribe opioids need to also consider prophylactic treatment for constipation. All types of laxatives can be used as initial therapy except for the bulk-forming laxatives. The annual estimated expenditure for laxatives in the United States is over 800 million dollars

The most common regime for OIC is a stimulant (senna/bisacodyl) with or without a stool softener (docusate), or daily administration of an osmotic laxative (polyethylene glycol). Stool softeners are ideal for preventing constipation; they do not work well for established cases of constipation

Methylnaltrexone bromide is the first available peripherally acting opiate antagonist which is used to treat OIC. Methylnaltrexone (Relistor) does not cross the blood-brain barrier which doesn't induce symptoms of opioid withdrawal. Subcutaneous methylnaltrexone was found to be significantly better at reversing OIC than lubiprostone, naloxegol, and oral methylnaltrexone

Lubiprostone (Amitiza) is a type-2 chloride channel activator that increases secretion of fluid in the GI tract. These actions result in increased tone, enhanced peristalsis, and increased acceleration of the small bowel and colonic transit times. Studies show that lubiprostone can increase the overall frequency of bowel movements each week in patients with opioid-induced constipation.

Other therapies include naloxegol, alvimopan, and naldemedine. Naloxegol and naldemedine are both approved for treatment of OIC in patients with non-cancer pain. Alvimopan has only been approved to treat recalcitrant cases of postoperative ileus.