Psoriasis may be a skin disorder but its management is very complex and usually requires a team of professionals dedicated to this disease. Besides the dermatologist, the nephrologist, plastic surgeon, pharmacist, rheumatologist, and ophthalmologist should manage these patients. The key goal is to improve the quality of life by educating the patient about avoiding the triggers. The pharmacist should educate the patient on the use of moisturizers and managing dry skin. Further compliance with medications is vital; plus the pharmacist should ensure that the patient is on no medications that can cause flare-ups. The nurse should educate the patient on changes in lifestyle by avoiding alcohol, smoking, stress, and dry cold weather. While the sun is beneficial, too much should be avoided. The nurse should monitor the patient for self-harm and refer the patient to a mental health counselor. Finally, the patient should be told to eat healthily, exercise regularly, and maintain a healthy weight. All patients with psoriasis need lifelong follow-up because relapses are common.

**Outcomes**

Even though psoriasis is a benign skin disorder, it is a lifelong illness with no cure. Everyone undergoes remissions and relapses and overall it leads to poor quality of life. Today there are several reports indicating that psoriasis also increases the risk of adverse cardiac events. Psoriasis also is associated with alcohol use, smoking, depression, risk of lymphoma, suicide, adverse drug reactions, and several types of skin cancers. Evidence continues to mount that psoriasis is associated with hypertension, renal disease, and heart disease. Overall, patients with psoriasis involving the palms and soles tend to have a much poorer quality of life than those who have psoriasis on other parts of the body.