Patients presenting with low back and gluteal region pain should be evaluated for CN. In one study, 49% of patients who met a specific diagnostic criterion for SCN entrapment experienced leg symptoms, which can mimic symptoms of radiculopathy due to lumbar pathology.

Based on previous anatomical studies, it is suggested the medial SCN passes through the osteofibrous tunnel at about 6.6 cm lateral from the midline over the iliac crest. Palpation at this region may produce pain radiating from the low back to the gluteal region and posterior thigh in the distribution of the SCN and down the posterior leg in the form of "pseudo-sciatica."

CN is a diagnosis of exclusion typically, as it is most important to rule out alternative diagnoses first. However, as is common in patients with chronic pain, most patients have had some evaluation of other possible etiologies, although that does not guarantee that previous evaluations were either appropriate, sufficiently robust, or consistent with the patient's contemporaneous presentation at the time of assessment. Nevertheless, some aspects of history and physical examination are decidedly useful in managing the differential diagnosis of low back pain with or without leg pain.

Localized Low back pain between the inferior gluteal folds and posterior costal arch, tenderness at the iliac crest rim, or reduced sensation below the iliac crest at the buttocks are findings consistent with CN. In the SCN and MCN, if involved, leg pain is usually found present with radiation to the ipsilateral leg, such that leg complaints are found in 47 to 84% of CN patients. CN pain may be elicited or worsened with walking, prolonged sitting, extending, bending, or rotating the lumbar region or any movement of the lumbar region.

CN involving the ICN typically presents with painful and/or burning sensations near the medial and caudal part of the buttocks, proximal/dorsal thigh, skin of the labia major or scrotum, and/or lateral anal margin. Pain should worsen with sitting, especially on hard surfaces, and should be relieved with standing or lying on the patient's side. Pain should classically be significantly worsened with activities such as bicycle, motorcycle, or horseback riding.