The standard surgical approaches to pulmonary artery banding include: 1) Anterior left thoracotomy through the 2nd/3rd intercostal space, 2) Left lateral thoracotomy through 3rd/4th intercostal space, 3) Median sternotomy. In the case of anterior/lateral thoracotomy, MPA is exposed by retracting thymus and dissecting the pericardium anterior to the left phrenic nerve. When median sternotomy is pursued, especially during concomitant surgeries such as atrial septectomy, the use of cardiopulmonary bypass is indicated. In patients with TGA or single ventricle anatomy, median sternotomy is preferred as it gives excellent exposure to MPA.

Surgical technique: After exposure to the aorta and MPA, the band is prepared for placement. Various materials are used for banding. The umbilical tape is preferred by few surgeons due to its low affinity to erode through the vessel wall and can be easily modified to be used as an adjustable band by passing it through a silastic snare. Trusler formula has classically been used to help determine the optimal band circumference.

The mid-portion of MPA is identified, paying close attention to the location of the pulmonary valve and branch PAs, in an attempt to avoid impingement of brand PAs and distortion of the pulmonary valve. Adventitia between aorta and MPA is dissected to avoid migration of the band. The band is passed across the transverse sinus encircling the pulmonary trunk. The band is then carefully passed between aorta and MPA through the previous dissection site, thereby avoiding the need to pass a clamp across MPA and potentially injuring the vessel. The marked sites of the band are aligned along the anterior wall of MPA and snared by passing it through polyethylene tubing. A pericardial pledget is placed underneath the snare to avoid injury to the vessel, and hemoclips are used to fix the snare.

The addition or removal of hemoclips helps reduce or increase the circumference of the band, respectively. Occasionally resorption of infoldings of MPA over the course of a few weeks will reduce the restriction across the MPA, thereby loosening the band. Therefore a technique to perform v-shaped arteriotomy of the MPA distal to sinotubular junction has been described. This is done using a C-clamp before placing the band to avoid the future risk of loosening the band. Cardiovascular hemodynamics to be achieved post-PAB include: 1) PA pressured 30 to 50% of systemic pressures 2) Oxygen saturation of approximately 90% at 50% FiO2, 3) Increase in systemic blood pressure by 5 to 10 mmHg. In patients with single ventricle physiology, lower arterial oxygenation targets are acceptable.

The takedown of PAB is usually performed after the staged intracardiac repair is completed. The scar tissue around the PAB is dissected, and removal of the band usually demonstrates the evidence of stenosis of MPA. This is corrected either by resection of the stenotic segment followed by end-to-end anastomosis or vertical incision of the stenotic segment with patch augmentation of the stenotic segment. In patients with whom the PA bands have been in place several months or less, this PA plasty is often not necessary.