While early detection of ROP is crucial, not every case will require treatment. Based upon findings in the Early Treatment for Retinopathy of Prematurity study (ET-ROP), the decision to treat is dependent on the type of ROP. Type I ROP, including any stage zone I ROP with plus disease, zone I stage 3 with or without plus disease or zone II stage 2 or 3 with plus disease, should be treated. Observation is recommended for Type II ROP, including zone I stage 1 or 2 without plus disease or zone II stage 3 without plus disease.

Treatment of ROP is primarily surgical. The first surgical treatment considered both safe and effective for ROP was cryotherapy to the avascular retina. (CRYO-ROP study) In cryotherapy, the sclera, choroid, and full-thickness of the avascular retina are frozen from the surface of the eye.

Due to the role of VEGF in the development of ROP, the use of anti-VEGF agents is a possible treatment strategy. The Bevacizumab Eliminated the Angiogenic Threat of Retinopathy of Prematurity study (BEAT-ROP) randomly assigned infants with stage 3 ROP in zone I or posterior zone II to receive therapy with an anti-VEGF agent, intravitreal bevacizumab, or conventional laser. The primary outcome in this study was the recurrence of ROP requiring treatment before 54 weeks postmenstrual age. There was a statistically significant difference in recurrence with 19 cases in the laser-treated group and 4 in the bevacizumab group. The treatment effect was significant patients in the zone I but not zone II. Macular dragging and retinal detachment were seen more frequently after laser treatment for zone 1 disease.

The beneficial effects of VEGF, a hormone that is both neurotrophic and neuroprotective, should not be ignored as it helps to maintain the blood-brain barrier, generate surfactant in the lungs, create glomeruli in the kidneys and stimulate skeletal growth.

Retinal detachment confers a much higher risk of poor visual outcome.