As mentioned earlier, NAVA was aimed to overcome the limitation of limitations of proportional assisted ventilation. However, NAVA has several potential benefits.

- Patient-ventilator synchrony: Mechanical ventilator synchrony depends on two factors- the timing of the mechanical breath delivery and the amount of pressure from a ventilator. There is a delay in diaphragm activity (signaled from the brain) and ventilator response in the flow trigger ventilator. However, NAVA delivers mechanical breath when the diaphragm receives a signal from the brain. Beck et al. and Breatnach et al. reported improved patent-ventilator synchrony during their NAVA trial in infants and children. It decreases the discomfort and agitation in patients while improving synchrony. Synchronized respiratory efforts have been associated with improved ventilation and oxygenation.

- Air leaks: Air leaks are very common in both invasive and non-invasive ventilation. Although, leaks can be minimized by choosing the proper size endotracheal tube (cuffed or uncuffed) and compensating circuit in ventilators. Air-leak can be a bigger problem in non-invasive ventilation. It has shown that NAVA continues to trigger effectively even in the presence of 75% air leaks.

- Benefits in preterm infants: In recent years, the use of NAVA has been increased and studied extensively in both preterm and term infants. Kallio et al. compared NAVA with conventional ventilators in preterm infants (28 to 36 weeks GA) and showed lower PIP needs in infants treated with NAVA, but the difference in the secondary outcomes such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia, time on mechanical ventilation, or pneumothorax.

- Non-invasive mode: Non-invasive NAVA works exactly the same as invasive NAVA, but ventilation is delivered via nasal prongs or a mask. Non-invasive NAVA has shown to be effective even in the settings of high leaks.