Triple testing is a combination consisting of clinical examination, imaging, and excision biopsy. This is essential for all women with a clinical finding, such as a discrete palpable mass.

Nodularity in young women less than 30 years of age may have management with clinical surveillance and short-term follow-up examination in 2 to 3 months. An investigation may be necessary if the lump has changed on review or if, at the initial presentation, there is a new change in her breasts.

Short-term follow-up is an important part of the management of nodularity so that the progression in size of a mass of nodularity or other associated findings (e.g., skin or nipple changes) is detected.

Mammography with ultrasound examination is required for all discrete palpable lesions in women over 35 to distinguish cysts from solid lesions. Complex cysts containing both fluid and solid matter require biopsy. For solid lesions, radiographically or ultrasonically directed core biopsy provides further information regarding the presence or absence of malignancy.

Core excision biopsy involves a cutting needle with a spring-loaded, automated biopsy instrument that allows sufficient specimen of tissue for histologic analysis.

FNA allows a cytopathologist to evaluate cellular material.

Cytology of nipple discharge has limited specificity and sensitivity to detect malignancy (35 to 47%). If the results of both clinical and diagnostic evaluations are benign, a 6 to 12-month clinical breast examination, ultrasound, and mammography are the suggested follow-up to confirm a stable appearance.

A study of 156 patients in Japan who had a benign breast biopsy showed that 13 percent required a subsequent biopsy within two years of having routine FNA procedures performed. In a retrospective study, 150 patients with benign histology after ultrasound-guided vacuum-assisted biopsy for complex cystic breast lesions (BI-RADS 4) were assessed.

This subset of patients underwent study in 6 monthly intervals. Of the 104 lesions, none led to the development of malignancy.

Routine ultrasound screening in Japan was used with 10519 women to evaluate recall criteria. Researchers noted a cystic-type breast pattern in 6512 cases.

Only one of the patient cases reported malignancy the following year, related to a solid tumor with a cystic component, proven to be a micro-invasive cancer of less than 1 mm.

There was no cancer diagnosed in this subset of patients. Most of the study subjects were less than 40 years of age.