In addition to the clinical manifestations and physical examination, laboratory and other diagnostic testing are used to confirm diagnoses of healthcare-associated infection (HAI). Routine blood tests, which include complete blood counts, metabolic panels, inflammatory markers, and blood gases will be useful to evaluate for HAI. Each type of HAI will require different workup, as indicated below.

**Central Line-Associated Blood Stream Infection (CLABSI)**

With the clinical suspicion of CLABSI, in the absence of other localized infection(s), blood cultures should be drawn. Ideally, samples for blood cultures should be drawn from two different sites, for example, one from CVC and the other from a peripheral vein before starting antibiotic therapy. Any purulent material at the exit site should be cultured.

**Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI)**

Urine samples should be collected from a midstream sample after removal of the urinary catheter, if possible. This prevents the chances of obtaining bacteria present in the biofilms present on the walls of the catheter. Urinalysis and urine cultures should be obtained. Pyuria is commonly seen in catheterized patients with bacteriuria. Bacteriuria, with culture growth of 100,000 colony forming units (CFU)/mL of uropathogenic bacteria without UTI symptoms, is referred to as asymptomatic bacteriuria and is typically not treated. In patients with clinical manifestations of CAUTI not explained by another source of infection, and urine culture growth greater than 1,000 CFU/mL of one or more pathogens are diagnosed with CAUTI.

**Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSI)**

The clinical presentation should guide the evaluation of SSI. When an SSI is suspected, a sample of the infected tissue, drainage, or purulent material should be cultured with an antibiogram. Swabs may be done on deep wounds. However, superficial swabs may be contaminated with polymicrobial colonization. Different modalities of imaging may be used to identify organ or space-occupying SSI, especially to guide drainage of infected fluid or abscess.

**Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia (HAP)/Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (VAP)**

A clinical diagnosis of pneumonia should be further evaluated with radiography and microbiologic findings. A chest x-ray is most commonly used and may reveal new infiltrates. Leukocytosis or leukopenia may be present. Sputum samples should be obtained by non-invasive sampling from endotracheal aspiration or expectoration or via bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage or specimen brushing.

**C. difficile Infection (CDI)**

Suspected CDI should be evaluated with stool tests for C. difficile toxin(s) or C. difficile toxin gene. Liquid stool from only clinically significant diarrhea should be sampled to limit false positives by highly sensitive diagnostic tests. A rectal swab may be done in patients with ileus and suspected CDI. Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) is highly sensitive and may lead to overdiagnosis and overtreatment.

An algorithmic approach with initial enzyme immunoassay for toxins A and B and glutamate dehydrogenase antigen is recommended. Indeterminate toxin or antigen tests should be confirmed with the use of NAAT.