**Common Causes of Meteorism**

**Functional:**In the majority of people, the cause of meteorism is unknown. These individuals present in the third decade of life with complaints of belching, excess gas, bloated sensation, and abdominal distension. Abdominal x-rays usually reveal a nonspecific collection of gas in the intestine. Workup usually reveals no pathology. X-rays should rule out constipation

**Bowel obstruction**from any cause can lead to the accumulation of gas in the intestine. This is pathological, and the patient may present with nausea, vomiting, inability to pass gas. X-rays will show dilated bowel loops, air-fluid levels, and lack of air in the distal colon or rectum.

**Ileus**is essentially the disruption of normal propulsive bowel movements. It has many causes, and the failure of peristalsis leads to the accumulation of air in the GI tract. Patients with ileus often present with abdominal distension, moderate abdominal discomfort, bilious vomiting, an absence of bowel movements, and no appetite. Risk factors for ileus include the following:

- Electrolyte imbalance (hypokalemia, hypercalcemia)

- Gastrointestinal surgery

- Diabetes mellitus

- Hypothyroidism

- Use of medications like opiates

- Spinal cord injury

Ileus is managed conservatively by limiting the patient to nothing by mouth and administering fluids. A nasogastric tube may be required to decompress the intestine and stomach. Most patients start to recover within 3 to 5 days. One may use peristaltic agents like erythromycin or metoclopramide to enhance bowel movements.

**Irritable bowel syndrome**is a complex disorder of bowel motility that presents with abdominal pain and a changing pattern of bowel movements. Almost universally, patients complain of a bloated sensation. So far, no patient has shown any underlying damage to the bowel with IBS. The disorder presents with vague abdominal symptoms in the third decade of life. The disorder may be associated with diarrhea, constipation, or a combination of the two symptoms.

IBS seriously affects the quality of life and results in missed work and school. These patients are not able to tolerate a wide range of foods. As soon as the offending food is ingested, the patient will complain of bloating, abdominal pain, and nausea. Many of these patients also have other existing disorders like major depression, anxiety, and fibromyalgia.

The diagnosis of IBS is difficult as the signs and symptoms are nonspecific. Investigations are usually done to rule out other organic causes like inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, and food intolerance. Unfortunately, there is no cure for IBS, and there is no one treatment that works for everyone. Patients are counseled on dietary changes, use of probiotics, and eating a diet low in fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols (FODMAP)