Oliguria can be the result of various causes that can be apparent or subclinical.

Prerenal Causes:

- Hypovolemia: decreased effective blood volume secondary to less fluid intake, bleeding, gastrointestinal fluid loss (diarrhea, vomiting, or nasogastric suction), renal losses (diuretics or glycosuria), third-spacing of fluid (ascites, pleural effusion), trauma, surgery, burns, sepsis, anaphylaxis, hepatic failure, nephrotic syndrome, vasodilatory drugs or anesthetic agents.

- Pump Failure: Myocardial failure secondary to myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, cardiac tamponade, and congestive heart failure.

- Vascular: Renal-artery or renal-vein occlusion due to thrombosis, thromboembolism, severe stenosis, disrupted renal autoregulation secondary to the administration of angiotensin-converting–enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.

Renal or Intrinsic Causes:

- Vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, scleroderma, malignant hypertension, or interstitial nephritis.

- Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) due to ischemia and nephrotoxic substances, including drugs (e.g., gentamicin, kanamycin, mercury, cisplatin), radiographic contrast agents.

Postrenal Causes:

- Upper urinary tract obstruction due to ureteral obstruction of one or both sides.

- Lower urinary tract obstruction (more common), including bladder-outlet obstruction due to BPH, tumor, drugs, etc.

In the postoperative course, as a result of the release of vasopressin as well as the sympathetic stimulation, transient oliguria may be observed.