Parotitis can occur in any patient and is not unusual after surgery. The condition is not always easy to diagnose and thus is best managed by an interprofessional team. The nurses are often the first to note the problem in postoperative patients. While there is no generic preventive method, the nurse should educate the patient on adequate hydration and maintaining good oral hygiene. The pharmacist should ensure that the anticholinergic medications have been discontinued, assist the providers in therapeutic agent selection to treat parotitis based on the underlying cause, and perform medication reconciliation and verify dosing. The clinician (MD, DO, NP, or PA) or surgeon will manage the case but requires open communication and information sharing from all interprofessional team members. Any team member who notes a change in status, medication side effect, or therapeutic failure needs to document their observations in the patient chart or record and report the new information to the rest of the team. [Level 5]

While the condition is treated supportively in most cases, consultation with an otolaryngologist may be required. Nursing can follow up, monitor therapy effectiveness, and watch for adverse events. The condition may last a few days and can be painful; hence, optimal pain control is necessary. The dietitian should be consulted on nutrition, as many patients cannot chew or even swallow. Close communication between interprofessional team members is vital to improving outcomes. [Level 5]