**Radiological evaluation:**Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are useful in establishing the diagnosis of subglottic stenosis. Higher speed CT has reduced imaging timing. Radiography helps to locate the exact location and length of the stenotic segment. The anteroposterior high kilovoltage technique increases the visibility of the upper airway by enhancing the tracheal air column while deemphasizing the bony cervical spine. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a minimally invasive endoscopic imaging modality capable of monitoring the progression of subglottic mucosal injury. OCT and texture analysis help in the early detection of mucosal injury, which helps with better management of the airway and limits its progression to stenosis.

**Endoscopic examination:**Direct endoscopic visualization with flexible fiberoptic endoscopy assesses the dynamics of the vocal cord function and the upper airway plus the esophagus. The rigid telescope carries importance in children for better visualization of the small larynx.

**Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) evaluation:**Gastroesophageal and gastrolaryngopharyngeal reflux plays a role in the exacerbation of subglottic stenosis and adversely affect the successful outcomes of laryngotracheal outcomes. Therefore, 24 hours of esophageal pH probe using the dual-probe technique is most reliable.

**Pulmonary function tests:**A useful marker to follow in patients with subglottis stenosis is spirometry. This is also indicative of post-op outcomes in airway surgery candidates. Patients with subglottic stenosis have FEV1/PEF >10. This ratio does not correlate with the anatomical severity of the stenosis in terms of the Mayer-Cotton grading system. As per a case report, low peak inspiratory flow was related to worsening airway obstruction in patients with subglottic stenosis. Some authors use spirometry values as a noninvasive measurement in the upper airway obstruction to measure the outcomes of balloon dilatation.