The administration of anthracyclines requires the efficient functioning of an interprofessional healthcare team comprised of doctors and other health professionals. A general practitioner, oncologist, physician assistant or nurse practitioner, pharmacist, and nurses are usually involved in the patient's care. A pediatrician and cardiologist may also have involvement as the case may dictate. The primary oncologist usually decides the patient's treatment plan; they will also counsel the patient on the need for this chemotherapeutic agent and the potential risks. During the initial treatment phase, a pharmacist is usually involved in providing the patient information on the dose, adverse effects, monitoring, checking for possible drug interactions, and follow-up.

After the initial phase of treatment, the patient is regularly followed up in the oncology clinic by the oncologist, who assesses response to treatment and also monitors the patient for adverse effects. The oncologist may alternate with the physician assistant or the nurse practitioner to see the patient at shorter intervals. A pediatrician may monitor growth and development in cases of chemotherapy in children. Oncology certified nursing will administer the medication and must be aware of the signs of toxicity or adverse effects so they can effectively monitor the patient and report any issues to the clinician on duty or oncologist. These examples demonstrate the impact of an interprofessional team on patient care, driving outcomes to a positive result while minimizing adverse events.

The most critical component of an interprofessional approach is the involvement of a cardiovascular team in the treatment to prevent anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and manage it effectively. Several studies have shown the benefit of this approach, including long-term care and follow-up in the outpatient setting. One such study provides high-level evidence for the development of guidelines.