Biopsy, partial or excisional, is the most appropriate approach for the evaluation of a lesion in which the diagnosis of melanoacanthoma is being considered. An adequate biopsy specimen should be obtained so that the pathologist has sufficient tissue to examine and thereby be able to provide an accurate diagnosis.

The clinical features of a melanoacanthoma mimic those of melanoma. Therefore, the clinician often cannot establish the diagnosis of melanoacanthoma based solely on the lesion's morphologic appearance. Thus, the evaluation of a suspected melanoacanthoma may include dermoscopy and reflectance confocal microscopy. However, biopsy for microscopic examination is usually necessary to establish the diagnosis.

**Dermoscopy**

Dermoscopy is a non-invasive in vivo examination technique to evaluate the surface of the skin. Subsurface skin structure in the epidermis can be visualized using a hand-held dermatoscope. Dermoscopy, most often used to evaluate pigmented skin lesions, has been done by four groups of investigators to study melanoacanthoma.

Dermoscopic features of melanoacanthoma, which mimicked those of a pigmented Spitz nevus, were initially described by Rossiello et al. in 2006. They examined a raised 4 millimeter verrucous pigmented left hip lesion and viewed a starburst pattern consisting of symmetrically distributed pigmented streaks on the periphery; this pattern has previously been considered diagnostic for a pigmented Spitz nevus. Also, in the center, they noted other features of a pigmented Spitz nevus, which can also occasionally be found in a melanoma: (1) gray to whitish hyperkeratotic areas and (2) multiple, black to brown, dots and (3) multiple globules.

Shankar et al., in 2010, evaluated a giant 10 cm by 5 cm melanoacanthoma. Dermoscopic examination showed a regular pigmentary network. A cribriform pattern of ridges and fissures characteristic for a seborrheic keratosis was also observed. There were no melanoma dermoscopic features.

Subsequently, in 2015, Chung et al. studied the lesions from eight patients with melanoacanthomas with dermoscopy. They noted features of seborrheic keratoses (comedo-like openings, hairpin vessels, milia-like cysts, moth-eaten border, and sharp demarcations) in all of the lesions. However, they also observed features specific for melanoma features (atypical dots, blue-white veil, granularity, and polymorphous vessels) on six of the lesions.

More recently, in 2016, Shahriari et al.'s dermoscopic examination of melanoacanthoma which presented as a 7 mm black papule on the left submandibular area showed a lesion with a verrucous contour, scale, and features that prompted the investigators to consider a pigmented nodular melanoma: irregular blue-white and black clods.

**Reflectance Confocal Microscopy**

Reflectance confocal microscopy is a novel non-invasive imaging technique. It allows in vivo imaging of the skin. It allows visualization of the epidermis and superficial dermis at nearly histologic resolution.

Reflectance confocal microscopy of melanoacanthoma was initially described by Shahriari et al. in 2016 of a left mandibular black papule. A well-circumscribed lesion whose overall architecture showed keratotic debris-filled surface depressions and ridges was observed at the level of the stratum corneum of the epidermis; this correlated with the verrucous surface of the lesion. Numerous tangled bright dendritic cells were noted in the suprabasal spinous and granular layers of the hyperplastic epidermis; this feature was suggestive of that seen in melanoma with a pagetoid distribution of melanocytes throughout the epidermis. Since a melanoma was suspected based on the reflectance confocal microscopy findings, the lesion was excised.

Porto et al., in 2019, also used reflectance confocal microscopy to evaluate a melanoacanthoma presenting as a 9 mm dark brown patch on the scalp. At the spinous-granular layer, a typical honeycomb pattern was present; also, there were not only epidermal projections and keratin-filled invaginations but also widespread dendritic pagetoid cells. At the dermo-epidermal junction, between the dermal papillae, there was also infiltration of dendritic cells. Melanophages were noted at the level of the papillary dermis. The presence of suprabasal dendritic cells can be observed in squamous cell carcinoma in situ, and the pagetoid spread of dendritic melanocytes can be noted in melanoma; therefore, the lesion was excised.

In summary, several investigators have described the dermoscopic features and the reflectance confocal microscopic features of melanoacanthoma. Although dermoscopic findings such as a starburst pattern, a regular pigmentary network, and a cribriform pattern of ridges and fissures are typically observed, other features suggestive of melanoma are also frequently present. Similarly, features observed on reflectance confocal microscopy mimic those of melanoma. Hence, dermoscopy and reflectance confocal microscopy alone are not reliable for establishing the diagnosis of melanoacanthoma.