# Continuing Education Activity

Transdermal fentanyl is a medication used in the management and treatment of chronic pain and cancer pain. It is part of the opioid class of drugs. This activity outlines and reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for Transdermal fentanyl as a valuable agent in treating chronic pain. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, dosing, monitoring, and toxicity pertinent for the healthcare team members in the pain management of patients with chronic pain and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of transdermal fentanyl.
- Describe the contraindications of transdermal fentanyl.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for transdermal fentanyl.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance transdermal fentanyl and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Transdermal fentanyl has FDA approval for patients with moderate to severe chronic non-cancer and cancer-associated pain. The patient's chronic pain must demonstrate tolerance to opioid medication, be intractable, and require constant analgesic effects.

# Mechanism of Action

Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid agonist, which acts primarily at the μ-opioid receptor. It is 100 times more potent than morphine resulting in an estimated conversion ratio of 1 to 100 to provide an equal degree of analgesia. Its low molecular weight, high potency, and lipid solubility make it ideal for delivery via the transdermal route. After absorption and entrance into circulation, fentanyl can exert potent effects on areas of the brain that are highly responsible for analgesia. Fentanyl is a 4-anilidopiperidine compound. Like other opiates, this synthetic form exerts its effect by acting as a high-affinity agonist on selective Mu-opioid receptors in the brain. Also, it can exercise its effects on delta and kappa receptors to a lesser degree. The activation of Mu-opioid receptors causes analgesia and stimulating areas of the brain responsible for addictive potential.

The transdermal route eliminates the first-pass metabolism of fentanyl by the liver, increasing bioavailability to 90%, making it possible to use lower doses of the drug, thus reducing the incidence of adverse effects. Fentanyl metabolism occurs via cytochrome P450 (CYP34A) enzymes into inactive metabolites; hence drugs that enhance or inhibit cytochrome P450 will affect its metabolism.

# Administration

The patch has an adhesive side that contains an active ingredient that must be applied directly flat on the skin. The skin should be cleaned with water before application and allowed to dry to be free of oil and other debris.

The transdermal fentanyl patch must be removed after 72 hours and replaced with a fresh patch in a new suitable location. The fentanyl will be absorbed first through the topmost layer of the epidermis (stratum corneum) until further reaching the blood vessels to enter the systemic circulation and exert effects on the target receptors. An important consideration with the transdermal patch is the secondary reservoir of the skin. After about 24 hours, significant amounts of fentanyl transfer into the epidermis, which will act as a reservoir for fentanyl; only after the epidermis has absorbed enough drug will it enter the systemic circulation. This action provides a sustained level of fentanyl to avoid inconsistent pain control. This secondary reservoir phenomenon allows for the continual absorption of fentanyl and continues to exert effects on target receptors until the reservoir amount descends below the threshold.

# Adverse Effects

The most common adverse drug reactions of transdermal fentanyl are nausea (incidence of 10 to 90%), vomiting (incidence of 10 to 90%), and constipation.

As is characteristic of opioids, the withdrawal of transdermal fentanyl may result in additional adverse side effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and shivering. These symptoms may occur when decreasing dosage, abrupt cessation of use, or changing to an alternative opioid medication.

# Contraindications

Contraindications of transdermal fentanyl include use during the acute postoperative pain period for short term pain control, intermittent pain control, or mild pain.

# Monitoring

Fentanyl is an extremely potent opioid and requires monitoring due to the low therapeutic drug concentration. A blood concentration of 0.6 ng/ml to 3.0 ng/ml is appropriate for analgesia. The gold standard method of determining fentanyl concentration for monitoring is Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Alternative methods of monitoring included radioimmunoassay. However, it is known to overestimate concentrations of fentanyl by 29 to 100%. Monitoring Fentanyl is increasingly important when the patient is subject to polypharmacy. Notable drugs to pay special attention to are those which inhibit CYP3A4 metabolism and cause an increase in Fentanyl concentration leading to toxicity. Examples of such medications include azole class antifungals as well as macrolide antibiotics.

CYP3A4 inducers may also reduce the level of fentanyl to a non-therapeutic level causing the patient inadequate analgesia and distress. Such drugs include rifampin, phenytoin, and carbamazepine.

# Toxicity

The most concerning adverse reaction with fentanyl is respiratory depression. The treatment approach is by management via mechanical ventilation, using a laryngeal mask airway (LMA), or bag-mask ventilation. Securing the airway is of utmost importance to counteract hypoventilation.

As mentioned earlier, fentanyl is a synthetic opioid that is 100 times stronger than morphine. Due to its powerful opioid properties, fentanyl diversion for misuse is a problem. Fentanyl is added to heroin to increase its potency or is disguised as highly potent heroin. Many users believe that they are purchasing heroin, but it has been adulterated with fentanyl – which often results in overdose deaths.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Transdermal fentanyl is extremely effective for pain control, but it requires careful monitoring. Physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and allied health professionals (NPs and PAs) must have training in patient safety, possess the proper knowledge and readily available information to screen for opiate abuse, misuse, and toxicity.