Patients should undergo a detailed history and evaluation. Echolalia has several subtypes. There are two major types of echolalia:

- Immediate echolalia: This refers to the repetition of speech immediately after the utterance.

- Delayed echolalia: This refers to the repetition of speech sometime after the utterance.

Historically, echolalia was described as a meaningless speech disorder. However, recent literature suggests echolalia may have a communicative function. Both immediate and delayed echolalia can be communicative (repetition with an apparent meaningful or communicative purpose) or semi-communicative (repetition with no clear communicative purpose).

Echolalia can also be classified based on the features of speech repetition.

- Unmitigated echolalia refers to verbatim or exact repetition of speech.

- Mitigated echolalia refers to the repetition of speech in altered form.

As the language and comprehension improve in children with autism, more mitigated echolalia may be observed. The child learns to make a change in the speech or intonation instead of repeating verbatim. Mitigated echolalia may have a higher functional category.

Echolalia can also be classified based on the nature of the stimulus. The speech repetition can be person-directed or non-person directed.

- Ambient echolalia refers to the repetition of words or sentences from the environment (e.g., television, bike, car, fan).

- Echoing approval refers to the situations where patients echo, in positive or negative intonations, replying to questions instead of repeating the whole or part of sentences. Sometimes they may respond to questions that were not addressed to them.