- Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy is a progressive, autosomal dominant CAG repeat disorder typically characterized by ataxia, myoclonus, epilepsy, choreoathetosis, dementia, psychiatric disturbance, and progressive intellectual deterioration.

- Juvenile onset (less than 20 years) disease presents with progressive myoclonus epilepsy disorder with ataxia and abnormal intellectual development, with recurrent severe seizures. The sudden unexpected death of someone with epilepsy (SUDEP) is the most deadly complication.

- Adult-onset (more than 20 years) disease presents with dystonias, neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric decline with ataxia, with aspiration pneumonia as the most common cause of mortality.

- DRPLA is a microsatellite CAG repeat disorder with genetic anticipation affecting the atrophin-1 (ATN1) gene, leading to the intranuclear accumulation of protein deposits in affected neurons, ultimately leading to progressive neuronal dysfunction, atrophy, and death.

- Pathogenic CAG repeat length can range from 48 to 93. Complete penetrance has 48 tandem copies, incomplete penetrance clinical phenotype has 35–47, and normal is less than 35.

- Japanese patients have a higher baseline of CAG repeats (20-35) compared to individuals from European descent, which could explain their increased susceptibility to the disease.

- Prognosis is poor, mean disease duration is about 15 years, and life expectancy is 8–16 years from symptom onset. The length of the ATN1 CAG repeat expansion is directly correlated with the age of onset, clinical phenotype, and life expectancy.

- Highly suspicious cases for DRPLA are further evaluated by targeted molecular genetic testing: PCR amplification across the ATN1 CAG repeat region; for higher CAG repeats, ancillary Southern Blot electrophoresis, is used to confirm the diagnosis.

- EEG and MRI are helpful for certain clinical scenarios, but they are mostly non-specific for the disorder.

- Treatment is predominantly supportive: symptomatic treatment of seizures, ataxias, choreoathetosis, as well as nonpharmacological interventions such as special education programs for children, neurorehabilitation, neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric, and most importantly, genetic counseling.

- Avoiding general anesthesia during surgical procedures can decrease the rate of breakthrough seizures.