**Carbohydrate Metabolism**

It focuses on one specific kind of sugar, glucose. After a cell uptakes a molecule of glucose, it gets immediately metabolized to glucose-6-phosphate, which cannot exit the cell. The catalyzing enzyme in this reaction is called hexokinase (in the liver and pancreas) or glucokinase in every other tissue. This metabolite is usable by almost every metabolic process, including glycolysis and glycogenesis. Carbohydrates are stored as glycogen granules for rapid mobilization of glucose when required.

Glycogen is a polymer of glucose, assembled by the glycogen synthase, with branch points every ten glucose molecules, which gives the glycogen a tree-like structure, which is beneficial for glucose mobilization. Some tissues utilize glycogen for their own maintenance, like a skeletal muscle; some other tissues use glycogen to maintain serum glucose levels stable, such as the liver. The liver can store almost 100 g of glycogen that supplies glucose for 24 hours; the skeletal muscle stores 350 g that are sufficient for 60 minutes of muscle contraction. Glucose is metabolized by glycolysis in all cells to form pyruvate. This process does not use oxygen, and it generates two molecules of pyruvate, 2 NADH and 2 ATP.

Pyruvate may have three fates within the cell: it can be transported into the mitochondria and generate acetyl–CoA, it can remain in the cytosol and generate lactate, or it can be used in glyconeogenesis by the enzyme alanine aminotransferase (ALT). The fate of pyruvate in tissues will depend on hormonal regulation, oxygen availability, and the particular tissue. For example, in the liver, excess pyruvate is metabolized to acetyl–CoA, and then this is used for lipid synthesis, whereas in muscle, it undergoes complete oxidation to CO2.

Glucose–6–phosphate is also usable by the pentose phosphate pathway. This pathway synthesizes nucleotides, synthesis of specific lipids, and to maintain glutathione in its active form. This process is under the regulation of glucose–6–phosphate dehydrogenase.

Carbohydrate metabolism is regulated mainly by insulin, as it stimulates glycolysis and glycogenesis. Catecholamines, glucagon, cortisol, and growth hormone, stimulate gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis.

**Lipid Metabolism**

Fatty acids serve as energy production in oxidative tissues. Some of them are amphipathic and potentially toxic, and they are transported bound to albumin. The intestines absorb fatty acids in the form of micelles; these get engulfed by the enterocytes in the intestinal wall. Once inside, these molecules of fat get broken down to smaller molecules, free fatty acids and glycerol that are posteriorly conjugated to form triglycerides. These are bound to proteins, to form chylomicrons outside the enterocyte.

These chylomicrons are very rich in cholesterol and triglycerides, which are transported by the portal vein system to the liver. The liver will process these complex molecules to extract a fraction of cholesterol and triglycerides. The liver secretes a new form of a complex molecule called VLDL that transports endogenous lipids and fat to peripheral tissues that express hormone-sensitive lipase and lipoprotein lipase.

This enzyme reduces VLDL into LDL, which contains more cholesterol than the other molecules, and it gets finally engulfed by target tissues. All this process is called “forward cholesterol metabolism.” When too much fat or cholesterol exists in peripheral tissues, it travels within a lipoprotein called HDL, which will enter the biliary system for excretion. This process is called “reverse cholesterol metabolism.” Both are regulated by insulin, which stimulates lipases in the organism but suppresses lipolysis.

**Amino Acid Metabolism**

We consume almost 100 g of protein per day. The body contains nearly 10 kg of protein that is metabolized by 300 g per day. The structural units comprising proteins are amino acids. Some of these are essential (meaning that the body cannot synthesize them, and must obtain them from the diet), and some are non–essential amino acids (which the body can synthesize). Proteins are absorbed in the form of amino acids by the enterocytes. Amino acids contain a nitrogen group and a two-carbon skeleton called 2–oxoacid.

Metabolism of amino acids generates ammonium, which is a toxic molecule, especially for the CNS. Ammonium can be metabolized in the liver for excretion into the ornithine (urea) cycle. Amino acid metabolism occurs in two kinds of chemical reactions. The first is called transamination, in which alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) participate. These two reactions require a three-carbon skeleton to interchange the amino group; the skeleton for these two enzymes is alpha-ketoglutarate. In the reaction regulated by ALT, alanine transfers the amino group to alpha-ketoglutarate to form pyruvate and glutamate. In the AST-regulated reaction, the inverse situation occurs. It takes the donated amino group from glutamate to create aspartate to donate a second amino atom to the Urea cycle. The second reaction is deamination, in which the glutamate dehydrogenase metabolizes glutamate to form alpha-ketoglutarate and ammonia, which has to be detoxified by the urea cycle.

After deamination, the skeleton undergoes intermediate metabolism. The metabolism of amino acids can yield seven types of skeletons, namely: alpha-ketoglutarate, oxaloacetate, succinyl–CoA, fumarate, pyruvate, acetyl–CoA, and acetoacetyl–CoA. The first five have three or more carbons, and they are useful for glyconeogenesis, the last two have only two carbons, and they are unusable for glyconeogenesis. Instead, they are used for lipid synthesis.

Like all the other metabolic pathways, insulin is the main regulator. In contrast, the regulator in the amino acid metabolism is cortisol, and thyroid hormone that mediates muscle breakdown.