The suboccipital nerve may play a role in the pathogenesis of cervicogenic headaches and occipital neuralgia. The nerve may also be vulnerable to trauma from whiplash injuries. For this reason, it is a novel target for the intervention and treatment of these regional pain syndromes.

**Occipital Neuralgia**

Occipital neuralgia, also called C2 neuralgia, is a condition of recurrent headaches localized to the occipital area of the head and neck. Occipital neuralgia is described as a sudden onset neuropathic pain, generally unilateral but occasionally bilateral, across the dermatomes of the greater occipital nerve and the lesser occipital nerve.

Cervicogenic headaches present as unilateral headaches or migraine brought on by movement or palpation of the cervical vertebrae. The pain can present anywhere on the scalp due to the referred pain of nerves, but it primarily presents in the posterior area of the neck. The pathogenesis of cervicogenic headaches appears to be due to cervical vertebrae pathology affecting the C1-C3 nerves. The suboccipital nerve may contribute to cervicogenic headaches, especially in certain anatomic variants where it connects with the greater and lesser occipital nerves.

**Cluster Headaches**

Cluster headaches are characterized by attacks of severe unilateral pain focussed around the orbit, supraorbital, or temporal area.

**Post-dural Puncture Headache**

Pregnant women who undergo spinal anesthesia for cesarean section delivery can present with post-dural puncture headache, typically with symptoms of postural headaches, which can be associated with neck stiffness, and, more rarely, with photophobia, tinnitus, or vomiting.

**Suboccipital Muscle Spasm**

Like other muscles, the suboccipital muscles can become strained, resulting in neck pain, spasms, or headaches. Additionally, the suboccipital muscles and the suboccipital nerve can incur damage from whiplash injuries from car accidents or other rapid deceleration injuries. The theory is that damage to the suboccipital nerve that occurs due to whiplash injuries may be due to injury of the rectus capitis posterior minor muscle.