TSS typically presents with rapid onset of fever, rash, and hypotension. It may be preceded by a prodrome of fever and chills with nausea and vomiting as well as nonspecific symptoms such as myalgias, headache, or symptoms of pharyngitis (e.g., a sore throat, painful swallowing), which then progresses to sepsis and organ dysfunction. Risk factors include superabsorbent tampon use, nasal packing, post-operative wound infections, recent influenza infection, as well as immunocompromised states.

The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) clinical criteria for TSS includes fever, rash, hypotension, and multisystem organ involvement.

The CDC defines Streptococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome as an illness with the following

- Hypotension defined by a systolic blood pressure less than or equal to 90 mm Hg for adults or less than the fifth percentile by age for children aged less than 16 years.

- Multi-Organ Failure characterized by two of the following:

- Renal impairment: Creatinine greater than or equal to 2 mg/dL (greater than or equal to 177 µmol/L) for adults or greater than or equal to twice the upper limit of normal for age. In patients with preexisting renal disease, a greater than twofold elevation over the baseline level.
- Coagulopathy: Platelets less than or equal to 100,000/mm (less than or equal to 100 x 10/L) or disseminated intravascular coagulation, defined by prolonged clotting times, low fibrinogen level, and the presence of fibrin degradation products.
- Liver involvement: Alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, or total bilirubin levels greater than or equal to twice the upper limit of normal for the patient's age. In patients with preexisting liver disease, a greater than twofold increase over the baseline level.
- Acute respiratory distress syndrome: defined by acute onset of diffuse pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxemia in the absence of cardiac failure or by evidence of diffuse capillary leak manifested by acute onset of generalized edema, or pleural or peritoneal effusions with hypoalbuminemia.
- A generalized erythematous macular rash that may desquamate.
- Soft-tissue necrosis, including necrotizing fasciitis or myositis, or gangrene.

Laboratory Criteria for Streptococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome:

Isolation of group A Streptococcus

They then define the case as Probable if the case meets the criteria in the absence of another etiology and GAS isolated from a non-sterile site.

The case is defined as confirmed if GAS is isolated from a sterile site (blood, CSF, joint fluid, pleural fluid, or pericardial fluid)