A thorough history and physical examination are essential in the evaluation of a patient with suspected lumbar disc herniation. The principal signs and symptoms include:

- Radicular pain

- Low back pain

- Sensory abnormalities at the lumbosacral nerve roots distribution

- Weakness at the lumbosacral nerve roots distribution

- Limited trunk flexion

- Pain exacerbation with straining, coughing, and sneezing

- Pain intensified in a seated position, as the pressure applied to the nerve root is increased by approximately 40%

The history must include questions about the quality of the pain and the impact on the patient's activity. The mechanism of injury is essential to know. The clinician must ask the patient about any current or past treatments, urinary or fecal incontinence, saddle anesthesia, past medical history of malignancy, inflammatory conditions, systemic infection, immunosuppression, and drug use. Red flag signs that could be features of underlying infection, inflammatory disease or malignancy like fever, night sweats, unexplained weight loss, loss of appetite, extreme pain, and vertebral body point tenderness require investigated.

A careful and thorough neurological examination can help to localize the level of lumbar disc herniation if it is causing radiculopathy. The correct knowledge of the anatomy of nerve roots and lumbar disc herniations would allow a proper interpretation of the clinical findings associated with this condition. The radiculopathy associated with LDH varies based on the herniation type and the level at which the herniation occurred. In paracentral or lateral herniation, the transversing nerve root is usually affected; a lateral herniation at L4-L5 would cause L5 radiculopathy. Extreme lateral (far lateral) herniations typically result in the exiting nerve root being affected; extreme lateral herniation at L4-L5 would cause L4 radiculopathy.

L1 nerve root exits at the L1-L2 foramina, assessed with a cremasteric reflex (male). When compressed by a herniated disc, it causes pain, and sensory loss in the inguinal region rarely causes weakness in the hip flexion.

The L2 and L3 nerve roots exit at the L2-L3 and L3-L4 foramina, respectively. Symptoms worsen with sneezing, coughing, or leg straightening.

L4 nerve root exits at the L4-L5 foramina. L4 has a reflex assessed with a patellar reflex. When compressed by a herniated disc, it causes back pain that radiates into the anterior thigh and the medial aspect of the leg, accompanied with sensory loss in the same distribution, weakness in the hip flexion and adduction, weakness in knee extension, and a decreased patellar reflex.

L5 nerve root exits at the L5-S1 foramina. When compressed by a herniated disc, it causes back pain that radiates into the buttock, lateral thigh, lateral calf, the dorsum of the foot, and the great toe. Sensory loss is present on the web space between the big toe and second toe, the dorsum of the foot, and lateral calf. There is a weakness in hip abduction, knee flexion, foot dorsiflexion, big toe dorsiflexion, foot inversion, and eversion. Patients present with decreased semitendinosus/semimembranosus reflex. Weakness in foot dorsiflexion makes it challenging to walk on the heels. Chronic L5 radiculopathy may cause atrophy of the extensor digitorum brevis and the tibialis anterior of the anterior leg.

S1 nerve root exits at the S1-S2 foramina, assessed with the Achilles reflex. When compressed with a herniated disc, it presents with sacral or buttock pain that radiates into the posterolateral thigh, the calf, plantar or lateral foot or the perineum. Sensory loss is present on the calf, lateral, or plantar aspect of the foot. There is weakness on foot plantar flexion, hip extension, and flexion of the knee. Weakness in foot plantar flexion causes an inability to tiptoe walk. It could also cause urinary and fecal incontinence and sexual dysfunction.

A straight leg raise test is a neurological maneuver performed while examining a patient presenting with lower back pain. It is conducted with the patient lying supine while keeping the symptomatic leg straight by flexing the quadriceps. The examiner slowly elevates the leg progressively at a slow pace. The test is positive when it reproduces the patient's symptoms (pain and paresthesia) at an angle lower than 45 degrees with radiation below the knee (Lasegue sign). It is most helpful in diagnosing L4, L5, and S1 radiculopathies. The patient is asked to dorsiflex the foot while the examiner is raising the leg (Bragaad's sign) to increase the sensitivity of the test.

Another maneuver is the crossed straight leg test, which is similar to the straight leg raise test but is conducted on the asymptomatic leg instead. The crossed straight leg test is considered positive when the patient reports pain in the symptomatic leg, while the asymptomatic leg is at 40 degrees angle, representing a central disc herniation with severe nerve root irritation.

A recent meta-analysis concluded that a clinical diagnosis of lumbar disc herniation with radiculopathy, could be made with a straight leg raise screening test, if also Hancock rule requirement is met (having three positives out of the four following findings: dermatomal pain in the nerve root distribution, and associated sensory deficit, reflex abnormality, and motor weakness).