With any possible penetrating ocular injury, such as corneal abrasion, foreign body, or globe perforation, the mainstay of initial treatment is pain control, removal of contact lenses, and protection of the eye to prevent further trauma. Ocular patches are not recommended in the initial management, however protective eye shields may be helpful in children, or altered patients, to prevent further trauma from digitization.

Pain management can is obtainable with topical, oral, intramuscular, or intravenous medications. The most efficacious is topical tetracaine. However, overuse can lead to long-term cornea breakdown, and its use is reserved for the initial hour or two.

Cycloplegic eye drops may be helpful, as well as placing a patch over the unaffected eye, to minimize as much pupillary movement as possible. Topical ketorolac has also recently been shown to be of benefit. However, this is avoided in the pregnant population.

Finally, systemic pain relief may be necessary if the patient cannot tolerate your examination. However, caution should be used with this approach, as dependence and misuse syndrome has become more prevalent in recent years.

Foreign body removal should commence as soon as possible; within 24 hours is ideal, as, after this time, the foreign body can become embedded within the stroma of the cornea, and this makes removal more difficult. If the foreign body is thought to be or has physical exam findings consistent with full stromal thickness, the object should be removed on an emergent basis by an ophthalmologist.

There are many ways to remove a foreign body, but there is a consensus that a step-wise approach is most reasonable. The following techniques are the recommendations after thorough examination rules out globe perforation.

Simple irrigation and a moist cotton swab is the first step. The majority of recent and superficial foreign bodies can be successfully removed this way. If this is unsuccessful, the bevel of a needle is usable under slit lamp guidance. The physician may use their personal preference, but most texts recommend a 25 to 30 gauge needle connected to a TB syringe for the utmost control.

Another method to remove it is with an ophthalmic corneal burr also referred to as a spud, or more commonly the “Alger brush.” This has a couple of distinct functions. As it rotates, it can be used to essentially flick out the foreign body, although more commonly, it is used to shave down the rust ring from a metallic foreign body.

When a foreign body is full-thickness or intra-ocular, there are limited options. If the object is thought to be inert, such as glass or plastic, the patient can be observed serially. All metallic foreign bodies should be removed regardless of the depth, as they react with the stroma, causing a rust ring. Small rust rings can be left, as they will often go away on their own, or they can be serially shaved away as the stroma continues to regenerate. Central corneal foreign bodies or rust rings should undergo aggressive removal, as they have the most impact on future vision. Secondary iritis can be a finding with inadequate removal of rust rings.

Upon successful removal of the corneal foreign body, treatment consists of pain control, follow-up, and consideration given to prophylactic antibiotics. When choosing an antibiotic, contact lens wearers should have anti-pseudomonas coverage. In one study, 90% of the bacteria cultured from corneal foreign bodies were sensitive to fluoroquinolone drops.