While there is variability in the ABO phenotype frequencies among different ethnic and racial groups, blood type O is generally the most prevalent worldwide, followed by types A and B, respectively. Type B is more common in the Asian population. Blood type AB is the rarest of the ABO phenotypes.

Clinically significant antibodies can lead to adverse events during transfusion and can also lead to hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn after placental transmission from mother to fetus.  Hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) occurs due to incompatibility between the blood of the mother and the baby. Antibodies from the mother cross the placenta during pregnancy and attack the baby’s red blood cells. ABO incompatibility between mother and infant can cause hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia in the infant.  HDN due to ABO incompatibility tends to be less severe than that caused by Rh compatibility because fetal red cells tend to express less of the ABO blood group antigens than adults. Also, the ABO blood group antigens are present on various tissues, which decreases the likelihood that ABO antibodies will bind to their targets on fetal red cells. The degree of severity of hemolysis varies greatly.  HDN can occur with the first pregnancy and has a high recurrence rate.

A hemolytic transfusion reaction is one type of reaction that can occur with the transfusion of blood products. Acute hemolytic transfusion reactions most commonly occur with transfusion of red blood cells, although they can develop with transfusions of other blood products. An acute hemolytic transfusion reaction occurs within 24 hours of the transfusion. Acute hemolytic reactions are most often caused by incompatibility between the donor product and recipient blood group system, most commonly the ABO blood group system. The classic presentation of acute hemolytic transfusion reaction includes fever, red/brown urine, and back/flank pain. However, not all patients will present in this way; other symptoms that may be noted include hypotension, chills, renal failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Once an acute hemolytic transfusion is suspected, the transfusion should be immediately stopped. The most common cause of death during a transfusion is a clerical error, where an incompatible unit of blood was transfused, and so clerical error should be ruled-out and ensure the correct blood product was given to the intended patient. The remaining blood product, along with a sample of blood from the patient, should be sent to the blood bank for repeat ABO testing on the patient after the reaction. Repeat cross-matching is then performed, and patient samples should be sent to evaluate for renal failure, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and hemolysis. Treatment for an acute hemolytic transfusion reaction is mainly supportive care, and specific treatments are determined by the specific complications noted.