Location is the most important factor that determines the natural history of CCM.

Surgical excision is the only definitive treatment for CCM but the decision to operate remains challenging as postoperative morbidity may approach or exceed the complications of the untreated disease.

CCMs located in the deep gray nuclei and brainstem pose a much greater challenge. Studies using diffusion tensor imaging and diffusion tensor tractography have shown that up to 82% of patients with brainstem lesions have involvement of corticospinal tract and other major fiber tracts

The technical goal of surgery should be, at a minimum, complete lesionectomy.

Stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has long served as an alternative to surgery in symptomatic patients with anatomically foreboding lesions or unfavorable risk profile. SRS is highly accurate and allows targeted delivery of high-dose radiation (typically 11 to 15 Gy) with sparing of adjacent, healthy brain parenchyma. The mechanism of therapeutic SRS is uncertain; lesion size may decrease, remain stable, or even increase and there is no reliable imaging biomarker for successful CCM obliteration as with metastasis and high-flow vascular lesions.

CCM is a surgical disease, and the role of medical management is limited but the subject of much ongoing laboratory research. Preclinical animal model studies have recently shown that both statins and targeted Rho-kinase inhibitors may reduce symptoms and lesion progression.

The risks of surgical morbidity should be weighed against the natural history of the disease. While microsurgical resection is curative for intractable cases, most patients with supratentorial cavernous malformations are managed conservatively either with radiographic and clinical observation alone or in addition to anti-epileptic drugs, as the current first-line management strategy.