There are multiple factors involved in the development of acanthosis nigricans.

- Increased circulating insulin that activates keratinocyte insulin-like growth factor (ILGF) receptors, particularly IGF-1. At high concentrations, insulin may displace IGF-1 from IGF binding protein. Increased circulating IGF may lead to keratinocyte and dermal fibroblast proliferation.

- Hereditary variants are associated with fibroblast growth factor defects.

- Increased transforming growth factor (TGF) appears to be the mechanism for malignancy-associated acanthosis nigricans. TGF acts on epidermal tissue via the epidermal growth factor receptor.

**Familial Acanthosis nigricans:**may arise as a result of an autosomal dominant trait, presenting at birth or during childhood. It occurs due to mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3).

**Obesity-associated Acanthosis nigricans:**Obesity is one of the most common conditions associated with Acanthosis nigricans. Lesions are usually common in adulthood but can occur at any age. It was once labeled as “pseudoacanthosis nigricans". It may be associated with insulin resistance. Treating obesity with diet, weight reduction or medications can result in revolvement of Acanthosis nigricans.

**Medications associated Acanthosis nigricans:**Multiple medications have been linked to Acanthosis nigricans. These include the use of nicotinic acid, systemic glucocorticoids, diethylstilbestrol, combined oral contraceptive pill, growth hormone therapy, estrogen, protease inhibitors, niacin, injected insulin. Once the offending medication is stopped, acanthosis nigricans usually resolves.

**Acanthosis nigricans associated with endocrine dysfunction:**It is more insidious in onset, less widespread, and patients are often obese. Insulin-resistance syndromes may be divided into type A (HAIR-AN) and type B syndromes. Type A syndromes present with hyperandrogenemia, insulin resistance, and Acanthosis nigricans. Type B syndrome usually occurs in females who have uncontrolled diabetes, ovarian hyperandrogenism or autoimmune disease like SLE, Sjogren's syndrome, scleroderma. Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is associated with Acanthosis nigricans. Insulin resistance and hyperandrogenism are seen in patients with PCOS.

**Acral acanthotic anomaly:**Refers to a variant of acanthosis nigricans limited to the elbows, knees, knuckles, and dorsal surfaces of the feet. It is common in individuals who have dark skin.

**Malignant Acanthosis nigricans syndrome:**Is associated with gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas and genitourinary cancers such as prostate, breast, and ovary. Lung cancer and lymphoma rarely are associated with acanthosis nigricans. Malignant acanthosis nigricans may precede, accompany, or follow the onset of internal cancer. Malignancy-associated acanthosis nigricans usually has a rapid onset and is accompanied by skin tags, multiple seborrheic keratoses (sign of Leser-Trelat), or tripe palms.

**Auto-immune Acanthosis nigricans:**Is associated with autoimmune disorders like SLE, Sjogren's syndrome, scleroderma or Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

**Unilateral Acanthosis nigricans:**Also called as nevoid Acanthosis nigricans. It is very rare and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Lesions occur unilaterally. Lesions present at infancy, childhood or adulthood.