There is no consensus regarding optimal treatment, owing to the wide variability in etiologies, relatively uncommon prevalence, and the majority of cases being self-limiting. If a causative organism or disease has been identified, then that requires treatment. It is agreed that most idiopathic cases and most CSD-NR will spontaneously resolve. However, there are no randomized clinical trials to determine the best course of action in these or other cases, and current literature is still in debate.

To treat systemic cat-scratch disease, presenting with fever and lymphadenopathy, a prospective randomized clinical trial showed that a course of azithromycin more rapidly reduces lymph node volume than without treatment.

Treatment regimens analyzed in retrospective series of CSD-NR include antibiotics, steroids, and antibiotics with steroids. Antibiotics commonly used include azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, or doxycycline in combination with rifampin.  These have been purported to hasten recovery, but statistical conclusions cannot be drawn due to the vast majority being self-limiting, particularly in immunocompetent patients.

A more recent review of evidence and expert opinion concluded that for patients with severe vision loss and/or moderate to severe systemic, systemic symptoms, treatment with doxycycline or azithromycin with rifampin for a duration of 4-6 weeks may provide benefit, and that routine use of steroids is not recommended.

For recurrent cases of neuroretinitis, long-term immunosuppression with azithromycin may be necessary.