History should be targeted, and age focused. In the neonate with seizures, mothers with poor nutritional status may be suggestive of a vitamin B6 deficiency.  Also, consideration should be given to the inborn error of metabolism that is Vitamin B6-dependent.

Pyridoxine dependent seizures are a rare cause of seizures in neonates, and these seizures, unlike other seizures, are not responsive to the typical anti-epileptic drugs. But they respond significantly after pyridoxal phosphate administration. More than 100 cases of pyridoxine dependent seizures are documented worldwide, especially in neonates. The majority of these cases are due to genetic mutation in the pyridoxamine phosphate oxidase gene. Genetic causes should be kept in mind while treating seizures, which are refractory to conventional anti-epileptics.

The older patient should be questioned on nutritional intake, supplement use, and medication history. Also critically important is eliciting a history of potential malabsorption syndromes, which have been strongly associated with Vitamin B6 deficiency, such as inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, or surgery of the small intestines including bariatric surgery. On a review of systems, the finding of weakness, mental status change, paresthesias, or other sensory or dermatological symptoms may suggest the diagnosis.

Physical exam findings may include confusion and skin lesions, particularly facial lesions such as stomatitis, glossitis, seborrheic dermatitis, and angular cheilitis. Objective physical findings may include peripheral neuropathies, skin photosensitivity, and movement disorders.