A stroke of the vertebral or basilar artery should be suspicious in a patient presenting with vestibulocerebellar symptoms, including dizziness, nystagmus, truncal and/or limb ataxia, hypotonia of one side, oscillopsia, or cranial nerve impairment.

**Intracranial Vertebral Arterial Strokes**

**Lateral medullary infarction (Wallenberg syndrome)**

The most common posterior circulation stroke, which is generally the result of atherothrombotic occlusion of the vertebral artery causing ischemia to the lateral part of the medulla. This ischemia impairs the inferior vestibular nucleus, solitary, and ambiguous nuclei, causing the classic presentation of hoarseness, dysphagia, ataxia, and vertigo. The patient can also experience crossed hemianesthesia, indicating a brainstem lesion, with ipsilateral facial sensory loss and contralateral upper and lower extremity anesthesia due to dysfunction of the spinothalamic tract and descending trigeminal tract. This syndrome does not affect muscle strength as the corticospinal tract is located ventrally in the brainstem.

**Medial Medullary Infarction (Dejerine syndrome)**

Medial medullary infarction is also known as inferior alternating syndrome. It is a result of ischemia to the medial medulla due to occlusion of paramedian branches of the vertebral artery. The classic presentation is ipsilateral tongue paralysis, contralateral limb weakness, contralateral limb anesthesia resulting from impairment to the hypoglossal nerve, dorsal medial lemnisci, and corticospinal pathways. The crossed paralysis localizes the lesion to the brainstem due to ischemia from undecussated corticobulbar fibers located in the medulla.

**Hemimedullary Infarction**

This is a rare stroke that involves ischemia to the medial and lateral medullary due to intracranial vertebral artery occlusion proximal to the anterior spinal artery, which results in a combination of symptoms of both lateral and medial medullary syndromes.

**Cerebellar Infarction (Pseudotumoral Cerebellar Syndrome)**

The presenting symptoms depend on the artery that is obstructed. Interruption of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery results in vertigo, truncal ataxia, horizontal nystagmus. The anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) causes dysmetria, loss of hearing on the ipsilateral side, paralysis of the ipsilateral face. Occlusion of the superior cerebellar artery, which receives supply from the basilar artery later discussed in this article, causes dysarthria, ataxia, and vomiting. Space in the posterior fossa is limited, and large cerebellar strokes may cause herniation discussed further in the complications section.

**Basilar Artery Strokes**

**Top of the Basilar Syndrome**

This is also known as a rostral brainstem infarction is caused by embolic occlusion of the distal basilar artery causing ischemia to the midbrain, temporal, and occipital lobes producing vertical gaze palsy, pupillary palsy, hypersomnolence, abulia, amnesia, and visual hallucinations. Notably, sensory and motor dysfunction is generally not present.

**Inferior Medial Pontine Syndrome (Foville Syndrome**)

Inferior medial pontine syndrome or isolated dorsal pontine tegmentum infarcts is also termed Foville’s syndrome. It results from occlusion of perforating pontine arteries, commonly due to atherosclerosis of the basilar artery. This syndrome results in ipsilateral cranial nerve VI, VII, and contralateral limb hemiparesis and hemianesthesia.

**Ventral Caudal Pontine Infarct (Millard-Gubler Syndrome)**

This syndrome most often arises due to mass effect compression of one side of the caudal pons due to tumors, hemorrhage, and infections. It has been observed in younger patients can be caused by demyelinating diseases or viral encephalitis. This compression causes ipsilateral facial and lateral rectus palsy, with contralateral limb hemiplegia. These symptoms are due to dysfunction of the abducens and facial nerves and interruption of the corticospinal tract.

**Ventral Medial Pontine Infarct (Raymond Syndrome)**

This is a very rare pontine stroke with two subtypes: classic Raymond syndrome and common Raymond syndrome. The classic subtype presents as ipsilateral lateral rectus with contralateral facial nerve paralysis and limb hemiparesis secondary to medial midpontine infarct. The common subtype spares the face and is secondary to an infarct that does not include corticofacial fibers.

**Raymond–****Cestan Syndrome**

This syndrome is caused due to the lesion involving the upper dorsal pons. It manifests as ipsilateral ataxia and coarse intention tremor, ipsilateral paralysis of muscles of mastication and sensory loss in the face, contralateral sensory loss in the body, and contralateral hemiparesis of the face and the body.

**Gasperini Syndrome**

This is a rare syndrome caused by impairment of the caudal pons tegmentum, which presents with ipsilateral CN V, VI, VII, and VIII impairment with contralateral limb hemianesthesia. This syndrome has been observed in demyelinating conditions like multiple sclerosis and ischemic events due to occlusion branches of the basilar and AICA arteries.

**Lateral Pontine Syndrome (Marie Foix Syndrome**)

This is a rare brainstem stroke caused by occlusion of the long circumferential branches of the basilar artery or the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. This syndrome presents with ipsilateral peripheral facial nerve deficits with loss of facial pain and temperature, ipsilateral hypacusis, ipsilateral Horner syndrome, contralateral extremity hemiparesis, and pain and temperature sensory loss and extremity ataxia.

**Weber Syndrome (Superior Alternating Hemiplegia**)

This presents from occlusion of paramedian branches of the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) or the basilar bifurcation perforating arteries in the midbrain. It presents with ipsilateral CN III palsy and contralateral hemiparesis of extremities and face. This syndrome can also present with vertical gaze paralysis if the ischemic region includes the red nucleus.

**Paramedian Midbrain Syndrome (Benedikt Syndrome)**

Occlusion of the paramedian penetration branches of the basilar artery causes ipsilateral CN III palsy with contralateral loss of proprioception and vibration, and ataxia. It is separated from Weber syndrome in that this syndrome has a tremor and choreoathetotic movements, whereas Weber has hemiparesis.