As GERD is the principal pathophysiological mechanism for Barrett’s disease, its treatment forms a crucial aspect of management. Lifestyle modifications such as weight reduction, smoking, alcohol cessation, and dietary modifications, including avoiding bedtime snacks and keeping the head of the bed elevated using 6 to 8-inch blocks, are all important nonpharmacological approaches to the management of GERD. Although lifestyle modifications, including smoking cessation, are commonly advised, only weight loss and elevation of the head of the bed have been associated with improvement of GERD in case-controlled studies.

Proton pump inhibitors are the most effective agents against GERD and its complications. As a rule, they should be used in the lowest effective dose. In patients with Barrett’s esophagus, they are used for the initial and maintenance therapy independent of the presence of esophagitis. Some patients with Barrett’s disease may become asymptomatic without normalization of esophageal acid exposure. This may be due to their inherent predisposition to reflux. Fundoplication had been suggested as a more effective means for reducing distal esophageal acid exposure and thus decrease the incidence of cancer in these patients. However, multiple studies, including one randomized controlled trial, have debunked this notion.

Aspirin and other NSAIDs have been proposed as chemoprotective agents against adenocarcinoma development in patients with Barrett's esophagus. This data is based on in-vitro and animals based studies. Epidemiological studies have also shown a decreased risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma with NSAID use. Serious gastrointestinal (GI) and cardiovascular side effects associated with NSAIDs may outweigh potential benefits. Therefore, routine use of these drugs is not recommended.

Although endoscopic screening for all patients with GERD without risk factors has not been found to be cost-effective, it should be considered if more than one risk factor is present. These risk factors include age 50 years or more, caucasian race, male gender, obesity (especially central adiposity), tobacco use, or a long duration of reflux symptoms.

Utility and benefit of endoscopic surveillance for dysplasia in patients with Barrett's esophagus have been a contentious issue due to a lack of randomized control trials showing a mortality benefit, an overall low incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma in patients with Barrett's metaplasia, and financial expense of interval endoscopies. Given the low risk of endoscopic procedures, the theoretical efficacy of surveillance measures preventing cancer, observational and computer models demonstrating the benefit of surveillance, American Gastroenterological Association, American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, and American College of Gastroenterology recommend endoscopic surveillance for dysplasia in patients with Barrett's esophagus.

If no evidence of dysplasia is found, the surveillance endoscopy is recommended every 3 to 5 years. If dysplasia is noted, then another endoscopy is usually recommended for extensive sampling to rule out invasive cancer. This is to minimize the sampling error inherent in the procedure. Expert pathology review, usually by more than one pathologist, is needed due to the inherent difficulty in differentiating between reflux esophagitis and low-grade dysplasia. Once low-grade dysplasia (LGD) has been confirmed, follow-up surveillance endoscopy is recommended in 6 to 12 months although endoscopic eradication therapy is an acceptable alternative after discussing the risks and benefits with the patients. If high-grade dysplasia (HGD) is detected, without evidence of invasive carcinoma, endoluminal therapy for eradication of visible Barrett's metaplasia is strongly recommended.

Endoscopic eradication therapies have become the mainstay of treatment for patients with Barrett’s esophagus with dysplasia. This can be achieved using the application of heat through laser, radiofrequency, argon plasma coagulation, cold cryotherapy, or photodynamic therapy (PDT) to destroy the abnormal epithelium. Due to comparable efficacy and beneficial side effect profile, radiofrequency ablation is the preferred mode of endoscopic therapy compared to PDT. Cryotherapy can be substituted depending on local expertise. Ablation therapies are indicated for flat lesions. Any nodular lesions should be removed using endoscopic mucosal resection, which also provides a substantial sample for determining the depth of invasion. Endoluminal therapy is not recommended in cases of submucosal invasion because it is associated with a much higher risk of metastatic spread.

Esophagectomy was previously the treatment of choice for high-grade dysplasia and intramucosal carcinoma in Barrett's disease. It is associated with prolonged hospital stay, short and long-term complications with a poor quality of life in the immediate post-operative period, and is no longer the first-line treatment. It can be considered on an individual basis in patients with high-grade dysplasia or carcinoma-in-situ if endoluminal therapy is not feasible or unable to eradicate the neoplastic disease.