Urinary bladder and ureteral injuries are the most common preventable complications that can occur during the hysterectomy. The technique for performing a hysterectomy is as follows:

- **Decompression of the bladder**-A Foley catheter is used to drain urine.

- **Injecting vasoconstricting agents**- Dilute vasopressin (20 units in 100 ml of normal saline) is circumferentially injected into the proper planes of the cervicovaginal junction. The purpose of this is for hemostasis and hydrodissection.

- **A circumferential**incision is made around the cervix at the cervicovaginal intersection by using a scalpel or diathermy.

- **Dissection and deflection of the bladder**,**anterior colpotomy**- After the circumferential incision is made, the anterior aspect of the vaginal mucosa is grasped and tented up, sharp and blunt dissection is done to separate the vaginal mucosa from the cervical stroma. The peritoneum is identified, and the peritoneal cavity is entered sharply. A right angle or Deaver retractor is then placed into the peritoneal cavity, and the bladder is protected.

- **Posterior cul-de-sac entry**- Posterior vaginal epithelium is grasped at the previous circumferential incision with a pair of Allis clamps and tended up. The peritoneum is identified and sharply entered with Mayo scissors. Once the peritoneal cavity is opened, the vaginal mucosa is stretched or incised laterally, and a long-weighted vaginal speculum is reinserted into the peritoneal cavity.

- **Uterosacral and cardinal ligament complex**-Uterosacral ligaments are felt by examining with the index finger. The right-angle retractor is placed in the medial aspect of the vagina for proper exposure of this ligament, which is then clamped with Heaney clamp and cut. It is then sutured, and the tail of the suture is clamped and saved for future McCall's culdoplasty. Similarly, the cardinal ligaments are identified, clamped, cut, and suture ligated. Care must be taken during clamping as the ureters are very close to the uterosacral ligaments. Clamps must be placed very close to the cervical stump. All clamps must incorporate both anterior and posterior peritoneum to prevent bleeding from collateral blood vessels.

- **Uterine vessels-**The Heaney clamp is widely opened and slide off the cervix, making sure all the vasculature is incorporated into the clamp, uterine vessels are cut, and suture ligated. The author does not recommend Heaney stitch as it can cause unnecessary injury to the vascular pedicle and cause bleeding. A significant uterine descent is seen after the uterine vessel's dissection.

- **Broad ligament-**This is an avascular****ligament primarily composed of peritoneum and minor blood vessels. This ligament is clamped medially, cut, and sutured.

- **Utero-ovarian, round ligament complex, and cornual end of the Fallopian tube-**The upper and the final pedicle can be clamped all together or separately. If the pedicles are too large, the round ligament can be clamped individually. As this is a large pedicle, the author recommends doubly clamping this pedicle, and two sutures are placed. First, suture tie followed by suture ligation medial to the first. Once all ligaments and vessels are cut, ligated, and secured, the uterus is delivered.

- Evaluate all pedicles in a clockwise fashion for adequate hemostasis.

- **Closure of the cuff and McCall's culdoplasty-**As the vaginal apex is the most common site of bleeding during vaginal hysterectomy, we usually close it in the running and locking fashion to control bleeding from the vaginal edges.

Incorporate the uterosacral ligaments into the angle of the vaginal cuff at the time of cuff closure for the suspensory support of the vagina. This maneuver prevents future vaginal wall prolapse.

The vagina is not usually packed as it has not been shown to improve bleeding or any other outcomes.

A Foley catheter is left in place until the patient is ambulatory.

Diet is advanced as tolerated.