- Personal protective equipment

- Dental syringe

- A 25, 27, or 30 gauge, short or long dental needle, depending on the anesthetic technique

- Local anesthetic solution

- Topical anesthesia can be considered

**Local Anesthetic Agents**

Local anesthetics are divided into two classes: amides and esters. Amide anesthetics are common in dentistry, including lidocaine, prilocaine, mepivacaine, and bupivacaine. Articaine is an amide anesthetic with an ester linkage. Ester anesthetics are less frequently utilized in dentistry, but drugs such as benzocaine may be used for topical anesthesia.

The gold standard and most widely used local anesthetic in dentistry is lidocaine due to its safety and effectiveness. Adrenaline is added to lidocaine to counteract its vasodilating properties and delay drug absorption, which prolongs the duration of anesthesia and reduces the toxicity risk.

Articaine with adrenaline, while not as frequently utilized as lidocaine, is heavily relied upon as a result of its superior solubility. Articaine has a high lipid solubility due to its thiophene ring and can diffuse across the maxillary and mandibular bone more readily than other anesthetics. Articaine buccal infiltrations are particularly useful in the posterior mandible as, unlike other agents, articaine can penetrate the dense cortical bone to anesthetize the IAN. It must be noted that articaine is not recommended for IANB due to a greater risk of nerve damage.

Comparatively, prilocaine and mepivacaine have weak vasodilation properties and can be used without adrenaline. Both are short-acting anesthetics and good options for children, the elderly, and patients with contraindications to adrenaline.

Children are more prone to soft tissue injury by inadvertently biting soft tissues when anesthetized; therefore, a short-acting anesthetic can be advantageous.

Mepivacaine is the anesthetic of choice for patients with cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, studies suggest that mepivacaine can be more successful than other agents in anesthetizing teeth with irreversible pulpitis