**Harvesting sites of Mucous Membrane Grafts**

- buccal mucosa of the inner cheek

- mandibular labial mucosa of the lower lip

**Boundaries of the Lower Labial Mucosa**

- Laterally and anteriorly by the lower lip commissure

- Posteriorly by the anterior tonsillar pillar

- Superiorly by the maxillary vestibular fold

- Inferiorly by the mandibular vestibular fold

**Blood Supply**

Branches of the maxillary artery, including the buccal artery, the middle and posterior superior alveolar arteries, and the anterior superior alveolar branch of the infraorbital artery, supply the mucosa. Additional blood supply is from the transverse facial artery, which is a branch of the superficial temporal artery.

**Innervation**

The buccal mucosa is innervated by the long buccal nerve, a branch of the third division of the trigeminal nerve (CNV3), and the anterior, middle, and posterior superior alveolar branches of the second division of the trigeminal nerve (CNV2). The facial nerve also contributes sensation to the buccal mucosa.

Histologically the mucosal epithelium is lined by the stratified non-keratinized squamous epithelium without any goblet cells. Below the mucosa is the vascular layer of connective tissue, which is termed lamina proparia. The loose connective tissue of the lamina propria inserts into the overlying epithelial layer through finger-like projections or papillae.

The inferior labial mucosa is supplied by the inferior labial branch of the facial artery and the buccal branch of the maxillary artery.

**Minor Salivary Glands**

Labial minor salivary glands are more numerous than at other sites. They are exocrine glands with a less developed ductal system than seen with major salivary glands. Minor salivary glands secrete mucinous or seromucinous secretions. Secretion is stimulated by the lingual nerve (postganglionic parasympathetic innervation).

**Properties of Oral Mucosa**

Buccal and labial mucosa have non-keratinized stratified squamous avascular epithelium with vascular connective tissue called lamina propria. The oral mucosa has a thick elastin-rich epithelium which is resistant to shearing or stretching forces. There are connective tissue projections from the lamina propria into the epithelium, which further adds to the resilience of the mucosa. The lamina propria has extensive nerve fibers and blood vessels from the submucosa. It is the highly vascular lamina propria that allows excellent take of mucosal grafts. The lack of hair and minimal contracture, when placed in a recipient bed further, makes mucous membrane grafts ideal for mucosal cover. The inherent biological properties of oral mucosa make it resistant to infections and inflammation. Antimicrobial peptides, cytokines, and defensins secreted by the mucosal epithelium together with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue limit micro-bacterial colonization of the mucosa. Additional resistance to microbial invasion is provided by the rich lymphocyte, neutrophil, macrophage, mast cell, and plasma cell populations in the lamina propria. The mucosal epithelium has also been shown to have epithelial stem cells which promote rapid epithelialization when injured. The density of mucosal salivary glands is higher in the lateral aspect of the labial mucosa, which should allow the proper choice of donor mucosa when treating dry eyes.

**Comparing Physiology of Saliva to Tears**

Mucin is responsible for coating the ocular epithelium reducing the surface tension of the eye, and forms a stable and durable wet layer. Evaporation is reduced by mucins which form a hydrophobic barrier and increase the tear film break-up time. Saliva also contains immunoglobulin A, lysozyme, lactoferrin, and human beta-defensin, which have antimicrobial properties and protect the ocular surface from infection. Mucosal salivary gland secretions also contain epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-B, promoting normal growth of ocular surface epithelium and corneal reepithelization. Salivary secretions have lower osmolality when compared to normal tears and can lead to corneal epithelial microcystic edema in some patients with transplanted mucosa. Mucosal salivary glands produce secretions continuously, even during sleep which is useful in maintaining ocular surface lubrication.