Approximately 50% of children with PSGN are asymptomatic and are discovered accidentally during routine urine analysis. The classic triad of glomerulonephritis includes hematuria, edema, and hypertension. Typically, patients give a history of a recent streptococcal infection such as pharyngitis, tonsillitis, or impetigo. However; some patients develop PSGN without experiencing symptoms of respiratory tract infection or pyoderma, which can be a diagnostic challenge.

The most common presenting symptom is gross hematuria as it occurs in 30 to 50% of cases with acute PSGN; patients often describe their urine as smoky, tea-colored, cola-colored, or rusty. The hematuria can be described as postpharyngitic (hematuria seen after weeks of infection).

Renal involvement is common and is transient with recovery in 1-2 weeks. Less than half of the patients experience oliguria. Depending on the severity of renal involvement, signs, and symptoms suggestive of anuric renal failure or life-threatening acid-base imbalance, electrolyte abnormalities (especially hyperkalemia), and fluid overload would require RRT. About 60-80% of the patients experience high blood pressure which typically resolves in 10 days.

The incidence of edema is seen in about 65-90% of the cases. Puffiness of the eyelids (periorbital edema) is typical for the nephritic syndrome. It is most prominent in the morning and tends to resolve at the end of the day. Generalized edema is also a common feature. Moreover, in severe cases, patients might experience respiratory distress as a result of pulmonary edema. They may experience other non-specific symptoms like anorexia, malaise, nausea, vomiting, etc.