Hymenoptera stings cause reactions by injecting venom via their ovipositors into their target. The venom for Apidae, Vespidae, and Formicidae have some similar characteristics, consisting of a mixture of smaller, low-molecular-weight, proteolytic enzymes (hyaluronidase, proteases, phospholipase, acid phosphatase), lipids, carbohydrates, and also high-molecular-weight proteins, which act as allergens. The low-molecular-weight components are responsible for local inflammatory reactions, while the high-molecular-weight component is integral to the systemic reaction (in other words, anaphylaxis). When the venom is introduced into the skin, the proteolytic enzymes begin to degrade the surrounding tissue. The release of histamine from mast cells and basophil activation, in response to the venom, causes vasodilation and the ensuing inflammatory response: edema, pain, erythema, and increased warmth. Fire ant venom is primarily made of alkaloids that result in the characteristic sterile pustules associated with these stings. Large, local reactions (LLRs) develop in about 10% of Hymenoptera stings and are believed to be immune IgE-mediated. Anaphylaxis develops in people with preformed antibodies to the high-molecular-weight aspects of these venoms. These reactions, like other anaphylactic reactions to allergens, occur via a systemic IgE-mediated histamine release. The resulting mast cells and basophil activation can cause systemic vasodilation, angioedema, urticaria, hypotension/shock, and death.