Acute findings of beryllium toxicity on chest X-ray may initially be normal, followed by diffuse alveolar infiltrates 1 to 3 weeks after initial exposure.

The chest x-ray findings of chronic beryllium disease are nonspecific and similar to those of sarcoidosis. Ill-defined nodular or irregular opacities and hilar adenopathy can be seen. The abnormalities often may only be present in the upper lobes. With more advanced disease, fibrosis and the development of blebs and emphysema in adjacent areas can be seen. Radiographic abnormalities will sometimes improve with the removal of the offending agent and initiation of corticosteroids but will typically never fully resolve.

Chronic beryllium disease has a latency period and is usually identified 10 to 20 years after initial exposure but can develop up to 40 years after initial exposure.

In addition to the BeLPT, tissue confirmation via biopsy should be performed. As a result of the development of these tests, many workers are now screened for beryllium sensitivity and chronic beryllium disease before developing symptoms, leading to early intervention and treatment.

**Sarcoidosis vs. Berylliosis**

While pulmonary manifestations of these two diseases are nearly identical clinically, chronic beryllium disease typically lacks the extrapulmonary findings common in sarcoidosis. Cystic bone lesions, ocular involvement, neurosarcoidosis, cardiac disease, parotitis, and salivary gland involvement are all significant findings in sarcoidosis but not chronic beryllium disease.