Herein we describe lip implantation using an alloplastic implant, a quick and straightforward technique with little downtime that is well-tolerated, safe, and provides a natural look and feel to the lips.

After the patient is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion, 4 to 5 mm transverse commissural incisions are made bilaterally with a sharp scalpel (the commissural incision prevents medial displacement). Using small, straight operating scissors (e.g., Iris), a uniform submucosal pocket is developed in the lip along the wet-dry border to the midline. Dissection should be in a deep submucosal plane and limited to 2 mm from the marked wet-dry line to reduce the chance of depth malposition and implant migration, respectively. It is essential to maintain a consistent depth along the length of the lip to ensure an even appearance. Avoiding making the pocket too superficial will prevent the tapered ends of the implant from becoming visible. This same maneuver is performed from the commissural incision on the contralateral side, resulting in the convergence of the two pockets into a single tunnel along the entire length of the wet-dry lip.

Next, a curved tendon passer is advanced from one end of the submucosal tunnel to the other until it emerges from the contralateral incision. The implant is grasped with the passer and brought through the tunnel until both ends of the implant are exposed. The implant is then “flossed” from side to side until equal lengths extend beyond the commissural incisions. (Note: some authors recommend using smaller implants that do not span the entire width of the commissure to mitigate migration). Finally, the ends of the implant get embedded underneath the commissural incisions. If the surgeon is placing lower lip implants, they are done in the same fashion, through the same incisions, also using a submucosal dissection plane. A 4-0 absorbable suture (chromic gut or Vicryl) is used to close the incisions in either simple interrupted, figure-of-eight, or mattress fashion. Regardless of the suture or technique used, incorporating deep submucosa and muscle within each stitch will help mitigate migration.

NOTE: The technique described above is appropriate for both alloplastic and autogenous implants.