The optic nerve head (ONH) can be subdivided into four regions: intra-ocular, prelaminar region, lamina cribrosa, and retrolaminar regions.

- Blood supply to the ONH is primarily via the short posterior ciliary arteries (SPCA).

- The short posterior ciliary arteries are branches of the ophthalmic artery.

- All blood supply, whether from pial branches, choroid or ciliary arteries, is derived from the ophthalmic artery whose branches these smaller vessels represent.

The pathophysiology of NAION is not completely understood, but it is accepted that relative hypoperfusion of the optic nerve head, as well as structural or other factors, lead to edema and infarction of optic nerve fibers, most often in the superior half of the ONH.

- Several systemic and ocular risk factors are recognized to increase the risk of NAION including small optic nerve cup (representing the so-called "disc at risk"), optic disc drusen, systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obstructive sleep apnea, and the use of phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors but their exact roles in the mechanism are not yet fully understood.

- Crowded discs or "disc-at-risk" is the strongest risk factor for developing NAION. A disc-at-risk is characterized as ONH that has a small diameter and small cup-to-disc ratio, typically 0.2 or less. In a disc-at-risk, optic nerve head edema induced by ischemic injury is thought to cause compression of the axons within a smaller, rigid scleral tunnel.

- Similarly, optic disc drusen are thought to contribute to axonal compression within the tight confines of the ONH.

- Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and smoking all contribute to the vascular causes of NAION, including arteriosclerosis of branches of the ophthalmic artery and intimal thickening of sPCAs.

- Obstructive sleep apnea has also been recognized more recently to also be an independent risk factor for NAION, likely due to its effect on nocturnal blood pressure.