Location usually characterizes unicameral bone cysts. They tend to be near or at the metaphysis and are more centrally located within the medullary cavity. However, as mentioned earlier, as the cysts become increasingly latent, they tend to migrate away from the physis and have been found within the diaphysis. They do not cross the growth plate. Most commonly, unicameral bone cysts are found in long bones (in decreasing order of frequency), the proximal humerus (90%), proximal femur, and proximal tibia in children. Other common sites include the fibula, ribs, radius, ulna, and phalanges. In adults, they may occur in the calcaneus, iliac wing, distal radius, or patella

Generally, on radiographs, they appear as a lucent lesion with a narrow zone of transition and is sharply demarcated from normal bone. The rim is sclerotic, and the adjacent cortex can be thinned; however, the cortex typically remains intact without cortical destruction or soft tissue invasion. No adjacent periosteal reaction is seen unless a fracture is present. When a fracture is present, a bony fragment may be displaced and be termed a “fallen fragment.” This fragment settles within the dependent portion of the cyst and can change with patient positioning. Rarely, calcification or ossification occurs within the cyst.

On computed tomography (CT), they are centrally located with an intact cortex that is thinned. There is no enhancement when intravenous (IV) contrast is administered), and the internal contents are that of fluid attenuation. The “fallen fragment” will be in the dependent portion following a fracture, similar to radiographs. The “rising bubble” sign may be seen with CT, which demonstrates a bubble of gas within the nondependent portion of the bone cyst and indicates a pathologic fracture.

On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the cystic composition of the lesion is confirmed on fluid-sensitive sequences (high signal intensity) and are of low to intermediate signal intensity on anatomic sequences. The rim may enhance 80% of the time on postcontrast imaging. Less commonly seen is a central enhancement of the bone cyst (27%). The “rising bubble” sign may be seen on MRI, but the “floating fragment” sign is less commonly demonstrated

CT and MRI do not add much additional information but can aid in eliminating other mimics of a unicameral bone cyst.