- Catabolism of hemoglobin is a normal function that releases heme molecules, which then converts to biliverdin, a precursor to bilirubin. Biliverdin then transforms into unconjugated bilirubin within the reticuloendothelial system. Being that unconjugated bilirubin is lipid-soluble, the renal system does not eliminate it. Unconjugated bilirubin is bound in serum to albumin or exists as free unbound bilirubin. Unbound bilirubin is taken up by hepatocytes and converted to conjugated bilirubin, which is water-soluble. Conjugated bilirubin becomes part of the bile, which is secreted from the hepatocytes in the liver.

- Bile formed in the liver flows through the right and left hepatic ducts into the common hepatic duct. Fifty percent of the bile flows into the cystic duct and is then stored in the gallbladder, with the rest of the bile flowing through the common bile duct and converging and flowing through the main pancreatic duct in the head of the pancreas to empty into the duodenum through the sphincter of Oddi.

- Biliary obstruction refers to obstruction in the biliary system, leading to blockage of bile flow into the small intestine. Biliary obstruction can occur anywhere along the path from the liver to the intestinal tract. Biliary obstruction is common and affects a large portion of the population around the world, with significant morbidity and mortality. Gallstones are the most prevalent cause of biliary obstruction; they commonly manifest by dilatating the common bile duct and jaundice.

- Jaundice, a physical exam finding of yellowish discoloration of the skin, conjunctiva, and/or mucous membranes, is a consequence of obstruction leading to bile stasis and buildup of conjugated bilirubin in the blood.

- Normal total serum bilirubin values are 0.2 to 1.2 mg/dL. Jaundice is evident clinically at the level of 3 mg/dl.

- Normal urine contains no bilirubin; however, in patients with obstructive jaundice, conjugated bilirubin is excreted in the urine, giving it a dark color. Urinary bilirubin is detectable at a lower level of bilirubin than that needed to cause clinical jaundice.

- The inability of bilirubin to reach the intestinal tract gives pale color to stools.

- Pruritus is common in patients with biliary obstruction, but the cause of this is unknown. The deposition of bile acid into the skin is one postulation that could account for these symptoms. Percutaneous biliary drainage was found to decrease pruritis symptoms.