Applying MUE to patient care is an interprofessional team activity; it cannot occur within disciplinary "silos." For MUE to be effective, it requires communication and coordination among the various healthcare team members, where clinicians, specialists, pharmacists, and nurses all have input and access to all data regarding medication use. Each team member must be empowered to contribute to the process, and the latest studies and data should apply in the decision-making process. Clinicians must be open to input from pharmacists and nursing staff so that optimal medication use and procurement can lead to optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

**Prospective DUR**

This approach places accountability on the health care practitioner to review the prescription when presented for filling and proactively resolve potential problems related to drug therapy. It allows the pharmacist and other health care practitioners to communicate with patients and the health care team to optimize the treatment plan for each patient. In institutional and retail setups, a pharmacist can evaluate the prescription order when dispensing and, utilizing clinical data from the patient's medical and pharmacy records, determine the appropriateness of the prescribed drug therapy. If the pharmacist identifies possibilities for improved patient care, they can communicate with the prescriber to discuss the treatment alternatives.

**Concurrent DUR**

The pharmacists have the responsibility in the concurrent DUR process to evaluate the ongoing treatment of the patient. If needed, pharmacists should provide input to revise the treatment plan. Case managers can become actively involved in managing the patient's condition, particularly in patients with multiple diseases. Through interaction with the prescriber, pharmacists can better comprehend the treatment plan. In addition, healthcare practitioners can counsel patients on the appropriate use of medications.

**Retrospective DUR**

Pharmacists play a leading role in clarifying the relationship between drug use and patient outcomes using retrospective DUR due to their expertise in drug therapy management. Managed care pharmacy professionals have an important role in planning, organizing, and implementing DUR. Pharmacists can collaborate with other healthcare professionals regarding medication use and actively participate in decision-making within the context of the Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee. Pharmacists are members of DUR committees where input regarding drug policy development is necessary.****

**Conclusion**

The process of DUR is still evolving. Pharmacists can recognize prescribing trends and commence corrective measures by utilizing DUR data. In addition, rapidly improving information systems and artificial intelligence will provide a strategy for matching medical and pharmacy data with patient outcomes. Drug utilization review education by simulated clinical decision-making ensures competency in pharmacists.