The trapezius is a muscle comprised of particularly long muscle fibers spanning a large width of the upper back. Functionally, this allows the trapezius to assist in mainly postural attributes, allowing and supporting the spinal column to remain erect when the person is standing. The trapezius is one of the broadest and most superficial (closest to the skin) muscles of the upper back and trunk. It is often used as a landmark when dissecting a cadaver because it is encountered first. The trapezius is triangular, broad, and thin; it covers the upper back of the shoulders and neck. Its attachment points consist of the spinous process of C7-T12 of the spine, ligamentum nuchae, scapulae, clavicles, and ribs. While the trapezius muscle is mainly postural, it is also used for active movements such as side bending, rotation of the head, elevating and depressing the shoulders, and internally rotating the arm. The trapezius elevates, depresses, and retracts the scapula. The descending muscle fibers of the trapezius muscle internally rotate the arms. The transverse muscle fibers retract the scapulae, and the ascending muscle fibers medially rotate the scapulae.

Thus, there are three components of the trapezius muscle.

One way to visualize the actions of the back and upper limb muscles is to visualize a large construction crane. The giant arm is the most obvious feature of the crane, but the jacks that anchor the cab of the crane to the ground are essential to its stability. Without these muscles, the upper limb (the arm of the crane) would be useless.

To visualize the actions of the trapezius, consider a soldier coming to attention. The head is extended at the skull and neck (action of the upper portion of the trapezius). The scapulae are adducted, straightening the middle back and arms (action of the middle portion of the trapezius). The lower back and shoulder are extended (action of the inferior portion of the trapezius. The result is the "ramrod straight" posture.

The unequal development of the three portions of the trapezius causes muscle imbalances and posture disturbances.

Injury to the spinal accessory nerve (cranial nerve XI) can result in denervation and subsequent loss of motor function of the trapezius, resulting in muscle wasting (atrophy). Hypotonia and hyporeflexia are also characteristic of this lower motor neuron syndrome. The spinal accessory nerve (cranial nerve XI) and the trapezius can be examined during a clinical examination by asking the patient to shrug their shoulders passively and observe the shoulders for a shoulder droop. If pain occurs with passive stretching, this may be significant. Next, the examiner's hands are placed on the patient's shoulders while exerting downward pressure. The patient is then instructed to shrug the shoulders against this resistance allowing for assessment of any weakness. Unless strength against resistance is assessed, lesser degrees of muscle weakness may go unnoticed.

The trapezius forms the posterior border of the posterior triangle of the neck. The sternocleidomastoid muscle (also innervated by the spinal accessory nerve) forms the anterior boundary. The clavicle completes the triangle.