**HIV-Infected Patients**

- The incidence of cryptococcal meningitis has diminished in patients with antiretroviral therapy (ART).

- Symptoms typically begin insidiously during a 2-week period. The most common symptoms are fever, malaise, and headache. Cranial neuropathies may also be present. Symptoms like cough, dyspnea, and skin rash suggest a disseminated disease.

- The antifungal prophylaxis is not recommended as a routine for cryptococcal disease (II-B Evidence).

**Non-HIV-Infected Patients**

- C. neoformans disseminates hematogenously from the respiratory tract and has a propensity for the central nervous system. The inflammatory response in the brain is usually milder than the one in bacterial meningitis. The inflammatory infiltrate is comprised of mononuclear cells predominantly with occasional polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Generally, brain involvement is diffuse but localized infection can occur (cryptococcoma).

- Most individuals with cryptococcal meningitis are immunocompromised. The most common cases include glucocorticoid therapy, organ transplantation, cancer, and other conditions such as sarcoidosis and hepatic failure.

- Symptom presentation is variable. Some patients have symptoms for up to 2 to 8 months before diagnosis while others can present an acute illness in a few days. Approximately 50% of cases have fever. Generally, headache, lethargy, personality changes, and memory loss can appear over 2 to 4 weeks. Some patients can also present as a disseminated disease.

The definitive diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis is made by culture from the CSF. The opening pressure should be measured along with India ink evaluation, cryptococcal antigen testing, fungal culture, and routine spinal fluid studies. A positive cryptococcal antigen in the CSF or serum can strongly suggest the infection before the cultures become positive in high-risk patients.

Neuroimaging must be performed prior to lumbar puncture if there is a concern for a high intracranial pressure.

The principal antifungal agents for the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis are intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate and its lipid formulations, oral flucytosine, and oral fluconazole. While amphotericin B and flucytosine are fungicidal, fluconazole is only fungistatic. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B are preferred on patients with renal dysfunction or at risk for renal failure.

Cryptococcal meningitis is fatal if untreated. The therapeutic regime includes three phases: Induction followed by consolidation for a total of 10 weeks (to rapidly sterilize the CSF and to decrease early mortality) and maintenance therapy to prevent relapses.