The diagnosis and treatments of glenoid fractures are continuously evolving with enhanced imaging, new fracture classifications, and advanced operative techniques.  Additionally, this is an uncommon fracture which makes treatment and management more complicated given the limited population and studies. Two strong points surfaced in the literature.  One, the mechanism of injury should be a strong consideration of the need for imaging. Evidence shows that other thoracic injuries and a high ISS score should lead to a higher suspicion of scapular fractures and the treatment team should have a low threshold for CT imaging if an injury is suspected. Second, the degree of instability seems to have the most substantial and consistent impact on the need for surgery, but shared decision making with the patient regarding risks and outcomes merits discussion. New advanced techniques can minimize surgical risks.  Conservative treatment has been shown to be effective in non displaced fractures. Comorbidities must be considered including age, level of function, and social history can also impact outcomes and should be viable options when discussing therapy options with the patient.

The diagnosis, management, and treatment of glenoid fractures and other glenohumeral joint injuries require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5] The nursing staff usually coordinates follow-up care and reports back to the clinicians regarding the progress of physical therapy and whether the pain is appropriately controlled. The pharmacist may assist in pain management, sometimes recommended progressive weaning from narcotics to alternative therapies as tolerated. Physical therapists will manage therapy and report to the team regarding progress or relapse. A team approach to the education of the patient involving nurses and clinicians will produce the best long-term results.[Level 5]