The clinical significance of anatomy contained in the posterior neck triangle is vast. Vessels found in the posterior neck triangle are harvested for use in plastic and reconstructive flap cases throughout the body. As previously mentioned, lymph nodes present in the posterior neck triangle are the most common areas of metastasis from head and neck cancers and are routinely dissected in surgical cases.

The left-sided supraclavicular lymph node, also known as Virchow’s node, is supplied by lymph vessels originating from the abdominal cavity that pass through the thoracic duct to enter the venous circulation in the left subclavian vein. This lymph node is clinically important as it can be used to aid in the discovery and diagnosis of carcinomas originating from the abdomen. An enlarged, firm, non-tender Virchow’s node is known as Troisier’s sign and can be indicative of cancer originating commonly from the stomach, ovaries, testicles, and kidneys.

The right-sided supraclavicular lymph node is also clinically relevant as it drains lymphatic fluid from the thorax. A firm, enlarged, non-tender right-sided supraclavicular lymph node can represent metastasis from lung or esophageal cancer, as well as Hodgkin’s lymphoma.

Less common lymph node pathology found in the posterior neck triangle includes Castleman disease. Castleman disease results from angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia or giant lymph node hyperplasia. The cause of Castleman disease is largely unknown but thought to be caused by either a chronic inflammatory reaction or viral etiology. Diagnosis of Castleman disease involves biopsy of the suspected lymph node followed by histopathologic evaluation. Some studies suggest that the lymph tissue hyperplasia seen in Castleman disease serves as a predisposing factor for progression to lymphoma or Kaposi’s sarcoma.