Major complications can occur, including:

- Bleeding can occur due to injury from the splenic capsule or the short gastric vessels during mobilization. When bleeding occurs, one should consider converting to an open procedure to adequately control hemostasis. Without adequate hemostasis, patients can develop a large hematoma, which is at risk for developing into an infection. Bleeding can also occur, especially in patients with myelodysplastic disorders such as myelofibrosis, chronic granulocytic leukemia. Platelets are not functional in these disorders. It is important to consider platelet transfusion despite a normal count.

- Injury to the surrounding structures: pancreas, stomach, colon. Up to 15% of laparoscopic splenectomy has reported pancreatic injuries. Pancreatic injuries can lead to acute pancreatitis, pancreatic fluid collection, and possible pancreatic fistula.

- Subphrenic abscess. This can occur from infected hematoma or injury to the stomach or colon, requiring drainage and antibiotics. Patients, particularly with immune thrombocytopenic purpura, are at risk for developing a subphrenic abscess.

- Thromboembolic complications occur in up to 10% of patients. Patients can develop portal vein thrombosis, deep vein thrombosis, to pulmonary embolism. Splenic and portal vein thrombosis can present with decreased appetite, vague abdominal pain, nausea, and malaise. Symptoms can present anywhere approximately 8 to 12 days postoperatively. Laboratory findings can show elevated leukocyte and platelet counts. Diagnosis can be made using Doppler ultrasonography or computed tomography with intravenous contrast. If suspicion is high, patients should be started on anticoagulation. Patients with massive splenomegaly (greater than 3000 grams) and myeloproliferative disorders are at risk.

- Splenosis

- Missed accessory spleen

- Overwhelming post-splenectomy sepsis

- Conversion from laparoscopic splenectomy to open procedure