The levels of LFTs can point to the differentials. Many disease processes have very distinct abnormalities in the liver enzymes. Further investigation is warranted if repeated tests confirm abnormality.

**Alcohol**

In patients with alcohol use disorder, AST to ALT ratio is generally at least 2:1, showing a high level of AST activity in alcoholic liver disease.

**Medications**

Several medications are known to cause liver damage. Many of these are commonly used in daily practice, including but not limited to NSAIDs, antibiotics, statins, anti-seizure drugs, and drugs for tuberculosis treatment. Acute hepatocellular injury can be seen secondary to several drugs including but not limited to acetaminophen, allopurinol, NSAIDs, alcohol, anti-tuberculosis medications such as isoniazid, pyrazinamide, rifampin, statins, antifungals such as ketoconazole, antibiotics such as tetracyclines, anti-seizure drugs such as valproic acid and phenytoin, antidepressants such as fluoxetine, antipsychotics such as risperidone and antivirals such as valacyclovir and ritonavir.

Acute cholestasis can be seen secondary to drugs including anabolic steroids, NSAIDs, tricyclic antidepressants, alcohol, antibiotics such as azithromycin, amoxicillin, nafcillin, rifampin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Long-term use of these agents can also lead to chronic hepatocellular and/or cholestatic liver damage.

**Viral Hepatitis**

Viral illnesses are a common cause of hepatitis and elevation in LFTs. Viral hepatitis B, C, and D can cause chronic hepatitis, while hepatitis A and E cause acute viral hepatitis.

**Autoimmune Hepatitis**

Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic disease characterized by continuing hepatocellular inflammation, necrosis, and a tendency to progress to cirrhosis. It is more common in young women than men, with a 4:1 ratio. The patient usually presents with high LFTs without apparent cause.

**Hepatic Steatosis and Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis**

Fatty liver disease, aka nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, has recently gained more attention because of its ability to cause chronic hepatic disease and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The typical patient with this disease is overweight, has type II diabetes, or has dyslipidemia and no evidence of clinically significant alcohol use.

**Hemochromatosis**

Hemochromatosis is abnormal iron accumulation in parenchymal organs, leading to organ toxicity. It is the most common autosomal recessive genetic disorder and the most common cause of severe iron overload. Clinical manifestations include diabetes, liver disease, and cutaneous hyperpigmentation.

**Wilson Disease**

Wilson disease, a rare autosomal-recessive inherited disorder of copper metabolism, is characterized by excess copper deposition in the liver, brain, and other tissues. It is fatal if not recognized and treated early. A low serum ceruloplasmin level is seen in the majority (up to 85%) of the cases.

**Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency**

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is a relatively common yet often undiagnosed genetic condition.

**Celiac Disease**

Celiac disease is a common gluten sensitivity disorder associated with modest elevations of liver transaminases; screening should be considered in patients with persistently elevated liver enzymes and consists of tissue transglutaminase IgA, and serum IgA level or tissue transglutaminase IgA and anti-deamidated gliadin peptide IgG.

**Thyroid Disorders**

Both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism have been associated with abnormal liver enzymes, including both hepatocellular and cholestatic patterns of injury, particularly in more severe cases of myxedema and/or thyrotoxicosis. Screening should be considered in patients with a compatible medical history and consist initially of thyroid stimulating hormone and selective testing of free T4 and free/total T3.