The normal value of water content in stools is approximately 10 mL/kg/day in infants and young children or 200 g/day in teenagers and adults. Diarrhea is the augmentation of water content in stools because of an imbalance in the normal functioning of physiologic processes of the small and large intestine responsible for the absorption of various ions, other substrates, and consequently water.

Acute diarrhea is described as the acute onset of three or more loose or watery stools a day lasting for 14 days or less. However, chronic or persistent diarrhea is labeled when an episode lasts beyond 14 days. Infection commonly causes acute diarrhea. Noninfectious etiologies become more common as the duration of diarrhea becomes chronic. This distinction is important because treatment and management are based on the duration and specific etiology. Rehydration therapy is an important aspect of the management of any patient with diarrhea.

The term "acute gastroenteritis" is synonymously used with "acute diarrhea"; however, the former is a misnomer. The term gastroenteritis signifies both gastric and small intestinal involvement, whereas, practically gastric involvement is almost never seen in acute diarrhea even if it is the infective form of diarrhea. Additionally, enteritis is also not always present. Examples of infectious diarrhea without enteritis include cholera and shigellosis. Hence, it is more clinically appropriate to use the term acute diarrhea as opposed to acute gastroenteritis.