The most significant complication which can occur in patients undergoing TOLAC is uterine rupture which involves the incision made into the uterus at the time of the prior cesarean delivery. Uterine rupture is a medical emergency and patients must be taken immediately for laparotomy for delivery of the fetus and to address and additional complications. When uterine rupture occurs, transfer of blood and oxygen to the baby is interrupted, and this can result in fetal complications including fetal acidosis, a need for neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission, and even death. While the absolute risk of perinatal mortality is low with TOLAC, the risk is slightly higher when compared to babies born to mothers undergoing planned repeat cesarean delivery (.13 versus 0.05%).

In cases of uterine rupture risk to the mother is also significant. Patients may experience significant hemorrhage. When hemorrhage occurs in this setting transfusion, and sometimes hysterectomy, is necessary to control bleeding and can be life-saving.

Uterine dehiscence is also described. Dehiscence differs from a uterine rupture in that the outer serosal layer of the uterus may remain intact while the underlying muscular layers have opened allowing for visualization of the amniotic sac and fetus. Alternatively, all layers of the uterus may have separated however the fetus remains safe within the uterus thru this small opening. Such a finding is often referred to as a "uterine window." Patients with uterine dehiscence are most often asymptomatic, and the more serious sequela that can occur with uterine rupture are not encountered. When reviewing scholarly articles about uterine scar rupture and dehiscence the distinction between the two is not always clear sometimes making study conclusions difficult to interpret.

Some patients attempting TOLAC may require a cesarean delivery. When this occurs after labor, the risks of postpartum infection, uterine atony, and wound separation are higher in comparison to patients who have planned repeat cesarean section.