During every aspect of care, there are potential complications or suboptimal outcomes. Failure to recognize the full extent of the injury, delayed treatment, poor initial care, and improper surgical technique can all lead to poor outcomes. As healthcare systems advance, there have been improvements in the rate of complication, but challenges still abound. Major burns are associated with an immunocompromised state, systemic inflammatory response, and hypermetabolism that predispose the patient to sepsis and multi-organ failure.

Loss of visual acuity can result from various ocular complications from facial burns but is usually secondary to exposure keratopathy. Palpebral retractions from cicatricial ectropion or lagophthalmos, expose the cornea, which leads to the development of corneal ulcers. Early evaluation by an ophthalmologist and corneal lubrication is recommended to prevent this outcome.

Oral contractures are common complications after facial burns. This affects functionality and diminishes aesthetics requiring months to years of physical therapy. Oral burn recovery is typically evaluated by measuring the vertical and horizontal oral openings. Microstomia is a common complication of facial burns involving the lips or oropharynx. Commissural splints prevent contractures during the healing process.

Nose reconstruction after a burn injury is complex, and a common complication is stenosis of the nares. In order to fix or prevent this complication, the surgeon releases the stenosis, reconstructs the nose, and applies graded stents to the nares over days to weeks. This approach has been shown to maintain long-term nasal patency.

Auricular burns are relatively common with facial burns though complication rates are less common than other areas of the face. Reconstruction is typically difficult, given the unique shape of the ear.

Facial burns are associated with psychological and social complications. Surgical reconstruction and effective pain management can mitigate the adverse effects through a process that could last for years. Early psychiatric involvement in the management of these patients is critical. Psychiatric disorders, such as acute stress reaction, anxiety, PTSD, depression, behavioral disorders, and others, can complicate recovery. Burn management is a complex process that involves the whole healthcare team, and early intervention can decrease psychological and social sequelae.