The etiology of blepharospasm is not well understood. Some gene mutations have been implicated in the development of the disease: 20% to 30 % of cases have a positive family history of benign essential blepharospasm (BEB), and some genes have been associated with a greater susceptibility for developing the disease.

**Non-inherited Risk Factors**

There are many environmental risk factors that are associated with an increased risk of developing benign essential blepharospasm. These include high levels of urbanization and those working 'white-collar' jobs associated with a stressful lifestyle.

There are other factors that are loosely associated with an increased risk of developing blepharospasm, such as reading, watching television, and computer screen use.

Furthermore, patients suffering from psychiatric conditions such as obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, and anxiety appear to have an increased risk of developing blepharospasm.

It has been shown by Conte et al. that 40% to 60% of patients present with ophthalmic symptoms such as burning, dryness, or grittiness, which precedes the development of blepharospasm. Furthermore, there is an association between diseases of the anterior segment such as keratoconjunctivitis/blepharitis and an increased risk of developing blepharospasm, although this is more correctly termed "secondary blepharospasm" as the condition improves when the underlying conditions have been appropriately treated.

**Inherited Risk Factors**

Genetic contribution to the disease is suggested by the finding of multiple affected individuals within families. In such cases, the inheritance pattern appears to be autosomal dominant with reduced penetrance. GNAL, CIZ1, TOR1A, DRD5, and REEP4 are genes reported to play a role in the development of BEB.

GNAL:

The GNAL gene encodes for the G alpha subunit of the G protein receptor.  It is found in the olfactory epithelium and helps to mediate odorant signaling.

Mutations in the GNAL gene have been shown to be associated with autosomal dominant dystonia-25, and it is thought that mutations in GNAL leading to abnormalities in the function of DRD1/Adora2a contributes to the development of dystonia.

CIZ1:

The CIZ1 gene encodes for the CKDN1A-interacting zinc finger protein 1.

TOR1A:

The TOR1A gene encodes for torsin-1A, otherwise known as DYT1. This is an adenosine triphosphatase that aids with a wide range of cellular activities.

TOR1A mutations are associated with torsion dystonia and are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

DRD5:

DRD5 encodes for the dopamine receptor D1B. DRD5 functions to increase adenylate cyclase activity leading to the accumulation of intracellular cAMP.