The retina demonstrates the highest rate of oxygen consumption of any tissue in the human body and, therefore, requires a steady and large volume of oxygenated hemoglobin to nourish it. The retina possesses a dual blood supply to accommodate this high demand; it receives supply by the choroid and the branches of the ophthalmic artery. Blood leaves the heart from the aorta and enters the common carotid artery, which divides into the internal and external carotid vessels. From this junction, the internal carotid enters the skull and just distal to the cavernous sinus, the first tributary off of the internal carotid is the ophthalmic artery. The ophthalmic artery gives rise to both the central retinal artery and the posterior ciliary arteries which supply the retina from different angles. The central retinal artery is the first branch of the ophthalmic artery and runs inside the dura just beneath the optic nerve, and travels with the optic nerve through the optic disc and supplies the cells in the macula. The posterior ciliary artery divides into the short and long posterior ciliary arteries that penetrate through the sclera and provide blood flow to the posterior uveal tract. Blood flow to the retina remains constant regardless of intraocular pressure, systemic blood pressure, and is independent of sympathetic autoregulation. Instead, retinal blood flowregulation is by local factors such as nitric oxide, prostaglandins, endothelin, but most importantly, arterial carbon dioxide tension. Much akin to the brain, retinal blood flow will increase in response to increased carbon dioxide and decrease in response to lower levels of carbon dioxide. The two branches are the posterior ciliary arteries which supply the outer and middle retina and the central retinal arteries which supply the inner retina. The choroid is the posterior part of the uveal tract that nourishes the outer layers of the retina. The choroid itself gets blood from the long and short posterior ciliary arteries. Capillaries are found within all parts of the retina from the innermost nerve fiber layer to the outermost outer plexiform layer and occasionally in the outer nuclear layer. Nutrients from the vasculature of the choriocapillaris behind the pigment epithelium layer supply the delicate photoreceptor layer. The photoreceptors and the larger portion of the outer plexiform layer obtain nourishment from the choriocapillaris indirectly, as opposed to the inner retinal layers which receive supply from the superficial and deep capillary plexuses formed by branches of the central artery of the retina. Inner layers of the retina are known to show the highest sensitivity to hypoxic challenges, whereas the outer retina exhibits greater resistance to hypoxic stress.