Individuals experiencing delusions do not often seek medical attention voluntarily, as their delusions are ego-syntonic, leading to the externalization of psychic distress onto others. Often patients are prompted to seek help by concerned family members after noticing social and occupational dysfunction.

In the event that an individual seeks treatment, creating therapeutic rapport is the quintessential aim for the clinician.

Bebbington and Freeman (2017) propose an integrated neuropsychiatric framework for understanding and treating delusions. The authors indicate that treatment requires amelioration of both biological and psychological aspects and that both processes need to occur in order to lead to remission. The remission of the biological aspect consists of the dampening of mesolimbic dopamine release with antipsychotic medication. This reduced dopaminergic activity decreases the uneven salience and attribution of personalized meaning to surrounding stimuli. With the decrease in intensity of salience, the person is able to reassess the stimuli and more accurately distribute attention, which in turn reduces the level of over personalized meaning, leading to a more realistic appraisal of the situation. As insight improves, the therapist can subsequently attempt to "shake" the once "unshakable" delusion.

Psychological remission consists of the reappraisal of primary psychotic experiences. Both forms of remission are partially independent, and shifts in both areas are required for the remission of symptoms.