Asthma can paint a slightly different clinical picture, and clinicians must identify them. Asthmatic patients can usually have but are not limited to, wheezing, shortness of breath, and a cough, which is often worse at night. There are various triggers in which intensify asthma. Such triggers are cold air, exercise, and the pollutants listed above. Other non-specific symptoms that could suggest a severe obstruction can be tachypnea, tachycardia, or a patient seated in a tripod position. Asthma can be a severe disease if not treated and managed correctly**.**Since there are two phases of asthma, it is essential to try to target and decrease bronchoconstriction, inflammation, and airway remodeling. Asthma is defined in different stages depending on spirometry and/or clinical indications. There are four stages regarding the severity of asthma, intermittent, mild, moderate, and severe. Depending on the specific stage of asthma, treatment, and management change. Intermittent asthma occurs when one has symptoms less than two days a week, and nighttime awakenings less than two times a month. Mild asthma consists of having episodes more than two days a week (but not daily), while there are nighttime awakenings of 3 to 4 times a month. Moderate asthma is where the patient is symptomatic daily and has nighttime awakenings greater than once a week but not nightly. Severe asthma is where a patient is symptomatic throughout the day and often has nighttime awakenings more than seven times within a week. Based on these criteria, correct treatment can be administered to decrease the symptoms of the patient. The most common medications used are short-acting beta-agonists, long-acting beta-agonists, muscarinic antagonists, and inhaled and systemic glucocorticoids**.**The idea behind a beta-agonist is to try to bronchodilate the patient’s lungs when they become constricted during an asthma attack. The mechanism behind beta-agonists is that they are G protein receptors that activate cAMP. cAMP then activates smooth muscle relaxation by a mechanism not fully understood. Also, a glucocorticoid may be used to decrease the inflammation and remodeling of the lungs. The primary mechanism of a glucocorticoid is to increase the production of IL-10. IL-10 inhibits inflammatory cytokines, T-cell activation, and different white cells such as mast cells and eosinophils.