**History**

In the emergency department, it is very important to know what type of priapism the patient is presenting with to initiate treatment promptly. Ischemic priapism presents with progressive penile pain with the duration of the erection. Past medical history of SCD, other hematological disorders, or is known to have a neurological condition provides the history of a risk factor. In high-flow priapism, the patient usually presents with a history of a prolonged erection but no pain. It usually follows a perineal or penile trauma, penile injections or procedures, or pelvic surgery.

When a patient presents with stuttering priapism, it is important to know the number and frequency of episodes, their average duration, and what were the precipitating factors. They usually occur as a non-resolving morning erection or after sexual stimulation. A history of high-risk or underlying causative factors such as SCD and other hematological diseases, as well as a complete medication history is very important. Psychoactive medications or a history of mental health issues can be critically important. Many patients will have learned ways to resolve this at their homes such as hot or cold packs, cold baths, or exercise. It should also be established if this ever progressed to an acute ischemic attack and, if so, how often. As this has the potential to cause permanent erectile dysfunction and difficulties in the patients' sex life, it is pertinent and reasonable to establish its effect on their life.

**Physical Examination**

The aim of the physical examination in the acute attack is also to determine the type of priapism the patient is presenting with. In ischemic attacks, the corpora cavernosa is fully rigid and somewhat tender. In high-flow priapism, it is the opposite; full but relatively soft and painless. Inspection and palpation of the perineum should be done to identify for signs of trauma like discoloration and tenderness, as this is one of the main causes of high-flow priapism. In recurrent priapism, examination of the testicles, abdomen, perineum, rectum, and prostate should be undertaken to look for masses. Although they are a rare cause of priapism, there is a possibility they can be identified so the examination is recommended.