Understanding environmental toxins' effect on infertility is clinically significant, as it is preventable, and in some instances, modifiable once already exposed.

**Treatment and Prevention**

In certain cases, toxicity can be treated, such as in the case of heavy metal exposure. Additionally, with cigarette smoking, return to normal fecundity is noted with smoking cessation, making cessation counseling of utmost importance during an evaluation for infertility.

Prevention of environmental toxin exposure comes from individual action and community and policy level change. Reproductive health providers are especially poised for exposure prevention, as they can identify at-risk patients during pre-conception counseling and pregnancy, perhaps even preventing prenatal exposure. Providers can prevent exposure through appropriate reporting and patient education. If a patient is found to have an exposure-related illness or suspected exposure based on screening, the case should be referred to occupational medicine programs or an Environmental Health Specialty Unit.

Patient education is extremely important and can be done easily through counseling and education pamphlets to prevent or minimize exposure. A specific example of this includes a research study that showed that transitioning a child's food consumption to an organic diet significantly reduces organophosphate pesticide metabolite concentration in the urine.

Another study found that avoiding sources of bisphenol A, such as canned food, reduced levels of bisphenol A in study participants.

Large-scale prevention will ultimately involve policy change. Several academic societies, including the American Society of Reproductive Medicine and the Endocrine Society, have called for public policy change to regulate environmental toxin exposure. These statements urge the United States Environmental Protection Agency and other involved government agencies to analyze substances made available to the public for their effect on human health.

Certain actions have already been taken to reduce specific exposures, such as banning certain EDCs like DES by the Food and Drug Administration. BPA has also been regulated by banning its presence in various early life products such as baby bottles and infant formula.