The veins of the anterolateral abdominal wall accompany the arteries supplying the anterior abdominal wall.****

**Veins**

**Superficial Venous Drainage**

The venous drainage of the anterior abdominal skin around the midline is by branches of the superior and inferior epigastric veins. The skin of the flanks is drained by branches of the intercostal, lumbar, and deep circumflex iliac veins. Also, the skin in the inguinal region is drained by the superficial epigastric, the superficial circumflex iliac, and the superficial external pudendal veins, tributaries of the femoral vein.

- The anterior cutaneous veins carrying deoxygenated blood from the superficial abdominal wall are tributaries of the superior and inferior epigastric veins and accompany the anterior cutaneous nerves.

- The lateral cutaneous veins are tributaries of the lower intercostal veins and accompany the lateral cutaneous nerves.

- The superficial inguinal veins drain into the femoral vein and drain the skin of the lower part of the abdomen. The superficial epigastric vein runs upward and medially and drains the skin up to the umbilicus. The superficial external pudendal veins run medially then pass in front of the spermatic cord and drain the skin of the external genitalia and the adjoining part of the lower abdominal wall. Laterally, the superficial circumflex iliac vein runs just below the inguinal ligament and receives blood from the skin of the abdomen and thigh.

**Deep Venous Drainage**

The anterior abdominal wall is drained by:

- Two large veins from above: the superior epigastric (medial) and musculophrenic (lateral)

- Two large veins from below: the inferior epigastric and the deep circumflex iliac

- Small tributaries of the intercostal, subcostal and lumbar veins, which accompany the corresponding arteries

The superior epigastric vein and musculophrenic vein are the two terminal tributaries of the internal thoracic vein inferior epigastric vein. The anterior intercostal veins carry deoxygenated blood from the diaphragm, the anterior abdominal wall and the seventh, eighth, and ninth intercostal spaces and continue upward and laterally along the deep surface of the diaphragm as far as the tenth intercostal space of the abdominal wall

The inferior epigastric vein drains into the external iliac vein near its lower end just above the inguinal ligament. It runs upward and medially in the extraperitoneal connective tissue, passes just medial to the deep inguinal ring, pierces the fascia transversalis at the lateral border of the rectus abdominis and enters the rectus sheath by passing in front of the arcuate line. Within the sheath, it drains the rectus muscle and ends by joining with the superior epigastric vein.

The venous drainage from the lateral abdominal wall drains above mainly into the axillary vein via the lateral thoracic vein and below into the femoral vein via the superficial epigastric and the superficial circumflex iliac vein. The level of the umbilicus is a watershed. Venous blood and lymphatic fluid drain upward above the plane of the umbilicus and downward below this plane.