Chloroquine phosphate dosing for chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum is 1000 mg by mouth immediately, followed by 500 mg by mouth at hours 6, 24, and 48 hours. An alternative in chloroquine-sensitive infections is to use Hydroxychloroquine 800 mg by mouth immediately, followed by 400 mg orally at hours 6, 24, 48 hours. Other malaria infections that would follow the same protocol would be P. malariae or P. knowlesi.

Primaquine phosphate 26.3 mg is added to the above therapy at a dose of two tablets by mouth once a day for 14 days for chloroquine-sensitive P. vivax or P. ovale infections. Primaquine should be given with meals to decrease GI adverse effects (abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting). If the patient vomits within 30 minutes of taking a dose, then they should repeat the dose.

Atovaquone-proguanil 250 mg/100 mg dosing is administered as four tablets once a day for three days. The other first-line treatment for malaria caused by chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum is artemether-lumefantrine 20 mg/120 mg dosed as four tablets immediately and at 8 hours, followed by four tablets twice daily on days 2 and 3. It should be taken with a meal or a milky drink to increase absorption, as the rate of absorption of atovaquone is dependent on the amount administered with dietary fat.

When treating chloroquine-resistant P. vivax or P. falciparum, sulfate is given as 650 mg by mouth three times a day for 3 or 7 days with the 7-day regimen used for infections acquired in Southeast Asia. The addition of doxycycline, tetracycline, and clindamycin is given as a 7-day course as well.

Mefloquine is administered as 750 mg by initial mouth dose followed by 500 mg by mouth, given 6 to 12 hours after the initial dose. Mefloquine requires administration with food and at least 8 ounces of water. An additional full dose is necessary if vomiting occurs within 30 minutes after the dose; if it occurs within 30 to 60 minutes after the dose, an additional half-dose should be given. This agent can be useful as a third-line option for the treatment of malaria caused by chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum or a first-line option for the treatment of uncomplicated chloroquine-resistant P. vivax.

Quinine gluconate, used as the only IV option for severe malaria treatment, is given as a loading dose of 10mg/kg IV over one to two hours, followed by a continuous infusion of 0.02 mg/kg/minute for at least 24 hours. Patients may alternatively receive a 24 mg/kg loading dose infused over four hours, followed by 12 mg/kg over four hours dosed every eight hours. IV quinidine should continue until the parasite density is less than 1% and the patient can tolerate oral medications. After discontinuation of IV quinine, the patient should switch to oral quinine for the remainder of treatment. Renal adjustments are not necessary when calculating loading doses of IV quinidine gluconate. If a patient has a creatinine clearance less than or equal to 1 mL/minute, the maintenance dose should be reduced by 25%. The addition of doxycycline, tetracycline, or clindamycin to intravenous (IV) quinidine is also given as a 7-day course.