Gastric cancer rates are significantly declining worldwide. However, the pace has been variable in different regions such as China and Japan. An estimated 28,000 new cases will be diagnosed with gastric cancer in the United States, with an expected 10,960 new deaths during 2017. Gastric cancer decline may be due to identification and treatment of infectious causes in addition to lifestyle modifications of dietary and environmental risk factors, but it is still common in regions of the world where the storage of fresh foods and the quality of water are poor. The vast majority of gastric cancer occurs in developing countries, twice more common in men than women, more frequent in black men than in white men. The lowest incidence is in white western society with higher socioeconomic status.

Migration studies have supported evidence for the effect of lifestyle changes on gastric cancer development, as the second and third generation born in the United States have lower rates. Prior concepts of gastric cancer strongly support the notion that nutritional, socioeconomic, and medical factors rather than genetic predisposition have been demonstrated on Japanese migrants. Gastric cancer’s histological patterns have also seen an epidemiological change in the pattern; whereas, the intestinal gastric type is on a gradual decline but continues to be more common (70%). Characteristically, it is seen in males above their fifth decade with linked environmental factors. Contrarily, the diffuse or infiltrative type is less frequent (30%) but diagnosed at a younger age in both sexes and carries a worse prognosis. A major anatomical shift from distal to proximal stomach cancer parallels the increasing incidence of distal esophageal carcinoma in the United States. The proximal lesser curvature, cardiac, and esophagogastric junction (EGJ) are the most common sites in Western countries, whereas non-proximal continues to predominate in Japan. In Japan, gastric cancer is associated with a distinctly better prognosis than in the United States, largely due to endoscopic screening programs contributing to detecting early lesions and potentially curable stage.