While Simulations have gained wide acceptance as a teaching tool, their use for skill evaluation has been more controversial. The major methods of skill assessment in SBTs are questionnaires, objective structured assessments of technical skills, global rating scales, as well as video recording and evaluation.

Questionnaires examine the participants' feedback and are a low-cost assessment tool. However, the method is subjective and qualitative and therefore is not a very good tool. Questionnaires are a form of summative evaluation.

Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills (OSATS) is a checklist that evaluates the skill and competency developed by the participant and provides a better assessment of the outcomes. OSATS also has the advantage of being formative as well as summative. However, the evaluator needs to be trained to ensure observer reliability. Due to its nature, OSATS can only be used to evaluate the completeness of a procedure and not the quality of the procedure.

Global Rating Scales (GRS) uses a rating scale to evaluate the quality of the procedure, and so have often been used as an adjunct to complement the OSATS tool. GRS can be developed to assess both objective and subjective criteria and are also useful for evaluating non-technical skills. This means that GRS has disadvantages, including subjectivity, lower observer reliability, and bias.

Video recording is used to allow flexibility to the observer to use other tools like OSATS or GRS at a time convenient to the observer. The recording can also be used by multiple observers to evaluate the procedure. Similarly, the recording could be abridged to shorten the assessment time. Video recording can also be used in conjunction with motion and temporal analysis to help provide an objective analysis of the quality of the procedure. The disadvantages include the cost as well as the need for trained personnel to ensure the quality of the recordings.