Given the considerable variation in connective tissue types, numerous pathologies and surgical considerations relate to these tissues. Such conditions include tendon tears, bony fractures, muscular compartment syndromes, cartilaginous injury, surgical disruption, and direct inflammation of connective tissues. In addition, there are five currently identified autoimmune connective tissue diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, myositis, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjogren syndrome.

**Autoimmune Connective Tissue Disease**

Five currently recognized autoimmune connective tissue diseases exist, and each is relatively rare: systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, myositis, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjogren syndrome. Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune disease involving the inability to form and the loss of self-tolerance of nuclear autoantigens and immune complexes and causes inflammation of multiple organ systems.

Myositis is another rare autoimmune disease involving autoantibodies and variable patient presentations involving muscle tissue inflammation.

**Undifferentiated Connective Tissue Disease**

Individuals with symptoms of connective tissue disease and laboratory findings that suggest connective tissue disease but do not meet the criteria for classification for a specific connective tissue disease are said to have undifferentiated connective tissue disease.

**Overlap Syndromes**

Patients are considered to have overlap syndrome when they meet the criteria for multiple defined autoimmune connective tissue diseases either concurrently or in sequence.

**Gene Defect-Related Connective Tissue Disease**

Defective genes may sometimes cause abnormalities in the formation or strength of connective tissue. Several conditions fall within this category and impact multiple organ systems, including Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, most commonly characterized by hyperflexible joints and elastic skin; Marfan syndrome, associated with tall and thin individuals with long limbs, epidermolysis bullosa involving delicate and easily injured or blistered skin, and osteogenesis imperfecta involving brittle and easily fractured bone. Each of these conditions is complex, highly variable in patient presentation, may include damage to multiple organs and organ systems, and may range from mild to severe health-related quality of life reduction to the patient.