The clinical presentation of acute lower extremity DVT varies with the anatomic distribution, extent, and degree of occlusion of the thrombus. Symptoms may range from absence to massive swelling and cyanosis with impending venous gangrene. Three patterns of thrombosis are usually recognized: isolated calf vein (distal), femoropopliteal, and iliofemoral thrombosis, and symptoms tend to be more severe as thrombosis extends more proximally. However, up to 50% of patients with acute DVT may lack specific signs or symptoms.

In advanced cases, it is marked by severe venous hypertension with collateral and microvascular thrombosis, leading to venous gangrene. Venous gangrene is particularly associated with warfarin-mediated protein C depletion in patients with cancer or heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

Obtaining the diagnosis of DVT only based on clinical signs and symptoms is notoriously inaccurate. The signs and symptoms of DVT are generally non-specific. They may be associated and misdiagnosed with other lower extremity disorders. Accordingly, lymphedema, superficial venous thrombosis, and cellulitis should be excluded. However, the most common presenting symptoms with inconsistent sensitivity and specificity are calf pain and swelling. The former index has a sensitivity of 75% to 91% and a specificity of 3% to 87%, and the latter might have a sensitivity of up to 97% and a specificity of up to 88%.

**History**

- Pain (50% of patients)

- Redness

- Swelling (70% of patients)

**Physical Examination**

- Limb edema may be unilateral or bilateral if the thrombus extends to pelvic veins.

- Red and hot skin with dilated veins

- Tenderness