Adverse events relating to the procedure can be dichotomized into three categories:

- **Respiratory -**Exaggerated laryngeal reflexes causing coughing, bucking, or laryngospasm - aspiration, secondary to residual effects of drugs and inadequate relaxation, is the major cause of mortality as well as malpractice claims due to anesthesia-related adverse events.

- **Traumatic -**Injury to the larynx, vocal cords, laryngeal nerves, dental trauma, lingual trauma, and emotional distress.

- **Hemodynamic**– Post-extubation hemodynamic shift and increased intra-thoracic pressure following vigorous coughing.

The most feared complications of extubation are the failure and immediate need for re-intubation and post-extubation stridor.

**Extubation Failure**

Extubation failure and the need to be re-intubated within 48 hours are noted in 10 to 20% of patients despite passing a spontaneous breathing trial and undergoing planned extubation.

Recently, the use of non-invasive ventilation (NIV), mostly in the form of BPAP, has gained prominence. Current evidence favors prophylactic use of NIV immediately after extubation to prevent reintubation in only selected high-risk patients, like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and hypercapnia. Otherwise, NIV use for post-extubation respiratory failure has not been shown to reduce reintubation rate or ICU mortality.

In addition to using NIV, high-flow oxygen systems have gained popularity over the last few years in selected patients with hypoxemic respiratory failure. Studies have shown to reduce the re-intubation rate.

**Various Clinical Parameters to Predict the Outcome Following Extubation**

Glasgow coma scale-Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) before extubation has been observed to be the most significant variable governing the outcome following extubation.

- Cough strength, level and consistency of secretion, and status of gag reflex

- Indexes such as heart rate, acidosis, consciousness, oxygenation, and respiratory rate (HACOR)

- Point of care holistic ultrasound- to assess left ventricular function), number of B-lines, and diaphragm thickening fraction - diaphragmatic excursion (DE) with a cut-off value of 1.25 cm and diaphragmatic thickening fraction (DTF) with a cut-off value of 21.5% indexes during the diaphragmatic US have high positive predictive values

- Synchronization between the thoracic and the abdominal wall movement

- Changes in ΔPCO2 (Δ - ΔPCO2) and central venous oxygen saturation (ΔScvO2) during spontaneous breathing trials

**Weaning Failure**

Weaning failure means that the patient cannot tolerate the SBT, which is different from extubation failure, where the patient can pass the spontaneous breathing trial leading to successful extubation, which later fails. An international consensus conference proposed a classification of patients based on the difficulty and length of the weaning process.

**Unexpected Extubation**

A systematic review and meta-analysis have shown the pooled prevalence of UEE at around 7%, with almost 70% occurring despite being preventable.

**Post-Extubation Stridor**

Post-extubation stridor is uncommon and seen only in less than 10% of unselected critically ill patients and correlates with increased rates of reintubation, prolonged duration of mechanical ventilation, and longer length of ICU stay. Stridor is the result of laryngeal edema.

Several identified risk factors include:

- Prolonged intubation (36 hours to 6 days or more)

- Elderly: above 80 years of age

- A large ETT (greater than 8 mm in men and over 7 mm in women)

- A ratio of ETT to the laryngeal diameter of more than 45%

- A GCS score higher than 8 or traumatic intubation

- Female gender

- Medical history of asthma

- Improper fixation of the tube

- Inadequate or lack of sedation

- Aspiration

- The presence of an orogastric or nasogastric tube

The cuff-leak test is used to predict the occurrence of post-extubation stridor.

The two methods of performing the cuff-leak test are:

- Qualitatively by just listening to the leak of air by a stethoscope over the upper trachea on deflation of the balloon.

- Quantitatively, placing the patient on volume control mode and calculating the difference between inspired and expired air. If the cuff leak is less than 110 ml or less than 25% of the delivered tidal volume, it suggests an increased risk of laryngeal edema.

**Management of Post-extubation Stridor**

For patients with no cuff leak when tested before extubation, a short course of steroids (methylprednisolone 20 mg every 4 hours for four doses) may be helpful. This course has support from a few studies and meta-analyses.

For patients who develop post-extubation stridor, nebulized epinephrine, intravenous methylprednisolone, high flow O2, and CPAP is an option if clinically stable. Otherwise, prompt reintubation is warranted if significant airway obstruction is suspected. Following reintubation, a short course of steroids is the recommendation, with a re-assessment of the cuff leak. If a leak is present, extubation is generally safe. If cuff leak is reduced or absent, extubation over an airway exchange catheter should be considered, usually in consultation with bedside anesthesiology or ENT consultant.