Because contrast-induced renal injury leads to high morbidity, prolonged admission, and increased health care costs, the goal is today is focused on prevention. Besides physicians, both the nurse and pharmacist need to be aware of the patient's medical history and concomitant use of other medications. A detailed history of risk factors like diabetes, heart failure, and hypertension is critical. Any patient prescribed an intervention procedure that uses contrast dye must be fully assessed for a history of diabetes and renal function. These individuals may be better served with another imaging test that does not require the use of contrast. If there is no choice, then the patient must be educated about the possibility of kidney injury and the need for dialysis. The pharmacist should ensure that all nephrotoxic drugs are discontinued prior to the test. The nurse should make sure that the patient is well hydrated both before and after the test. The drug metformin should be withheld for 48 hours and restarted if the renal function is normal. Only through proper communication and monitoring can the frequency of contrast-induced renal injury be lowered.

**Outcomes**

Contrast-induced kidney injury is in most cases not a permanent injury and most patients will see a recovery of renal function within 10-14 days. However, in patients with underlying renal disease, diabetes, or hypertension, about 20-30% of patients will have residual impairment of renal function. Dialysis may be required in less than 1-3% of non-diabetic patients, but in diabetics, dialysis may be required in anywhere from 10-15% of cases. Of those who do required dialysis, at least 20% may end up on permanent dialysis. The presence of persistent kidney damage after the use of contrast highlights the importance of hydration and avoidance of contrast when other imaging modalities are available.