Etanercept is one of several different options for treating plaque psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis. The medical providers should weigh the risks and benefits of selecting etanercept as a treatment, such as drug cost, effectiveness, method of administration, and adverse effects. Because it is a biologic, etanercept usage comes with serious side effects such as infections, malignancies, and autoimmune conditions.

An interprofessional team of clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists must work together to ensure the safety and wellbeing of the patient. When deciding to treat with etanercept, clinicians should know the treatment guidelines, including monitoring the patient for signs of heart failure, tuberculosis, hepatitis B, and other infections before and during treatment. Clinicians and nurses will instruct the patient or the patient’s relative on properly administering etanercept injections at home. Clinicians and pharmacists must ensure that the patient receives the proper medication and dosage and that the patient receives on drug interactions and adverse effects. Nursing can participate in injection administration training and education and should keep the team informed regarding the appearance of any adverse reactions, as well as monitoring the success/failure of therapy. Also, biosimilars of etanercept have been emerging on the market, so healthcare providers need to be kept abreast regarding the different options that they have for treatment.