In the United States (US), allergic reactions result in millions of hospital and office visits each year, which cost billions of dollars.

This rise in atopic disorders has not been observed in developing countries. It is suggested that hygiene, counter-regulatory, GM-CSF, hapten-atopy, antioxidant, lipid, and vitamin D hypotheses presumably contribute to this rapid increase in allergic reactions in Western countries.

The hygiene hypothesis proposes that diminished exposure to infectious agents during development is associated with susceptibility to allergic disease. The proposed mechanism behind this hypothesis is the imbalance in the activation process of T helper (Th) 2 cells over Th1 cells. Th2 cells are the known culprit for the development of atopic disorders.

When expressed by immature dendritic cells and mononuclear phagocytic cells, Interleukin 10 (IL-10) is vital in stimulating and maintaining tolerance to benign allergens. But in allergic rhinitis and asthma, airway IL-10 expression is reduced. This, in turn, results in inflammation in response to non-harmful allergens. The counter-regulatory hypothesis suggests that infections lead to increased expression of IL-10, which lowers the predisposition towards allergy. The current lifestyle in Western countries has reduced exposure to infectious agents. This has diminished the benefits of this counter-regulatory feedback, making people more susceptible to atopic disorders.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is produced by many cell types, including T cells, macrophages, and endothelial cells, following their activation. GM-CSF stimulates the proliferation and activation of neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. The GM-CSF hypothesis suggests that overexpression of GM-CSF is associated with severe tissue damage in various places in the body. In allergic disorders, GM-CSF causes the continual survival of eosinophils by inhibiting their apoptosis.

The hapten-atopy hypothesis proposes that high-level exposure to chemicals in the early stages of development is associated with increased allergic disorders. Haptens are small molecules with low molecular weight (less than 500 Da) that are typically not capable of generating an immune response but can bind to bigger molecules and turn them into allergens. Over the past four decades, exposure to dietary haptens through processed food, formula milk, and oral medications has drastically increased. It is suggested that this rise in exposure has contributed to the increased prevalence of atopic disorders during this period.

There are two contradictory theories behind the role antioxidants play in atopic disease. Some studies propose that a low intake of antioxidants, such as green vegetables, fresh fruits, and fish, contributes to the increased prevalence of atopic disorders. In contrast, others suggest that increased antioxidant intake has caused an increase in allergic disorders.

The consumption of foods containing n-3 polyunsaturated fat, found in tuna, herring, mackerel, salmon, sardines, and trout, has reduced in the past few decades. At the same time, there has been a rise in the consumption of processed foods rich in n-6 polyunsaturated fat, which presumably activates IgE production, causing atopic disorders. This theory is defined as the lipid hypothesis. The Vitamin D hypothesis proposes that the prevalence of allergic disorders is higher in patients supplemented with vitamin D as infants.

IgE plays a vital role in allergic disorders by inducing immediate hypersensitivity reactions. The activation of Fc epsilon RI, located on the surface of mast cells, facilitates immediate hypersensitivity reactions that can manifest as sneezing, urticaria, acute bronchospasm, secretory diarrhea, cardiovascular collapse, or fatal systemic anaphylactic reactions. In addition, Fc epsilon RI activates SYK (an SRC-family kinase), which plays a critical role in the augmentation of the mast cell downstream signaling process. Thus SYK is an ideal therapeutic target for inflammatory and allergic conditions.

Hyper IgE syndromes include rare primary immunodeficiency disorders distinguished by a triad of atopic dermatitis and chronic skin and lung infections with raised IgE levels. There is an impaired IL-10 and IL-21 signaling and eosinophilia. Job syndrome( autosomal dominant hyper IgE syndrome) is due to a deficiency of Th 17 cells due to STAT3 mutation. These patients usually present with non-inflamed abscesses, retained baby teeth, and fractures from minor trauma, along with the clinical features described above. Treatment is supportive, consisting of prophylactic antibiotics against staphylococcal infection, eczema care, and intravenous immunoglobulin or subcutaneous immunoglobulin depending upon the severity of presentation.