Salivary gland function can undergo alteration in many ways leading to undersecretion or oversecretion of saliva. Sialorrhea, excess salivation, is common and normal among babies between 15 months and 3 years of age, seen commonly in those with neurodegenerative disorders, and can be seen as a side effect of medication. Sialorrhea becomes pathologic among children after the of 4 years and is most common in children with cerebral palsy. It can be due to excess production and stimulation of the glands or due to decreased clearance of saliva from the oral cavity by lack of muscle strength and coordination with disruption of neuromuscular activity. Sialorrhea is also a side effect of some medications including the atypical antipsychotic drug clozapine used in the treatment of schizophrenia, direct acting muscarinic agents such as pilocarpine, and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as donepezil.

Dry mouth, also known as xerostomia, can occur for many reasons and is ultimately due to decreased salivation. Some of the major causes include radiation therapy to the head and neck region, medication side effect, infections like mumps, autoimmune diseases like Sjogren syndrome, and many other reasons like hormonal changes, diabetes, or simply as normal age-related changes. Radiation therapy to the head and neck directly damages the integrity of the salivary glands and decreases their ability to make and secrete saliva. Medications like atropine, scopolamine, and others in the anticholinergic drug class can result in xerostomia by blocking the muscarinic receptors on the salivary glands. Other drug classes that may cause xerostomia include antidepressants, particularly the tricyclic antidepressants which include amitriptyline, doxepin, nortriptyline as they also have antagonistic effects at the muscarinic receptors. Some antihypertensive medications like terazosin, clonidine, atenolol, and propranolol can also cause dry mouth. Retinoids like tretinoin, and isotretinoin, which are commonly used in the dermatological setting to treat acne, and other dermatologic conditions can also cause xerostomia. Other drugs include antihistamines, proton pump inhibitors, opioids, cannabinoids, and neurokinin 1 receptor antagonists. Unvaccinated individuals are at risk of infection by the mumps virus, which targets the salivary glands, results in enlargement of the parotid gland due to inflammation and this inflammation restricts saliva production and secretion leading to dry mouth. Sjogren syndrome is an autoimmune condition that causes dry mouth and dry eyes. These individuals have autoantibodies, anti-Ro (SS-A) and anti-La (SS-B) which target the salivary and lacrimal glands. There is no cure for Sjogren syndrome, and treatment focuses on symptomatic relief with saliva substitutes, agonist drugs of the muscarinic receptors, lubricating eye drops, and good oral hygiene.

The salivary glands themselves are susceptible to neoplastic changes, and an individual may develop a benign or malignant lesion. Depending on tumor location, the possibility of damage to the facial nerve after surgical removal can lead to the paralysis of one side of the face, decreased saliva production, or damage to the nearby vasculature and musculature.