Acute human T-lymphotropic virus-1 infections are rarely identified or diagnosed as the initial infection is so commonly asymptomatic.

ATLL is defined as a neoplastic clonal expansion of CD4+ cells infected with HTLV-1. The lifetime risk of developing ATLL in HTLV-1 infected individuals appears to be approximately 4%, and there is often a lag of up to three decades between initial infection and malignant transformation.

Presenting signs and symptoms of ATLL include generalized lymphadenopathy, cutaneous lesions, hepatosplenomegaly, and immunosuppressed state heralded by established opportunistic infections. Paraneoplastic hypercalcemia is usually present at the time of ATLL diagnosis and may be caused by tumor necrosis factor-beta or parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP). Bone turnover is accelerated, and lytic bone lesions are often present.

The diversity of clinical presentation and disease progression of ATLL necessitates sub-classification into four categories: acute, lymphomatous, chronic, and smoldering.

Acute: The most common of these is the acute type, which is associated with the worst prognosis (median survival from diagnosis is six months) and accounts for 55% of ATLL cases. Clinical features include skin lesions, bone pain caused by hypercalcemia and lytic bone lesions, and pulmonary symptoms with infiltrates present on chest imaging. Pulmonary features may be caused by primary disease or opportunistic infections, which are present in 30% of patients at presentation. Commonly encountered opportunistic organisms include Pneumocystis jirovecii (causing PCP pneumonia often seen in AIDS patients), Cryptococcus neoformans causing occult meningitis,

Lymphomatous: This form accounts for 20% of cases, and clinical features include massive lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly with the absence of circulating tumor cells.

Chronic: This type occurs in a further 20% of ATLL cases and has a more indolent disease course compared to the acute and lymphomatous sub-types with a median survival of two years.

Smoldering: Is the rarest form of ATLL accounting for only 5% of disease burden. Cutaneous features are often present, but these are milder than those seen in the acute sub-type. Respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms are absent. For the diagnosis of this sub-type, fewer than 5% of peripheral CD4+ T cells are affected.

HAM/TSP: Characterised as chronic myelopathy, which develops and progresses over the years, although cases of faster deterioration have been described, and this is hypothesized to correlate positively with a high viral load.

The typical presentation is one of slowly progressive paraparesis with associated spasticity. First physical signs are usually in the lower limbs, but upper limb involvement may follow. Limb weakness is more marked proximally.

Autonomic dysfunction is well-described in HAM/TSP. These patients can suffer from orthostatic hypotension, and hyperhidrosis/hypohidrosis can significantly affect patients’ quality of life.

Other Neurological Disease: In addition to these two main diseases caused by HTLV-1 described above, HTLV-1 is also linked to a myriad of other neurological diseases, including sub-acute meningitis, encephalitis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis syndromes, and conus medullaris syndrome.

Dermatological: HTLV-1 is associated with infective dermatitis, usually affecting the face, scalp, and flexures of infected children. Clinically it is characterized by an eczematous rash that frequently is infected by secondary organisms such as Staphylococci and Streptococci.

Ophthalmological: HTLV-1-associated uveitis presents with floaters, and blurred vision frequently affecting both eyes and is more common in patients under 50 years of age. On examination, the anterior chamber is cloudy with cells, and there may be retinal involvement too with hemorrhages and exudates. These patients respond well to topical steroid therapy but frequently flare when this has weaned necessitating long-term treatment with increased risk of steroid-induced glaucoma.

Rheumatological: A significant number of autoimmune diseases are observed more frequently in HTLV-1 infected patients, including polymyositis, Sjögren syndrome, and Raynaud disease.

Pulmonary: Bronchiolar disease occurs with a significantly higher incidence in HTLV-1 affected individuals compared to the background population. This has been observed in a large prospective Australian study that found that of patients hospitalized with bronchiectasis, 60% of these patients were identified to be infected with HTLV-1 compared to a general population prevalence of 10%.