General guidelines recommend determining baseline renal function before and after initiation of nephrotoxic pharmaceutical agents. The most common formula used in the calculation of glomerular filtration rate is the Schwartz formula. Calculation of GFR (mL/min/1.73 m^2= length (cm) X potassium /serum creatinine (mg/dL). To use clinician judgment in determining whether to withdraw a nephrotoxic agent, we aim to keep the GFR above the chronic kidney disease threshold of 60.

Also, many biomarkers have become available to assess renal toxicity further. A few of these are as follows:

**Urine Proteins and Enzymatic activity**

- Alanine aminopeptidase, alpha-glutathione-S-transferase, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, N-acetyl-D-glucosaminidase, and π-glutathione-S-transferase 18294749.

**Proteinuria**

- An increase in the amount of high or low molecular proteins in urine testing is another key diagnostic tool. Typically high and low molecular weight proteins get reabsorbed before being released into the proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron. High molecular weight proteins that signal renal damage include albumin, transferrin, and immunoglobulin G. Low molecular proteins diagnostic for renal damage include a1-microglobulin, B2-microglobulin, cystatin-C, and retinol-binding protein.

**Kidney injury Molecule 1**

- KIM1 is a type 1 glycoprotein rapidly detected in urine upon damage to tissue that allows for the measurement of proximal renal tubule damage. Greater sensitivity than traditional methods of measuring renal damage such as BUN, Creatinine, and the presence of proteinuria.

**Neutrophil Gelatinase-associated Lipocalin**

- NGAL is synthesized during granulocyte maturation and as a byproduct of tissue inflammation and damage, especially in the proximal renal tubule. Acute kidney injury can be measured and diagnosed earlier with this biomarker. Caution is necessary as NGAL also elevates general inflammatory and infectious processes.

**Type 4 Collagen**

- Type 4 collagen is present in the basement membrane of the glomerulus. The presence of type 4 collagen in the urine may serve as a critical marker in glomerular membrane damage.

**Osteopontin**

- Osteopontin is a bone phosphoprotein present in the bone that is useful in measuring damage from certain nephrotoxic drugs. A few of these drugs include cisplatin, angiotensin-2 receptor blockers, cyclosporin, gentamicin, and puromycin.

**Clusterin**

- Clusterin is a glycoprotein used to measure proximal and distal convoluted tubule damage via presence in the urine.

Preventative measures aimed at decreasing the incidence of significant nephrotoxic effects include oral administration, low effective doses, and short therapy. Furthermore, the dose can be reduced or discontinued in the setting of toxicity.