The human bladder expresses various sympathetic and parasympathetic receptors to help regulate micturition. Activation of the parasympathetic system will result in bladder contraction. Receptors positively affecting bladder contraction and micturition include the M2 and M3 receptor subtypes, which function via the parasympathetic nervous system.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: According to the manufacturer's product labeling, mirabegron reaches maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) at approximately 3.5 hours. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within seven days. In adults, there are no clinically significant differences in mirabegron pharmacokinetics when administered with or without food. However, in pediatric patients, fasted Cmax and AUC increased by 170% and 80%, respectively, compared to the fed state following the administration of mirabegron Granules.

Distribution: Mirabegron has an extensive distribution with the volume of distribution at steady-state (Vss) 1670 L. Mirabegron is bound (approximately 71%) to human plasma proteins, including albumin and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein. Mirabegron distributes to erythrocytes. Mirabegron volume of distribution is relatively higher in pediatric patients and is proportional to body weight.

Metabolism: Mirabegron is metabolized in the liver via multiple pathways involving dealkylation, oxidation, glucuronidation, and hydrolysis. Metabolites are not pharmacologically active. Studies have also shown the involvement of butyrylcholinesterase, and UGT in the metabolism of mirabegron, in addition to CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. In poor metabolizers of CYP2D6, mean Cmax and AUC are approximately 16% and 17% higher than in extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6.

Excretion: The mean elimination half-life (t1/2) of mirabegron is approximately 50 hours in adult patients and 26 to 31 hours in pediatric patients(mirabegron granules). Renal elimination of mirabegron is primarily through active tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. Approximately  55% is excreted in the urine, 34% in the feces, and ~25% in the urine(unchanged).