Effective treatment of maple syrup urine disease requires addressing the nutritional needs and optimally managing acute metabolic decompensations.

**Medical Nutritional Therapy**

The initiation of nutritional therapy requires clinical confirmation and a positive newborn screening result. The mainstay of treatment remains the dietary restriction of branched-chain amino acids. These dietary modifications need to be maintained throughout life. The goals of nutritional therapy are as follows

- Promote anabolism

- Prevent catabolism

- Promote normal growth and weight gain

- Preserve intellectual function

- Enable restriction of branched-chain amino acid in the diet, which helps reduce toxic metabolites

- Maintain plasma BCAA levels within the required treatment ranges

- Evaluate thiamine responsiveness

The allowed amounts of dietary BCAA are titrated into the diet using biochemical lab values and growth measurements during respective life periods. Long-term treatment warrants accurate assessment of caloric needs, BCAA restriction, BCAA-free amino acid supplementation, and valine and isoleucine supplementation.

**Treatment of Acute Metabolic Decompensation**

Metabolic decompensations (plasma leucine >380 micromol/L) usually occur due to dietary non-compliance and infections. Dietary non-compliance raises the BCAA levels and rarely progresses to decompensation and encephalopathy. However, trauma and infections can trigger large protein catabolism leading to a metabolic crisis. Decompensations arise more commonly in the first year of life and after the age of 15.

- Effectively treating the underlying stressor causing the metabolic crisis

- Restrict protein intake for 24 to 72 hours

- Provide ample caloric support

- Provide adequate hydration to maintain metabolic homeostasis

- Provide supplementation with cofactors

- Eliminate toxic metabolites

- Treat associated clinical sequelae

- Correct metabolic abnormalities

**Home Therapy**

Providers can be instructed to use a dinitrophenylhydrazine reagent to detect high urine branched-chain ketoacids. This allows for the timely detection and home management of mild to moderate cases of acute metabolic decompensation. In such cases, experienced providers can help manage with restriction of dietary leucine, sick day formulas, and outpatient monitoring.

**In-Hospital Therapy**

Goals and treatment strategies of in-hospital therapy include:

- Effectively treating the underlying stressor (e.g., fever, dehydration, infection, and inflammation).

- To control nausea and vomiting, antiemetics such as ondansetron should be administered.

- Reduction in leucine concentration at 750 micromol/L or more per 24 hrs. This reduction in leucine can be achieved via insulin and glucose infusions. Ideally, leucine levels should be maintained from 200 to 300 micromol/L. Upon clinical improvement, total parenteral nutrition can be used to reintroduce protein back into the diet (25%-50% of normal intake). This intake can be increased depending on the clinical situation over the next few days.

- EER must be provided at least 1.25 times the weight or surface area. Lipid should constitute 40% to 50% of total calories. Nutritional goals can be achieved by combined parenteral and enteral feeding.

- Isoleucine and valine should be supplemented at 20-120 mg/kg/day each. The intake of supplements is adjusted to maintain a steady plasma concentration of 400-600 micromol/L.

- Enteral supplementation of tyrosine (100-400 mg/kg/day) to treat focal or generalized dystonias.

- Glutamine and alanine supplementation at 150-400 mg/kg/day each.

- Supplement BCAA-free amino acids.

- Maintain sodium levels within the physiological range.

- Correct underlying acid-base disturbances.

- Avoid osmolarity fluctuations > 5 mosm/L per day and maintain urine output.

- Prevent and treat hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia associated with IV glucose and insulin therapy.

**Role of Sodium Phenylbutyrate (NaPBA)**

Sodium phenylbutyrate is a nitrogen scavenger. It is primarily used in the treatment of urea cycle disorders. NaPBA can also reduce branched-chain amino acid levels. It can be used in patients with intermediate MSUD.

**Orthotopic Liver Transplantation**

Indications:

- Psychomotor disabilities

- Poor metabolic control

- Frequent metabolic decompensations

The liver is responsible for expressing 10% of BCKAD activity. Therefore, liver transplantation is recommended for classic MSUD patients who are difficult to manage. More commonly, the liver from an undeceased and unrelated individual is used.

**Management in Pregnancy**

It is indeed possible for women with MSUD to deliver a healthy child. The mother must be educated about the potential teratogenic risks of elevated maternal leucine concentration. In such patients, tight metabolic control before and throughout gestation is critical. As the placenta and fetus develop, the maternal need for protein and BCAA exponentially increases. Therefore, measurements of plasma amino acid concentrations and fetal growth are imperative to avoid possible nutritional deficiencies. Maintaining BCAA levels between 100 and 300 micromol/L is said to be compatible with normal infant delivery. At the time of delivery, referral to a metabolic center must be made. This is because the post-partum period is deemed dangerous for the mother. Events such as labor stress, internal blood sequestration, and uterine involution can act as a source of metabolic decompensation. Therefore, extra measures must be taken to counteract catabolism during the post-partum period.

**Management of other MSUD Complications**

**Cerebral Edema**

- Administer furosemide (0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg)

- Infusion of mannitol (0.5 to 1.0 g/kg) followed by hypertonic saline (3%-5%)

The risk of developing cerebral edema can be reduced by elevating the head of the bed.

**Cerebral Herniation**

- Elevate the head

- Induce hyperventilation with the help of a face mask or endotracheal tube.

- Infuse mannitol and hypertonic saline.

- Transfer the patient immediately to a pediatric/neonatal intensive care unit.

**Infection**

Patients with MSUD are predisposed to candida infections and catheter-based bacterial or fungal infections. It is vital to monitor patients for hospital-acquired infections continuously. Failure to treat them can result in an episode of acute metabolic decompensation.

**Acute Pancreatitis**

During an acute metabolic decompensation episode, a patient may develop symptoms such as epigastric pain, mid-back pain, anorexia, and vomiting. This should raise suspicion of acute pancreatitis and immediately order serum levels for lipase and amylase. Also, the physician must suspend enteral feeding and keep the patient NPO. Treatment is usually supportive, and the patient's nutritional needs can be managed with the use of special parenteral solutions.

**Neuropsychiatric Illnesses**

Adult and adolescent patients are at an increased risk of developing anxiety, depression, and ADHD. These can be treated by prescribing standard anti-depressants and psychostimulant drugs.

**Secondary Complications**

Surgical procedures and trauma care should be planned in coordination with a metabolic specialist.

**General Prevention**

Patients must be advised never to exceed their daily allowed dose of branched-chain amino acids.