When comparing the different types of vagotomies, mortality, recurrence, and the incidence of long-term, post-vagotomy syndromes must be considered. In general, HSV has been shown to have the highest ulcer recurrence rate with the lowest morbidity and mortality compared to other procedures. TV or SV + antrectomy has classically been known to have the lowest recurrence rate but harbors the highest morbidity and mortality of the denervation procedures. The recurrence, morbidity, and mortality of the TV/SV + drainage procedures fall in-between the results of the 2 previously described techniques.

The indications for vagotomy are few with the advancements of medical therapy. Generally, acid-reducing operations are reserved for complicated ulcer disease in a stable patient who has failed maximum medical therapy. The type of surgery performed depends on the type of ulcer (duodenal versus gastric), the complication of PUD (bleeding, perforation, obstruction, intractability), and the location of the ulcer (types I to V gastric ulcers as described by the Modified Johnson Classification system).

**Specific Scenarios**

- Bleeding duodenal ulcer: In a patient who has failed medical treatment for any reason (allergy to medications, recurrence despite maximum medical therapy). The original operation consists of opening the first portion of the duodenum and the pylorus, thus creating the drainage procedure (pyloroplasty). In this setting, a truncal vagotomy should be added to the procedure to limit recurrence risk.

- Bleeding gastric ulcer: Since most gastric ulcers are not associated with high acid secretion (aside from type II and III, which are located at the pre-pyloric area), a vagotomy is very rarely indicated. Typically the ulcer should be resected. A TV may be added for type II and III ulcers, along with the distal gastrectomy.

- Perforated duodenal ulcer: Typically, a Graham patch repair is performed to seal the perforation. An HSV may be considered in a stable patient with minimal soilage, high risk for recurrence (unable to stop NSAIDs or an active smoker), failure of maximum medical therapy, and recent documentation of H. Pylori negative status.

- Perforated gastric ulcer: These will be treated as a bleeding gastric ulcer as described above.

- Gastric outlet obstruction: First-line therapy consists of endoscopic balloon dilation along with PPI medication. If there is recurrence or failure of medical treatment, truncal vagotomy and antrectomy is the procedure of choice. One may consider HSV with gastrojejunostomy without resection in a case where duodenal scarring prevents a safe antrectomy.

- Intractability: In a patient with a duodenal or type II or III gastric ulcers, an HSV should be considered. In gastric ulcers not related to acid hypersecretion, gastric resection without vagotomy is the procedure recommended.

- Recurrence despite a previous vagotomy: If the patient cannot be managed medically (50% fail), then the procedure required is a TV + A.