Unfractionated heparin is an anticoagulant indicated for both the prevention and treatment of thrombotic events such as deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) as well as atrial fibrillation (AF). Heparin can also be used to prevent excess coagulation during procedures such as cardiac surgery, extracorporeal circulation, or dialysis, including continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT).

Heparin is widely used in the hospital for many different off-label indications, for example, patients who present with acute coronary syndromes (ACS) and who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). During hospitalization, heparin will be used to bridge to oral anticoagulation, warfarin for mechanical and bioprosthetic valves. The American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) recommends using heparin for many other thrombotic states: atrial fibrillation undergoing cardioversion, endocarditis, systemic emboli, or venous thrombosis.

Dosing recommendations vary for each indication. Most heparin drips will be initiated with a bolus injection of 80 units/kilogram intravenously, followed by a continuous infusion rate of 18 units/kilogram/hour. In obese populations, these dosages are capped off at a maximum bolus infusion and maximum infusion rate. Dosing in some situations is much lower with different maximum doses. For example, in patients with acute coronary syndrome or stroke, the dose is much lower due to an increased risk for bleeding. When heparin is administered and dosed by indication, there are no dosage adjustments required for renal dysfunction.

Heparin is also useful in smaller volumes as lock flushes. Due to the increase in adverse effects and exposure to heparin, these are not used as often in clinical practice. These are intended to maintain patency for IV lines and should not be used to achieve therapeutic anticoagulation. Lock flushes are usually dispensed as a 1 to 5 mL volume syringe used for catheter flush only. A small volume of heparin is instilled into the catheter tip and flushed daily. Extra caution should be observed in the administration of heparin lock solution frequently in a 24 hour period with pediatric patients. Dependent upon the concentration, if instilling a lock flush, this could be close to a therapeutic dose of heparin in some pediatric patients.