Improved sanitation has resulted in a shift in the age group that acquires hepatitis A. In recent years there has been a decline in the incidence of a new infection.

The United States has a low endemicity. Mexico has a high prevalence of individuals with the anti-HAV antibody indicating a previous infection. The frequency of acute hepatitis is higher in those U.S. states that are adjacent to Mexico.

The reported hepatitis A incidence has declined by 90% to as low as 1.2 cases per 100,000 population. The greatest reductions are seen in children and in those states where routine vaccination was started in 1999. Over the last 4 decades, the average age of hepatitis A infected individuals has increased.

Individuals in high-risk populations account for most cases of HAV infection. These groups include foreign travelers to developing nations, gays, childcare workers, institutionalized individuals, and those living in poverty.

Food handlers are an infrequent source of outbreaks in the United States. Virtually any food may be contaminated with HAV.

**International**

HAV is highest in resource-poor regions such as Africa, Asia, and South America, where evidence of past infection is nearly universal. Acquisition often occurs in childhood, and it is usually asymptomatic.

**Sex**

There is no sexual predilection. It is most common in aid workers, gays, and around sewage.

**Age**

With increasing age symptomatic disease and adverse sequelae increases. Mortality from fulminant hepatic failure increases with increasing age.