**Second Stage of Labor**

Around the time of delivery, the patient will begin experiencing strong contractions around 2 to 4 minutes apart. When the mother is experiencing a contraction, be sure to coach the mother by encouraging her to push for a full 10 seconds, if possible. This process can be quite exhausting for the mother, so generally, the mother is encouraged to push for 3 sets of 10 seconds during a contraction then take a break.

Once the head is delivered, sweep fingers around the fetal neck feeling for a nuchal cord. If the umbilical cord is felt wrapped around the neck, the cord will need to be reduced.

Next, clamp and cut the umbilical cord. There is no rush for the prehospital provider to clamp or deliver the placenta. It is advised to wait at least 30 seconds before clamping the cord; this allows for autotransfusion of some of the placental blood into the neonate.

The infant is now free from the mother. If available, use a clean towel to dry and stimulate the infant. As it is unlikely that an ambient warmer will be available in the prehospital setting, skin-to-skin contact between child and mother is strongly encouraged. This promotes bonding and helps keep the child warm.

**Third Stage of Labor**

After the neonate has been successfully delivered, the placenta must be delivered. This should occur between 5 and 30 minutes after delivery.

Slowly increase the amount of traction on the cord until the placenta begins to descend. Once the placenta is visible, grab it, continuing to pull downward. Once the placenta is approximately halfway out of the vaginal os, begin to twist the placenta as traction is maintained. This will cause the stringy delicate membranous tail of the placenta to wrap around itself, providing greater structural integrity, preventing retained products of conception. Once the placenta has been delivered, it needs to be inspected for any missings pieces. If the placenta is not intact, the retained products will need to be retrieved to prevent bleeding or later infection.