Several classification systems have been proposed and evolved over a period of years.

**Classification based on endothelial proliferative activity**by Mulliken and Glowacki (1982)

Vascular anomalies have been subclassified into hemangiomas and vascular malformations.

**Hemangiomas**

Hemangiomas are lesions showing increased mitotic activity. This has been further subdivided into two phases - The proliferative phase and Involuting phase.

**Characteristics Of Proliferative Phase Hemangiomas**

- Endothelial hyperplasia with [3H] thymidine incorporation

- Presence of multi-laminated basement membrane beneath the endothelium

- Rapidly growing lesion during early infancy

**Characteristics Of Involuting Phase**

- Fibrosis and fat deposition on histology

- Low to absent thymidine labeling

- Rapid growth followed by regression

**Vascular Malformations**

These constitute the structural abnormalities with normal endothelial activity, consisting of abnormal vascular elements, namely capillary, venous, lymphatic, and arterial, in mostly combined or rarely isolated forms.

**Classification based on hemodynamic properties**by the Orbital Society (1999)

- No flow lesions

- Venous flow lesions

- Arterial flow lesions

**Rootman's Hemodynamic Model of Orbital Vascular Malformations**

- Type 1 – No flow lesions, with no connection to the venous system. It included combined venous-lymphatic malformations (VLMs), erratically called "lymphangiomas."

- Type 2 – Low flow lesions (venous), with direct communication with the venous system. It was further subclassified as – distensible (rich venous communication), non-distensible (scarce communication), and combined (features of both).

- Type 3 – High flow lesions (arterial), which were further subdivided into arteriovenous (AV) malformations, with direct antegrade flow through the malformation to the venous side, and cavernous hemangioma (low-flow AV malformation), with direct arterial in-flow and venous out-flow mechanisms.

This hemodynamic conceptualization of vascular lesions helps determine the threshold of intervention and facilitates specific adjunct procedures such as pre-operative embolization, intra-operative application of glue, etc., to achieve safer and predictable outcomes.

**The International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies (ISSVA)**classification – With the advent of modern technology and advancements in interventional radiology, an updated nomenclature system was laid down by the 20th ISSVA workshop in 2014, which incorporated the clinical features and natural course, hemodynamic properties, radiological characteristics, as well as histopathological findings of vascular lesions. This was subsequently expanded and revised in 2018 with biological and genetic updates.

OVAs can be classified as vasoproliferative tumors and malformations.

**Subclassification Of Vasoproliferative Tumors**

**Benign**

- Infantile hemangioma – It can be of superficial, deep, mixed (superficial + deep), reticular/abortive (minimal growth) type or other forms. It can exhibit focal, multifocal, segmental, or indeterminate (features of both focal and segmental) patterns. It can also be found in association with PHACE (Posterior fossa malformations, Hemangioma, Arterial anomalies, Cardiovascular anomalies, Eye anomalies, sternal clefting and/or supraumbilical raphe) and LUMBAR syndrome (Lower body hemangioma, Urogenital anomalies, Ulceration, Myelopathy, Bony deformities, Anorectal malformations, Arterial anomalies, and Renal anomalies).

- Congenital hemangioma – Rapid involuting (RICH), non-involuting (NICH), or partially involuting (PICH)

- Tufted angioma

- Epithelioid hemangioma

- Spindle cell hemangioma

- Pyogenic granuloma

- Others

**Locally Aggressive**

This group comprises hemangioendothelioma and Kaposi sarcoma

Malignant

These include angiosarcoma, an epithelioid variant of hemangioendothelioma, or others.

**Subclassification of Vascular Malformations**

**Simple******

- Capillary malformations (CM)

- Venous malformations (VM)

- Lymphatic malformations (LM) – They may be macrocystic, microcystic, or mixed

- Arteriovenous malformations (AVM) – High flow lesions

- Arteriovenous fistula (AVF) – High flow lesions

**Combined Vascular Malformations**

These are defined as two or more vascular components found within a single lesion. For example, when CM, LM, and AVM components are found within one lesion, it is termed "capillary-lymphatic-arteriovenous" malformation (CLAVM). Similarly, a lesion comprising venous and lymphatic components is termed a "venous-lymphatic" malformation (VLM). It is worth noting that the widely used terms such as "cavernous hemangioma" "lymphangioma" are now better avoided since, instead of true neoplasms, they are vascular malformations. Lymphangiomas are now accurately known as VLMs. Cavernous hemangioma is, in fact, a solitary, encapsulated venous malformation (VM). Similarly, clinicians must refrain from using the terms "orbital varix" and "capillary hemangioma" in their daily practice.

In 1990, Schobinger clinical staging system for AVMs was introduced, which divided them into four stages - Stage 1 (quiescent stage) AVMs which are warm and pink-blue in color; Stage II (expansion) AVMs exhibiting pulsations, thrill, and bruit; Stage III (destruction) characterized by ulceration, bleeding, and dystrophic skin changes; and Stage IV (decompensation) AVMs leading to high-output cardiac failure.

**Anomalies of Major Named Vessels**

They are also known as "channel type" or "truncal" vascular malformations, affecting lymphatics, arteries, and veins.

**Syndromic Malformations**

This includes Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, Parks Weber syndrome, Servelle Martorell syndrome, and Sturge-Weber syndrome.