Theophylline can be used as an oral agent (rapid or slow-release tablets, solution, syrup, or capsule) or in a more soluble form such as aminophylline (an ethylenediamine salt of theophylline) that can be dosed orally or intravenously. Cautiously administer theophylline in a patient who has consumed large amounts of foods or drinks with high caffeine content, which could increase the risk of side effects of theophylline.

**Intravenous (IV)**

Patients can be administered IV theophylline for acute bronchospasm. Those who are not currently taking theophylline should be given a loading dose of 5 to 7 mg/kg intravenously, followed by a maintenance dose of 0.4 to 0.6 mg/kg per hour intravenously to maintain serum concentrations at 10 to 15 mg/L.

IV aminophylline was previously a frequent therapy used to manage acute exacerbations of COPD and asthma but now sees much less frequent use, as it is far less effective than nebulized beta2-agonists. The currently recommended loading dose is 6 to 7 mg/kg administered intravenously over 20 to 30 minutes. After this, the patient receives a maintenance dose of 0.5 mg/kg per hour. In patients already taking theophylline, or those with any factors that decrease its clearance from the body, doses should be cut in half, and its plasma concentration is checked more frequently. In patients with cardiac decompensation, cor pulmonale, older patients, or those on medications that are known to decrease theophylline clearance, the infusion rate of theophylline should not be increased above 17 mg per hour unless the patient remains symptomatic, their steady-state serum concentrations are consistently below 10 mcg/mL, and their serum concentrations are observable at 24-hour intervals. Administering solutions comprising dextrose concurrently through the same administration route as blood may result in hemolysis or pseudo-agglutination and should be avoided.

**Oral**

Theophylline tablets are rapidly absorbed, but plasma concentrations show wide fluctuations and are therefore not currently recommended. Several sustained-release preparations that absorb at a relatively constant rate provide steady plasma concentrations of the drug over a 12 to 24-hour period. It should be taken consistently with or without food (as this helps maintain a more consistent serum drug concentration).

- The 12-hour formulation: Dosing can be once every 24-hours in patients who are non-smokers (who have appropriate total body clearance of theophylline) and in patients who have low dosage requirements. Only after theophylline has titrated to therapeutic concentrations in the patient can the 12-hour formulation be considered. The once-daily dosing should be based on the twice-daily dosing and initiated at the end of every 12-hour dosing interval. Do not give the once-daily dosing to the patient at night (after the evening meal).

- The 24-hour formulation: Take each morning around the same time and avoid taking it at night (after the evening meal). In patients whom a higher dose is required (13 mg/kg or greater than or equal to 900 mg, whichever one is less) should take the medication less than 60 minutes before a high-fat meal (as a significant increase in the peak serum concentrations and absorption could occur). Patients should consistently take theophylline either in a fasting state or with food (as this helps maintain a more consistent serum drug concentration). The twice-daily dosing could be a consideration for those who metabolize theophylline quickly (for example, smokers, younger patients, and some nonsmoking adults) and those who still have symptoms at the end of the dosing interval. The first dose should be in the morning and the second one around 10 to 12 hours after the first dose (but before eating the evening meal). Administration at night should be avoided.

**Other Routes**

Administering by inhalation is both irritating and ineffective. Administration of theophylline through intramuscular injections is very painful and should never be given.

**Dosing Considerations**

- If administering aminophylline, the dose should increase by 25% (as aminophylline is 79% to 86% theophylline).

- Dose calculations should use the ideal body weight.

- Aminophylline or immediate-release theophylline should be used for per-oral loading.