Evaluation of a patient with XGP requires an appropriate history, physical examination, and comprehensive lab work. The detailed laboratory and radiographic findings are explained below:

- Blood examination: Includes a complete blood count (CBC) with a differential that may show anemia and leukocytosis in a patient with XGP. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are often elevated. Renal function tests may show elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels. The liver function test is often abnormal due to mild biliary retention.

- Urine examination: Urinalysis may show signs of a urinary tract infection (UTI) that includes pyuria, bacteriuria, and hematuria. Urine culture shows the growth of organisms like Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas, Enterococcus faecalis, Klebsiella, etc.

- Radiographic imaging: Plain X-ray of the abdomen may show calculi, especially staghorn calculi. Renal ultrasonography may reveal hydronephrosis and loss of normal renal architecture. Computed tomography (CT) scan findings are most useful for diagnosing a case of XGP. CT scan with contrast may show replacement of the normal renal tissue by multiple, hypoechoic areas of the dilated collecting system that is surrounded by an enhanced rim of contrast medium that results in a multiloculated appearance (known as the "bear paw" sign).

- Biopsy: The pathognomonic finding is the lipid-laden foamy macrophages, which can be challenging to differentiate from clear cell carcinoma of the kidney.

- Immunohistochemical staining: In cases where differentiation between XGP and renal cell carcinoma is difficult, it has been found that patients with XGP stained positive for PAS (periodic acid Schiff) stain.

The preoperative diagnosis of XGP can be difficult due to the similar findings associated with renal cell carcinoma. CT scan helps differentiate these two conditions as well as knowing the extension of the disease. However, confirmatory diagnosis of XGP is made by pathological examination.