The peritoneum is the serous membrane lining the abdomen, which supports the abdominal viscera and provides a conduit for blood, lymph, and nerve conduction. It consists of two layers; the parietal peritoneum, attached with the abdominal wall, and the visceral peritoneum surrounding the organs. The space between the bilaminar layers is the abdominal cavity or coelom and contains the peritoneal fluid, which encloses abdominal organs and provides lubrication for peristaltic movements. Its volume is around 100ml.

The peritoneum is the largest dynamic membrane that can adapt according to different pathologies. Histologically, it consists of mesothelium and submesothelial connective tissue, separated by a thin basement membrane called basal lamina comprising of collagen IV and laminin. The elastic matrix is made of collagen I, III, and cells such as fibroblasts, adipocytes, and macrophages. It also hosts lymphatics and blood vessels. The mesodermal layer is derived from mesoderm and has both the characteristics of epithelial and mesenchymal cells. It acts as the first line of defense due to the tight junctions among the cells and also expresses cytokeratin, fibronectin, and other markers. It binds tumor cells with peritoneum. The peritoneal deposits occur at sites of immune cell aggregates, ‘milky spots’ named by Ranvier, and contain mesothelial cells and blood vessels. The submesothelial stroma causes adhesion to cancer cells via integrins and hence, penetration into the peritoneum.

The carcinogenesis of peritoneal cancers can be explained by ‘seed and soil theory’ given by Stephen Paget. It describes how a malignant tumor gives up cells (seeds) that travel in all directions but can only survive and multiply at tumor accepting localizations (soil).

The primary spread from the tumor is due to the extensive intramural growth beyond the serosal layers. The secondary seeding occurs in surgical tumor resections that result in the spillage of malignant cells. The first step is the detachment of cancer cells from the primary due to the down-regulation of intracellular adhesion molecules called E- Cadherin.

The adhesion molecules on mesothelial cells like intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), and vascular adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) interact with tumor cells’ receptors like CD44 and cytokines such as tumor necrosis alpha (TNFa), interleukin- 1beta, and interleukin-1gamma are released. Hence, the basement membrane is exposed. CD44 has a role in metastasis of colorectal and ovarian cancer.

EOPPC pathogenesis can be explained by the theory of retention of ‘differentiating potential’ by mesothelial cells of peritoneum. The cells undergo a malignant transformation called ‘Mullerian metaplasia’.

Histologically, psammoma bodies are characteristic of this tumor.

Asbestos exposure is linked to the development of MPM. Other risk factors are talc, mica, erionite, volcanic ash, radiation, and chronic peritonitis. Asbestos inhalation is responsible for causing cellular damage, which leads to carcinogenesis. The following essential processes explain it:

- Asbestos in the body produces reactive oxygen species damaging DNA.

- Asbestos fibers either physically disrupt the cell cycle genes by entering mesothelial cells or induce inflammation and tumorigenesis by releasing cytokines and growth factors from macrophages and mesothelial cells. Epigenetic modifiers like BRCA-1 associated protein-1 (BAP-1) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A/ alternative reading frame (CDKN2A/ARF) genes are specific for mesothelial cell transformation in MPM. High-mobility group box 1(HMGB1) produced by mesothelial cells causes necrosis, inflammation, and carcinogenesis. TNFa released by macrophages causes activation of nuclear factor-kb and promotes cell survival.

- Lastly, the large surface area of asbestos renders it to absorb more carcinogens, thus promoting malignancy.

Histologically, they are divided into epithelial, sarcomatous, and bimorphic types.

Leiomyosarcomas show variable smooth muscle actin and eosinophilic spindle cells. It is caused by a deletion in retinoblastoma gene1 (RB1) 10q and PTEN 13q. The mutations at TP53 also add to the risk.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor, a small round blue cell tumor, is associated with Ewing tumor family chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(p13;q12), causing the formation of EWSR1-WT1 fusion oncogene that result in tumor development.