**Structure**

The ACL is a band of specialized connective tissue located in the knee joint that connects the femur and the tibia. They are predominantly made up of collagen fibers, which make up 70% of their dry weight. Mostly type I collagen (90%) and a small amount of Type III collagen(10%).

The ACL is composed of two bundles: the anteromedial (AMB) and the posterolateral (PLB). The AMB fascicles arise from the most posterior and proximal site of the femoral attachment and attach to the anteromedial portion of the tibial attachment. The PLB fascicles arise from the distal portion of the femoral attachment and attach to the posterolateral portion of the tibial attachment. The ACL is mostly composed of the PLB.

**Function**

The ACL is a crucial element in stabilizing the knee joint. It primarily stabilizes the anterior tibial translation and plays a small role in resisting internal rotation and prevents any excessive movements.

Anterior Tibial Translation

The ACL functions as the primary restriction to anterior tibial translation with respect to the femur. When the knee is extended, the anterior tibial translation is low (maximum 2 mm) and supports the knee while standing. With knee flexion, the anterior tibial translation can increase up to 3 mm while walking and up to approximately 6 mm under anterior load.

Internal rotation

The ACL also functions as the secondary restraint to internal rotation, especially when the joint is close to full extension. In a study by Fleming et al., an internal torque of the tibia between 0-10 Nm resulted in the ACL strain in vivo.