Before detailing the technical nuances of non-surgical rhinoplasty, it is worth reiterating that the clinician should always follow safe injection techniques when placing filler in the nose. These include injecting into an avascular sub-SMAS plane (directly above the perichondrium or periosteum), staying midline when possible (also helps prevent asymmetries), aspirating to assess for intravascular needle/cannula placement, injecting slowly, placing small aliquots of filler at a time, and minimizing the number of injection sites. Lastly, the use of a blunt-tipped cannula may increase the safety of nonsurgical rhinoplasty by theoretically reducing the likelihood of intravascular injection.

The approach to non-surgical rhinoplasty is relatively uncomplicated and relies on making incremental enhancements to the cartilage and bony framework of the nose. Nevertheless, multiple non-surgical rhinoplasty techniques exist with variations on what type of filler to use, the order of injection, the specific injection technique employed (e.g., droplet, threading, need for subcision), location of filler, and the amount of filler required.

Regardless of the technique employed, reproducible, and satisfactory results are attainable if safe injection techniques and an anatomic-based treatment plan are executed. For those trained in surgical rhinoplasty, the graft-based technique (wherein the filler simulates the effects of a similarly positioned cartilage graft) represents the most intuitive approach.

Herein, we list several areas that can be addressed with non-surgical rhinoplasty and describe key maneuvers required to produce safe and reliable results:

**Radix/dorsal augmentation**: First, the desired height of the radix and dorsum is determined, as well as the amount of supratip break (if any). The selected areas of the radix and/or dorsum are then filled with a 30-gauge needle using a series of droplets precisely placed in the midline with a 90-degree inclination. Alternatively, dorsal augmentation is achievable using a cannula introduced via the supratip and advanced in a sub-SMAS plane up to the height of the desired augmentation but not beyond the nasion. The cannula bevel should be faced down, and the filler injected in a retrograde fashion. In either approach (needle or cannula), the skin should be tented upwards to mitigate vascular occlusion. Some authors recommend placing a finger above the radix to prevent superior filler migration. Typically, 0.5 mL is an appropriate amount of filler for full dorsal augmentation. Immediate massage and molding will help to ensure smooth contour. NOTE: some authors advocate that dorsal augmentation with HA requires slight overcorrection to account for the immediate post-injection edema. If significant overcorrection occurs during the procedure, this can usually be addressed with molding and massage.

**Dorsal convexity (hump) camouflage**: The illusion of hump reduction is a relatively straightforward maneuver achieved by strategically augmenting the midline dorsum with a few precise needle injections placed cephalad and/or caudad to the existing dorsal convexity. An amount of 0.2 mL per injection site is typical. As with dorsal augmentation, radix height and supratip break must be determined before injecting.

**Straightening the crooked nose**: Just as surgically placed onlay grafts and/or asymmetric spreader grafts help to straighten a crooked nose, so too does carefully placed filler along the dorsum and nasal sidewall provide camouflage to contour irregularities of the mid to upper third of the nose. Of note, extra care should be taken when injecting laterally on the nose due to the vascular arcade (see ANATOMY above). In particular, direct injection in the region of the alar groove should be avoided to avoid intravascular injection of the lateral nasal artery. For this reason, some advocate adhering to midline injections while using massage and molding to lateralize the filler into the desired location.

**Premaxillary deficiency**: Besides presenting as an obvious alar base discrepancy, asymmetry of the premaxilla can promote tip asymmetry as well as alar-columellar discrepancies (e.g., ipsilateral ala retraction). Like the premaxillary graft in surgical rhinoplasty, filler can be placed under the alar base to correct this asymmetry. Importantly, the filler should be injected deeply on the maxilla from a medial position to avoid vascular complications. Injection with a cannula is our preferred technique of injection in this region.

**Tip projection**: Like the effects of various tip-projecting grafts in surgical rhinoplasty (e.g., tip graft, shield graft, caudal septal extension grafts, etc.), so too can filler be used to augment tip projection. Safe tip injection techniques include placing very small aliquots of filler in a location that will correspond to the desired tip defining point. Depending on the clinician’s experience, an infratip or supratip approach are both options. Regardless of the method used, filler should be injected at the depth of the perichondrium. Injection directly between the domes should be avoided to prevent splaying of the domes, which can result in inadvertent tip widening. If the infratip lobule warrants augmentation as well, and further injection can be placed to replicate a shield graft. Also, the supratip area is modifiable with careful filler placement depending on the desired supratip break. NOTE: supratip augmentation should always be performed after tip projection maneuvers to avoid the risk of iatrogenic Polly beak deformity.

**Tip rotation**: Increasing the tip rotation using fillers represents an advanced technique in non-surgical rhinoplasty that is achievable in a variety of ways. Firstly, the illusion of increased rotation can be created by blunting the nasolabial angle with an injection placed deeply into the subnasale along the anterior nasal spine. Generally, approximately 0.5 mL of filler suffices. Secondly, filler can be deeply injected in the intercolumnar space between the medial crura footplates adjacent to the posterior septal angle (PSA). This deep intercolumnar space injection essentially acts as a columellar strut and lengthens the central leg of the tripod as described by Anderson, thus causing increased tip rotation (and projection).

**Alar rim contouring**: Similar to a rim graft’s effect on the contour of the ala, filler can be placed along the alar rim to correct slight alar retraction or asymmetry. Care is in order when injecting the alar rims in patients who have undergone previous rhinoplasty, as the blood supply post-operatively remains rather tenuous due to the previous marginal incision.

**Functional applications**: As mentioned previously, injectable fillers placed into the scroll, internal nasal valve, alar rims, and nasal sidewall have been used to address nasal valve insufficiency by simulating the effects of various functional grafts (e.g., spreaders, alar battens, butterfly grafts, strut grafts, alar rim grafts) or implants (e.g., poly-L-lactic acid). This application of fillers in non-surgical rhinoplasty, however, remains controversial.