The definitive treatment of pheochromocytoma is surgical resection.

**Unilateral pheochromocytomas:**Most sporadic tumors are unilateral.

Minimally invasive adrenalectomy: Per endocrine society guidelines, minimally invasive adrenalectomy (laparoscopic) is the preferred treatment for most unilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas.

Open adrenalectomy: This can be considered in larger adrenal pheochromocytomas or in cases where the tumor is considered invasive.

**Bilateral pheochromocytomas:**These are most commonly associated with hereditary cases, particularly multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) and von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease.

Bilateral partial or cortical sparing adrenalectomy (open or laparoscopic) is an option in these cases and has demonstrated similar survival despite tumor recurrence and preservation of adrenocortical function with reduced need for lifelong glucocorticoid replacement therapy.

**Preoperative Preparation**

No randomized studies are available to guide approaches for medical optimization before surgery. It is, however, well recognized that initiation of medical therapy in the preoperative period is associated with a lower risk of uncontrolled hypertension (including hypertensive crises), tachycardia, and volume expansion in the perioperative period.

Per endocrine society guidelines, the initial drugs of choice for preoperative preparation are alpha-adrenergic receptor blockers.

At least 3 to 4 days after initiation of alpha-blockers, beta-blockers (propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol) are initiated to control tachycardia. These agents should not be initiated without prior alpha blockade because of the risk of precipitating hypertensive crisis due to unopposed alpha-receptor stimulation.

Calcium channel blockers (amlodipine and nifedipine) are alternative/add-on agents that effectively control hypertension in the preoperative period.

Volume contraction associated with catecholamine excess in pheochromocytoma patients can be managed with the initiation of a high-sodium diet a few days after the initiation of an alpha blockade. This can also decrease the risk of hypotension after surgery.

The cornerstones in perioperative management include:

- Preventing catecholamine surge through minimal handling of the lesion, preventing spillage of the tumor content (especially in cystic lesions), and early control of the adrenal vein.

- Managing sudden decrease in peripheral vascular resistance (hypotension) following surgical removal of the lesion.