**Overwhelming Post-Splenectomy Infection (OPSI)**

OPSI is a syndrome that is encountered in post-splenectomy, hyposplenic and functional asplenic patients. Bacteremia caused by encapsulated microorganisms characterize the syndrome. The syndrome might present without a visible primary source of infection, and with a short prodromal phase, Clinical presentations include septic shock, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, and bilateral adrenal hemorrhage. OPSI is a medical emergency and administration of antibiotics should be administered promptly along with supportive measures. Hyposplenic patients might already be on prophylactic antibiotics, and hence, cultures might be negative; however, antibiotic therapy should continue. Empiric parental antibiotic therapy should include vancomycin and either cefotaxime or ceftriaxone. Although the efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin  (IVIg) treatment for asplenic sepsis has not been proven, some experts recommend its administration in this situation. The morbidity of OPSI is high, and death may result in 24 to 48 hours, with mortality rates of 50% to 70%. This syndrome has been observed up to 10 to 30 years post-diagnosis with hyposplenism. Some series indicate that the risk of OPSI decreases with the time elapsed since splenectomy, while other studies do not show a significant reduction. The most commonly reported pathogen in OPSI is Streptococcus pneumoniae.

**Thrombocytosis**

Functional asplenism is almost always associated with secondary elevation of platelet count because the spleen is the main site of platelets’ destruction. However, this is not seen in patients with liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension. These patients present with thrombocytopenia rather than thrombocytosis due to impaired liver function. Thrombocytosis increases the risk of thrombotic events. Venous thrombosis in patients with asplenism is associated with platelet counts greater than 600 to 800 k/microliter and occurs in approximately 5% of patients. Thrombocytosis can also cause arterial thrombosis leading to myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accidents. Some patients are advised by their doctors to take aspirin or even a cytoreductive agent such as hydroxyurea or anagrelide to reduce the risk of thrombotic events.