Contrast-enhanced esophageal imaging provides excellent demarcation of the anatomy and is effective in detecting perforations. There are different types of contrast media that can be utilized, including water-soluble iodinated high osmolality agents and water-soluble non-ionic agents for preliminary detection of perforation. These are generally followed by barium sulfate in cases where initial esophagram is negative, but suspicion for the presence of injury remains high. It should be noted that because of the possibility of significant esophageal inflammation and edema in the setting of injury, the false-negative rate of esophagograms approximates 10%.

Computed tomography (CT) is useful to evaluate nontransmural esophageal perforations not detected on esophagram. CT may help establish the full extent of an injury and guide any subsequent therapeutic interventions. Some clinical scenarios where CT has high utility include negative early esophagram with continued high clinical suspicion; in patients who are uncooperative, neurologically impaired, and/or critically ill; and cases involving simultaneous vascular and airway injuries. Findings on CT imaging may include gas and fluid gathering around the esophagus; esophageal wall thickening; and radiographic evidence of inflamed mucosa. Finally, air or air-fluid collection in the mediastinum, pleural effusion(s), pneumocardium and pneumoperitoneum may also be seen. A chest and upper abdominal CT study with oral contrast are most likely to demonstrate a leak from thoracic or abdominal esophageal perforations.

Flexible esophagoscopy has clinical utility in penetrating trauma because it provides direct visualization of the EI and has a sensitivity of nearly 100% with a specificity of about 85%. On the other hand, the role of esophagoscopy in nonpenetrating EIs is inconclusive at best.  Because it requires air insufflation, flexible esophagoscopy, is contraindicated with small mucosal or submucosal tears because it may exacerbate the perceived severity of the injury/perforation and thus lead to inappropriate subsequent management.  Although generally not indicated as the initial diagnostic tool, endoscopy may be justified for use in the setting of continued suspicion of injury despite negative CT scans and esophagograms, as well as in the setting of the history of GERD or peptic ulcer disease.

Early diagnosis of esophageal perforation is associated with improved morbidity and mortality. Because EIs are rare, and their initial symptoms tend to be vague, a high degree of suspicion, in conjunction with a thorough physical examination and consideration of injury mechanism in the context of pertinent anatomy, may help optimize the management of EIs.