The management of WE is complex and usually requires a team approach. Because the disorder can present with various manifestations, the patient is best managed by a neurologist and an intensivist. Other specialists may be required according to organ involvement. The role of the nurse, dietitian, social worker, and pharmacist cannot be overemphasized. These patients are sick, frail and malnourished. A dietary consult should be done to assess the calorie needs and determine how to provide the food as well as thiamine. Since many WE patients are managed as outpatients, the pharmacist should encourage abstinence from alcohol. Since the cornerstone of therapy is thiamine, the importance of compliance is vital. At the same time, the electrolyte deficiencies should be corrected. Finally, the family should be educated about the prognosis of these individuals and make preparations for long-term care, in case the patient develops korsakoff syndrome. Close communication between members of the team is vital to ensure that the patient is receiving the current standard of care treatment. The ultimate goal is to improve the quality of life and lessen the burden on the family.

**Outcomes**

WE is a serious medical disorder which carries enormous morbidity and mortality. Even when the condition is managed with thiamine, the global confusion usually improves rapidly, but the ataxia and ophthalmoplegia may persist for some time. Patients who minimal or neurological signs have the best outcomes with thiamine supplement. However, survivors of WE may develop korsakoff psychosis and require long-term institutionalization. Of these, less than 10% will recover to be discharged from long-term care. A significant number of patients will have long-term neurological deficits like ataxia, nystagmus and korsakoff syndrome, which seriously diminishes the quality of life. Unfortunately, there are no long-term follow-up studies and anecdotal reports indicate that many of these patients do die prematurely.