The consideration for the need for comfort measures should be in the back of the treating physician's mind as they provide care to severely ill patients whether admitted to the hospital or seen in the clinic. This is especially important while treating acutely sick patients in multiple organ failure, including those in respiratory failure on mechanical ventilation or patients who are diagnosed with advanced-stage cancer or neurodegenerative diseases.

Terminally ill patients, especially those likely to die within the next 30 days, should be communicated about the 'goals of care,' including their preferences for 'end-of-life' care. This is the most important part of this process and needs to be handled in a delicate, sensitive, and empathetic manner keeping in mind any cultural and religious differences if present. The aim is to provide honest information with realistic expectations while preserving hope.

While direct communication to the patient is preferable, in many instances, it is not possible due to the patient's clinical condition, rapidity of their deterioration, or other factors, then the legal surrogate of the patient needs to be talked to. It is important to confirm the legal status of the surrogate medical decision-maker, especially in complex social situations, before proceeding with any important medical discussion. Once this is established, it is helpful to have one team member designated to be the medical team representative. This helps build mutual trust and maintain the continuity of care.