Conservative management with serial imaging and observation, microsurgical resection, and stereotactic radiosurgery are the 3 main options for the management of cerebral cavernomas. When discussing treatment options, the risks of intervention versus the risks of having an untreated cavernous malformation must be weighed carefully. The natural history of cavernous malformations, clinical presentation, lesion location, number of hemorrhagic events, and medical comorbidities help guide this discussion.

According to the Cerebral Cavernous Malformations Care Guidelines published in 2017 by the Angioma Alliance (https://www.angioma.org/for-professionals/clinicians/ccm-care-guidelines), surgical resection is not recommended for asymptomatic cavernous malformations. This is particularly true for multiple lesions or situations in which the lesions are located in deep, eloquent, or brainstem tissue. Surgical resection may be considered for a solitary asymptomatic cavernous malformation if the lesion is in a non-eloquent and accessible location. In those cases, the benefits to resection may include prevention of hemorrhage, reduction of time and costs of follow-up, relief of psychological burden, lifestyle or career decisions, or facilitation of future anti-coagulation if needed.

As per those same guidelines, early surgical resection should be considered for medically refractory epilepsy when the epileptogenic focus is related to the cavernoma. Such early intervention may prevent a "kindling" effect and improve the likelihood of seizure freedom. For symptomatic and easily accessible cavernous hemangiomas, it has been suggested that morbidity and mortality associated with surgery are approximately equivalent to the risk of living with a cavernoma for 2 years. For symptomatic and deeply located cavernomas, morbidity and mortality associated with surgical resection may be considered to be approximately equivalent to living with the cavernoma for 5 to 10 years. While surgery is not typically recommended for brainstem cavernomas due to a significant risk of complications, many recommend operating after a second symptomatic bleed due to the concept that those cavernomas may have a more aggressive natural course. Indications for resection of brainstem cavernomas after a single disabling hemorrhage or spinal cavernomas are more controversial.

For cases undergoing surgical resection, steroids may be considered 1 to 2 weeks before surgery to reduce edema and aid with resection. Resection of any associated developmental venous anomalies should be strictly avoided due to potential venous infarction. Complete removal of the lesion is required to prevent recurrent hemorrhages. If the surgery is being performed for seizures, the hemosiderin-stained surrounding neural parenchyma and gliosis should also be resected when feasible. After surgery, MRI within 72 hours is recommended to ensure complete resection. Some authors report a 40% risk of rebleeding of cavernoma remnants after partial resection.

Stereotactic radiosurgery has been proposed as an alternative to microsurgery for treatment, although the effect of radiosurgery on reducing risks of re-bleeding remains controversial. Even for proponents of the technique, radiosurgery is thought to have a 2-year latency period before optimal risk reduction of recurrent hemorrhage occurs. While microsurgical resection remains the standard treatment for cavernomas, stereotactic radiosurgery is an option for solitary symptomatic lesions with an unacceptably high surgical risk.

For patients with a newly diagnosed cerebral cavernoma and with no history of brain radiation, no positive family history, or multiple cavernous malformations, genetic testing should be considered. If a positive mutation is found, genetic counseling should be offered to the patient and family.

Medical treatment (still in trial stage) with ROCK inhibitor, statins (with multiple effects including Rho inhibition), vitamin D, and B-cell depletion has shown to decrease hemorrhage in cavernomas.