Clindamycin is FDA-approved to treat septicemia, intra-abdominal infections, lower respiratory infections, gynecological infections, bone, and joint infections, and skin and skin structure infections. Clindamycin is also used to treat streptococcal pharyngitis, acne vulgaris, bacterial vaginosis, and severe pelvic inflammatory disease. Although not a first-line treatment, The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) has published guidelines for using intravenous (IV) clindamycin for the inpatient treatment of community-acquired pneumonia and aspiration pneumonia. Dentists will use clindamycin for prophylactic coverage against endocarditis. Anesthesiologists and surgeons will often administer clindamycin per The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) and IDSA guidelines as prophylaxis in the operating room. Gynecologists use clindamycin in combination with gentamycin +/- ampicillin for covering their patients with endometritis. It can also be an alternative to metronidazole for treating Gardnerella vaginosis, which presents with gray, fishy vaginal odor with clue cells on wet prep.

Additionally, clindamycin can be used to treat babesiosis, anthrax, and malaria. Clindamycin is also commonly used in skin and soft tissue infections that are uncomplicated. Clindamycin is used in soft tissue infections due to its efficacy against MRSA. Clindamycin is also a choice for outpatient treatment because of its cost, availability, and effectiveness against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.