The clinician or medical care professional must obtain informed consent. A timeout should take place to confirm the patient and correct joint. The most crucial step is having the patient lay in a comfortable position with the affected knee fully extended or flexed at 15 to 20 degrees with a towel roll under the knee. This position helps to facilitate procedure success by ensuring quadriceps muscle relaxation. The clinician should then locate the patella. The clinician may mark it with a marking pen.

The knee is the largest synovial cavity in the body and is easily accessible from either the medial or lateral aspect, and superior, inferior at the midpoint of the patella.

Sterilize area and drape in a typical sterile fashion.

Choose the approach, then use a small syringe and small-bore needle, draw up lidocaine and anesthetize superficial skin and then deeper tissue in the projected trajectory of joint aspiration to anesthetize the track.

- For the midpoint approach, insert an 18 g needle with 30 cc to 60 cc syringe one cm lateral or medial to the patella, directing the needle posterior and horizontal toward the intercondylar notch of the femur.

- Make sure to pull back on the syringe while inserting and stop once you aspirate synovial fluid.

- Attempt to aspirate as much fluid as possible.

- The superior approach is performed one cm superior and one cm medial or lateral to the patella, directing towards the femur's intercondylar notch.

- The infrapatellar approach requires the patient to be sitting upright, with the knee flexed at 90 degrees. Needle insertion is five mm below the patella's inferior border while also directing posterior to the patellar tendon, making this a less desirable approach.

“Milking” or compressing the joint can help facilitate the aspiration of fluid.

Transfer fluid to specimen tubes. Remove the needle from the joint and place bandage over the insertion site.