**Hepatitis A**

Hepatitis A virus is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the family Picornaviridae.

The virus is mostly transmitted through the fecal-oral route. This is most prevalent in developing countries with poor hygiene and sanitation, which results in food and water contamination. The virus can be transmitted through sexual contact and rarely through blood exposure in injecting drug users during a blood transfusion**.**

The average incubation period for hepatitis A is 30 days. Hepatitis A virus has the highest concentration in the feces, serum, and saliva, respectively. Hepatitis A is also transmitted through sexual contact. There has been no report of chronic sequelae among persons infected with hepatitis A. Intrauterine and perinatal transmission of Hepatitis A is a rare occurrence.

**Hepatitis B**

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an enveloped virus, partially double-stranded virus, circular DNA genome, and belonging to the family Hepadnavirus. Chronic hepatitis B infection is associated with cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Hepatitis B virus does not cross the placenta and cannot infect the fetus unless there have been breaks in the maternal-fetal barrier. Perinatal transmission accounts for more than 50% of cases worldwide. Pregnant women with chronic hepatitis B and positive hepatitis B virus E antigen (HBeAg) have a 90% likelihood of their newborns being infected with the hepatitis B virus.

Other modes of transmission include sexual intercourse, body fluids, and blood transfusion.

**Hepatitis C**

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a partially double-stranded, plus-sense RNA virus with 11 major genotypes and 15 different subtypes.

Acute hepatitis C infection occurs during the first 6 months after exposure. Failure to clear the Hepatitis C virus after 6 months would progress to chronic hepatitis C.Hepatitis C is a major cause of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide.

The major mode of transmission of HCV is mostly through parental transmission, which includes infected blood transmission, intravenous drug users sharing needles, sexual contact, and mother-to-child transmission.

Invasive procedures such as amniocentesis and chronic villus sampling break the maternal-fetal barrier. This increases the risk of vertical transmission of the hepatitis C virus during pregnancy and delivery.

**Hepatitis D**

Hepatitis D is caused by the hepatitis delta virus (HDV), a single-stranded, circular RNA and a defective virus with an incomplete RNA requiring the assistance of the Hepatitis B virus, specifically hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), to be infectious.

Hepatitis D is mostly transmitted through the same route as the Hepatitis B virus. The parenteral mode is the major mode of transmission, and vertical transmission during pregnancy is rare.

Coinfection of Hepatitis D virus and Hepatitis B virus leads to severe acute infection. Superinfection of Hepatitis D virus on chronic HBV leads to higher progression to chronic Hepatitis D.

**Hepatitis E**

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is an icosahedral, non-enveloped virus with a single-stranded, positive RNA virus classified into the family Hepeviridae and the genus Orthohepeviurs. There about 7 genotypes of the Hepatitis E virus, and genotypes 1-4 are known to affect humans.

The main transmission route for HEV infection is the fecal-oral route and is most prevalent in developing countries with poor sanitation. Vertical transmission of the Hepatitis E virus varies between 23.3% and 50%.

Sporadic case not associated with travel has been reported in developed countries, and this is mostly caused by genotype 3, which is mostly attributed to the immunocompromised state.

Hepatitis E virus has rarely been reported to be transmitted through sexual intercourse.