**Negative Autopsy**

An autopsy without any positive findings that fail to reveal the cause of death with gross, microscopic, toxicological, and other necessary ancillary investigation is said to be a negative autopsy.

**Obscure Autopsy**

A complete, meticulous autopsy with its ancillaries that fails to serve the purpose of ascertaining the cause of death, despite the presence of trivial/unclear/obscure findings, is termed an obscure autopsy. An ill-informed opinion often turns out to be worse than no opinion at all. Absent an opinion, the legal authority investigating the death will be at least aware of the lacunae in his/her evidence/investigation, rather than deceived by the speculative or orchestrated statements made by the autopsy surgeon/forensic pathologist.

In general, a negative or obscure autopsy is one where the cause of death remains unascertained despite a complete, meticulous autopsy, including ancillary laboratory tests. Such autopsies where the cause of death remains undermined despite a meticulous workup of the cases are not uncommon in forensic practice.

**Second Autopsy**

A second autopsy is the one that follows the first autopsy on the same body. Some of the circumstances for a second autopsy include a repatriated body and exhumation of a previously autopsied body.

**Exhumation**

Exhumation is the lawful disinterment of a previously buried body, for medicolegal purposes, where a postmortem examination is an imperative task. The exhumation is followed by either the first autopsy or a re-autopsy in light of new suspicious information.

Exhumations are usually carried out for one of the following reasons

- Where new relevant information or substantiated allegations suggesting death due to criminal action, either from poison or injury, arise:

- For instance, in Tunisia, a body buried in 1979 without an autopsy was exhumed in 2011 more than 30 years later as the relatives were doubtful of the reported cause of death.
- A forensic autopsy conducted on an exhumed body in Switzerland a year after burial revealed the actual cause of death with the revision of the manner of death from natural to accidental
- The first president of the Palestinian National Authority, Yasser Arafat's remains were exhumed in 2012 - the new probe into Arafat's 2004 death came after a Swiss laboratory reported traces of a deadly radioactive isotope, polonium-210, on his clothing.

- Where confirmation of identity is deemed necessary for various civil and criminal purposes

- Where the first postmortem examination report is inexplicable or ambiguous

Stringent measures must be in place to identify the grave and the coffin (if applicable) so that there is no mistake in exhuming the body to be autopsied.

**Autopsy Artifacts**

The interpretation of the external and internal postmortem examination findings is of utmost importance to the criminal justice system as the autopsy surgeon's expert opinion has a bearing on the outcome of the case decided by the Court of Law. In this context, the autopsy surgeon should be aware of artifacts (resuscitation artifacts, agonal artifacts, and postmortem artifacts) that may be present during an autopsy.

To quote, "A postmortem artifact is regarded as any change produced in the body or any feature introduced into the body, after death, that often leads to much confusion about its nature and causation, and often results in misinterpretation of medicolegally significant antemortem findings or is itself wrongly considered as a significant antemortem finding".