The normal onset and sequence of physical maturation vary greatly based on sex, race and ethnicity, and environmental factors. Tanner Stages are utilized in pediatric and adolescent practice to counsel patients about the timing of anticipated body changes, perform appropriate medical screenings, and monitor for deviations in normal timing and sequence of physical signs of puberty that may represent physiologic problems. Changes that are associated with but not directly measured by Tanner staging include bone growth and fusion, body composition and linear growth, and hematocrit values. Tanner Staging, rather than chronological age, should be used in assessing pubertal development. Clinical examples of use include delivering timely anticipatory guidance on menstrual hygiene needs (menarche occurs about 2 years post-thelarche/tanner 2 breasts) or targeting scoliosis exams at well-visits before and during peak height velocity (Tanner 2 to 3, depending on sex).

In females, the normal onset of puberty ranges from 8 to 13 years old, averaging age 10 years in White Americans and age 8.9 years in African-Americans. Puberty in females begins with the development of breast buds under the areola, also known as thelarche, and represents entry into Tanner Stage 2. As puberty progresses, the glandular tissue of the breast increases in size and changes in contour. In females, thelarche is followed in 1 to 1.5 years by the onset of sexual hair (pubic and axillary), known as pubarche. Menarche, the onset of menses, arrives on average at age 12.5 years, regardless of ethnicity, following thelarche on average by 2.5 years (range 0.5 to 3 years).  Between Tanner Stage 2 and 3 breast development, females experience peak height velocity. African-American females have closer to 3 years between their thelarche and menarche, accounting for greater height potential.

In males, the onset of puberty ranges from 9 to 14 years of age. The first secondary sexual characteristic visible is gonadarche when the testicular volume reaches greater than or equal to 4 mL (or long axis greater than or equal to 2.5 cm) and enters tanner stage 2. During Tanner Stage 3 genital development, males undergo peak height velocity. Spermarche, the counterpart of menarche in females, is the development of sperm in males and typically occurs during genital Tanner Stage 4.