The care of patients with radiation enteritis is interprofessional. Besides the surgeon, radiation oncologist, gastroenterologist, and radiologist, the nurse and dietitian is a vital member of the team. While not all complications of radiation enteritis can be prevented, the patient's nutritional state should be improved prior to any surgery. The patient should be educated about the potential complications and the need for repeat surgery. The patient should be seen by a stoma nurse in case a colostomy or ileostomy is performed during surgery. More important the patient should be told about the short bowel syndrome and the need for long-term parenteral nutrition. After surgery, routine surgical complications like deep vein thrombosis and atelectasis should be prevented with prophylactic treatment with LWMH and the use of the incentive spirometer, respectively. Finally, the family and the patient should be educated on end-of-life preparation and designation of a power of attorney.

**Outcomes**

When surgery is performed on the radiated intestine, this carries high morbidity and mortality. Complications that can result include non-healing of wounds, a breakdown of the intestinal anastomosis, pelvic abscess, secondary malignancy, and fistula formation. An anastomotic leak can carry a mortality rate of 30-50% in the presence of radiation enteritis. Even those who survive may require additional surgical procedures to repair the fistula. And the repeat surgery also carries additional mortality. The quality of life for patients who suffer from complications of radiation enteritis is poor.