Clinical suspicion for a particular lysosomal storage disease (LSD) precedes the screening tests. Many LSDs have similar features between themselves and, with other non-lysosomal inborn errors of metabolism and diligence is required. Urine and serum screening tests: Urine GAG elevation points to MPS, an oligosaccharide pattern glycoproteinosis, sialic acid in sialic acid storage disorders, and sulfatide excretion in MLD. A serum CK elevation suggests Pompe disease, while chitotriosidase suggests Gaucher or Niemann-Pick C disease.

The dried blood spot (DBS) specimen that has been so successful in other treatable inborn metabolic errors is useful in diagnosing LSDs. It is especially true in newborn screening programs performed with multiplex assays using mass spectroscopy (MS).

A positive screen may include many false positives and negatives, which will need confirmation with specific enzyme assays and molecular analyses in serum/plasma, leucocytes from peripheral blood, cultured cell lines like skin fibroblasts and lymphoblasts. Leucocytes have isoenzymes that may cause assay interference. Skin fibroblasts are "gold standard" because of optimum enzyme activity but need a skin biopsy and culture facilities. The cultures, however, can be maintained indefinitely and may be useful in biobanking. Cultured lymphoblasts obtained by Ebstein-Barr virus transformation from a peripheral blood sample is another choice. Still, some enzymes (Arylsulfatase A, for example) are inherently absent and unhelpful in those situations.

Enzyme assays performed with fluorimetric methods are simple to use than the more expensive but fast and accurate liquid chromatography with mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS). More and more sophisticated modifications are available and useful in research settings.

In some situations, a patient has a low enzyme level and normal urinary substrate levels but has no clinical symptoms or signs of the disease. These healthy enzyme deficient persons have a condition called pseudodeficiency. They have between 5 and 15 percent enzyme activity than normals sufficient to metabolize the substrates and prevent their accumulation and explain their health status. Such persons must be recognized promptly to avoid misdiagnosis and its deleterious consequences. They have a mutation in the gene encoding the enzyme in one or both copies forming a pseudoallele gene (Pd). Such Pd patterns are constant in some LSDs and easily recognized and aid in genetic counseling. Pathogenic variants are also characteristic in some LSDs that are easily spotted and action taken. In some LSDs, the Pd is more common than the pathogenic variant (Arylsulfatase A in MLD; 15 versus 1 percent) and, the concept gains much importance. Pseudodeficiency occurs in 9 genes in LSDs. **Table E**lists these LSDs, the enzymes, and their genes.

Molecular genetic techniques can diagnose mutations in the genes encoding the enzymes. Examples are:

1) Restriction fragment length polymorphism by polymerase chain reaction(RFLP-PCR) 2): Amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) PCR for detecting point mutations which may be missense, nonsense, splicing, regulatory, small or gross insertions and deletions, or complex ones. Other techniques used are mutation scanning, DNA sequencing, multiplex-PCR, and next-generation sequencing (NGS).

The final diagnosis of an LSD should rest on the combined evidence from clinical, biochemical, radiological, and genetic information.

Apart from the tests for the specific diagnosis of the LSD, investigations to address organ damage are necessary. The individual patient's condition dictates these tests. They are:

- X-rays

- MRI scans

- EKG, echocardiogram

- Audiometry, Visual assessment

- Pulmonary function tests

- Hemogram, liver and renal function, and many more.

Many of them may need to be repeated periodically as part of treatment monitoring.

A patient clinically suspected of having an LSD, but with normal enzyme levels and no mutation in the enzyme coding gene should be further investigated. Such patients can have a mutation in the gene for the enzyme activator. A protein called prosaposin (PSAP) has four subunits A, B, C, and D. A gene codes for prosaposin. The code for each subunit occupies separate points on the gene. The prosaposin protein is cleaved into its subunit components. Each subunit functions as an activator protein for a specific enzyme. In the absence of its activator, the normal enzyme is rendered functionless. The substrate accumulates and may leak into the urine; examples are MLD (saposin B) and Gaucher disease (saposin C).

Prenatal screening using amniocentesis and chorionic villus biopsy is available for many LSDs. It helps families with an index case that caused fetal or infantile death and helps in genetic counseling.

Newborn screening for LSDs has gained acceptance over the years. It has increased the diagnostic yield many folds, especially of the adult phenotypes. The screen panel has included more LSDs as newer treatments are becoming available.

The application of the principles of both targeted and untargeted metabolomics is an exciting new area that has promise in both the diagnosis and treatment monitoring of LSDs in the future.