Zafirlukast has a 40% reduction in bioavailability with food; therefore, tablets should be taken on an empty stomach, at least 1-hour pre-prandial or 2 hours post-prandial. Chewable zafirlukast tablets contain up to 0.842 mg of phenylalanine.

- For chronic asthma, the dose should be administered on an empty stomach, twice daily, and 10 to 12 hours apart as the half-life of zafirlukast is 8 to 16 hours. The recommended dosage is 20 mg twice daily for adults and children over 12 years. The recommended dose for children aged five to eleven is 10 mg twice daily. There is no clinical data on the safety of zafirlukast in children under five years old, and it is not indicated for this age group.

Zafirlukast takes 2 to 6 weeks for optimal effect and does not reverse acute bronchospasm. Therefore, zafirlukast should not be used for acute asthma exacerbations or status asthmaticus.

- For asthma with allergic rhinitis, a dose of 20 mg twice daily for two weeks has improved symptoms.

- For chronic urticaria, a dose of 20 mg twice daily for 3 to 6 weeks has improved outcomes.

- For exercise-induced asthma, a dose of 20 mg twice daily for two weeks has been shown to help prevent exercise-induced bronchospasm within 8 hours of dosing.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**Zafirlukast does not require dose adjustment for patients with renal disease

- **Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Patients with hepatic impairment should not use zafirlukast as hepatic clearance will be impaired, and there will be a 50 to 60% increase in the maximum plasma concentration.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Zafirlukast is a Pregnancy Category B drug based on reassuring animal studies and no reported evidence of major fetal malformations in humans.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**There is a lack of data on zafirlukast during breastfeeding; however, the manufacturer's labeling indicates that zafirlukast's concentration in milk is low. Hence, If the mother requires zafirlukast, it is not a reason to discontinue breastfeeding. However, an alternate therapy may be preferred, especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.