Treatment of TEV is typically non-operative in the majority of cases. Before the 1990s, most orthopedists managing a patient with TEV used the method described by Hiram Kite. However, Ignacio Ponseti developed a new way of non-operative management, which became widely popular in the 1990s. The success of the Ponseti method has been reported at greater than 90 percent in multiple studies. The Ponseti process involves serial manipulation and casting of the affected limb(s). The molding should not be forceful or painful. The clinician spends about one minute manipulating the foot before casting. The affected limb is cast with weekly cast changes. Initially, the cast is placed with the forefoot supinated. The goal is to align the forefoot and hindfoot with the first metatarsal dorsiflexion. Subsequent casts are placed with gradual forefoot abduction around the talar head. Casting will also bring the calcaneus into valgus or eversion. Typically, after 3-4 casts, the only remaining deformity will be equinus, which is addressed by casting in gradual dorsiflexion. Scher states that percutaneous Achilles tenotomy is required in 80%-90% of cases to correct equinus.

Surgical management for TEV consists of anterior tibialis tendon transfer, midfoot osteotomies, distal tibial hemiepiphysiodesis, posterior ankle, and subtalar release. These are typically utilized after relapse or failure of non-surgical management. Weakness in eversion with inversion while dorsiflexing the foot can be seen after non-operative management. Weakness is typically managed with an anterior tibialis tendon transfer. Before anterior tibialis tendon transfer, the foot must have recovery of the initial correction. The foot must be able to evert to at least neutral passively. For children greater than 2.5 years of age, the anterior tibialis tendon is transferred from its insertion on the base of the first metatarsal to the lateral cuneiform. The transfer changes its action from dorsiflexion and inversion to dorsiflexion and eversion.