In 1937, A biochemist from Sweden, Tiselius, demonstrated that particles with charge could be separated based on their charge with the help of an electrical field. Various biomolecules, such as proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, nucleotides, etc., also possess electrical charges. On application of electrical field, they migrate towards anode or cathode based on their net charge. Electrophoresis is defined as the migration of electrically charged molecules under the effect of the electrical field.

Tiselius used a liquid medium that had less resolution due to the effect of gravity and diffusion. Electrophoresis utilizes solid support media with buffers to overcome these obstacles. Molecules with similar charge, mass, shape, and size tend to move together and are separated in distinct bands or zones. Whatman filter paper, agarose, cellulose acetate, polyacrylamide, etc., are examples of such solid support mediums.

**General components of electrophoresis apparatus:**Refer to media 1 (figure 1): Schematic diagram of an electrophoresis apparatus.

**Functions of Each Component of the Electrophoresis Apparatus**

- **Buffer**: Carries the current and maintains the pH of the medium.

- **Wicks**: Connects support medium with buffer to complete the circuit.

- **Support medium**: Provide the matrix in which separation takes place.

- **Cover**: Reduces evaporation of buffer and prevents contamination during the electrophoretic run.

- **Power supply:**Provides an electrical field for the movement of charged particles.

- **Densitometer:**Quantification of separated bands is done by comparison of the optical density of bands.

**Factors Affecting Electrophoretic Mobility of a Molecule**

**Size, Shape, and Net charge of the Molecule**

- Mobility is inversely proportional to the size of the molecule and directly proportional to the net charge of the molecule. Globular proteins have compact structures, so they have faster mobility than fibrous proteins of similar molecular weight.

- Particles with a negative charge (anions) always move in the direction of the positive pole, whereas particles with a positive charge (cations) always move in the direction of the negative pole. When performing gel electrophoresis, the positive pole refers to the anode, while the negative pole refers to the cathode. As a result, charged particles will move to the nodes that are appropriate for them [e.g., anions migrate from cathode (-) to anode (+)].

**Strength of the Electrical Field**

- Mobility is directly proportional to potential gradient (voltage) and inversely proportional to resistance.

**Buffer**

- Buffer functions to carry the current and maintain the pH of the medium. The optimum ionic strength of the buffer is necessary as higher ionic strength increases the share of current carried by buffer ions & slows down the sample migration. It also produces a high amount of heat, leading to increased diffusion of separation bands. While low ionic strength of the buffer also reduces resolution due to reduced overall current passing through the medium.

- The ionization of molecules, such as proteins, amino acids, etc., depends on the pH of the medium. Alteration in the pH of the medium can alter the direction and velocity of migration.

**Supporting Medium**

- A medium having affinity for the molecules in samples can hinder the rate of migration and can decrease the resolution of separation. The pore size in the support medium is inversely proportional to the concentration of gel. Adjusting pore size according to the properties of a molecule of interest is necessary for optimum resolution.

- Fixed groups such as sulfate get ionized and acquire a negative charge at alkaline or neutral pH. Applying the electrical field, HO ions associated with these negatively charged groups start migrating towards the cathode. This movement hinders sample movement towards the anode and can reduce the resolution of separation. This effect is known as electroendosmosis. It can be reduced by using ultrapure agarose gel with low sulfate content.

**Types of Support Medium**

Different types of support medium and buffers are utilized to effectively separate different types of molecules.

**Whatman Filter Paper:**Whatman’s filter paper is used as a support medium. As it requires long run-time (12-16 hours) and low voltage for separation, the resolution is poor due to the increased diffusion of separated analytes.

**Cellulose acetate:**Cellulose acetate membrane is one of the preferred solid media as it requires less run-time (<1 hour). Due to this, the resolution of separated bands is far superior to paper electrophoresis. Though it is expensive, it is widely used for separating lipoproteins, proteins, enzyme isoforms, and hemoglobin variants due to superior resolution and less interaction with analytes in a sample.

**Agarose gel:**Agarose is a type of heteropolysaccharide. It forms a viscous solution when dissolved in a hot buffered solution (50 to 55-degree Celsius), but it solidifies as a gel on cooling down. It is used to separate serum proteins, hemoglobin, nucleic acids, polymerase chain reaction products, etc. Fixed sulfate groups present in agarose can reduce the resolution of bands due to increased electroendosmosis. This can be prevented by using ultrapure agarose gel with low sulfate content.

**Polyacrylamide gel**: It is formed by polymerization of acrylamide and bis-acrylamide in the presence of ammonium persulfate, N, N, N’N’-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) & riboflavin in the presence of ultraviolet (UV) rays. The pore size of the gel can be very well controlled by adjusting the concentration of monomers. This gel can be used for a wide variety of analytes such as proteins, peptides, nucleic acid, nucleotides, etc. It can provide excellent resolution due to better molecular sieving and minimal interaction of sample molecules with the matrix.

If protein solution is boiled briefly in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and mercaptoethanol, proteins in the solution get denatured, and they acquire a uniform negative charge which masks the native charge of the protein. This produces polypeptide chains with a constant charge-to-mass ratio with a uniform shape. In this condition, electrophoretic mobility will depend on the number of amino acids and mass of the polypeptide chains.

**Other Variants of Electrophoresis**

**Isoelectric focusing (IEF):**Gel matrix is filled with ampholytes (molecules with both positive and negative charge), and a pH gradient is formed. When the electricity is applied, molecules migrate towards their isoelectric pH. The mobility of sample molecules stops at their respective isoelectric pH, where the net charge on the sample molecule will be zero. IEF can provide excellent resolution and fractionation of serum proteins and hemoglobin variants.

**Immunoelectrophoresis and immunofixation electrophoresis:**Initially, proteins are separated on the agarose gel. Wells are created after separation, and specific antibodies against molecules of interest are added. Bands of precipitation due to antigen-antibody reaction are formed, which signifies the presence of a specific protein in the sample. It is used to identify the abnormal elevation of gamma globulin fractions and free light chains in patients with suspected monoclonal or polyclonal gammopathy.

**High voltage electrophoresis:**Relatively higher voltage (400 to 2000 Volts) is used instead of 250 Volts for separation. It provides very fast separation with good resolution and relatively less diffusion. It is used for the separation of proteins, hemoglobin, and nucleotides.

**Pulse field electrophoresis:**Separation of long nucleotide fragments with good resolution is difficult with conventional electrophoresis. In pulse field electrophoresis, the current is passed in two different directions alternatively, which leads to the movement of fragments in two directions, giving good separation with optimum resolution.

**Capillary electrophoresis:**Very small diameter capillary tube filled with buffer solution, ampholytes, or gel is used as a support medium. Due to the availability of a higher surface area for heat dissipation, very high voltage can be applied for speedy separation and better resolution. Separated fractions can be quantified simultaneously as they pass through the detector during the electrophoretic run.

**2-dimensional (2D) electrophoresis:**Initially, isoelectric focusing (IEF) is done to separate the analytes based on their isoelectric pH. The gel containing separated analytes is then subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the direction of 90 degrees to IEF run. Molecules having similar molecular weight can be separated via this method due to differences in their isoelectric pH.