Three intracellular mechanisms affect the expression and release of renin.

- Cyclic GMP (cGMP) and nitric oxide (NO) - NO is a known vasodilator that also acts on JG cells to increase renin release. As in smooth muscle cells, NO acts via induction of intracellular cGMP formation, which can then inhibit phosphodiesterase. Phosphodiesterase then impairs the breakdown of cAMP, triggering renin release. On the other hand, cGMP can also suppress renin secretion through activation of protein kinase type II. However, it is important to note that current research suggests that cGMP has both inhibitory and stimulatory effects on the release of renin. The degree to which it affects renin release is yet to be understood.

- Calcium ions - Calcium ions also control the release of renin; they are responsible for the negative feedback loop elicited by subsequent products of the RAAS, such as angiotensin II and antidiuretic hormone. These products act to increase the concentration of JG cell calcium levels, which will inhibit the release of renin. This is referred to as the "calcium paradox" as exocytosis of intracellular secretory vesicles is typically stimulated in the presence of raised intracellular calcium. Researchers postulate that this due to the inhibition of adenylate cyclases AC5 and AC6 by calcium.

- Cyclic AMP (cAMP) - cAMP is a key secondary messenger involved in cellular signal transduction involved in the activation of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). GPCR activation triggers the conversion of adenosine triphosphate to cAMP, which then acts on protein kinase A which further phosphorylates essential proteins involved in protein expression such as transcription factors.