Standard imaging protocol consists of plain radiographs, computed tomography (CT) scans, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Three views, AP, lateral, and open mouth odontoid plain films, are used during a standard trauma evaluation. The plain films must contain the entire cervical spine, including the C7-T1 junction. Up to 17% of injuries in the cervical spine occur at C7/T1 junction, which makes it imperative to see T1 when assessing cervical trauma.

Listed below are specific radiographic features seen on CT that could indicate cervical instability and dislocations:

**Axial Spine**

- Occipitocervical dislocation: Power ratio is frequently used to determine instability. This is calculated by measuring the distance from;

basion to posterior arch
**/**anterior arch to opisthion

- A ratio of approximately 1 is considered normal, greater than 1 consider anterior dislocation, less than 1 consider posterior dislocation

- Another commonly used measurement is Harris's rule of 12. This is the distance from the basion to the tip of the dens; greater than 12 mm suggests occipitocervical dissociation.

**Sub Axial Spine**

- Facet dislocations are best appreciated in the sagittal plane. It is key to examine the sagittal CT scan to examine the mid-sagittal and parasagittal cascade of the anterior vertebral column, posterior vertebral column, spinolaminar line, and the interspinous line. These lines should be smooth and continuous. In the axial plane, the facet joints resemble hamburger buns, with the flat portions articulating.

- Signs of dislocation can include; facet joint diastasis/dislocation and translation of the vertebral body compared to vertebrae below on the sagittal plane. 'Reverse hamburger bun' sign seen on the axial plane.

MRI scans are extremely sensitive in detecting disc herniations and injuries to the spinal cord, nerve roots, and the posterior ligamentous complex (PLC). However, they are not as accurate in assessing osseous anatomy when compared to CT scans. Therefore, an MRI scan is only recommended in patients with an abnormal neurological exam or in the unconscious or intoxicated patient where a spinal cord injury is suspected.