History and physical for patients with Marfan syndrome (MFS) encompass various organ systems. Of primary concern is cardiac pathology. Aortic root disease, leading to aortic regurgitation, aneurysmal dilatation, and dissection, is the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in MFS, in up to 60% to 80% of patients.

**Revised Criteria for Patients with MFS**

- Aortic root dilatation

- Family history of aortic root dilatation

- FBN1 mutation previously associated with aortic root dilatation

Dilatation may also involve other segments of the thoracic aorta, the abdominal aorta, the root of the pulmonary artery, or even the carotid and intracranial arteries, although this is much less frequent than observed in LDS.

As recommended in the 2010 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association/American Association for Thoracic Surgery (ACC/AHA/AATS) thoracic aorta guidelines, echocardiography is recommended at initial diagnosis and six months to assess the aortic root and ascending aorta in patients with Marfan syndrome.

Aortic dissection and rupture are preventable in patients with MFS by replacement of the ascending aorta. Prophylactic surgery is recommended when the diameter of the ascending aorta at the level of the aortic sinuses reaches 5.0 cm. Patients with an aortic diameter of less than 2.75 cm/m2 are considered to be at low risk of dissection, those with 2.75 to 4.24 cm/m2  are at moderate risk, and those with greater than 4.25 cm/m2 are at high risk. A family history of dissection, increased rate of aortic dilation (greater than 2 mm per year), severe aortic valve regurgitation with left ventricular dilation, and relative feasibility of aortic valve-sparing surgery are also indicators for early surgical intervention.

Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is identified in 40% to 54% of patients with MFS.

Patients with Marfan syndrome have excess linear growth of the long bones and joint laxity. Some have reduced joint mobility, particularly of the elbow and digits. Individuals with MFS are taller than the general population.

Patients present with findings diagnostic for scoliosis, including a vertical difference of equal to 1.5 cm between the ribs of the left and right hemithorax, and a Cobb angle of at least 20 degrees. If scoliosis is absent, exaggerated kyphotic thoracolumbar spinal curvature can be taken into account to aid in the diagnosis of MFS. Radiographic findings of MFS scoliosis are indistinguishable from those of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS). Scoliosis associated with MFS is less responsive to a brace; therefore, a brace is only utilized in skeletally immature patients with scoliotic curves less than 25 degrees.

An acetabular protrusion, or protrusio acetabuli, can be diagnosed by the medial protrusion of the acetabulum equal to 3 mm beyond the ilio-ischial (Kohler) line. This reflects one of the main causes of osteoarthritis in patients with MFS. Degeneration of the hip joint is secondary to ligamentous laxity combined with this bony abnormality. Thakkar et al.

Dural ectasia results from enlargement of the spinal canal secondary to vertebral bone enlargement, most commonly in the lumbosacral region.

Patients with MFS develop lung bullae secondary to emphysematous pulmonary changes predominantly in the upper lobes, predisposing them to spontaneous pneumothorax. Patients may exhibit skin striae, or striae atrophicae in MFS, owing to the disease as long as they are not associated with pronounced weight loss or pregnancy. Recurrent or incisional herniae and a high arched palate may occur but are not included in the systemic score since these features are considered nonspecific clinically.