There is no definitive treatment option for Edwards syndrome. Ethical issues exist around the treatment plan for newborns with Edwards syndrome due to the high mortality rate and difficulty predicting which infants will live beyond their first year of life. The major cause of sudden death in Edwards syndrome is neurological instability, cardiac failure, and respiratory failure. An individualized approach should be considered for each patient giving the utmost importance to the parental choices in the child's best interests.

- **Delivery room and NICU (Neonatal intensive care unit ) management**: Previously, trisomy 18 was considered lethal, and resuscitation at birth was not indicated. American Academy of Pediatrics and the recent Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP) guidelines are no longer advocating withholding the active management, including resuscitative efforts in the delivery room.

- **Feeding management**: Nasogastric tube feeding and gastrostomy feeding are considered to address the feeding issues. Gastroesophageal reflux can be initially managed with medical therapy and later with surgical options if refractory.

- **Cardiac management**: Diuretics, digoxin are used for heart failure. Palliative and corrective cardiac surgery are recommended for complex congenital heart defects.

- **Infections**: Treat infections like respiratory infections, pneumonia, Urinary tract infection, and otitis media with the standard approach.

- **Orthopedic**management may be required, particularly for scoliosis due to the hemivertebra.

- **Psychiatric management**: Psychosocial support should be given to the family, including information on support organizations.