The treatment of iron-deficiency anemia includes treating the underlying cause, such as gastrointestinal bleeding and oral iron supplementation. Iron supplementation should be taken without food to increase absorption. Low gastric pH facilitates iron absorption. Rapid response to treatment is often seen in 14 days. It is manifested by the rise in hemoglobin levels. Iron supplementation is needed for at least three months to replenish tissue iron stores and should proceed for at least a month even after hemoglobin has returned to normal levels. Ferrous sulfate is an inexpensive and effective therapy, usually given in two to three divided doses daily. The adverse effects of oral iron include constipation, nausea, decreased appetite, and diarrhea. Intravenous iron may be required if the patient is intolerant to oral iron, has malabsorption such as celiac disease, post-gastrectomy, or achlorhydria, or the losses are too high for oral therapy. Although intravenous iron is more reliably and quickly distributed to the reticuloendothelial system than oral iron, it does not provide for a more rapid increase in hemoglobin levels.

The most common adverse effect of intravenous iron is nausea. While rare, anaphylaxis may occur with intravenous iron infusions. Extravasation of iron solutions into the subcutaneous tissue causes brownish stains that can be permanent and aesthetically unpleasant for the patient. Dietary counseling is usually necessary for management. Teenage girls who are experiencing excessive menstrual blood loss may benefit from iron and hormonal therapy.