Up to 50% of patients may present with acute or chronic ischemia (ALI).  Patients may describe a recent history of worsening claudication, ulceration, rest-pain or blue toe syndrome. A careful physical exam will typically demonstrate a mass in the popliteal fossa.  In the event of complete thrombosis, the popliteal mass may not be pulsatile.  All patients who present with chronic or acute limb ischemia should undergo evaluation for the presence of a popliteal aneurysm.

The grade of acute limb ischemia dictates management.  Clinicians should determine the level of limb viability by examination of the presence of sensory and motor deficits and by the presence or absence of peripheral pulses or Doppler signals.  The Rutherford classification for ALI is a grading system that helps clarify the urgency of intervention needed and the viability of the acutely threatened limb.

- Grade I: Viable and not immediately threatened. No sensory or motor deficits. Arterial and venous doppler signals are audible

- Grade II: Threatened.  Two subcategories exist:

- IIa: Marginally threatened, salvageable if promptly treated.  Minimal or no sensory deficits. No motor deficits. Absent arterial signal, with audible venous signal
- IIb: Immediately threatened, salvageable with immediate revascularization. Moderate sensory deficits, associated rest-pain, mild to moderate motor deficits.  Absent arterial signal, audible venous signal.

- Grade III: Irreversible, major tissue loss or permanent nerve damage inevitable. Profound sensory and motor deficits present. Absent arterial and venous signals.