History, ECG, and cardiac biomarkers are the mainstays in the evaluation. An ECG should be performed as soon as possible in patients presenting with chest pain or those with a concern for ACS. A normal ECG does not exclude ACS and NSTEMI. ST-elevation or anterior ST depression should be considered a STEMI until proven otherwise and treated as such. Findings suggestive of NSTEMI include transient ST elevation, ST depression, or new T wave inversions. ECG should be repeated at predetermined intervals or if symptoms return.

Cardiac troponin is the cardiac biomarker of choice. Troponin is more specific and more sensitive than other biomarkers and becomes elevated relatively early in the disease process. While contemporary cardiac troponin may not be elevated within the first 2 to 4 hours after symptom onset, newer high sensitivity troponin assays have detectable elevations much earlier. It is also true that the amount of troponin released, and therefore the time to elevation, is proportional with infarct size, so it is unlikely to have a negative initial troponin with larger infarcts. Regardless of infarct size, most patients with true ischemia will have elevations in troponin within 6 hours, and negative troponins at this point effectively rule out infarct in most patients.  Most assays use a cutoff value of greater than a 99th percentile as a positive test. In older, contemporary troponin assays, no detectable troponin is reported in most healthy individuals without the disease.  Newer high sensitivity troponin assays often will report a normal detectable range in healthy individuals without the disease.

Several tools and scores have been developed to assist in the workup of ACS. These tools must be used with caution and in the appropriate context as none have been definitively shown to be superior to clinician judgment. Some common tools available are the TIMI (Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction) risk score, the GRACE (Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events) risk score, the Sanchis score, the Vancouver rule, HEART (History, ECG, Age, Risk Factors, and Troponin) score, HEARTS3 score, and Hess prediction rule. The HEART score was specifically developed for emergency department patients and has gained popularity in this setting.

**Diagnosis**

NSTEMI is diagnosed in patients determined to have symptoms consistent with ACS and troponin elevation but without ECG changes consistent with STEMI. Unstable angina and NSTEMI differ primarily in the presence or absence of detectable troponin leak.