Imaging of the appendix is most commonly performed to investigate acute appendicitis. The use of imaging for appendiceal neoplasms, though less commonly done, does have high sensitivity and specificity. If the patient has symptoms, the accuracy is improved further as neoplasms can sometimes produce symptoms of acute appendicitis (which is most common), generalized abdominal pain, palpable mass, obstruction, or distension. Imaging studies can be used to diagnose the tumor, and they can also be used to stage the tumor in the classic TNM staging system. The staging typically takes place via MRI. These studies more often identify epithelial tumors, and the diagnosis of NETs is uncommon due to their relatively small size and nonaggressive behavior. Overall, the definitive diagnosis of neoplasms requires pathologic examination after appendectomy.

On the other hand, appendicitis is regularly diagnosed using radiology studies. In fact, imaging is often the deciding factor between operative and non-operative management. Though the diagnosis can be clinical following a thorough history and physical, imaging is regularly employed to confirm the diagnosis in question. The most commonly used radiographic study is the CT scan, given its speed, sensitivity, and specificity. Though MRI and US are also relatively useful modalities to diagnose acute appendicitis, they have their limitations. Ultrasound is highly operator dependent and tends to work best on individuals with less fat and muscle content in their abdomen (i.e., children). MRI is not always readily available, especially in smaller hospitals or rural settings. It is also a more prolonged study, and it may be more difficult for patients to be still while they are in acute pain, especially children. Currently, the negative appendectomy is less than 12% in men but can be up to 33% in women; accurate imaging studies could reduce the number of unnecessary surgeries performed on patients.