Urethritis is commonly asymptomatic; if symptomatic, the symptoms vary based on the causative organism.

Symptoms of urethritis may include dysuria, pruritus, burning, and discharge at the urethral meatus.  Frank purulent discharge suggests gonorrhea as the causative organism. Dysuria alone is common among chlamydia. If the patient has dysuria with painful genital ulcers, the causative organism is most likely the herpes simplex virus.

Neisseria gonorrhea is often associated with copious purulent or mucopurulent urethral discharge in men or can be asymptomatic.  In women, urethritis is often associated with cervicitis or may be asymptomatic. If symptoms are present, dysuria is the most common.  Other symptoms in women can include frequency and urgency.

Chlamydia trachomatis is most commonly asymptomatic. Symptomatic patients can have dysuria and urethral discharge. Females with urethritis usually also have cervicitis. Female patients may report dysuria, urgency, or frequency.  Symptoms of cervicitis include intermenstrual vaginal bleeding, post-coital bleeding, and changes in vaginal discharge. Cervicitis symptoms may be the reported chief complaint of females with urethritis. Males that are symptomatic may complain of mucoid or watery discharge and dysuria.  A small number of patients with chlamydial urethritis may develop reactive urethritis triad.

Mycoplasma genitalium infections are commonly asymptomatic; however, symptoms may include dysuria, purulent or mucopurulent urethral discharge, urethral pruritus, balanitis, and posthitis. The urethral discharge is commonly associated with this organism but is not always evident in contrast to the Neisseria gonorrhea infections. It can cause acute and persistent urethritis in men.

Herpes simplex virus usually presents with intense dysuria. On physical examination, a limited amount of discharge can be present and commonly meatitis and balanitis. The majority of patients may not have herpetic lesions present at the time of examination but generally presents shortly after.

Adenovirus commonly presents with intense dysuria instead of urethral irritation, which helps differentiates it from other causes of nongonococcal urethritis. Usually transmitted by oral sex with upper respiratory tract symptoms generally during fall and winter months. Patients usually do not report urethral discharge. The genitourinary examination usually shows scant urethral serous discharge as well as meatitis and balanitis. It is important to perform a complete physical examination as associated constitutional symptoms and conjunctivitis assist in the diagnosis.

Some data indicate that enteric organisms are causative agents of urethritis from rectal exposure — gram-negative rods from urinary tract infections or anal sex. Haemophilus species, Neisseria meningitides, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Streptococcus pneumonia are pathogens associated with oral sex causing NGU.