- Shave the hair away from the head incision site (some surgeons use minimal shaving)

- Clean the skin with an antiseptic

- Apply a sterile fenestrated drape over the incision sites (head, neck, chest, and abdomen)

- Fenestrated drape the patient

- Make a "U or C" shaped skin incision over the entry point where the burr hole is to be performed for the introduction of the ventricular catheter. If the frontal approach will be used, then Kocher’s point is used which is an entry point that is 11 cm superior and posterior from the nasion, 3 cm lateral to midline along the mid pupillary line, and 1 to 2 cm anterior to the coronal suture; catheter should then be passed to a depth of 5-5.5 cm.

- Burr hole is performed at the desired entry point and the dura incised. A small entry point in the cortex is coagulated and incised.

- Ventricular catheter is introduced directed into the ventricle and cut to the appropriate pre-measured length

- CSF samples are collected

- The ventricular shunt is connected to the valve and secured with a silk tie.

- An incision in the abdomen is done to access the peritoneal cavity; the site depends on the surgeon's preference and can be done in the upper quadrant or the midline

- Shunt passer is used to pass the peritoneal distal catheter between both incisions.

- Peritoneal catheter is connected to the valve and secured with a silk tie.

- After good distal CSF flow at the peritoneal catheter, it is introduced into the peritoneal cavity.

- Wounds are closed in anatomical layers

- The CSF sample is sent to the laboratory for cell count, glucose, protein, gram stain, and culture