Cancer of the prostate is the second most diagnosed solid cancer in adult males, surpassed only by non-melanoma skin cancer. It is the second leading cause of male cancer death worldwide.

Data from the NIH indicates a 44% drop in prostate cancer-specific mortality since PSA testing became widely available in the early 1990s. The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result Program (SEER) Cancer Statistics Review 1975 to 2017 from the National Cancer Institute indicates that prostate cancer mortality rates in the US decreased from 39/100,000 male individuals to 19/100,000 from 1992 to 2017, a 51% decrease. According to simulation models, a large portion of this decrease, 45% to 70%, is thought to be due to PSA testing, as screening significantly decreased the incidence of metastatic disease.

A large 2018 Kaiser Permanente study of over 400,000 patients found that yearly screening in the optimal age range of 55 to 75 years reduced prostate cancer-specific mortality by 64% (95% confidence interval 50-78%, P <.001) and overall mortality by 24% (95% confidence interval 15%-34%, P <.001).

Since prostate cancer is slow growing, it typically takes at least ten years for a typical localized cancer to cause significant symptoms. At age 75, the Social Security Administration Actuarial Tables indicate that the average US male will live slightly over 11 years. Therefore, after age 75, the vast majority of men would not receive any benefit from identifying or treating their localized prostate cancers.

**General Recommendations for PSA Testing**

Comparisons of screened and unscreened populations have repeatedly shown a 50% cancer-specific mortality decrease when PSA testing is widely used over time.

Care should be taken to consider the patient's personal opinions and desires as well as their overall health, family history, and comorbidities. They should be fully informed of the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screening. Clinicians should endeavor to avoid the overtreatment of low-grade, low-stage prostate cancers, which can be accomplished by following the American Urological Association and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Guidelines on treating localized prostate cancer.

- PSA testing should only be done after a detailed, comprehensive explanation of the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screenings.

- A single baseline PSA level is suggested for all men aged 40 to 45.

- Yearly testing is reasonable in higher-risk men starting at age 45.

- A change of >0.75 ng/mL per year or >25% is considered suspicious.

- At least two separate elevated PSA tests are needed to confirm the increase.

- Routine screening should be stopped in men with ten years or less of life expectancy (based on comorbidities) or by age 75.

- Men who fall outside of guidelines but are fully informed and are requesting testing should have a PSA level performed.

- Patients who would not benefit from testing or refuse treatment if cancer were found should probably not be screened.

- High-risk individuals would include those men with the following:

- African descent
- Lynch Syndrome
- Family history of prostate cancer (especially if a first-degree relative and cancer were found <age 65)
- Family history of multiple malignancies.
- PSA density of 0.15 or more
- Positive germline testing for BRCA1, BRCA2