**Lateral Medullary Syndrome**

Lateral medullary syndrome, also known as medullary or posterior inferior cerebellar artery syndrome, occurs due to the occlusion of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery or the vertebral artery. An occlusion to either of these arteries can result in a lack of blood flow to the lateral medulla, the location of the spinal trigeminal nucleus. The primary ischemic events that trigger lateral medullary syndrome can result from stenotic blood vessels, as seen in adults, often with other comorbid conditions. In children, however, ischemia can be due to injury to the vertebral artery following a hyperextension neck injury.

The lateral medullary syndrome presents with many symptoms, including contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation in the body with ipsilateral Horner syndrome, dysphagia, and loss of sensation in the face.

**Trigeminal Neuralgia**

Trigeminal neuralgia is a condition that most often presents with unilateral, stabbing, and paroxysmal painful sensations from the face along the trigeminal nerve distribution.

This theory has as its basis the characterization of trigeminal neuralgia as focal epileptic and neuronal hyperactivity. An increase in activity at the spinal trigeminal nucleus has been shown to precipitate the pain seen in trigeminal neuralgia in both cats and monkeys. Furthermore, the administration of anti-epileptic medications in cats and monkeys was able to decrease the intensity and duration of the attacks. The difficulty of treatment approaches makes the understanding of trigeminal neuralgia imperative. Though there is no consensus on the underlying mechanism of trigeminal neuralgia, recent evidence suggests that the spinal trigeminal nucleus, particularly the pars oralis, plays a vital role in this process.

**Chronic Orofacial Pain**

Understanding chronic orofacial pain is important as it has been determined as a source of significant psychological distress in patients. This distress is likely because procedures and medications often cannot relieve symptoms.

A recent study was conducted in humans to demonstrate changes in synapses of patients with chronic orofacial neuropathic pain. Utilizing T1-weighted MRI imaging, the study showed that alterations in the anatomy of primary synapses of the trigeminal nerve, particularly in the pars oralis, are critical for both the generation and maintenance of chronic pain in the distribution of the trigeminal nerve. These changes included significant regional gray matter volume reduction, a decrease in mean diffusivity, and a fractional anisotropy increase.

**Craniocervical Dystonia**

Craniocervical dystonia is a poorly-understood neurological disorder, part of the group of primary focal dystonias which present with involuntary muscle contractions, sustained or intermittent.****No cause or candidate pathological gene has been found,****and treatment for this condition, which has significant deleterious effects on quality of life, remains limited.****

The observation that these reflexes associated with the trigeminal ganglia are aberrant in patients with craniocervical dystonia has led to the hypothesis that aberrant plasticity in the basal ganglia leading to tonic inhibition of the trigeminal sensory complex may be involved in the pathological process of this condition.