# Continuing Education Activity

Chromium deficiency can be easily missed when evaluating patients with new-onset hyperglycemia. While it is difficult to tell whether chromium deficiency is common in situations other than malnutrition, it should be kept on the differential for certain patient populations. This activity will review the types and demographics of patients at risk for chromium deficiency, the signs and symptoms of chromium deficiency, and the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the management of chromium deficiency.
- Review the evaluation of chromium deficiency.
- Summarize the causes of chromium deficiency.
- Identify patients at risk for chromium deficiency.

# Introduction

Minerals are naturally occurring elements found as part of the human diet. These essential trace elements are imperative for normal health, regulation, and function. They include copper, fluoride, iron, iodine, manganese, selenium, zinc, and chromium. Excess or deficiencies in any of these can lead to various biochemical imbalances. Chromium, in particular, is a mineral that has many implications in the setting of nutritional health and medical care.

Chromium exists in both the trivalent (+3) and hexavalent (+6) forms. The trivalent form is an essential trace element that is naturally present in the human diet, while the hexavalent form is a toxic by-product of the manufacturing processes.

Trivalent chromium is used as a coenzyme in the normal biochemical reactions of multiple processes throughout the body. Chromium can be found in various fruits, vegetables, grains, cereals, and processed meats. Deficiency has been linked to multiple physiological aberrations, especially in certain populations. This text will examine the causes, manifestations, and identification of the trivalent(+3) form of chromium deficiency specifically.

# Etiology

Chromium deficiency was first identified by studies of patients on total parenteral nutrition and measurement of chromium levels.

# Epidemiology

In healthy individuals, the symptomatology of chromium deficiency has not been well identified. It has been mainly identified in patients on total parenteral nutrition with malnutrition and malabsorption.

The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) provides insight into the dietary intake of individuals around the United States of America. Chromium has not been included as an item of measurement. Chromium was also not listed as an item of measurement on the World Health Organization's Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Information System.

There have been multiple case studies reporting patients on long-term parenteral nutrition who suffered from new-onset metabolic and neuropathic derangements, which were relieved by the supplementation of chromium via their parenteral nutrition. Since the recommendation of the American Medical Association to supplement adequate amounts of chromium in parenteral nutrition solutions in the 1980s, there have been fewer published reports regarding the issue of chromium deficiency.

# History and Physical

Chromium deficiency is related to a variety of metabolic and neurologic abnormalities, including insulin intolerance. History taking ideally includes evaluating the timing of symptoms and identifying risk factors from past medical, procedural, trauma, and nutritional history. Chromium is absorbed in the small intestine and circulated throughout the organ systems bound to transferrin and albumin.

Risk factors that will alter the absorption process or carrying capacity are significant. Development of the following symptoms with no prior history of these symptoms in conjunction with the presence of pertinent risk factors may lead to a diagnosis of chromium deficiency.

Trivalent chromium has been theorized to influence the interaction of insulin with its peripheral receptors.

There has been some discussion regarding neurological abnormalities related to chromium deficiency. If encephalopathic, orientation questioning should be conducted before intake. Obtaining a neurological history includes asking about symptoms including ataxia, paresthesias, postural tremors, and peripheral sensory neuropathy. These may also be included in reviewing systems from the initial history.

The common denominator in all the case studies presented on chromium deficiency is the use of total parenteral nutrition. As such, factors that lead to total parenteral nutrition use must be assessed. In discussing past medical and nutritional history, It is important to note prior or current diagnoses of malnutrition, including anorexia nervosa and alcoholism. Procedural and trauma history, including bowel resection, extensive burns, and short bowel syndrome, can all lead to decreased chromium absorption but also increased demand for chromium due to the alterations in catabolism and anabolism in these high-stress situations. Patients that have had an extended hospital stay with an extensive history of total parenteral nutrition must be closely assessed as well.

There are no specific pertinent exam findings for patients with chromium deficiency. If patients report a history of new-onset neurological symptoms, evaluating those symptoms with a complete and thorough neurological examination is vital.

# Evaluation

In the blood, chromium is primarily bound to transferrin and, to a lesser extent, albumin. 5% is unbound.

Some evaluation methods include serum, urine, stool, and hair assessment. It is important to note that, like many other essential trace elements, there is no reliable laboratory measurement for accurately determining the nutritional status of chromium. Urine excretion may reflect recent intake, while circulating serum chromium may not be in equilibrium with biologically active stores. Hair levels are thought to suggest past fluctuations in chromium intake.

Serum and urinary chromium concentrations may be the most accurate markers for evaluation due to evidence of increased levels with supplementation.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of chromium deficiency is primarily supplementation. According to the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine, the Dietary Reference Intake of chromium is 20 to 35 mcg/day. While there is no distinct guideline on the treatment and management of chromium deficiency, it has been recognized that pharmacologic amounts of chromium may relieve patients of their symptoms. The doses have averaged around 200 mcg/day and are generally in the hundreds of mcg of chromium added to the total parenteral nutrition solution for approximately two weeks.

Healthy individuals absorb approximately 0.15 mcg/day of chromium from a well-balanced diet. The current standard chromium supplementation added to total parenteral nutrition for individuals not being treated for chromium deficiency is about 10 to 15 mcg of chromium per day. This is much higher than the amount of chromium that is naturally absorbed.

# Differential Diagnosis

There is a wide range of differential diagnoses related to chromium deficiency. These include diseases related to insulin resistance, pathologies related to neurological disturbances, and other related nutrient deficiencies. New-onset diabetes should certainly be high on the differential as it is a common cause of insulin resistance. Pancreatic processes such as pancreatic obstruction or inherent dysfunction may also be evaluated.

The neurological symptoms of ataxia, encephalopathy, tremors, etc., warrant the addition of cerebrovascular accident (CVA) work up as well. Stroke is the most acutely life-threatening differential diagnosis when exploring the diagnosis of chromium deficiency. Other neurological differential diagnoses include transient ischemic attack, vertigo, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, malignancy, and multiple sclerosis. One important thing to note is that visual or auditory changes have not yet been described in patients with chromium deficiency, which may help narrow the differential towards the working diagnosis.

Many nutrient deficiencies overlap in their presentations which is in part due to their overlap in function and mechanism of absorption. This can make it challenging to identify one specific nutrient deficiency as the cause of patients' symptoms. For example, one case discussed the possibility of selenium deficiency in a patient with muscle weakness. While supplementation with selenium mildly relieved their symptoms, supplementation with chromium for new-onset hyperglycemia relieved the patient's hyperglycemia.

Similarly, manganese deficiency has been thought to be implicated in the development of ataxia, abnormal fat and carbohydrate metabolism in animal models, and dyslipidemia in experimental studies in humans, overlapping with the presentation of chromium deficiency.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for patients with chromium deficiency is highly favorable. Mortality due to the deficiency of chromium, specifically, has not been observed clinically nor described in the literature.

Patients diagnosed with chromium deficiency and on total parenteral nutrition require added supplementation with chromium. There are no guidelines at this time that recommend a specific dosage or the appropriate timeline, but studies have used various pharmacologic doses of chromium supplementation for around two weeks, and in some cases, possibly longer.

# Complications

No specific symptoms reported in healthy individuals can be attributed directly to low chromium intake.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most important population that would benefit from teaching related to chromium deficiency includes patients that are on chronic total parenteral nutrition. These patients, along with those with concomitant risk factors such as short bowel syndrome, diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, burns, or trauma, should be considered in a reevaluation of their total parenteral nutrition formula if they develop signs of chromium deficiency.

Notably, there is enhanced absorption of chromium in the presence of zinc and iron deficiency.

The association between low chromium levels, impaired glucose tolerance, and unfavorable lipid profiles has been described, but a causal association has not yet been determined.

There is little evidence supporting the supplementation of chromium in individuals who are not deficient in chromium. In 2010, the American Diabetes Association announced in their diabetes guidelines that since chromium supplementation has not definitively shown benefits in the literature, they cannot recommend its regular supplementation. Patients with diabetes mellitus with no other risk factors or signs and symptoms of chromium deficiency should be treated with guideline-directed management.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Chromium deficiency may be identified in patients with chronic total parenteral nutrition with comorbid conditions. This, in turn, could worsen the quality of life of an already vulnerable population. Evaluation of this condition must be considered in individuals showing clinical features of this diagnosis.

The interprofessional healthcare team is essential in the evaluation and treatment of chromium deficiency. Primary and critical care physicians are integral in identifying and diagnosing this condition. The laboratory team allows for the analysis of human samples to help reach the postulated levels of chromium available in circulation. Registered dieticians and pharmacists play an essential role in formulating appropriate supplementation for use in total parenteral nutrition solutions. Communication between all team members regarding progress or lack thereof in the patient's condition provides enhanced patient-centered care while caring for patients with this complex ailment. [Level 5]