As with any procedure, informed consent, including the risks, benefits, and alternatives, is discussed with the patient and is obtained before the procedure. The joint, as well as the laterality, should be confirmed. A history of allergies, as well as reactions, should also be reviewed. If a patient is to undergo an MRI after the arthrogram, it must be confirmed that the patient is safe to undergo such a procedure prior. This includes asking about pacemaker status or spinal stimulator presence.

For an elective arthrogram, management of a patient’s anticoagulation is typically performed by the referring physician. This involves holding the anticoagulation medication for an appropriate number of days and achieving a periprocedural INR less than 2.0 for a patient on warfarin.

If a patient is undergoing direct arthrography, an injection into the glenohumeral joint is performed under fluoroscopy, CT, or ultrasound guidance. The contrast will depend on whether a patient is undergoing a CT or an MRI arthrography. The CT injectate is an iodinated contrast with a concentration of no greater than 240 mg of iodine per mL.

The MRI injectate is a diluted solution, 1/200 to 1/250, of gadolinium containing an MRI contrast agent used in sterile saline, which reaches a concentration level of 0.0020 to 0.0025 mmol/mL. Some institutions use a mixture of local anesthetic with normal saline to reduce artifact and periprocedural pain. A typical solution includes 10 mL normal saline, 10 mL local anesthetic like 0.5% ropivacaine, and a 0.1 mL gadolinium MRI contrast agent. While the glenohumeral joint has a capacity of approximately 8 to 15 mL, a 12 mL intra-articular injection of the typical solution is adequate for joint distention.

If the injection is fluoroscopically performed or under CT guidance, a small volume of 1 to 3 mL of dilute iodinated contrast can be injected first to confirm the intra-articular positioning. The MRI scanning should be performed within 90 minutes post-intra-articular injection to optimize imaging quality.