Wide local excision is the first-line treatment for all malignant salivary gland tumors. Superficial parotidectomy is the standard treatment of choice for the removal of benign and malignant parotid tumors in the superficial lobe with preservation of the facial nerve.

The disadvantages of superficial parotidectomy include excessive resection of parotid tissue leading to loss of parotid function and risk of facial nerve paralysis due to complete facial nerve dissection. For low-grade or smaller lesions located in the lateral or latero-inferior part of the superficial lobe, the partial superficial parotidectomy, where the tumor is resected with a normal margin of parotid tissue with the facial nerve dissected only in the vicinity of the tumor, has been proposed.

Excision of the entire submandibular gland should be performed for any submandibular malignant lesions or if the final diagnosis cannot be confirmed.

Cervical (neck) metastases in salivary gland malignancies range from 10% to 40% depending on tumor grade, location, histologic subtype, and size.

Chisholm et al. analyzed the anatomical distributions of positive nodal metastasis in parotid cancers showing only ipsilateral involvement. They found up to 28% in level I, 59% in level II, 52% in level II, 38% in level IV, and 42% in level IV. About 33% of cases displayed skip metastasis to level V which led to the recommendation of a complete ipsilateral neck dissection from level I-V for parotid malignancies with positive neck disease.

For submandibular and minor salivary gland carcinomas, clinical cervical metastasis is present in 8 to 20% of cases and increases up to 41% after neck dissection with the most frequently involved nodes occurring in levels I-III for submandibular gland malignancies.