The tibia is the second largest bone in the body and provides support for a significant portion of the weight-bearing forces transmitted from the rest of the body. Proximally in cross-section, the tibia assumes a pyramidal shape/surface that articulates with the femur at the knee joint.  The proximal tibia consists of medial and lateral tibial plateau surfaces, each with an associated meniscus. In the center of the two plateaus is an intercondylar spine, which contains a portion of the attachment footprint for the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL).  The posterior portion contains a corresponding portion for the attachment footprint of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL).

In addition to the ACL and PCL, knee joint stability in the coronal plane is a function of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and the lateral collateral ligament (LCL). The MCL spans from the medial aspect of the femur to the proximal tibia distal to the joint line. The LCL attaches to the lateral aspect of the femur and courses to the anterolateral fibula head.

The fibula is much smaller and provides much less weight-bearing support compared to its tibial counterpart. The fibula connects to the tibia via an interosseous membrane that connects the two bones distally at the ankle joint.  Proximally, the proximal tibiofibular joint serves as the proximal anchoring stabilizing connection between the two bones in the lower leg.

The fibula forms the lateral border of the ankle joint while the tibia forms the medial border.  Relative to the ankle joint, these osseous segments are referred to as the lateral and medial malleoli, respectively.