An understanding of the normal anatomic distribution of Tc99m-MDP is important for interpreting skeletal scintigraphy. Symmetric uptake should be seen throughout the osseous structures of a healthy adult. In children, additional intense uptake is present in the physes of the long bones, which represent the normal growth centers. Common areas of benign increased radiotracer accumulation are present at the acromioclavicular joints, sternoclavicular joints, sternomanubrial junction, sacroiliac joints, and pubic symphysis as well as in articular surfaces of the shoulders, hips, knees, ankles, and feet. This is likely due to the constant bony remodeling of the weight-bearing surfaces of the joints and the propensity of degenerative changes in these areas. Also, primarily in adult patients, focal increased uptake is frequently seen in the maxillary and mandibular regions due to underlying dental disease which causes reactive osteogenesis. Similarly, uptake can be present in the nasopharyngeal region of the facial bones in individuals with chronic sinus disease.

Extraosseous activity is seen in the kidneys and bladder due to the normal renal excretion of T99m-MDP. If the kidneys and bladder are not seen, this should raise suspicion of the so-called “superscan.” A superscan implies diffusely increased osseous uptake due to metastatic disease (most commonly breast or prostate cancer) or metabolic bone disease which is so intense that little or no renal excretion of the radiotracer occurs.

**Critical Findings**

- Detection of osseous metastatic disease: most frequently occurring in the axial and proximal appendicular skeleton corresponding with sites of red marrow

- Detection of stress fracture: most commonly seen in lower body such as tibia, metatarsals and femoral necks, a site particularly critical due to the risk of progression to a displaced fracture

- Detection of osteomyelitis or hardware infection

- Detection of occult fractures in evaluation for child abuse (generally in children older than 1 year): typically seen in ribs and extremities, though it should be noted that bone scintigraphy has a low sensitivity for detection of pediatric skull fractures and classic metaphyseal corner fractures

- Detection of avascular necrosis: history of sickle cell disease or chronic steroid use should raise suspicion for this entity

- Detection of incidental soft tissue uptake: may represent occult malignancy such breast cancer, malignant pleural effusion, soft tissue sarcoma, or metastatic disease in the liver

- Identification of the presence of kidneys on every bone scan; if the kidneys are not seen, a superscan should be suspected