Where available, useful laboratory tests include syphilis and tuberculosis testing, along with Bartonella and Borrelia serology.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an exceptionally useful tool to image the optic disc and macula to identify subretinal fluid and intra-retinal edema that may otherwise be missed on clinical examination in the early phases of the process.  Findings of flattening of the foveal contour, fluid within the outer plexiform layer, and/or subretinal fluid along with early intraretinal exudates can suggest the diagnosis of neuroretinitis before the appearance of a macular star.

This finding is crucial to note in equivocal cases as it will differentiate inflammatory/infective etiologies of disc swelling from non-inflammatory ones such as papilledema and ischemic optic neuropathy. Furthermore, the degree of subretinal and intraretinal fluid, along with the degree of optic disc swelling, can be quantified and monitored with serial OCTs. This can enable the physician to identify the likelihood or not of visual recovery within the first few weeks. Again, it is important to note when subretinal fluid is extensive or persistent as this may indicate a lower likelihood of visual recovery.

Fundus fluorescein angiography is a safe and useful tool to determine the site of leakage, identify other less visible retinal and retinal vascular pathologies such as vasculitis, occlusion, and document diabetic or hypertensive retinopathy. With neuroretinitis, leakage should begin in the optic disc and maybe segmental. It may also identify a single anterior optic disc vessel source.  It will also highlight subtle edema within the contralateral optic disc where bilateral pathology may otherwise be overlooked.

MRI is often normal but may show enhancement of the optic disc and may extend a few millimeters posteriorly within the intraorbital portion of the optic nerve.