Most therapies for Hurler syndrome are directed towards treatment of complications and are not specific for an underlying abnormality.

- Enzyme replacement therapy: Recombinant human alpha L- iduronidase (Aldurazyme) is given as a weekly intravenous injection. Better outcomes can be achieved if it is given before severe complications ensue.[8] It is used for patients with the Hurler and Hurler-Scheie forms of MPS I and moderate-to-severe symptoms in patients with Scheie form.

- Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT): HSCT is the progressive replacement of enzyme-deficient hematopoietic cells with donor-derived enzyme competent cells. It is the ideal treatment for patients who are under 2 years of age and in selected patients over this age limit as it can prolong the survival. HSCT decreases hepatosplenomegaly, airway obstruction, CSF pressures and increases joint mobility, cardiac function, and improves or stabilizes hearing (mostly in young patients). HSCT is more effective at preventing disease progression than reversing the established disease.

- Additional management of Hurler syndrome is supportive and includes surgical interventions like adenotonsillectomy; hernia repair; ventriculoperitoneal shunt; cardiac valve replacement; carpal tunnel release; spinal decompression; physical, occupational, and speech therapies; respiratory support such as continuous positive pressure ventilation with oxygen supplementation (CPAP); hearing aids; and medications for pain and gastrointestinal disturbances. Corneal transplants can be done for vision problems; however, surgery in patients with Hurler syndrome often presents with complications related to anesthetic procedures.

- Newer therapies: Research is ongoing with gene therapy in animal models, which includes the delivery of iduronidase enzyme gene by using viral vectors.