Le Fort injuries occur with high-impact force when energy transfer to the body exceeds the tolerance of impacted tissue. Beware that these complex injuries seldom occur in isolation and are often associated with concomitant or life-threatening injuries.

**Type of Fractures**

**Le Fort Type I
**

These fractures (trans-maxillary fracture) result from a force directed low on the maxillary rim in a downward direction. This occurs in the horizontal plane at the level of the base of the nose. A direct blow to the lower face causes fractures that involve all 3 walls of the maxillary sinus and pterygoid processes. The fracture extends around both maxillary antra, through the nasal septum and the pterygoid plates. This causes palate-facial separation. However, this fracture does not involve the glabella or zygoma.

**Le Fort Type II
**

This pyramidal fracture occurs due to trauma to the midface. The fracture line begins in the region of the bridge of the nose (nasion) and extends obliquely through the medial aspect of the orbits and inferior orbital rims. It then continues posteriorly in a horizontal fashion above the hard palate to involve the pterygomaxillary buttresses, resulting in a disarticulation of the pyramid-shaped facial skeleton from the remainder of the skull. Note that the zygoma remains attached to the cranium.

**Le Fort Type III
**

Also called cranial-facial separation, the fracture line in this injury passes from the nasofrontal area across the medial, posterior, and lateral orbital walls, the zygomatic arch, and through the upper portion of pterygoid plates.

**Anatomic Level Classification**

**Le Fort Type I**

Transverse fracture through the maxilla above the roots of the teeth, separating teeth from the upper face. These can be unilateral or bilateral.

**Le Fort Type II**

These fractures extend superiorly in the midface to include the nasal bridge, maxilla, lacrimal bones, orbital floor, and rim. They are pyramidal fractures with teeth at the base and nasal bone at the apex. These fractures are typically bilateral.

**Le Fort Type III
**

This type of fracture starts at the bridge of the nose and extends posteriorly along the medial wall of the orbit and the floor of the orbit, and then through the lateral orbital wall and the zygomatic arch. The fractures run parallel with the base of the skull, separating the entire midfacial skeleton from the cranial base. This discontinuity between the skull and the face is termed craniofacial dissociation. This may be associated with a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak.

**Causes**

**Le Fort Type I
**

These fractures result from a force directed low on the maxillary rim in a downward direction. Fractures extend from the nasal septum to lateral pyriform rims, and extend horizontally above the teeth, crossing below the zygomaxillary junction, then traversing the pterygomaxillary junction interrupting the pterygoid plates.

**Le Fort Type II
**

These fractures result from a force to the lower or mid maxilla. This fracture has a pyramidal shape and extends from the nasal bridge at the nasofrontal suture through the maxilla. Inferolaterally, the fracture extends through the lacrimal bone and inferior orbital floor near the inferior orbital foramen and inferiorly through the anterior wall of the maxillary sinus. On the lateral aspect, it travels under the zygoma, across the pterygomaxillary fissure, and through the pterygoid plate.

**Le Fort Type III
**

These fractures result from an impact to the nasal bridge or upper maxilla. This results in complete craniofacial dysjunction.