**Seizure Types**

After the diagnosis of epilepsy, choosing of an AED is largely dependent on the classification of the seizure type. In the most general sense, seizures can be classified as either partial or generalized. Partial seizures can be further broken down into those that do not affect awareness (simple partial) or those that do (complex partial).

Simple partial seizures affect focal areas of the brain that, in turn, cause focal neurological findings like loss of motor function in one limb, sensory dysfunction in a specific body region, or changes to vision or speech, without affecting awareness of the event. Complex partial seizures are similar but do include brief moments of confusion that quickly resolve once the seizure has ended.

Generalized seizures affect the entire body and can exist as tonic-clonic seizures (where muscles stiffen initially, which is followed by jerking and spasming of the body), absence seizures (where individuals may stare off into space, and there is a brief lapse in awareness, often confused with daydreaming), and atonic seizures (where there is a sudden loss of muscle tone, frequently resulting in falls).

The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) recommends that epilepsy be diagnosed when any of the following exist: a history of two unprovoked seizures at least 24 hours apart, or an unprovoked seizure when the risk for a subsequent seizure is greater than 60% after two unproved seizures over the subsequent 10 years, or seizures that are part of an epilepsy syndrome.

**Initiation of Antiepileptic Drugs**

AEDs can be broken down into two categories: broad-spectrum and narrow-spectrum. Broad-spectrum AEDs treat a wide variety of seizure types, as the name suggests, and are a good initial choice, especially when the classification of seizure type is uncertain. These AEDs include but are not limited to levetiracetam, lamotrigine, zonisamide, topiramate, valproic acid, clonazepam, perampanel, clobazam, and rufinamide.

Narrow spectrum AEDs primarily are for the treatment of focal or partial seizures. These include but are not limited to lacosamide, pregabalin, gabapentin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, ezogabine, phenytoin, and vigabatrin.

Monotherapy is the ideal pathway for the treatment of seizures, but newer AEDs have had difficulty obtaining FDA approval as a monotherapy agent due to the difficulty of achieving approval requirements. However, anecdotally, and by examining the current evidence base, second-generation AEDs appear to be an appropriate choice, as they have demonstrated similar efficacy when compared to older AEDs and may be better tolerated.

One large randomized trial, the Standard and New Antiepileptic Drugs (SANAD) trial, demonstrated some comparative advantages of certain AEDs when treating focal or generalized epilepsy. In the end, when comparing valproate, lamotrigine, or topiramate for generalized seizures, they recommended valproic acid as their first-line choice. Additionally, when comparing carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, and topiramate for focal seizures, lamotrigine was cited as the first-line choice.

Of note, regarding partial onset seizures specifically, perampanel, lacosamide, brivaracetam, and eslicarbazepine acetate are a few of the recently FDA-approved seizure medications for monotherapy.

**Discontinuation**

When to discontinue AEDs is less clear. In children, consensus recommendations appear to be after two years of remaining seizure free. However, in adults, some research has estimated the risk of seizure recurrence immediately after cessation of AEDs at the 2-year mark at 30%. The risk appears to diminish with time if an individual continues without further seizures. Taking this into account, it is apparent why guidelines in adults are more conservative and recommend a seizure-free period of 2 to 5 years while advising against driving for three months after AED cessation.