To appreciate the Why of HFS, consider some truths about traditional clinical education and how HFS alleviates some of the burden associated with the apprentice model of healthcare education. Learning in the conventional clinical setting cannot be student-focused or manipulated, as the needs and safety of the patient must always take precedence. It is impossible to provide standardized experiences for all learners. Access to clinical sites can be challenging to secure and schedule.

Simulation activities are planned and predictable. They are learner-centered and can be tailored to the needs and level of the learner and adapted to fit varying learning styles.

The transferability of learning is of prime interest to educators. Simulation activities that closely resemble real-life add a degree of authenticity that allows learners to take the knowledge and skills they develop in the simulated setting and apply them in the clinical arena. The type of fidelity requiring the highest levels of realism is dependent upon the practiced skills where a) proficiency in technical skills require higher functional fidelity, b) clinical reasoning and decision-making skills benefit from conceptual fidelity, and c) sociological fidelity levels impact teamwork, communication, and leadership skill development.

One possible downside to HFS is the potential for students to become overconfident as a result of participating in this type of SBLE activity. Educators need to watch for signs of this adverse effect, as it can lead participants to engage in risk-taking behaviors in the clinical setting.