# Introduction

The term 'lupus anticoagulant' is a misnomer as it is neither only found in lupus, nor is it mainly associated with bleeding. The term LA was first coined to describe the phenomenon of plasma samples from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) that failed to clot within an appropriate time.

# Fundamentals

Lupus anticoagulants are a heterogeneous class of immunoglobulins that specifically target the epitopes of the negatively charged phospholipid binding protein of cell membrane, prothrombin, and beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2-GPI) which inhibit phospholipid-dependent coagulation in vitro.

# Issues of Concern

Lupus anticoagulant is estimated to be present in 2 to 4% of the general population, but true prevalence is unclear. Estimates are that lupus anticoagulant is present in 15 to 34% of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. LA Incidence increases with age and female sex.****Laboratory diagnosis of LA may be difficult but could allow for the optimal duration of therapy as the risk of occurrence and recurrence venous/arterial thromboembolism are high.

# Cellular Level

Lupus anticoagulants are predominantly IgG and IgM autoantibodies that bind to negatively charged phospholipid-binding proteins, prothrombin, or beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2-GPI).

# Testing

There is no single test to detect lupus anticoagulant. However, a sequential nonstandard test exists that helps determine whether a patient has lupus anticoagulant.

1) Initial testing, which is also called the screening test, involves the use of one or more phospholipid-containing reagents. This test usually uses PTT, LA-sensitive PTT or dilute Russell viper venom test (DRVVT). These tests allow measuring the time it takes (in seconds) for a plasma sample to clot and which due to lupus anticoagulant gets prolonged beyond****the upper limit of the reference.

2) Upon observation of prolongation in the above test, a mixing study is next. A mixing study is a mixture of an equal volume of patient’s plasma with “normal” pooled plasma, and a PTT or preferably, DRVVT is performed on this mixture. Mixing study eliminates the possibility that prolongation is due to coagulation factor deficiency and confirms that an inhibitor is present. Mixing study also confirms that inhibitor is directed towards negatively charged phospholipid and not specific coagulation factor. The****mixing study fails to correct the prolonged coagulation test if it is due to LA.

3) Additionally**,**a confirmatory test involves the addition of excess phospholipid to shorten or correct the prolonged coagulation test. Thus lupus anticoagulant is characterized by the correction of prolonged clotting time with added phospholipid and not with control plasma. Many different sources of phospholipid are available, including aged platelets and synthetic phospholipids in the combination of APTT or DRVVT.

The International Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH) states that four criteria must be met to confirm the presence of lupus anticoagulant.

- (Screening test) Prolonged result in one of two coagulation tests that are phospholipids dependent such as PTT-LA or DRVVT

- (Mixing study) observe the prolonged result on mixing study

- (Confirmatory test) Lack of prolonged time when adding additional phospholipids

- Ruling out other coexisting coagulation factor inhibitor such as factor VII.

Lupus anticoagulant testing is often done simultaneously with cardiolipin antibody and anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodies when the antiphospholipid syndrome is suspected.

# Clinical Significance

Studies have shown lupus anticoagulant, compared to other antibodies, more strongly correlates with pregnancy morbidity and thrombosis.

Once a patient has been diagnosed with LA causing antiphospholipid syndrome per the Sapporo criteria (also known as Sydney criteria ).