Pulmonary sequestration should be suspected as a possible differential in the following:

- A fetus with evidence of polyhydramnios, fetal hydrops, pleural effusion, or pulmonary mass lesion

- Infants with grunting and recurrent respiratory distress, feeding difficulties

- Both adults and children with recurrent pneumonia, lung abscess, and hemoptysis

Antenatal diagnosis of pulmonary sequestration can be achieved by Doppler ultrasound at 18 to 19 weeks of gestation. However, some of them involute spontaneously and even disappear.

Definitive diagnosis requires the establishment of a systemic arterial supply and venous drainage of the sequestered lung tissue.

Conventionally digital subtraction angiography has been the study of choice to demonstrate the lesions well as the anomalous vascular supply. However, multi-planar CT with 3-dimensional reconstruction has taken over as a better noninvasive diagnostic tool. MR angiography is also a reasonable alternative.

Imaging has 2 main goals:

- To exclude the presence of other thoracic pathologies.

- To demonstrate the presence of an abnormal arterial supply.

In a CT chest with contrast, the sequestered lung tissue may have a variety of presentations, including a cyst, a mass, a lamellar lesion, a capsulated lesion with an air-fluid level (and thus, falsely interpreted as hydatid cyst or abscess), focal atelectasis, or bronchiectasis. Isolated emphysematous bleb with no functional lung tissue in an atypical location is also a reported presentation.

However, despite the broad use of invasive and CT-guided angiographic techniques, a retrospective review of 72 cases by Xiao et al. showed that 62.5% of cases were diagnosed after surgery, underlining the extent of misdiagnosis before surgery.

Intraabdominal extralobar pulmonary sequestration is very difficult to differentiate from retroperitoneal tumors. For the few reported cases in adults,  the diagnosis was almost always on histopathological examination of the surgical specimen.

Biopsy of the pulmonary sequestration for confirmatory tissue diagnosis is an area of controversy because of the high risk of bleeding from aberrant arterial and venous structures.

As a part of the initial workup, blood and urine catecholamine, cortisol, and aldosterone levels may help in differentiating from adrenal adenoma, pheochromocytoma, and other neurogenic tumors. There are case reports of elevated tumor markers like CA 19-9, which makes it even more difficult to distinguish from retroperitoneal malignancy.

As far as its impact on pulmonary function is concerned, the obstructive disease has been diagnosed in 8.8% of patients. The severity of obstructive disease was mild to moderate in almost all cases. From a pulmonary function standpoint, surgical resection is tolerated well.