The vasculature found in and around the infratemporal fossa has a prominent clinical significance. As previously mentioned, the pterygoid plexus overlying the lateral pterygoid muscle is present within the fossa. This venous plexus connects to the cavernous sinus and eventually drains into the maxillary vein. Infectious processes originating in the infratemporal fossa have the potential to spread via this venous plexus to the cavernous sinus and result in a cavernous sinus thrombosis. In addition to the pterygoid venous plexus, the retromandibular vein is also found within the infratemporal fossa.

Prominent arteries present in the infratemporal fossa include the maxillary artery and associated branches, including the middle meningeal artery and accessory meningeal artery. The maxillary artery is the seventh branch of the external carotid artery. It courses through the infratemporal fossa between the sphenomandibular ligament and condylar process of the mandible to enter the pterygopalatine fossa. Prominent branches of the maxillary artery found in the infratemporal fossa include the middle meningeal artery, inferior alveolar artery, deep temporal artery, and buccal artery. The middle meningeal artery courses between the tensor veli palatine muscle and lateral pterygoid muscle to enter the middle cranial fossa through the foramen spinosum. The accessory meningeal artery can arise from either the maxillary or middle meningeal artery to provide ancillary blood supply to this region.

The posterior boundary of the infratemporal fossa is loosely defined, but some definitions include the internal carotid artery and internal jugular vein. One of the most feared complications of surgery in the infratemporal fossa includes accidental incision of the internal carotid artery. Many surgeons confirm that they are in contact with the internal or external carotid artery by blocking the vessel and checking the pulse at the superficial temporal artery. Pulseless activity in the artery following blocking confirms that the external carotid artery is blocked.