Amiodarone is contraindicated in patients with second or third-degree heart block who do not have pacemakers. Amiodarone contraindications also include patients with pre-excitation (Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome) and concurrent atrial fibrillation. Amiodarone should be avoided in patients with baseline QTc prolongation. The incidence of hypersensitivity reactions to amiodarone in patients who have documented iodine allergies should be carefully evaluated; however, retrospective studies have concluded that allergies to iodine or iodinated contrast agents may not constitute an absolute contraindication to amiodarone.

Hyperkalemia and sodium channel blocker toxicity, such as in tricyclic antidepressant, bupivacaine, and quinidine toxicity, may produce arrhythmias that resemble VT. Accelerated idioventricular rhythm also may resemble VT. Treating with amiodarone in these clinical situations can precipitate a hemodynamic collapse. While these clinical situations are not commonly listed under contraindications, it is crucial to consider these arrhythmias within the correct clinical context to avoid cardiovascular deterioration.

Administering amiodarone to treat atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response involves complex decision-making and broad differential diagnosis. Due to amiodarone’s adverse side effect profile, alternative therapies should merit consideration before administering amiodarone. Also, the clinician should ensure that the patient has no reversible causes, such as fever, hypovolemia, or hypoxia, for atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response before initiating treatment with amiodarone. For these patients, addressing the underlying cause should be the prime mode of therapy rather than administering amiodarone.