Lymphocytosis is often incidental and detected on routine peripheral blood count. It is essential to keep a thorough and systematic approach to diagnose the underlying etiology appropriately. A comprehensive history and a detailed physical examination are critical as they provide important clues towards the etiology of lymphocytosis. An Interprofessional team, including primary care physicians (PCP), internists, pathologists, and hematologists, is essential for establishing an accurate diagnosis and initiating appropriate management. This team will also include nursing and pharmacy personnel, depending on the significance of the findings and ultimate diagnosis. Often a pharmacist specializing in oncology will be required to assist with medication selection, management, and family education. An oncology nurse may be required to help with the coordination of care. The family clinician is often the first point of contact. They should familiarize themselves with common causes of lymphocytosis and also recognize alarming features that would prompt additional investigations. All hematologists should review the peripheral blood smear and obtain a peripheral blood flow cytometry if needed. However, if the smear detects an alarming finding, then a trained heme-pathologist must be consulted for confirmation. When clinical observation is appropriate, then communication between the hematologist and the PCP/internist as well as pharmacist and nursing staff should be clear and unambiguous to reassure the patient.

Lymphocytosis has many underlying causes with different approaches to diagnosis and management. The management of lymphocytosis, which occurs secondary to an underlying malignancy like lymphoma or leukemia, is directed towards the underlying cause and is supported by level I evidence.