Preparation for a colonoscopy is the biggest complaint that most patients have about receiving the procedure, and is a primary reason for non-compliance to screening colonoscopies. For a colonoscopy to successfully detect malignant or pre-malignant lesions and reduce the need for repeat colonoscopies, appropriate bowel preparation is a standard that must be achieved. Failure to have adequate bowel preparation can be considered a contraindication to proceed with the procedure, as this increases the risk of perforation and false-negative results. There are several studies available that show significantly improved outcomes in patient care and early detection of cancer with the use of an appropriately cleansed colon before a colonoscopy. This, in conjunction with several other factors, including the time to the cecum, ileocecal intubation rate, and withdrawal time, are markers that determine the success of an appropriate colonoscopy.

The basis of adequate bowel preparation is quite simple; that is, the colon should be free of stool and allow for adequate visualization of the colonic mucosa. While the principle is simple, the method of achieving this can be a problematic component of colonoscopy and uncomfortable for patients. There are many different medications and oral laxatives that can be utilized in a bowel preparation regimen, including polyethylene glycol, magnesium citrate, magnesium hydroxide, bisacodyl, and sodium picosulfate. Several studies have been performed to determine the best bowel cleansing regimens. Each physician has their own regimen they have developed, and found works best for their practice. However, some factors must be considered when determining the appropriate bowel cleansing regimen. These include substance taste, quantity, gastrointestinal discomfort, and effectiveness. The Bowklean study, performed from October 23, 2013, to March 24, 2014, was organized to determine which regimen, polyethylene glycol (2 to 4 L), or picosulfate/magnesium citrate (300 mL), provided a better cleansing effect and higher patient satisfaction. Of their study, they found that patients tolerated the picosulfate/magnesium citrate solution better than the polyethylene glycol and that it provided a better bowel cleanse for adequate visualization during colonoscopy.

While the colon must be clean, it will never be fully cleared of stool. It should be explained to patients that they will still produce stool and that it may yet have some color to it. The key to the bowel cleanse is that the stool is liquid and can be quickly cleared using the irrigation function of a colonoscope. To date, there is no ideal cleansing regimen that is without discomfort. Patients should consume a clear liquid diet the day before the procedure. This, in conjunction with the chemical cleansing agent, provides the highest chance for a successful colonoscopy. For patients that cannot tolerate a 24-hours cleanse, it is possible that they can proceed with a clear liquid diet for up to three days before the procedure with a gentle laxative regimen to help facilitate a clean colon.

Enemas may be used before a colonoscopy, but alone, they do not provide adequate preparation and will not provide an appropriate bowel cleanse. This is primarily due to the limits of an enema and its ability to reach the transverse colon, ascending colon, and cecum. For the rectum and sigmoid colon, they may help to provide a final cleanse, but their use is limited.

Antibiotics prophylaxis for colonoscopies is a topic of much debate. While there are no hard indications that would warrant the use of prophylactic antibiotics in colonoscopies, tailoring the use of antibiotics based on patient risk factors should be entertained. A patient that is immunocompromised, or receives peritoneal dialysis, or has diabetes, may be at higher risk than the general population for peritonitis following colonoscopy and polypectomy. Consideration should be held for these patients and may be of benefit. In the general population, antibiotics are likely not indicated.

At the foundation of any good medical practice, any decisions and procedures should be thoroughly explained to the patient, and any questions answered before proceeding. Especially with a colonoscopy, it is of significant benefit to sit with and discuss the procedure steps and the prescribed bowel preparation. Studies have shown that this method of teaching provides a more successful bowel preparation than simply providing a pamphlet or handout alone. Incomplete bowel preparations have been reported to be as high as 10% to 20% of reported colonoscopies. By personally discussing the bowel preparation timeline and patient expectations, this increases compliance and successful colonoscopy.