During fetal life, the oxygen tension is low and the pulmonary vascular system is not functioning. Coupled with circulating levels of prostaglandins from the placenta, this keeps the ductus patent. At birth, the placenta is removed and thus the source of prostaglandins is also diminished, this allows blood to flow into the lungs where the remaining prostaglandins are broken down. In addition, with birth as the infant takes its first breaths, the oxygen tension increases which also drops the pulmonary vascular resistance.

In most healthy newborns the ductus will close within 12-24 hours of life. This occurs by contraction of the muscles of the ductus; which are sensitive to oxygen, acetylcholine, bradykinin, and endothelin. While the functional closure occurs within hours of birth, the anatomic closure may take several weeks. During the second stage, the ductus becomes fibrous and thus, there is no blood flow through it. Most infants have closure of the ductus within 2-3 weeks and if the ductus remains patent after 8 weeks, it should be closed. Spontaneous closure of the ductus is very rare.

A patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is rare in healthy term newborns. As gestational age decreases, the incidence of PDA increases. In extremely premature infants, especially those with respiratory distress syndrome, up to 80% may have a PDA at 3 days of age. Some genetic conditions are associated with PDA: Trisomy 13, 18, 21; Holt-Oram, Noonan, CHARGE, TAAD/PDA, DiGeorge, and familial PDA, many forms of congenital heart disease. Maternal conditions and exposures associated with PDA include maternal diabetes, magnesium exposure, cocaine, and calcium channel blockers. Neonatal conditions and exposures associated with PDA include extreme prematurity, respiratory distress syndrome, neonatal sepsis, birth at high altitude, excess fluid administration, loop diuretics, aminoglycosides, cimetidine, and heparin.