Managing rodenticide toxicity requires an interprofessional team, including the emergency department, poison control, toxicologist, neurologist, intensivist, and possibly a nephrologist or hepatologist. The specialists involved will depend on the organ systems affected. Pharmacists and nurses may also make significant contributions depending on the poisonous agent and necessary interventions or antidotes. For example, warfarin or warfarin-like anticoagulants may require vitamin K, which the pharmacist can prepare and assist in dosing recommendations and will be administered by the nurses. The initial management includes a primary survey with the ABCDE protocol. Gastric lavage and activated charcoal may be used within one hour of ingestion after proper dermal exposure and decontamination. A collective team effort will provide the most expedient care yielding the best prognosis.

Those with minimal symptoms may recover fully with treatment, but others with severe toxicity may have permanent organ damage, or their case may even result in death. All specialists and other personnel on the case must document their findings and interventions in the patient's record so that all interprofessional team members will have access to the same updated, accurate information. Open communication lines are essential, as miscommunications can have fatal consequences. Interprofessional care coordination and open lines of communication are critical to better patient outcomes in rodenticide toxicity cases. [Level 5]