The typical vertebrae have hallmark anatomic structures that are conserved across the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar regions. Generally, each vertebra is comprised of a ventral vertebral body comprised of mostly trabecular cancellous and a denser, mostly cortical dorsal vertebral arch.  The vertebral body is the main site of intervertebral articulation and load-bearing. Each vertebral body is linked to its cranial and caudal counterparts by an intervertebral disk.  The dorsal arch typically consists of a pair of pedicles arising from the dorsal vertebral body, which unite dorsally by a pair of flat laminae. The two laminae join at the midline producing a dorsal projection called the spinous process. The pedicles, laminae, and dorsum of the vertebral body form the vertebral foramen, a complete osseous ring that encloses the spinal cord. Its main role is to protect the spinal cord and its associated vascular structures. Additionally, the transverse processes and the superior and inferior articular processes are present near the junction of the pedicles and the laminae. In the cervical spine, the costal process becomes the anterior part of the transverse process that encloses the vertebral artery foramen.

**Unique Features of the Cervical Spine**

Despite displaying most typical vertebral hallmarks, a significant amount of anatomical variation exists within the cervical spine. The main role of the cervical spine is to support and promote the movement of the head and neck. Large vertebral bodies are not necessary, considering the relatively small weight-bearing load at this level. Thus, an increased range of motion takes priority over vertebral size and rigidity. However, the additional motion and flexibility may carry an increased risk for injury to the spinal cord and its associated neurovascular structures. All seven cervical vertebrae have transverse foramen within their transverse processes, where a pair of vertebral arteries travel cranially through the vertebrae starting at C6 before coursing medially over the arch of C1 towards the foramen magnum. The spinous processes of the C2 to C6 vertebrae are bifid, C1 has a posterior tubercle instead of a spinous process, and C7 has a much larger and singular spinous process, known as the vertebra prominens, which is similar to those in the thoracic vertebrae.

**The Upper Cervical Spine – The Atlas (C1) and the Axis (C2)**

The upper cervical region of the cervical spine includes C1 and C2, which are more commonly referred to as the atlas and the axis, respectively. The main function of the atlas is to support and cradle the base of the occiput at the atlanto-occipital articulation.  As such, there are many features unique to the atlas not shared with the rest of the spine.  Most notably, the atlas lacks a vertebral body and instead forms a large ring-shaped fusion of anterior and posterior arches that allows C1 to accommodate the spinal cord as it exits the foramen magnum. The atlas has pronounced concave and medially facing articular facets which accommodate the convex occipital condyles. This morphology helps the joint contribute roughly fifty percent of flexion-extension of the neck but limits lateral displacement of the occiput. These joints receive further stabilization from strong soft-tissue ligaments that promote tight adherence to the occiput.

The axis, or C2, also possesses unique anatomical features. Whereas the atlas is responsible for accommodating the occiput, the axis is the primary weight-bearing bone of the upper cervical region. The hallmark feature is its odontoid process, or dens, a bony projection extending cranially from the vertebral body. It evolved from the body of the atlas and serves as the principal attachment point for the soft tissues that stabilize the atlantoaxial junction. In contrast to the atlanto-occipital joint, the atlantoaxial junction is responsible for about fifty percent of the rotational motion of the cervical spine. The junction has three articulations: a midline atlanto-odontoid (or atlanto-dental) joint and a pair of atlantoaxial facet joints. The atlanto-odontoid joint permits the anterior arch of the atlas to pivot on the odontoid process. The lateral facet joints involve the articulation of the atlas’ inferior facets and the superior facets of the axis; these joints are fairly shallow to allow for significant motion.

**The Subaxial Cervical Spine – C3 to C7**

All five vertebrae in this region share nearly identical morphological and functional features and, compared to the upper cervical spine, share most characteristics with the typical vertebral anatomy. Unique to these, all five vertebrae possess uncinate processes, which are bony prominences on the lateral edges of the vertebral body that articulate at Luschka joints to confer additional stability and prevent vertebral listhesis.

There also exist some minor features of C7 that differentiate it from the rest of the subaxial region. The transverse foramen of C7 is smaller in diameter than the rest of the region and typically does not house the vertebral arteries.  Instead, the vertebral arteries cross anteriorly to the transverse processes of C7 before proceeding cranially through the transverse foramina of C6.  Additionally, C7 is considered a transitional vertebra and, as such, has a spinous process and inferior facets that resemble thoracic vertebrae.  The vertebra also has a somewhat larger vertebral body.