**History**

Clinical signs of rhinocerebral mucormycosis are nonspecific, impeding early diagnosis. Symptoms are mostly associated with the involvement of the head region. One-sided headache behind the eyes and lethargy are the earlier presentation. Other general presentation includes nausea, fever, nasal congestion and rhinorrhea, epistaxis, nasal hypoesthesia, facial pain and numbness, history of black nasal discharge and sinusitis. Common eye complaints are retro-orbital or periorbital pain, amaurosis, diplopia, blurring of visions. CNS involvement presents with convulsions, dizziness, altered mental status, and gait. In widespread cases, respiratory involvement shows the difficulty in breathing, cough, and hemoptysis. Vomiting and abdominal pain are common in gastrointestinal involvement.

**Physical Examination**

Nasal and orbital cellulitis, reddened and swelling of nasal bridge and skin of cheek in later stages, and eventually turn black due to cell death are the common findings. Black eschar visible on nasal mucosa or palatine mucosa. Bleeding from the nose may be present in severe cases. Intraoral examination can show palatal ulceration. Some series of studies revealed proptosis as the most common orbital sign followed by ophthalmoplegia and visual loss. Other eye signs are conjunctival chemosis, nystagmus, and fixed pupil. Patients with cerebral involvement and vascular compromise may be in a coma or may show signs of a stroke. Neurological examination may reveal palsies of loss of second to seventh cranial nerves.