In more than half of the reported cases of Harlequin syndrome, there is no underlying organic etiology, and the cause is unknown, referred to as idiopathic Harlequin syndrome. There is no genetic association found with Harlequin syndrome. Immaturity, injury, compression, or blockage of the sympathetic fibers to the face may result in the Harlequin sign, representing underlying pathology. Harlequin syndrome is common in neonates, attributed to hypothalamic functional immaturity and vasomotor instability.

Proposed mechanisms for Harlequin syndrome occurring in adults include occlusion of the third thoracic radicular artery secondary to exercise, atypical neural crest cell migration, and microvascular ischemia mediated by infections (Human herpes simplex virus-6, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus, varicella) or autoimmune processes affecting the nerves (Guillain Barre syndrome, multiple sclerosis, hyperthyroidism, diabetic neuropathy).

A significant number of reported cases of Harlequin signs are iatrogenic, occurring following surgical and anesthetic procedures. Harlequin face after anesthesia is mostly attributed to the local anesthetic blockade of the sympathetic fibers following regional or neuraxial anesthetic techniques. Few cases have also been reported secondary to needlestick injury following internal jugular cannulation or VA ECMO neck cannulation.

Compressive retraction injuries or accidental resection of the sympathetic fibers to the face during the neck surgeries may also result in the Harlequin sign.

1) Idiopathic (Harlequin syndrome)

2) Secondary (Harlequin sign)

- Underlying structural lesions:

- Pancoast tumors
- Cervical sympathetic tumors
- Dissection of the cervical carotid artery
- Birth injuries
- Thoracic syrinx
- Medullary infraction
- Thalamic hemorrhage

- Post anesthetic procedures:

- Thoracic epidural
- Paravertebral blocks
- Multilevel intercostal nerve block
- Interscalene block
- Erector spinae plane block
- Jugular venous lines

- Post-surgery

- Carotid endarterectomy
- Thyroidectomy
- Anterior cervical discectomy
- Neck schwannoma excision
- Rotational spine surgeries
- VA ECMO
- Thoracic sympathectomy
- Cervical or mediastinal mass excision

3) Harlequin syndrome of neonates