The sphenopalatine foramen forms from the fusion of the palatine bone and the sphenoid bone around the sphenopalatine artery; thus, a description of the embryology of the structures, as mentioned earlier, will provide a better understanding of the development of the sphenopalatine foramen.

- Sphenopalatine artery: Around the fourth to the fifth week of embryologic development, the aortic arch forms from the mesoderm of the first pharyngeal arch. The aortic sac that gives rise to the aortic arch then forms the maxillary artery and its subsequent branches, including the sphenopalatine artery. The branches and diameter of the sphenopalatine artery determine the number, shape, and size of the sphenopalatine foramen.

- Sphenoid bone: The sphenoid bone forms from neural crest cells and first develops as the body of the sphenoid at around 7 to 8 weeks of fetal development. The body of the sphenoid is originally formed in two parts: the pre-sphenoid, otherwise known as the tuberculum sellae, which is associated with the lesser wings and the post-sphenoid, otherwise known as the sella turcica and the dorsum sellae, which is associated with the greater wings and pterygoid process. The pre-sphenoid portion begins to ossify around the ninth week of fetal development, while the post-sphenoid portion begins to ossify around the eighth week of fetal development. The pre- and post-sphenoid portions of the sphenoid bone typically fuse around the eighth month of life.

- Palatine bone: The palatine bone derives from neural crest cells and forms around the ninth week of embryologic development as part of secondary palate formation.

In summary, the subsequent fusion of the palatine and sphenoid bone around the sphenopalatine artery result in the formation of the sphenopalatine foramen.