The mfERG is traditionally recorded in photopic conditions. This excludes rod contributions to the signal and ensures a cone-driven response primarily. The mfERG waveform includes an initial negative deflection (N1), followed by a positive deflection (P1), and a second negative deflection (N2).

**Waveform Components**

**N1**

The N1-wave is the initial negative deflection corresponding to cone photoreceptor cell activity. This wave component largely measures outer retinal function.

**P1**

The P1-wave is the positive deflection following the N1-wave representing the depolarization of inner retinal Muller and bipolar cells and amacrine cells, providing a measure of phototransduction activity.

**Waveform Analysis**

The mfERG can be analyzed according to the amplitudes and implicit times of the wave components. Generally, the amplitude and implicit time of P1 are the standard measurements. The amplitude and timing of N1 may also be measured. However, these measurements are not part of the current standard.

**Amplitude**

The amplitude is the maximal light-induced electrical response (voltage) generated by the various retinal cells. The mfERG amplitude is the trough-to-peak amplitude, measured from the trough of N1 to the peak of P1.

**Implicit Time**

Implicit time (time-to-peak) refers to the time needed for the electrical response to reach maximum amplitude. Implicit time is measured from stimulus onset to the corresponding wave-component peak and reflects the rate of signal conduction.

**Protocols**

The ISCEV standards for generating the mfERG response are designed to minimize variability between procedures, thus enabling data to be compared among laboratories.  ISCEV defines the following clinical protocols for mfERG stimulus parameters and recording:

**Stimulus and Recording Parameters**

**Stimulus Size and Number of Elements**

The stimulus display should comprise an array of 61 or 103 black-and-white hexagons over 40-50 degrees (20-25-degree radius to display edge) of the central visual field, including a central fixation target.

**Duration of Recording**

It is recommended to record the mfERG for a minimum duration of 4 minutes for 61 element arrays and 8 min for 103 element arrays. To permit patient rest between runs, the total recording time is typically divided into shorter segments of approximately 15–30 seconds. This helps to minimize the loss of data secondary to movement, noise, or other potential artifacts.

**Stimulation**

**Stimulus Source**

Cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors have traditionally been used for displaying mfERG stimuli. However, these are being more recently replaced with liquid crystal displays (LCDs). Since alternative sources of stimulation can impact the mfERG waveform, it is important to specify the details of the model used.

**Frame Frequency**

CRT frame frequencies of 75 Hz (most common) and 60 Hz may be used. Since variation in frequency may alter the mfERG response, normative values for healthy individuals must be separately determined for a given frequency. Therefore, it is important to note the frame frequency during data interpretation.

**Luminance and Contrast**

- When using CRTs, stimulus luminance should be at least 100 cd/m2 in the light state. In the dark state, luminance should be low enough to achieve a contrast (Michelson) of at least 90%.

- When using LCDs, a higher luminance setting may be required to achieve clear waveforms with reasonable mfERG amplitudes in the light state.

- For all recordings, the mean stimulus luminance should match the background luminance.

**Calibration**

Since luminance and contrast affect signal recordings, it is important to calibrate the stimulus according to ISCEV guidelines. In particular, the light and dark elements are not always uniform for many monitors, and variations greater than 15% are not acceptable.

**Stimulus Parameters**

**Stimulus Pattern**

The Standard display is a hexagonal stimulus with larger peripheral hexagons and smaller central hexagons. This pattern is scaled in size, such that mfERG responses of approximately equal amplitudes are produced over the healthy retina.

**Temporal Sequence**

The m-sequence is the standard for routine testing in mfERG. This algorithm determines the rate at which hexagonal elements change between dark and light stages with every frame.

**Stimulus Size and Number of Elements**

The size of the contrast-reversing stimulus may comprise an array of either 64 or 103 black-and-white hexagons over 30-40 degrees of the central visual field. The width of the stimulus field must include the blind spot. The selection of 64 versus 103 elements will depend on balancing between good spatial resolution and a high signal-to-noise ratio while also minimizing the recording time.

**Fixation Targets**

Stable fixation is critical for acquiring reliable mfERG recordings. To avoid a diminished response, fixation targets should minimally cover the central stimulus element. The examiner should also confirm the proper visualization of the fixation target by the patient.

**Signal Recording**

**Amplifiers and Filters**

Amplifiers and filters are used to produce recognizable signals and remove confounding electrical noise. A filter bandpass range of 5 to 200 Hz is acceptable for basic mfERG with 3 to 10 Hz, and 100 to 300 Hz ranges for the high and low pass cutoffs, respectively. Since filter settings within these ranges can variably alter the waveform, the same settings should be uniformly applied for all patients tested in a given study.

**Signal Analysis**

Artifact rejection

Artifact rejection algorithms are used for removing sources of signal distortion, as may be artificially induced blinks or movement.

Spatial averaging

Spatial averaging may be used to eliminate noise and smoothen waveforms. The contribution from the averaged neighboring elements should not exceed 17% to ensure equal influence by each of the 6 neighbors for a given hexagon.

Signal extraction/kernels

The first-order kernel is the standard response. The second-order kernel and other higher-order kernels are used in special circumstances and are occasionally reported as well. ****

**Interpreting and Reporting the mfERG**

- Carefully examine the mfERG trace array for areas of diminished or delayed signals.

- Assess mfERG normality based on the overall appearance of the waveform and comparison with locally available normative data.

- Evaluate 3-D representations and ring response plots to help further identify potentially damaged areas.

**Displaying Results**

Trace arrays

- Displays an array of the mfERG traces for visually inspecting topographic variability as well as the quality of recordings.

- Trace lengths of 100 ms or more should be used.

- It can be spatially compared to visual field tests to help evaluate potential relationships between retinal dysfunction and visual field defects.

Topographic (3-D) response density plots

- Depicts the overall signal strength per unit area of the retina.

- It can be useful for assessing the quality of fixation by observing the location and depth of the blind spot. The presence of a blind spot assures good fixation. The absence of a blind spot can be due to poor fixation or a generalized loss of signal due to disease.

- Limitations of the 3-D plot include:

- Loss of waveform information. Thus, large but abnormal or delayed responses can produce normal 3-D plots.
- A central peak in the 3-D plot can be seen in some records without any retinal signal. The appearance of the 3-D plot from a given recording is dependent on how the local amplitude is measured. For these reasons, 3-D plots should not be used without a simultaneous display of the trace array.

Ring and other regional averages

Regional responses can be averaged per hexagon and compared between affected and unaffected or control eyes. Averaged responses within successive rings may also be used to evaluate visual dysfunction in patients with radial asymmetry. Since the stimulus hexagons are scaled to provide approximately equal response amplitudes, responses are approximately constant across rings. Responses within a ring can further be calculated as amplitude/unit area, whereby the summed responses in each ring are divided by the total area of the hexagons in the ring and plotted as nV/ deg2. Notably, the largest response is observed in the central foveal region, given the high density of cone photoreceptors and bipolar cells.

Measurements and calibration marks

All traces/graphs must include calibration marks to enable adequate data comparison within and among patients.

**Normal values**

Each laboratory should develop its own age-adjusted, normative database. Median values rather than mean values should be reported given electrophysiologic data are not always normally distributed.