Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) should be checked to see if the patient has hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism. Thyroid microsomal antibodies and thyroid receptor antibodies can be checked for confirmation of autoimmune thyroid disease. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are significantly elevated in infectious thyroiditis (bacterial).

Thyroid ultrasound is the most important and most commonly used imaging modality for evaluation of the thyroid gland. Heterogenous thyroid parenchyma indicates inflammation of the thyroid gland, but it does not differentiate between production versus destruction thyroiditis. Thyroid ultrasound can also detect nodules in the thyroid gland. The characteristics of nodules can help to differentiate between benign or malignant nodules.

A thyroid uptake and scan can be done to differentiate production thyroiditis or destruction thyroiditis in patients who present with thyrotoxicosis characterized by low TSH with or without elevated T4 and T3. Low uptake on thyroid scan would indicate destruction thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis, infectious thyroiditis), while increased or normal uptake indicates production thyroiditis (Graves disease).

Fine-needle aspiration is done to evaluate suspicious thyroid nodules to rule out malignancy. In general, any thyroid nodule, which is less than 10 mm, can be monitored without fine-needle aspiration.

**Acute Thyroiditis**

Thyroid ultrasound, blood cultures, fine needle aspiration with gram stain should be obtained when the clinical presentation is suspicious of infectious thyroiditis. Thyroid function tests are usually normal, but in rare cases, hypo or hyperthyroidism may be present. In cases of radiation thyroiditis, there is a preceding history of radiation exposure or treatment with radioactive iodine for likely Graves disease, which will guide in the diagnosis.

**Subacute Thyroiditis**

There is a strong association with HLA-35. ESR and CRP are markedly elevated, and so is leucocyte count. T4, T3, and TSH can vary depending on the hyperthyroid or hypothyroid phase. The iodine uptake is low, distinguishing the thyrotoxic phase from Graves disease.

**Chronic Thyroiditis**

Diagnostic tests for autoimmune/Hashimoto thyroiditis include thyroid peroxidase antibody, which is present in 90% of the patients and thyroglobulin antibody, which is present in 20% to 50%. Thyroid function tests show a hypothyroid picture with high TSH and low T3 and T4. It is associated with HLA-DR3, HLA-DR4, HLA-DR5 in Whites.

In patients who are on drugs like amiodarone, lithium, interferon, interleukin 2, and checkpoint inhibitors should have baseline TSH at the commencement of treatment.

Postpartum thyroiditis presents with symptoms of hyperthyroidism and history of recent pregnancy and should be evaluated with TSH, free T4, free T3. It can be distinguished from Graves disease by 24-hour iodine uptake scan, and the uptake is low in postpartum thyroiditis.

Riedel thyroiditis: Biopsy is necessary for definitive diagnosis. FNA may not be sufficient for diagnosis and may require an open biopsy for definitive diagnosis of this disease.