The only proven curative approach in most patients is surgery (resection or transplant). Unfortunately, most patients are not candidates for surgery (70%). Resectable candidates have early hepatocellular carcinoma stage (less than IIIB and liver disease Child-Pugh stage A only). Resection can achieve relapse-free survival of 40% and 5-year OS of 90%, but the surgery carries a mortality rate of 5% to 10% in patients with cirrhosis. Transplant candidates are evaluated according to the Milan criteria (single tumor smaller than 5 cm or two to three tumors none exceeding 3 cm and no vascular invasion and/or extrahepatic spread) plus High MELD-Na score to ensure that available organs are directed to transplant candidates according to urgency. A liver transplant can achieve relapse-free survival of 80% and 4-year OS 75%. Waiting time for transplant may be months, and hence bridging therapies are performed (chemoembolization, radiofrequency ablation, or partial hepatectomy). Neoadjuvant therapy is not considered a standard of care and adjuvant therapy by the Adjuvant Treatment in the Prevention of Recurrence of Hepatocellular Carcinoma (STORM) (sorafenib) trial showed no benefit. Patients should be offered enrollment in clinical trials when available. If chronic viral hepatitis is present, treatment should be included in the multidisciplinary discussion.

For non-surgical candidates, a variety of local treatment options could be offered. Radiofrequency ablation could offer complete remission in 80% of cases (tumors less than 3 cm and 50% of tumors larger than 3 cm). Radiofrequency ablation can be performed in tumors smaller than 4 cm and Child-Pugh A/B liver disease severity. Transarterial chemoembolization is most often used for large or multifocal disease (larger than 5 cm or more than three tumors) not suitable for local ablation with early liver disease. Transarterial chemoembolization offers a survival benefit but only in selected patients with tumors that are smaller than 2 cm and CLIP1 and those cohorts of patients have a median of survival of 50 months. Transarterial chemoembolization absolute contraindications include portal vein thrombosis, encephalopathy, and biliary obstruction and other relative limiting factors. Transarterial chemoembolization plus radiofrequency ablation may be better according to a retrospective analysis with a five-year OS of 44% compared to 20% with only transarterial chemoembolization or 28% with only radiofrequency ablation. Percutaneous ethanol injection [PEI] is considered for poor Child-Pugh B/C liver stage. Other thermal ablation therapies are cryoablation or microwave. Multiple radiation therapy modalities are available (EBRT-SBRT-IMRT-Cyberknife-(90Y or 131I) radioembolization-Proton Beam) without clear guidelines or consensus.

Systemic therapy for hepatocellular carcinoma patients with advanced disease is single-agent multikinase inhibitor which is sorafenib and no role for chemotherapy.

The Sorafenib Hepatocellular Carcinoma Assessment Randomized Protocol (SHARP) study, a multicenter, phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with 602 patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma compared sorafenib (at a dose of 400 mg twice per day) to placebo and results revealed time to progression of 5.5 months versus 2.8 months and mOS of 10.7 months versus 7.9 months, in favor of sorafenib and statistically significant for both outcomes. Of note, the SHARP study only included hepatocellular carcinoma patients with Child-Pugh A, and a subgroup analysis showed HCV positive patients had a longer median survival of 14 months. Sorafenib was for long the only approved hepatocellular carcinoma option in the advanced disease setting until the Regorafenib After Sorafenib in Patients with Hepatocellular Carcinoma (RESORCE) study with regorafenib (a multikinase inhibitor) revealed positive results. This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter phase 3, that enrolled 573 patients with Hepatocellular carcinoma whose disease has progressed after treatment with sorafenib greater than 400 mg/day and CP-A (97%). The trial compared 160 mg regorafenib once daily for 3 weeks on and 1 week off, or best supportive care plus placebo, with 28 days cycles. The results revealed a statistically significant median of survival of 10.6 months in the regorafenib group when compared with 7.8 months in the control arm. The Regorafenib After Sorafenib in Patients with Hepatocellular Carcinoma (RESORCE) study included 87% of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma and a Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer system stage C. Another option for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma whose disease progressed on sorafenib therapy is ramucirumab (a recombinant monoclonal antibody which inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2). In the REACH study, a median of survival was improved with ramucirumab (9.2 months) compared with placebo (7.6 months) but did not reach statistical significant (p = 0.1391). Nonetheless, a sub-analysis demonstrated a significant median of survival benefit for patients with an AFP level of 400 ng/mL or greater and Child-Pugh A for 7.8 months for ramucirumab compared with 4.2 months for placebo (HR, 0.67; 95% CI; 0.51, 0.90). REACH-2 study of ramucirumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma with underlying Child-Pugh A cirrhosis and baseline AFP levels of 400 ng/mL or more is currently recruiting to evaluate this hypothesis. Ongoing clinical trials and future therapies are focused on immunotherapy (nivolumab and durvalumab) and small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (cabozantinib).