Spina bifida is a congenital disability in which the backbone or spine does not typically form in a baby while developing in the mother’s womb. It is also known as myelomeningocele or open neural tube defect. It will appear an opening in their skin on their back through which part of the spine and nerve tissue can protrude out.

Neural tube defects can cause various long-term problems in your child, and they depend on how severe the defect is. Many babies with spina bifida can have the following:

- A weakness of their leg and may not be able to walk

- Loss of feeling below their waist

- Problems controlling their urine and stools

- Issues of learning or memory

- Some children may also develop too much fluid in their brain and may need surgery to relieve the pressure on their brain

After receiving a prenatal diagnosis of spina bifida, some parents chose to terminate the pregnancy, while others prefer to continue their pregnancy. If you decide to continue the pregnancy, some centers can offer fetal surgery to correct the defect, or scheduled surgery to correct the congenital disability immediately after birth. After the initial treatment, your baby will need medical management throughout their life.

They may need:

- Wheelchair or assist devices to help them walk

- Other surgeries to fix their bones

- They may have learning problems and require additional testing and support at school

- If their bladder does not work, they may need a tube to empty their bladder from time to time.

A child’s diagnosis will affect their quality of life. The best way to support the child will be to take them to a multidisciplinary team of medical professionals who specialize in taking care of patients with this diagnosis.