The hormones of the pituitary gland are protein or polypeptide in nature and vary in complexity.

**Anterior Pituitary Hormones**

**Human Growth Hormone**

Human growth hormone (HGH), also known as somatotropin, is a protein of 191 amino acid single chain polypeptides secreted by the acidophilic somatotropic cells of the anterior pituitary gland.

**Prolactin**

Prolactin is a protein hormone secreted by the acidophilic lactotroph cells of the anterior pituitary gland. Chemically, prolactin is similar to a growth hormone composing of 199 amino acids, and forms after a 28-amino acid signal peptide are proteolytically cleaved from the prolactin prohormone (pre-prolactin).

**Follicle-stimulating Hormone (FSH) and Luteinizing Hormone (LH)**

FSH and LH, also known as gonadotropins, are glycoprotein hormones secreted by the gonadotropin cells of the adenohypophysis. They are both glycoproteins made up of an alpha and beta subunit. The alpha subunits are identical between the two hormones, but the beta subunit of each is different and gives each hormone its biological specificity.

**Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone (ACTH)**

The adrenocorticotrophic hormone is a polypeptide tropic hormone produced and secreted by the basophilic corticotropic cells of the anterior pituitary gland. ACTH is synthesized from Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and consists of 39 amino acids. The hypothalamus-pituitary axis and secretion tightly regulate its production is in response to the corticotropin-releasing hormone.

**Thyroid-stimulating Hormone (TSH)**

Thyroid-stimulating hormone is a peptide hormone secreted by the basophilic thyrotropes of the anterior pituitary gland. It is composed of 1 alpha chain and one beta chain.

**Posterior Pituitary Hormones**

**Vasopressin & Oxytocin**

Vasopressin, also known as antidiuretic hormone (ADH), is synthesized in the supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus while oxytocin synthesis occurs in the paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. Both the posterior pituitary hormones are packaged in secretory granules and move down the axon where they are stored in the Herring bodies. These bodies are neurosecretory granules that represent the terminal ends of the axons coming from the hypothalamus.