Complex organizations are tasked with utilizing limited resources to create goods and services; a healthcare organization is no exception. The resources that serve as inputs to a healthcare organization include clinical and administrative staff, medical supplies and equipment, and government and private health insurance. The goods and services that serve as outputs of a healthcare organization include patient care outcomes, patient satisfaction, and community and population health.

Therefore, whether it is the director of a national health system (e.g., National Health Services in the UK), the CEO of an academic hospital (e.g., the Mayo Clinic), or the manager of a local urgent care center, they must understand how to design, modify, and implement a business budget.

- **Budget objectives**: This component is thewhy behind a budgeting system and includes overarching organizational goals and specific programming efforts. For example, suppose a local hospital plans to set up a new dialysis center to better serve its patients with dialysis-dependent kidney diseases. In that case, managers should detail how such an initiative would impact next year's budget.

- **Capital budget**: This component typically includes equipment and infrastructure such as a robotic surgical system, CT/MRI machine, or new off-site clinic office space. Whenever a capital investment is considered, managers should go through a thorough evaluation process to determine whether the net benefit outweighs the net cost over the project's lifespan.

- **Statistical projections**: This component serves as theweather forecast function of a budgeting system with estimates of the volumes of services and procedures required during a budgetary period. This forecast will not only help with revenue projection but will also help with staffing and resource planning to ensure supply meets the demand.

- **Revenue budget**: This is the estimated gross revenue from various output streams. For example, an ophthalmology clinic may estimate its gross income by combining revenues from in-office clinical care and operating room surgical care.

- **Operating budget**: This is the expense side of the budget, composed of personnel salaries, supply and material costs, and administrative overhead. To accurately estimate the total expenses, one must understand the nature of the fees, i.e., fixed cost vs. variable cost.

The capital budget is often a big-ticket item throughout the budgeting process; therefore, it warrants further discussion. As stated above, the capital budget in the healthcare setting includes technologies, equipment, and sometimes physical buildings and facilities, which could require the investment of millions of dollars in any of the categories. Two financial models that could help managers evaluate whether a capital project is worth investing in are the **weighted average cost of capital (WACC)**and the**discounted cash flow (DCF)**models.

The WACC model is based on the concept of opportunity cost, computed by plugging in several variables to generate a percentage rate of return. These variables include the cost of capital before tax, the cost of equity, the cost of debt, the corporate tax rate, the value of equity shares, and the market value of debt.

The DCF model considers the time value of money by projecting the value of an investment over its lifespan. With this model, the yearly revenue from a project (cash flow) is projected, and each annual revenue projection is then discounted by the interest rate (i.e., the discounted cash flow). All the discounted values are added together to reflect the cumulative current value, and finally, the initial capital investment is subtracted from the cumulative current value. The resulting figure is the net present value (NPV), which could be positive (i.e., resulting in a profit), zero (i.e., resulting in net even), or negative (i.e., experiencing a loss).

Both WACC and DCF only estimate financial rates of return. Sometimes decisions to proceed with certain capital investments are also dictated by non-financial needs such as governmental mandates.