Indomethacin is available for oral administration as immediate-release (25 mg, 50 mg) and extended-release (75 mg) capsule formulations. An oral suspension formulation (25 mg/5 mL) is also available. Indomethacin administration can also be done via an IV injection (1 mg base per vial ) or rectal suppository (50 mg).

**Pain (Acute)**

20 mg three times a day or 40 mg two to three times a day orally.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis, Ankylosing Spondylitis, and Osteoarthritis**

25 mg two to three times a day orally or via rectal administration as an immediate-release formulation. The dose can be increased weekly to 25 to 50 mg until the maximum dose of 200 mg daily. This dose can be administered up to 100 mg at bedtime for patients with arthritis or night/morning stiffness. Alternatively, 75 mg extended-release capsules can be administered. The maximum recommended daily dose for extended-release capsules is 150 mg.

**Bursitis**

75 to 150 mg immediate-release formulation can be administered orally or rectally in three to four divided doses. Alternatively, 75 to 150 mg extended-release formulation can be administered orally in one to two divided doses

**Gouty Arthritis**

Administer 50 mg three times a day orally or rectally as an immediate-release formulation within one to two days of flare onset. American college of rheumatology also recommends prophylactic therapy with NSAIDs when initiating urate-lowering therapy.

**Patent Ductus Arteriosus**

The initial dose of indomethacin is IV 0.2 mg/kg/dose. No additional doses are required if the ductus arteriosus closes or significantly decreases within 48 hours. If the ductus arteriosus re-opens, a second/third dose may be required at 12 to 24 hours intervals as described. If the infant's age at the time of the first dose is <48 hours, administer 0.1 mg/kg IV. If the age at the time of the first dose is 2 to 7 days, administer 0.2mg/kg IV. If age at the time of the first dose >7 days, administer 0.25 mg/kg IV. If the neonate is nonresponsive to indomethacin, surgery may be necessary to close the ductus arteriosus. Echocardiographically directed indomethacin treatment can help in PDA closure, and dose minimization is possible.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment information is available for renal impairment in the manufacturer's labeling. According to KDIGO guidelines, NSAIDs, including indomethacin, should be avoided if GFR <30 ml/min 1.73m^2. Chronic treatment with NSAIDs is not advised in patients with GFR<60 ml/min/1.73 m^2.

**Hepatic Impairment:**Clinicians should use indomethacin cautiously in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**It is former FDA pregnancy category C medicine, and its use should be avoided. FDA suggests limiting NSAIDs use after 30 weeks of pregnancy. If treatment with NSAID is essential, physicians should reduce the dose and duration of therapy. If treatment is extended beyond 48 hours, consider ultrasound monitoring of amniotic fluid and discontinue the NSAID if oligohydramnios is found.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Indomethacin is found in low levels in breast milk, so it is acceptable to be used by lactating women. However, other drugs with established safer profiles during lactation may be preferred, especially when nursing a newborn or preterm infant.

**Potentially Inappropriate Medication in Older Adults:**Indomethacin is identified as potentially inappropriate medicine for use in older adults according to the American Geriatric Society Beers Criteria. Increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding/peptic ulcer disease and acute kidney injury in older adults. Indomethacin is more likely than other NSAIDs to have adverse central nervous system reactions.