Hypercalcemia, vitamin D toxicity, and hypersensitivity to calcitriol or any vitamin D analog are relative contraindications to taking systemic calcitriol. Further contraindications to calcitriol are patients with increased sensitivity to calcium dysregulation, including arteriosclerosis, cardiac disease, hyperphosphatemia, renal failure, and sarcoidosis. Patients with cardiac disease, especially those taking digoxin, are at an increased risk for cardiac arrhythmias from hypercalcemia and should be dosed conservatively.

From a preventative lifestyle perspective, accidental exposure, prolonged ultraviolet (UV) sunlight absorption, occlusive dressing use, ocular exposure, and dehydration are contraindications to calcitriol use, as they may increase serum calcium to toxic levels. Photosensitizing agents and UV sunlight may increase the risk of skin tumor formation when combined with topical calcitriol. The topical ointment should not be applied to the face and may lead to skin irritation. For patients with recent injuries and wounds, increased calcium levels may also occur with topical administration due to the enhanced absorption of calcitriol from occlusive dressings.

Pregnancy and breastfeeding are also contraindications to calcitriol administration. Calcitriol is considered in the FDA Pregnancy Category C, meaning there are no well-controlled studies on the adverse effects of calcitriol on pregnant women. In cases where calcitriol is necessary for pregnant women, close monitoring of serum calcium levels is required since pregnancy is associated with alterations in calcium production, metabolism, and excretion.

Further contraindications and considerations to calcitriol administration include major drug interactions that are known to induce hypercalcemia. For example, many patients who benefit from calcitriol may also be taking thiazide diuretics, and serum calcium concentrations must be monitored closely. Concomitant use of thiazides and calcitriol can worsen hypercalcemia as thiazides help reabsorb calcium at the distal tubule. Patients with chronic renal failure who take aluminum-containing antacids for hyperphosphatemia must also be monitored closely as the calcium-phosphate product may affect serum calcium and phosphate levels. Other drugs, such as phenytoin and phenobarbital, accelerate systemic calcitriol metabolism, and drugs such as ketoconazole may inhibit catabolic enzymes of calcitriol and cause unintentional hypercalcemia.