# Continuing Education Activity

Flucytosine is a medication used in the management and treatment of systemic and severe candida and cryptococcus infections. It is in the antimetabolite, antifungal class of drugs. This activity outlines the indications, action, and contraindications for flucytosine as a valuable agent in treating and managing severe fungal infections. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent to members of the healthcare team in the care of patients with candida and cryptococcus infections and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of flucytosine.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of flucytosine.
- Summarize the indications for using flucytosine.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance flucytosine and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Flucytosine (5-fluorocytosine) is an antimetabolite agent, classified as a systemic antifungal. It was first made in 1957 and FDA approved in 1971 for the treatment of severe candida and cryptococcus infections.

**FDA Approved Use**

Clinicians use flucytosine in combination with amphotericin B for invasive cryptococcal (meningitis) and candida infections.

**Other Use**

- Chromoblastomycosis

- Aspergillosis

# Mechanism of Action

Flucytosine (5-FC) action takes effect when it comes in contact with the fungus and is taken up by an enzyme known as cytosine permease. Once the drug has entered the fungus, it is then converted to its active form 5-fluorouracil(5-FU) by the enzyme cytosine deaminase within the cell.

# Administration

- 250 mg

- 500 mg

The medication can be started on an oral dosage of 50 mg to 150 mg/kg/day every six hours.

Flucytosine is available as a solution and is available in the following dosages

- 2.5 g/250 ml

Flucytosine administered by infusion should maintain concentrations of 50 mg/L.

The FDA has not approved flucytosine for intrathecal administration.

**Black Box Warnings:**flucytosine's use requires monitoring and extreme caution in patients with hepatic, renal, and hematologic insufficiency.

# Adverse Effects

**Common Adverse Effects**

- Gastrointestinal: nausea, emesis, abdominal pain, diarrhea

- Skin: rash, pruritus

- Acute hepatitis

- Nephrotoxicity

There are also reports of more severe hematologic adverse effects such as bone marrow suppression, pancytopenia, aplastic anemia, and agranulocytosis. Inflammatory bowel disease such as ulcerative colitis and perforation of the bowel are among the more severe but rare gastrointestinal adverse effects of flucytosine.

# Contraindications

Flucytosine is contraindicated in patients who have a hypersensitivity to the medication. During pregnancy, flucytosine use is not indicated during the first trimester as anatomic irregularities have appeared during aborted pregnancies. There have been no evidenced reports of toxicity during the second and third trimesters.

# Monitoring

It is vital to monitor the liver enzymes, CBC, and kidney functions regularly for patients taking flucytosine. The serum drug concentrations require thorough monitoring for patients receiving high dosages or extended durations of the treatment. The drug concentration is considered non-toxic and adequate at a level below 100 mg/L. With levels above 100 mg/L, toxicity may occur.

# Toxicity

Flucytosine toxicity can present with hepatitis and gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Flucytosine (5-fluorocytosine) is an FDA-approved medication indicated for the treatment of severe candida and cryptococcus infections. Administering care to patients prescribed flucytosine requires excellent interaction between the patient and an interprofessional team of healthcare providers. These providers can include a primary care clinician, mid-level practitioners, an infectious disease specialist, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care physician and infectious disease specialist must establish exceptional patient rapport so that the patient thoroughly comprehends the significance of medication compliance and is educated on the treatment of flucytosine for the illness and its complications.

The patient should receive routine checkups to monitor if the flucytosine is in an optimal range and the patient is not experiencing any toxicities and harm to the liver, kidneys, or bone marrow. The primary care and specialist should be up to date with the latest management guidelines with flucytosine, its implications, and adverse effects. Recommendations are not to use flucytosine as monotherapy due to likely drug resistance and its frequent use with nephrotoxic medication amphotericin B. If toxicity and organ damage does pursue, it is vital to dialyze the patient as 85 to 95% of the medication is excreted through the urine. Joint decision-making between the interprofessional team is essential to improve patient-centered care and reach the coveted outcome. Nursing staff can provide additional counseling on proper administration and potential adverse effects, and the pharmacist can reinforce those points and check for medication interactions. This type of interprofessional interaction will lead to better patient outcomes with flucytosine therapy. [Level 5]