The goal of rapid sequence intubation is to intubate the trachea safely and as quickly as possible without compromising oxygenation and hemodynamics.

During the preparation phase of rapid sequence intubation, tube size selection is important because attempting intubation with a larger endotracheal tube can cause vocal cord injury and laryngeal edema.

Aspiration of gastric contents is a potential risk in all patients undergoing this procedure. Fasting is encouraged if clinical suspicion for anticipated intubation is high, but this cannot always be achieved in emergency settings. Although cricoid pressure can be employed, at times, it can disrupt the laryngoscopy view and lead to esophageal rupture if active vomiting occurs. An aspiration event often results in a new infiltrate following endotracheal intubation on chest radiography.

Esophageal intubation can result in severe hypoxemia, ultimately leading to cardiac arrest and death. Hence, end-tidal carbon dioxide detection (colorimetric or waveform capnography) is recommended to confirm tracheal placement. Pneumothorax is a rare but potentially severe risk with endotracheal intubation; it usually results from a right or left mainstem intubation and can also occur in patients with severe reactive airway disease. Chest radiography following intubation is necessary to identify the depth of tube placement and to check for pneumothorax.

A key component of successful rapid sequence intubation is adequate sedation. Due to the many available drugs, the adverse effects of each sedative medication must be weighed against its potential benefits. Potential adverse effects of etomidate include myoclonus, nausea/vomiting, and adrenal suppression. It remains unclear whether a single induction dose of etomidate causes reversible adrenocortical suppression by reversibly inhibiting 11-beta-hydroxylase, a key enzyme in cortisol synthesis. When it occurs, it generally does not last more than 24 hours, and the cortisol level usually does not fall below normal physiologic levels. Etomidate can also lower the seizure threshold in patients who have a known seizure disorder.

Ketamine is known to cause disturbing dreams, hallucinations, and emotional distress as its sedative properties wear off. This is often referred to as the re-emergence phenomenon. This effect can be limited if concurrent benzodiazepine medications are used for sedation. As it increases cerebral blood flow, it should be avoided in patients with elevated intracranial pressures.

Propofol is contraindicated in patients with soybean or egg allergies as current formulations may contain these products resulting in a potential allergic reaction. As it decreases sympathetic activity, peripheral vasodilation and myocardial depression occur, leading to hypotension. This often resolves rapidly by replenishing intravascular volume by administering intravenous fluid bolus and sometimes with the transient use of inotropic agents. Propofol may also lead to the potential worsening of an existing neurological injury by reducing cerebral perfusion pressure