Once the determination of the need to evacuate is complete, planning for its implementation must begin in earnest. Ideally, there will have been prepared and rehearsed plans in place already, but every scenario is different and may not proceed as expected. The ability to adapt to the current situation is vital. Having a rehearsed plan, regardless of its fidelity to the real-life condition, sets a baseline from which all providers can branch out.

As can be seen in the evacuation phases, there are multiple transitions of care along with the periods of evacuation.  If one of the legs of evacuation is known to be a prolonged process, it may become necessary to establish exchange points along the route of evacuation.  Ambulance exchange points can work in two general ways.  First, one evacuation asset will move to an established location and then transfer their patients to another waiting evacuation asset before returning to the pickup point.  This method may be most useful in situations such as HAZMAT contamination.

As can be seen in the 9 Line Medevac report, there may be multiple issues affecting an evacuation. Communication between sites and moving assets is essential. Appropriate backup communication methods, including being told to go to a designated staging area and awaiting further instructions, should be part of the plan. The routes that assets will take should be known. It is not inconceivable that one route becomes unusable after an evacuation chain has already been put in to use. If there is a backlog on one route, prioritizing routes for the highest triaged patients may also become necessary. Various safety issues such as terrain, weather, contamination, or violence may need to be anticipated, and a balance between the need to evacuate and not should always merit consideration.

When utilizing evacuation triage, consideration of all these factors is crucial, and incorporation during the execution of the plan established on the scene is vital. It will be incumbent on the scene or incident commander to take charge of the evacuation chain or delegate this role to an appropriate party with authority and situational awareness. When executed properly, evacuation triage moves patients to appropriate treatment centers in a safe and timely fashion and ultimately helps to save resources and lives.