**Open Stamm Gastrostomy**

A supraumbilical incision is made, usually midline. The anterior parietal peritoneum of the stomach is visualized. A spot on the anterior stomach is chosen to allow for the stomach to be brought towards the anterior abdominal wall without tension. Next, the omentum is divided off of the greater curvature to reduce downward tension. 2-3 concentric purse-string suture is placed with a heavy permanent suture at the spot chosen on the stomach for gastrostomy, and a gastrostomy is created.

Permanent sutures can also be placed to fix the stomach to the anterior abdominal wall. The abdomen is then closed, and the feeding tube secured to the skin.

**Open Witzel Jejunostomy**

Multiple variations of a jejunostomy feeding tube technique are described; however, the Witzel jejunostomy feeding tube is the most commonly accepted technique. The ligament of Treitz is identified, which indicates the transition of the duodenum to the jejunum. A segment of jejunum approximately 30 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz is then chosen for jejunostomy feeding tube creation; the loop of bowel should be mobile. The feeding tube is then passed through an incision in the anterior abdominal wall at the chosen site. A purse-string of the suture is made at the on the antimesenteric border of the jejunum, and an enterotomy is made so that the tube is passed into the lumen distally. Next, a Witzel tunnel is created with interrupted permanent suture with seromuscular sutures are placed perpendicular to the feeding tube to imbricate the bowel wall over the feeding tube.

**Laparoscopic Feeding Tube Placement**

Many variations of laparoscopic approaches have been described. Ports are placed, and pneumoperitoneum is achieved. The stomach is then lifted to the anterior abdominal wall and spot chosen for tube placement. A 2-0 silk suture is then used to form a purse string around this area. Electrocautery is then used to make a small gastrotomy in the center of the purse string. The feeding tube is then inserted through the anterior abdominal wall and into the gastrotomy, tieing the purse-string suture tight around the tube. Next, the stomach is again lifted to the abdominal wall and sutured in place to the fascia.

It is also possible to perform the placement of a jejunostomy feeding tube laparoscopically. The procedure is began similar to the above described laparoscopic gastrostomy tube; however, a mobile portion of the jejunum distal to the ligament of Treitz is chosen. A purse-string is placed in the anterior mesenteric side, an enterotomy is made, and the feeding tube is passed via an incision in the anterior abdominal wall and suture tied. The jejunum is then fixed to the abdominal wall in four quadrants. Additional fixation of the distal jejunum to the anterior abdominal wall is also recommended; this is thought to decrease the chance of jejunal torsion.

**Percutaneous Gastrostomy Tube**

Percutaneous gastrostomy feeding tubes can be placed radiographically using fluoroscopy, or endoscopically. There complication rate for each procedure is similar, though vary in type of complication.

**Endoscopic Percutaneous Gastrostomy Tube Placement**

The Ponsky preoral pull technique is the most common technique used to perform percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. The endoscopic is passed thorough the oropharynx, and the esophagus is intubated. The scope is passed through the esophagus and into the stomach. After the stomach is insufflated and transilluminated, a spot is chosen for peg placement, usually 2 cm medial to the costal margin and 2 cm below the xiphoid process. The skin is localized, and a small incision is made to allow a needle to be passed through the incision into the stomach, which is visualized on the endoscopic camera. A guidewire is then passed through the needle and grasped with an endoscopic snare, which is withdrawal out of the patient's mouth, and the needle is removed. The feeding tube is attached to the guidewire and pulled into the patient's mouth and out of the anterior abdominal wall. It is secured in place with a disc or bar-shaped bumper against the skin, and repeat endoscopy is used to confirm proper placement.

**Percutaneous Radiographic Gastrostomy Tube**

For this procedure, a nasogastric tube is placed, and the stomach is inflated with approximately 500 ml of air. The stomach is identified with fluoroscopy, and a needle is then passed through a skin incision into the stomach. A wire is then inserted through the needle, and a series of dilators are used over the wire in a Seldinger technique before the feeding tube was then inserted.