Mechanism of regulation of glycolysis occurs through covalent modification of rate-limiting enzymes, their allosteric activation or inhibition, and by hormonal control.

A bifunctional enzyme PFK2/Fructose bisphosphatase, with kinase and phosphatase activity, is an important player in allosteric regulation. F2,6-BP is an allosteric effector whose concentration depends on the ratio of insulin and glucagon. PFK1 is positively regulated by F2,6-BP, whose synthesis is catalyzed by kinase activity of phosphofructokinase-2 (PFK-2). When there are plenty of substrates available, high levels of insulin activate a protein phosphatase that dephosphorylates phosphofructokinase-2 (PFK2), making it active, thereby promoting glycolysis.

On the other hand, when glucagon levels are high, a rise in cAMP activates protein kinase A which favors the phosphorylated form of the bifunctional enzyme. Phosphorylation inactivates PFK2 and allows the phosphatase form to stay active, causing the levels of F2,6-BP to decrease. This inhibits glycolysis, allowing gluconeogenesis to prevail.

Hormonal control plays an important role in the regulation of glycolysis. Carbohydrate consumption and its breakdown lead to an increase in the levels of glucose and trigger the release of insulin, resulting in an increase in the ratio of insulin to glucagon. Insulin activates glucokinase, PFK1, and pyruvate kinase, the three important enzymes catalyzing the irreversible steps in glycolysis in order to process the available substrate. At the same time, low glucagon levels ensure that gluconeogenesis is inhibited. Long-term control through gene transcription is particularly important in fasting and starvation states and in diabetes when the ratio of insulin to glucagon is low. In such conditions, the synthesis of glucokinase, PFK1, and pyruvate kinase are decreased by modulation of gene transcription