**Dosing**

**Pregnancy**

Tenofovir/emtricitabine has been studied in several trials that involved pregnant women. The limited data available indicate that the regimen is safe and does not lead to any adverse outcomes in the newborn. However, the priority is always non-drug therapy to reduce the risk of HIV infection in pregnant women. Even though current short-term data indicate that the pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis with tenofovir/emtricitabine is safe in pregnancy, all patients should be cautioned about the possibility of adverse outcomes. Tenofovir/emtricitabine is known to pass into breast milk.

**Adverse Effects
**

Overall, tenofovir/emtricitabine is well tolerated by most individuals. However, some people may experience the following adverse effects:

- Headache

- Nausea

- Abdominal pain

- Diarrhea

- Weight loss

**Rare, Serious Adverse Effects**

- Rarely the drug combination may cause liver dysfunction and lactic acidosis.

- In patients with hepatitis B, there can be worsening of the infection. Consequently, these patients should be closely monitored with regular liver function studies.

- When the drug combination is used for more than 3 to 6 months, some individuals may start to develop bone thinning, and thus some healthcare workers choose to obtain a baseline bone scan. A diet rich in calcium and dairy products is highly recommended in any patient with bone thinning prior to the start of therapy.

- Mild fat redistribution and reaccumulation may be seen in some individuals, and this is often associated with weight loss.

**Potential for Drug Interactions
**

Tenofovir is known to interact with other antiretroviral drugs. When coadministered with these agents, the following may occur:

- When tenofovir is coadministered with didanosine, it increases the serum concentrations of the latter, and this can lead to complications like peripheral neuropathy and pancreatitis. Thus, the dose of didanosine has to be reduced or discontinued in patients taking tenofovir.

- When tenofovir is coadministered with atazanavir, it can decrease the serum concentrations of the latter but increases concentrations of tenofovir. Thus, one must monitor the patient for tenofovir toxicity.

- When tenofovir is co-administered with lopinavir/ritonavir, it can lead to tenofovir toxicity.

- Tenofovir/emtricitabine also can interact adversely with other agents like adefovir, lamivudine, dabigatran, and vincristine.

Recent studies show that patients taking tenofovir/emtricitabine should not combine it with high doses of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as this can lead to new onset or worsening of renal impairment.

**What is the cost of tenofovir/emtricitabine?**

In the United States, the retail cost for a 30-day supply of this drug combination varies from $1400 to $1600. In Canada, the cost is anywhere from $800 to $1200, and unlike in the United States, most insurers do not cover the cost. Outside of North America, the cost per pill has been subsidized in Asia and Africa and varies from $0.20 to $0.40, which averages to about $8 to $15 a month, still a large sum in poverty-stricken areas of Africa and Asia.

**Financial Support
**

Several programs make tenofovir/emtricitabine more affordable by offering assistance with medication costs, co-payments, and insurance. However, patients should search out the best possible options because irrespective of what insurance is selected, the annual cost of this combination drug is expensive. The company that manufactures tenofovir/emtricitabine does have several programs for individuals who are unable to buy the product. Most US insurers cover the cost of tenofovir/emtricitabine, but the co-payments are very high. For those without insurance, some medication-assistance programs make the drug combination available for free. Outside of North America and Europe, the cost of tenofovir/emtricitabine is prohibitively expensive, and most people cannot afford it.