The scan is useful in the localization of primary neuroendocrine tumors (NET), showing somatostatin receptors. It is also used in follow-up, staging after treatment, and detection of metastasis. NETs arise from about 17 different cell types, which are present in the skin, lung, hepatobiliary system, genito-urinary tract, thyroid, and gastrointestinal tract

Van der Harst et al. used preoperatively [I]-MIBG scintigraphy and radio-labeled somatostatin analog for diagnosis of pheochromocytoma and concluded that somatostatin receptor imaging might be considered a supplement to MIBG scintigraphy in pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma patients with suspected metastasis.

111-In octreotide scan was used in localizing the presence of an intracardiac pheochromocytoma in a 13-year old boy. In that case, even a CT scan of the abdomen, pelvis, chest and whole body meta-iodo-benzyl guanidine (MIBG) scan could not localize the lesion.

- Merkel cell tumor of the skin

- Small-cell lung carcinoma

- Meningioma

- Astrocytoma

- Breast carcinoma

- Lymphoma

In a study, an octreotide scan helped to localize insulinomas among 4 out of 17 (24%) patients. This technique also detected ectopic insulinoma and malignant insulinoma. Only an octreotide scan could help in the localization of the ectopic insulinoma. Importantly, treatment with octreotide before the octreotide scan did not appear to alter tumor detectability in this series. Pre-treatment with octreotide may saturate the somatostatin receptors, but this treatment within a week before the scan can improve contrast and tumor detectability.

Liver metastases from carcinoids can demonstrate similar tracer accumulation like that of the surrounding liver; hence it may not be easy to distinguish it from normal hepatic tissue. Here subtraction technique using 99m-technetium colloid and SPECT is useful to arrive at a diagnosis.

Somatostatin receptors are present in 80% of gastrinomas. Pentetreotide scan successfully localizes these neoplasms (primary or nodal metastases) in up to 78 to 86% cases.

Certain autoimmune/granulomatous disorders (like sarcoidosis) can occasionally demonstrate octreotide takeup via overexpression of somatostatin receptors. Octreotide scanning correlates with the degree of dyspnea in sarcoidosis patients and more accurately quantifies the degree of pulmonary involvement compared with the radiological assessment. Octreotide scan can be useful in monitoring idiopathic interstitial pneumonia (IIP) in specific histological types [non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) and desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP)]. It may even substitute HRCT in the assessment of usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) for its excellent accuracy.

- Grade 1: uptake < normal liver

- Grade 2: uptake = normal liver

- Grade 3: uptake > normal liver

- Grade 4: uptake > spleen or kidneys

Octreotide scan performs even better to detect liver metastases than it does in primary tumor detection with sensitivity ranging from 49-91%. In different studies to identify NET metastases, Octreotide scanning was able to identify new lesions in 47% and 4.6% patients, respectively, whose lesions were missed by CT or MRI.