To fully understand the treatment and prognosis, one must separate this injury into three phases. The first phase includes the direct mechanical impact of injection: pressure-induced neurovascular compromise, edema, and possible compartment syndrome. As mentioned above, thousands of pounds of pressure can be transmitted through the nozzle and directly into the patient's hand and upper extremity. The high-pressure injection not only tears ligaments, tendons, and neurovascular structure but also causes osseous lesions in rare cases. The injected material or air rapidly flows around the neurovascular bundle, following the path of least resistance. The injection can reach as proximally as the mediastinum.

The second phase of high-pressure injection injury is the inflammatory sequela and chemical interaction of injected media with biologic substrates. Grease, paint, fuel, plastic, cement, and hydraulic fluid are examples of substances that may get injected into the extremity. Some of these materials, such as turpentine and other organic solvents, are extremely cytotoxic to the tissues and offer an overall poor prognosis. Oil-based paints have been reported to be more inflammatory than water-soluble acrylic-based paints. Turpentine and other paint thinners generally function by dissolving fats and can cause liquefaction of the tissues.

The third phase of high-pressure injection injury is the secondary microbial infection due to direct bacterial inoculation, potentially intensified necrosis precipitated by phases 1 and 2. This phase is relatively rare, ranging from 1.6% to 60% of cases reported in the literature, and is often polymicrobial.