Many biological markers of neuroblastoma have been discovered, of which the most important is MYCN. This oncogene is overexpressed in nearly 25% of patients with neuroblastoma. The gene is also commonly found in patients with advanced cancer. Patients with the MYCN gene tend to have rapid progression of cancer and poor outcomes. On the other hand, expression of the H-Ras gene is associated with low stage disease.

The DNA index is also used to assess response to treatment. Those with a DNA index of more than 1 tend to show a good response to doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide compared to those with an index of less than 1. Other biological markers linked to poor prognosis include lack of expression of glycoprotein CD 44 and elevated levels of telomerase RNA. Other markers linked to poor prognosis include elevated levels of LDH, serum ferritin, and serum neuron-specific enolase.

Close to 90% of patients have elevations in vanillyl mandelic acid and homovanillic acid in the urine. In Japan, mass screening using urinary catecholamines has been shown to lower deaths from high-risk neuroblastomas.

Neuroblastomas can develop in the adrenal gland (most common), paraspinal ganglia, and less often in the thorax, pelvis, and cervical areas. Infants commonly present with neck or thoracic masses, whereas older children tend to present with abdominal masses.

The symptoms are chiefly due to the mass of the lesion, which increases abdominal girth and causes pain. Lesions in the spinal canal can present with neurological deficits.