The laboratory tests will show the following:

- Low platelet count, usually <40x10^9/L for over three months.

- Blood film: It shows large platelets and tiny platelet fragments.

- Bone marrow examination: It shows an increased number of megakaryocytes.

- Platelet Coomb's test: Detects anti-platelet antibodies fixed on the patient's platelets. However, it should also be noted that antibody analysis focal to the platelet glycoproteins IIb/IIIa, Ib/IX, and Ia/IIa are of low sensitivity and seldom efficacious.

- Indirect test: Uses a pool of normal donor platelets to detect free serum antibodies against platelets, usually anti-glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antibodies.

- Various other tests can detect anti-platelet antibodies, including lymphocyte activation by autologous platelets, lymphocyte activation by platelet-antibody immune complexes, phagocytosis of platelet-associated IgG by competitive binding assays, radiolabeled Coombs antiglobulin test, fluorescein-labeled Coombs antiglobulin, and ELISA.

Testing for systemic lupus erythematosus (presenting with ITP):

- Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) can be performed using indirect immunofluorescence. Most cases of SLE show positive ANA results.  There is clinical data to suggest that ITP patients are at high risk of developing SLE

- Testing for auto-antibodies: This includes testing for anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA), anti-Smith, ENA, anti-cardiolipin, and anti-beta2 GP-I antibodies. A high serum level of anti-dsDNA and anti-Smith antibodies suggests SLE.

- Additionally, detection of C3 and C4, immunoglobulins (IgM, IgG, and IgA), serum protein electrophoresis, and cryoglobulins (if Raynaud is present) may be performed.

- Biopsies (lupus band test): Shows IgG and C3/C4 deposits along the dermo-epidermal junction in a lumpy-bumpy distribution. A renal biopsy may be helpful. It shows the deposition of immunocomplexes in the glomeruli.

Testing for HIV and Hepatitis C is advocated as these are treatable causes of thrombocytopenia.