**Lower Extremity Venous Anatomy**

The common femoral vein (CFV) starts at the inguinal ligament and bifurcates twice. The greater saphenous vein and the deep femoral vein (DFV) branch off medially and laterally, respectively. After these branch off the CFV, the CFV becomes the superficial femoral vein (SFV), which is the main deep vein of the lower leg. After passing through the adductor canal, the SFV becomes the popliteal vein, which subsequently trifurcates into the anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal veins. It is important to note the use of the correct anatomic nomenclature of lower extremity vasculature can be misleading clinically. The CFV and SFV make up the deep venous system in the upper lower extremity as they are the larger more central vessels in the leg. The DFV is a smaller superficial structure and therefore is not part of the deep venous system. It is because of this confusing nomenclature that many identify the CFV and SFV as just the femoral vein. When reporting identification or pathology of the DFV, such as a thrombosis of the DFV, this misleading nomenclature is usually also reported to prevent misdiagnosis of deep vein pathology.

**Upper Extremity Venous Anatomy**

The jugular vein and subclavian vein both branch off of the brachiocephalic vein. The subclavian vein bifurcates into the axillary vein and the cephalic vein, which is a large but superficial vein in the arm and forearm. The axillary vein gives off two branches of the brachial veins, which course alongside the brachial artery, before becoming the basilic vein, another large but superficial vein that continues for the length of the arm and forearm. When the brachial veins reach the antecubital fossa, it branches into multiple veins that each accompany an artery through the anterior compartment of the forearm.