Biochemical diagnosis: Measurement of IGF-1 level is the initial test for diagnosing acromegaly as it is a stable molecule with a half-life of 15 hours. It should be measured in cases with clinical suspicion of acromegaly and pituitary masses – normal IGF-1 level rules out acromegaly. False-positive IGF-1 levels can be seen in pregnancy and adolescence, and false-negative levels may be seen with estrogen therapy. Furthermore, hepatic failure, renal failure, hypothyroidism, malnutrition, sepsis, and poorly controlled diabetes mellitus can also influence IGF-1 levels. All cases with elevated IGF-1 levels need to have an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) with GH measurement to confirm the diagnosis of acromegaly or gigantism. A GH level of 1 mcg/lt or less, 2 hours after a 75 gms of oral glucose tolerance test, rules out acromegaly. Plasma glucose needs to be measured before and after the administration of glucose to make sure hyperglycemia has been achieved.

Imaging: Pituitary Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferred imaging modality for diagnosing acromegaly. The size, extent of the tumor, optic chiasmal compression, and cavernous sinus invasion can all be assessed on the MRI scan. Visual field testing is to be done in all cases where the tumor is in contact with the optic chiasm on the MRI scan.

Other tests: Prolactin levels need to be assessed especially in the presence of galactorrhea or symptoms of hypogonadism. Anterior pituitary hormonal assessment needs to be done based on the clinical picture. Rarely, in the presence of normal pituitary and biochemically confirmed acromegaly, GHRH levels and imaging of the chest and abdomen need to be done to evaluate for ectopic GH or GHRH secretion.