Patients usually present with foul-smelling purulent nasal discharge that is usually unilateral. NFBs are usually painless, however, some children present with headaches on the same side of the foreign body. Moreover, bloody stained discharge or even epistasis might be witnessed in these cases.

On the other hand, the child will often tell the parent that they placed an object in their nose. Younger children may only present with irritability.

If the foreign body in the nasal cavity was alive, the presentation might vary, with the symptoms more likely to be bilateral. Patients usually present with nasal occlusion, sneezing, and headaches in addition to nasal discharge. As these objects might end up causing a secondary infection, the white blood cell count in the affected individuals might be increased in response to the infection. Patients might present febrile as well.

On examination, the examiner must have good lighting to ensure visualizing the object, and the patient should be in a sniffing position, a vasoconstrictor agent can be used to shrink the nasal membranes prior to examination.

Anterior rhinoscopy should be performed, which might be enough, a fiberoptic nasopharyngoscope can be used as well.

In patients with an alive object in the nasal cavities, which are usually detected easily, the examination will show widespread destruction in the nasal mucosa, cartilage, and bones. This might be associated with unilateral epistaxis or discharge ranging from clear to purulent.

In the case of a rhinolith within the nasal cavity, the examiner will visualize a gray-colored object on the floor of the nasal cavity.

In addition, the tympanic membrane should be assessed for any signs of inflammation, and the lungs should be auscultated for any signs of aspiration such as wheezing.

In patients who are not co-operative, examination under general anesthesia must be carried.