The typical history obtained in a patient with ulnar collateral ligament injury includes fall or injury, causing extreme thumb abduction or hyperextension. The patient with localized discomfort to the first metacarpophalangeal joint area. Accompanied with the pain, there may be concomitant swelling near or at the thumb base. The patient may present acutely in the immediate post-injury timeframe, or the patient may not present for quite some time if the injury is more chronic. In both situations, pain and occasionally weakness may be present, especially when attempting to hold onto objects (pincer grasp mechanism in particular).

The physical examination can be especially helpful in discerning this diagnosis. Perform a valgus stress test by abducting the thumb at its base can help to determine if any laxity or complete disruption of the ulnar collateral ligament exists. Contralateral comparison with the unaffected thumb can help to establish a baseline to delineate the degree of tear or injury further. In situations where partial tears exist, there is increased laxity or mobility on valgus stress testing. A lack of any endpoint during such testing would portend a complete tear with complete instability at the thumb base. One method to help isolate the ulnar collateral ligament during testing is first to ask the patient to flex the first metacarpophalangeal to 45 degrees. This helps to more specifically test the ulnar collateral ligament rather than other ligaments at the thumb base.

Based on orthopedic studies, the typical degree of laxity, which should raise suspicion for ulnar collateral ligament injury, is any amount greater than 15 to 20 degrees on abduction or valgus stress testing. This should be compared to the unaffected thumb. Furthermore, if the degree of laxity is more than 30 degrees, this is very suggestive of ulnar collateral ligament tear.  While this is described in the orthopedic literature, in the actual clinical environment, the provider may have difficulty accurately measuring the degree of ulnar collateral ligament laxity.