Initial management is primarily directed at managing or eliminating factors such as medications, caloric deprivation, and dehydration that may have precipitated the attack. As such, ensuring rehydration using IV normal saline, glucose infusions, and cessation of any suspected inducer medications is a vital part of the management of the acute attack. Pain relief also forms a part of the initial management, and opioids are considered safe. Definitive treatment involves the administration of IV hemin for 3-14 days, which reverses the increase in ALAS1. Studies are being conducted with small interfering RNA (siRNA) to ALAS1 and appear promising. Givosiran was approved by the FDA for the management of acute hepatic porphyrias in adults.

Hematin is the only heme-associated compound that is currently approved for use in the United States. Heme arginate is more suitable as it has a low frequency of adverse effects. It has been successfully used in Europe and South Africa.

Ongoing management: some individuals may have recurring attacks. This scenario most often occurs in females and is related to menstruation. These patients should receive a specialist porphyria service referral. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs have been used to prevent ovulation in women that present with recurrent pre-menstruation related acute porphyria. A small number of patients with recurrent attacks have also had liver transplantation.

Acute seizure control can be a challenging task in acute porphyrias as most anticonvulsants induce the cytochrome P450 enzyme system. Acute seizure management includes the following:

- First-line drugs: Magnesium sulfate and diazepam

- For status epilepticus: Lorazepam

- Correction of electrolytes: Such as correction of hyponatremia with normal saline considering the volume status of the patient.

- Long-term seizure control: Gabapentin

- Prolonged seizures: Per rectal diazepam

Patients with acute porphyrias tend to have autonomic dysfunction, which can be managed by beta-blockers. An acute rise in blood pressure must be managed with appropriate emergency medication, such as labetalol.

Psychiatric symptoms are controlled by giving phenothiazines, such as chlorpromazine. These medications are also given for nausea in such patients.