The eFAST exam is done in real time B-mode imaging. With the patient in the supine position at

**RUQ:**Place the curvilinear probe along the posterior to the mid-axillary line between the 8 and 11 rib spaces to establish a coronal view of the interface between the liver and right kidney, known as Morrison’s pouch. Sweep anteriorly and posteriorly to evaluate the entirety of this space. Slide the probe caudally to evaluate the liver tip and the right paracolic gutter. Move the probe cephalad to visualize the diaphragm and inferior hemithorax, utilizing the liver as an acoustic window. Rib shadowing may obscure imaging. Mitigate this complication by rotating the probe to an oblique position. Additionally, if the patient is alert and cooperative, have the patient inhale deeply and hold. This will displace intraabdominal contents inferiorly below the ribs, allowing for a more complete visualization of the dependent recesses.

**Pericardium:**Position the probe just below the xiphoid process in the transverse orientation. Increase the depth in order to view the entire pericardium. Use the liver as an acoustic window to enhance your image. Typically, a shallow probe angle of less than 15 degrees is necessary to see the entire cardiac silhouette. An overhand grip is ideal to achieve this angle of approach. Patient body habitus can limit the subxiphoid window. Have the patient inhale deeply or try parasternal windows to assess for pathologic pericardial fluid.

**LUQ:**Typically, the left upper quadrant dependent recesses are more posterior and cephalad since the spleen is generally smaller than the liver. Begin with the transducer along posterior axillary line between the 6 and 9 rib spaces in the sagittal orientation. Fan anteriorly and posteriorly to survey the splenorenal and perisplenic spaces. Move cephalad to view the subphrenic space and the left inferior hemithorax. Slide caudally to image the left paracolic gutter.

**Suprapubic:**Locate the pubic symphysis and place the transversely oriented probe immediately cephalad to it. A full bladder is preferable, however if the bladder is decompressed aim the probe caudally. Increase the depth to visualize posterior to the bladder where free fluid collects. Sweep caudally and cephalad to obtain complete views of the rectovesical space in men and the rectouterine and vesico-uterine pouches in women. These pouches are the most dependent recesses of the intraperitoneal cavity.  In order to achieve greater sensitivity, rotate the probe 90 degrees clockwise into the sagittal orientation to best assess the pouch of Douglas and vesico-uterine pouch in women.

**Anterior Thoracic:**With the patient supine, position the probe in the longitudinal orientation along the midclavicular line at the third to fourth intercostal space (with an upright patient the first or second intercostal space is more sensitive). This is the most anterior portion of the thoracic cavity where free air accumulates as a pneumothorax. Normally, the visceral and parietal pleurae move against one another, creating a sliding artifact known as the “ants marching” sign. Absence of this movement is indicative of disruption between the serosal membranes by the presence of air. The presence of comet tail artifacts and B-lines indicate the absence of a pneumothorax, though.

If B-mode imaging is equivocal for lung sliding, change to M-mode. The resulting grayscale heterogenous image will have a distinct interface at the level of the pleurae. Normal lung sliding creates a grainy artifact below the pleural line known as the “sandy beach” or “seashore” sign. In the setting of a pneumothorax, the resulting homogenous image lacks this grainy artifact, which is known as the “barcode” or “stratosphere” sign. Likewise, the presence of a lung-point sign is virtually pathognomonic of a pneumothorax. Numerous studies have demonstrated that ultrasound is far more sensitive than plain radiography and physical exam for diagnosing pneumothoraces with specificities of 99%