**Compensation by the Body in Patients with COPD**

**Acute or Chronic Hypoxia in COPD Patients**

Maintenance of ventilation-perfusion ratio by compensatory pulmonary vasoconstriction: In COPD, the acute change that occurs immediately secondary to hypoxia is hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Alveolar dead space in COPD leads to inefficient gas exchange and a ventilation-perfusion mismatch. Therefore, the body tries to maintain the V/Q ratio by localized vasoconstriction in the affected lung areas that are not oxygenated well.

As COPD advances, these patients cannot maintain a normal respiratory exchange. COPD patients have a reduced ability to exhale carbon dioxide adequately, which leads to hypercapnia.

Hypercapnia and shift of normal respiratory drive to hypoxic drive to maintain respiratory hemostasis: Carbon dioxide is the main stimulus for the respiratory drive in normal physiological states. Carbon dioxide increases the hydrogen ions, which lowers the pH. Chemoreceptors are more sensitive to alteration in acid-base balance. An increase in arterial carbon dioxide levels indirectly stimulates central chemoreceptors (medulla oblongata) and directly stimulates peripheral chemoreceptors (carotid bodies and aortic arch). Chemoreceptors are less responsive to oxygen levels. In COPD patients, this effect is blunted as the chemoreceptors develop tolerance to chronically elevated arterial carbon dioxide levels. This is when the normal respiratory drive shifts to hypoxic drive and the low oxygen level play a pivotal role in the stimulation of respiration through the chemoreceptors and maintaining respiratory hemostasis. That is why the target pulse oximetry in these patients is 88% to 92%.

Renal compensation to maintain near-normal pH in COPD patients: The lungs and the kidneys are the key organs responsible for keeping the body’s pH in balance. In COPD patients, kidneys compensate by retaining bicarbonate to neutralize pH.

**Renal Compensation in COPD Patients to Maintain Acid-base Balance**

The ph and the hydrogen ions concentration are determined by the ratio of bicarbonate/pCO2 and not by any single value, and the Hasselbach equation can explain this.

- pH = 6.1 + log − HCO3/0.03pCO2

The metabolic disorders and respiratory disorders lead to alteration in bicarbonate and pCO2, respectively. The body tries to maintain and minimize changes in the pH by activating the compensatory mechanisms to keep the bicarbonate/pCO2 ratio constant. The compensation can be predicted to some extent based on primary metabolic or respiratory disorders.

In COPD patients, chronically elevated carbon dioxide shifts the normal acid-base balance toward acidic.

The response to acute and chronic respiratory acidosis is not to the same extent as both phases have different compensatory mechanisms. In acute hypercapnia, only 1 mEq of bicarbonate increases with every 10 mm Hg increase in pCO2. H+ ions buffering in the acute phase occurs via proteins (primarily hemoglobin) and other buffers (non-bicarbonate).

- H2CO3+ −Hb => HHb + −HCO3

The body has a mechanism to adapt to adversities. Adjusting the pH by the kidneys is much more effective in chronic respiratory acidosis and can be better tolerated than in the acute phase. In COPD patients with comorbidities, mixed acid-base disorders can be seen.

The body tries to compensate for chronic respiratory acidosis in COPD patients by retaining more bicarbonate to overcome acidosis. The renal compensation sets in, and the kidneys adapt to excrete carbon dioxide in the form of carbonic acid and reabsorb more bicarbonate. It usually takes about 3 to 5 days for the maximum response. This helps maintain acid-base balance near normal and prevents the pH from becoming dangerously low.

However, this effect is only at the blood level, not the brain. So, in long-term illness causing respiratory acidosis, central nervous systems (CNS) symptoms such as headache, anxiety, sleep disturbance, and drowsiness can be seen.