EMB is not a commonly indicated test in the diagnosis of heart disease. However, under some special clinical scenarios, EMB has a particular diagnostic and prognostic significance. There are no randomized clinical studies to prove the utility of EMB in any cardiac disease, and the recommendations are based on retrospective analysis, case series, and expert opinion.

Broadly, EMB can be used to diagnose heart failure of unknown etiology, cardiac sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, inflammatory cardiomyopathies, storage diseases (such as hemochromatosis), cardiac masses, and antineoplastic side effects. It can also be used in the surveillance of patients with a heart transplant or to differentiate between constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy or right ventricular myocarditis and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.

**Diagnostic Indications**

**Heart Failure of Unknown Etiology**

A special role of EMB is in patients who develop acute decompensated heart failure (less than 2 weeks in duration). If other causes of heart failure are excluded, including coronary artery disease, obtaining an EMB has a unique prognostic significance. Fulminant lymphocytic myocarditis (FLM) has an excellent prognosis, while on the other hand, giant cell myocarditis (GCM) and necrotizing eosinophilic myocarditis (NEM) specify poor prognosis.

This carries a clinical significance as patients with FLM have the probability of recovering on their own while those with GCM and NEM should be considered for immunosuppressive therapies as well as mechanical circulatory support if needed.

Another recommendation to performing EMB is heart failure of 2 weeks to months in duration with dilated left ventricle and associated arrhythmias (high-grade heart blocks, ventricular arrhythmias) and failure to respond to usual care. The concern here is GCM, which has a poor prognosis and usually requires immunosuppression and heart transplant in certain cases.

**Cardiac Sarcoidosis**

In cases of cardiac sarcoidosis, misdiagnosis of patients with other similar-presenting conditions, particularly idiopathic granulomatous myocarditis and GCM, is highly possible. However, due to its patchy involvement, the diagnostic yield of EMB is low (20% to 30%), even in patients with full-blown features of sarcoidosis. The use of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging to localize the areas of involvement may improve the diagnostic yield of biopsy.

**Hypersensitivity Myocarditis**

Hypersensitivity myocarditis (HSM) is an uncommon disorder with the most common presentation being a chronic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) though rapidly progressive and fatal CM may also be seen. Eosinophilic cardiomyopathy (ECM) is a type of HSM that is associated with hypereosinophilic syndrome. It typically presents as biventricular failure developing over the course of weeks to months. It may be idiopathic or associated with allergic reactions, parasite infections, or malignancies.

Both HSM and ECM are important to recognize as treatment of the offending parasite, allergy, or avoidance of the allergens may treat the underlying CM. It also distinguishes these entities from other fatal cardiomyopathies (CM) like GCM and NEM.

**Suspected Anthracycline Cardiomyopathy**

Given its invasive nature, EMB in patients treated with chemotherapeutic agents (anthracycline) may be best suited for situations in which there is a question as to the cause of cardiac dysfunction, as well as in select cases in which ultimate administration of greater than the usual upper limit of an agent is believed to be desirable, and in clinical studies of chemotherapeutic-related toxicity of newer agents and regimens.

**Heart Failure With a Restrictive Pattern**

Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) can be infiltrative, non-infiltrative, or could be due to storage diseases. Idiopathic restrictive CM is a unique form of RCM in which the etiology is uncertain with non-invasive diagnostic testing, but EMB may show mild myocyte hypertrophy with myofibrillary disarray which helps to formulate the diagnosis. Since RCM may mimic constrictive pericarditis clinically and hemodynamically, a cardiac computed tomogram (CT) or CMR should be pursued in uncertain cases. If a clear rim of calcification is identified surrounding the heart, then there is no indication for EMB. Similarly, in amyloidosis, apple-green birefringence of any misfolded amyloid protein when visualized under polarized microscopy after staining the specimen with congo red stain is virtually diagnostic.

**Cardiac Tumors**

In diagnosing cardiac tumors except for typical myxomas (as they have the potential to embolize from manipulation), EMB may be a reasonable choice. Though numerous tumors have been reported to have been diagnosed with EMB, lymphomas are the most commonly reported in the literature.

**Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC)**

The role of EMB in ARVC is controversial as there is a concern for perforation of the already thinned out right ventricular wall. Some experts believe that non-invasive testing may be utilized, while others think that a fibrofatty replacement of myocardium on cardiac biopsy may provide certainty to the diagnosis. A reasonable approach is to employ non-invasive tests as the first-line option, considering EMB for cases of diagnostic uncertainty.

**Heart Transplant**

Another indication for EMB is heart transplantation. In patients who undergo heart transplants, routine surveillance EMBs within the first year of transplant is performed to detect any evidence of transplant rejection, which may require further management by appropriate titration and adjustments of immunosuppressants.