Recurrent pregnancy loss represents a complex challenge in reproductive medicine and causes frustration for the patients, their families, and the healthcare team. Healthcare practitioners should thoroughly counsel patients with recurrent pregnancy loss so that they can make informed decisions about whether they want to go through extensive investigations and treatment. Interprofessional collaboration between endocrinologists, obstetricians, nurses, midwives, and geneticists plays a crucial role in helping couples with recurrent pregnancy loss throughout their journey.

The nurse should assist the clinician during the investigations and management of couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. The nurse should educate the woman and her family regarding the possible etiologies of their condition and explain the required investigations. The counseling of women with recurrent pregnancy loss requires sensitivity, and the negative emotional burden of their disease merits careful consideration at all times. The provides should provide women with written information leaflets on recurrent pregnancy loss to help them better understand their disease and make informed decisions about their care. Ideally, women should be counseled preconceptionally about the possible underlying modifiable risk factors, such as alcohol, smoking, and caffeine consumption. Women should be advised about taking folic acid in preparation for pregnancy. RPL carries a tremendous negative impact on women and their families. Therefore, women could benefit from regular follow-up visits with their clinician, interprofessional meetings, and psychotherapy, should it deemed necessary. The providers should inform the couple that there is no specific recommendation that could guarantee the outcome in future pregnancies. Couples with recurrent pregnancy loss need to understand that they have a high chance of having a live birth without any treatments, even after frequent pregnancy losses. The nurse should assist the clinician in screening couples with RPL for depression and anxiety and should refer couples immediately to mental health specialists, should it deemed necessary. The nurse should inform the clinician about any concerns the couple might have throughout their treatment journey.

The members of the interprofessional team should ensure that couples with RPL have access to the available community resources. The nurse should provide appropriate referrals to couples with RPL to the patient support groups that could help them cope with the negative emotional burden of their condition. The best possible outcome for couples with recurrent pregnancy loss is not achievable without the harmonious collaboration between the members of the interprofessional team with the core principle of patient-centered care.