It is important to be proficient in eyelid anatomy when addressing an eyelid laceration. The eyelid has multiple layers that serve different functions, as described below. Please see the eyelid anatomy illustration for correlation.

**Skin/Subcutaneous Tissue**

The eyelid skin is unique because it has no subcutaneous fat and is thus the thinnest layer of the body's skin. The skin overlying the tarsus tends to be firmly attached to the underlying tissue; whereas, the skin above the tarsal plate over the orbital septum is loosely attached to underlying tissue giving rise to a potential space for fluid to collect in the setting of trauma/edema. Because eyelid skin is very thin, a smaller diameter suture is required, and smaller bites are taken when approximating lacerations that only involve eyelid skin.

**Protractors**

Directly under the upper and lower eyelid skin is the orbicularis oculi muscle. This is the main protractor muscle of the eyelid (eyelid closure). The orbicularis oculi muscle is a large, thin, circular muscle divided into pretarsal, pre-septal, and orbital parts. The pretarsal and pre-septal parts are responsible for involuntary eyelid closure (blinking). The orbital portion is primarily responsible for voluntary/forced eyelid closure.

**Orbital Septum**

A thin, fibrous connective tissue layer separates anterior eyelid structures from intra-orbital structures. The upper orbital septum connects the periosteum of the superior orbital rim to the levator aponeurosis above the superior tarsal border (though this has racial variance). The lower orbital septum connects the periosteum of the inferior orbital rim to the capsulopalpebral fascia just below the inferior tarsal border.

**Orbital Fat**

This is located immediately posterior to the orbital septum and anterior to the levator aponeurosis in the upper lid and capsulopalpebral fascia of the lower lid. In the upper lid, there are discrete nasal and central fat pads. In the lower eyelid, there are three fat pads: nasal, central, and temporal. The pads are surrounded by thin fibrous capsules. The central orbital fat pad is an important landmark in lid laceration repair due to its locations directly posterior to the orbital septum and anterior to the levator aponeurosis.

**Retractors**

**Upper Eyelid**

The levator muscle originates in the apex of the orbit, travels forward over the eyeball, and splits into two different structures: the levator aponeurosis anteriorly and the superior tarsal muscle (Muller's muscle) posteriorly. The split occurs superiorly at the Whitnall ligament and inferiorly at the Lockwood ligament.

The levator aponeurosis continues inferiorly and splits into an anterior and posterior portion near the upper tarsal border. The anterior portion of the levator aponeurosis inserts into the pretarsal orbicularis and skin to form the upper eyelid crease. The posterior portion of the aponeurosis inserts into the upper anterior surface of the tarsal plate.

Muller's muscle extends from the undersurface of the levator aponeurosis at the level of the Whitnall ligament and inserts along the upper eyelid superior tarsal margin. It is a sympathetically innervated retractor muscle of the upper eyelid.

**Lower Eyelid**

The capsulopalpebral fascia is analogous to the levator aponeurosis in the upper eyelid. Its fibers originate from attachments to the inferior rectus muscle. It extends forward, envelops the inferior oblique muscle, forms the Lockwood ligament, and continues anteriorly, attaching to the orbital septum and inferior conjunctival fornix before finally inserting at the inferior tarsal border.

The inferior tarsal muscle is analogous to the Muller's muscle in the upper eyelid. This muscle is poorly developed and runs posterior to the capsulopalpebral fascia of the lower eyelid.

**Tarsus**

The tarsal plates serve as the main structural components of the eyelids. They are made of dense connective tissue and contain the Meibomian glands and eyelash follicles. The tarsal plate of the upper eyelid is 10 mm to 12 mm vertically in the center of the eyelid, and the tarsal plate of the lower eyelid is up to 4 mm vertically in the central eyelid. Both tarsal plates have rigid attachments to the periosteum via the medial and lateral canthal tendons.

**Conjunctiva**

This non-keratinizing squamous epithelium lines the inner surface of the eyelids and continues to cover the anterior surface of the eyeball, where it terminates at the edge of the cornea. It contains mucin-secreting goblet cells and accessory lacrimal glands that assist in keeping ocular tissues lubricated.

In the nasolacrimal system (not represented in the illustration), both the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid have small openings on the surface of the eyelid margin near the medial canthus. These are called puncta. The puncta lead to a drainage tube called the canaliculus which, eventually, drains into the lacrimal sac and out of the nose via the nasolacrimal duct. Within the eyelid, the canaliculus travels 2 mm inferiorly from the punctum, then turns 90 degrees medially and travels 8 mm to 10 mm before reaching the common canaliculus (where both upper and lower canaliculi meet). The common canaliculus drains tears into the lacrimal sac and down inferiorly into the nasolacrimal duct. The fluid can then exit underneath the inferior turbinate in the nose.