The philosophy of osteopathic medicine is to treat the patient as a whole. The answer to the question of when OMT should be used on the pelvis can be addressed when somatic dysfunction is found on an osteopathic structural exam and when treatment would benefit the patient. While BLT is one of many osteopathic treatment modalities, the decision to use one modality over another comes down to provider preference and the responsiveness of the patient’s tissues. Here are a couple of specific examples of how OMT for pelvic dysfunction can be applied.

The pregnant patient: There are many physiologic and biomechanical changes that happen to the body during pregnancy. These changes can lead to symptoms, including back pain, pelvic pain, stiffness, and lower extremity edema that have a large impact on a person’s ability to function in daily life. Many medications normally prescribed to address these symptoms are not recommended during pregnancy, and osteopathic manipulative treatment is a nonpharmacologic option for pregnant patients looking for relief. In the Pregnancy Research on Osteopathic Manipulation Optimizing Treatment Effects (PROMOTE) study, there was not a higher conversion rate to high-risk status in third-trimester patients in the OMT group indicating that OMT is safe for this patient population. In addition to the pelvic region (pelvic diaphragm, innominate, and sacrum), attention should also be given to the occipitoatlantal joint, cervical vertebrae, clavicles, and Sibson fascia, thoracoabdominal diaphragm, ribs, hips, and cranium during the assessment and treatment with OMT in the pregnant patient.

The hospitalized patient: BLT is a useful modality in treating the hospitalized patient because active participation of the patient in the treatment is not required, and it can be adapted to use in any part of the body while the patient is supine. The Multicenter Osteopathic Pneumonia Study in the Elderly (MOPSE) randomized controlled trial showed shortened length-of-stay and decreased in-hospital mortality rates in certain subgroups, which supports the role of OMT as an adjunctive treatment to standard of care in patients hospitalized with pneumonia.

Another study looking at the effects of OMT on hospital length-of-stay and incidence of postoperative ileus in general surgical patients showed that OMT decreased time to flatus and decreased length-of-stay.

Targeting the parasympathetic fibers innervating the colon could be useful in the postsurgical patient in trying to encourage the return of normal bowel function. Treating dysfunction at the lumbosacral junction and the sacroiliac joints could restore mobility and help in the process of getting the patient out of bed and walking again. Treatment of restriction in the pelvic diaphragm, which is recognized as a muscle of respiration, opens up the pathway for lymphatic and venous return and decreases any congestion in the area. A goal in treating a hospitalized patient with OMT is to help decrease the patient’s allostatic load by correcting somatic dysfunction so that they put more of their body’s energy towards healing.