The slit-lamp examination may show non-specific punctate, and snow-flake keratitis [figure], which represent a local reaction to dead microfilariae and rarely limbal global infiltrates, especially if treatment has been initiated. Recurrent corneal reactions end up with progressive corneal scarring. Other anterior segment features are those associated with uveitis, cataract, and glaucoma.

Occasionally microfilariae may be visualized in the corneal stroma and more commonly in the anterior chamber (AC) where they are seen actively swimming in the aqueous, and these can be captured on videography. To increase the chance of identifying microfilariae in the AC, patients are made to sit with their heads bent between their knees for at least 3 minutes.

Posterior segment features are equally non-specific and include chorioretinitis, progressive RPE, and optic nerve atrophy. The evaluation may require fundus photo, optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula and/or optic disc, fundus autofluorescence, fundus fluorescein angiogram, and Humphrey visual fields.

The diagnosis of onchocerciasis can be clinical. The presence of microfilariae in the anterior chamber can readily be observed using the slit lamp biomicroscope at high magnification. Skin snips are the gold standard for the diagnosis of onchocerciasis.Onchocerca volvulus microfilariae have no sheath nor nuclei in their tails, and these differentiate them from other worms like Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori.

Serological tests involving ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) and Western Blot techniques are currently available for detecting antibodies to Onchocerca volvulus antigens in the skin, tears, and urine.

**How to Perform a Skin Snip**

This is a specialized way of obtaining a biopsy specimen to examine for the presence of microfilariae. First, an area of skin is wiped with alcohol. Then it is elevated with the tip of a needle. Shave the small segment of tented skin with a razor blade or scalpel (measures about 3mm in diameter). This usually results in a harvest of about 2 mg of skin. This piece of skin is placed on a slide under a coverslip and immersed in normal saline at room temperature for 24 hours. This process allows the microfilariae, if present, to emerge. In an Onchocerca infected patient, this preparation when examined using a microscope, motile microfilariae emerging from the tissue will be identified.