Compartment syndrome of the forearm is primarily a clinical diagnosis. Patients often present within a few hours of the inciting event, sometimes even within 48 hours. They present with a swollen, tense, tender forearm with overlying skin that is often pink. Pain that is out of proportion to the injury is the pathognomonic sign, especially on passive stretching of the fingers. Pain is usually not relieved by rest, analgesia, or anti-inflammatory medication. Pain can, however, disappear in late stages or presentations or chronic compartment syndrome. A few patients who present a few hours after the onset of compartment syndrome present with hemorrhagic blisters in addition to the above mentioned.

Sensory deficits or paresthesias are usually signs of nerve ischemia in the affected compartment and can be present. Paralysis is often a late sign.

Radial and ulnar pulses are usually intact, given the systolic arterial pressure (around 120 mmHg) usually exceeds the pressure within the involved compartment. The absence of pulses is usually a late finding, and amputations are considered when there is a significant amount of ischaemic tissue death.

In children, anxiety associated with increasing analgesic requirements is a reliable indicator of compartment syndrome.

Be aware pain can sometimes be difficult to assess or be absent if there is nerve damage, in polytrauma patients, a patient who is unconscious or sedated, and in children or patients who have had some form of regional nerve blocks for pain relief.