Osteoporosis is a chronic disease that decreases bone mineral density and, thus, increases the risk of fractures. Managing osteoporosis requires an empathetic interdisciplinary team of rheumatologists, endocrinologists, orthopedic surgeons, nutritionists, nurses, nuclear medicine technicians, and physical therapists to diagnose, treat and rehabilitate patients.

Abaloparatide is a human parathyroid hormone-related protein analog that is FDA-approved in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis at a high fracture risk to reduce vertebral and nonvertebral fractures. Patients should be educated on postmenopausal osteoporosis, self-treatment with abaloparatide, and possible adverse effects. In addition to abaloparatide treatment, nutritionist intervention can be beneficial in ensuring the patient's adequate calcium and vitamin D intake.

Individuals who experience fractures or bone breakage should be treated by orthopedic surgeons and physical therapists for rehabilitation and to improve their quality of life. Rheumatologists and endocrinologists should maintain regular follow-ups to monitor calcium and phosphorus levels and assess for hypercalcemia or other adverse effects. Abaloparatide is associated with an increased risk of osteosarcoma. Thus, individuals taking abaloparatide may require a nuclear medicine technician to monitor them for the development of malignancies or possible metastasis. All individuals on the interprofessional team should be continuously updated on the patient's status and osteoporosis management guidelines.

Abaloparatide treatment is self-administered in an environment where the patient can sit or stand if orthostatic hypotension occurs. Patients should be educated on proper administration methods. They can be given the first dose in a healthcare setting for educational purposes and monitored for orthostatic hypotension or injection site reaction. Individuals should be cautious and watch for these adverse effects when self-administering abaloparatide injections. Patients not taking adequate amounts of calcium or vitamin D should be advised to take vitamin D and calcium supplements. The patient should be informed that abaloparatide cannot be accepted for more than two years.

Dose adjustments may be necessary for patients with preexisting severe renal impairment. Patients with mild to moderate renal impairment do not require dose adjustments. A rheumatologist or endocrinologist should closely monitor individuals with hypercalcemia or primary hyperparathyroidism for hypercalciuria or active urolithiasis.

Abaloparatide use is indicated in postmenopausal women and not in reproductive females. The effects of abaloparatide on pregnancy, breastfeeding mothers, breastfed infants, milk production, and the pediatric population are unknown. Abaloparatide is not recommended in pediatric patients with open epiphyses or genetic predispositions to bone malignancies.