The restorations are processed either by soft machining of pre-sintered blanks or by hard machining of fully sintered blocks. The mechanical properties of 3Y-TZP are strongly affected by its grain size. The mechanical properties of zirconia have been reported to be higher than other ceramics for dental applications. Fracture resistance of 6–10 MPa/m1/2, a flexural strength of 900–1200 MPa, and a compression resistance of 2000 MPa have been reported. Zirconia restorations bear an average load of 755 N. Zirconia yields higher fracture loads than alumina or lithium disilicate.

Zirconia ceramics yield superior wear behavior and lower antagonistic wear compared to porcelain.

The increased opacity of zirconia ceramics could be useful in esthetically demanding clinical situations, such as in cases of masking dichromatic abutment teeth or metal post and cores, but low light transmission may cause inadequate polymerization of resin cement under zirconia ceramics. When comparing different ceramic restorative materials, zirconia ceramics have the highest relative translucency compared to metals.

Bonded all-ceramic restorations provide superior aesthetics because ceramics allow diffuse transmission as well as the diffuse and specular reflectance of light, reproducing a depth of translucency and color that mimics natural teeth. Nevertheless, considering the optical properties, it could be said that yttrium-stabilized zirconia has a high refractive index, low absorption coefficient, and high opacity in the visible and infrared spectra.

This material is a non-cytotoxic metal oxide, is insoluble in water, and has no potential for bacterial adhesion. In addition, it has radio-opacity properties and exhibits low corrosion. These are inert material and exhibit biocompatibility. Zirconia implants osseointegrate as well as titanium implants.

Y-TZP has a high fracture toughness and flexural strength. When a crack initiates on the surface of Y-TZP, the stress concentration at the top of the crack causes the tetragonal crystal to transform into a monoclinic crystal, with associated volumetric expansion. In the vicinity of a propagating crack, the stress-induced transformation leads to compressive stress that shields the crack tip from the applied stress and enhances the fracture toughness.

Dimensional changes from the sintering process of Y-TZP can lead to non-uniform cement space in single copings. The manufacturing process of Y-TZP blanks may influence the sintering shrinkage pattern and, consequently, on the prostheses fit.

The production process of these blocks consists of compacting zirconia powder in the presence of a binder through a cold, isostatic pressing process; this leads to the homogeneous distribution of the components inside the block. The pre-sintering temperature of zirconia can influence the hardness, machinability, and roughness of the blocks.

Purification processes, new processing methods (CAD-CAM, hot isotactic pressing), and identification allow wide use of zirconia in technical and biological applications. As many new trends and applications for zirconia are being discovered, the future of this biomaterial appears to be very promising.