Reflexes in the human body are inherently protective. Without primitive reflexes, babies would be unable to interact meaningfully with their environment (e.g., to breastfeed using the suckle or latch reflexes, to hold objects using the grasp reflex, etc.). Brainstem reflexes are useful in diagnosing disorders of consciousness and evaluate for brain death.

The two key physiological structures that comprise the muscle stretch reflex include the muscle spindle apparatus and the Golgi tendon organ. The muscle spindle apparatus is both a sensory organ and a motor organ. Its function is to allow balanced tension between agonist and antagonist muscles.

The Golgi tendon organs are similarly designed to protect muscles from overwhelming elongation or force. They are located in the collagenous tissue fibers of tendon bodies and transmit information about tendon tension and rate of change of tension. When the Golgi tendon organs sense excessive tension at the musculotendinous junction, they send a signal to gamma efferent extrafusal fibers located in surrounding muscle tissue to inhibit agonist muscle firing and increase antagonist muscle activity. These actions function to decrease the amount of tension placed on the tendon. In the absence of this response, muscles are avulsed from their distal attachments in the setting of surfeit and prolonged muscle loading. The spinal cord receives the somatic afferents sent from both the muscle spindle apparatus and Golgi tendon organs at individual segmental levels. They comprise but one collection of a variety of signals that the spinal cord must receive, modulate via inhibitory Renshaw cells in the grey matter, and either send to the CNS for higher-order processing or relay back to the periphery for an efferent response.