Approximately 10% of patients report an allergy to penicillin however up to 90% of these patients do not have a true allergy. The incidence of anaphylaxis to penicillin is 0.02% to 0.04% and is mediated by a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction. Overall, cutaneous eruptions are the most commonly reported reaction. IgE antibodies decrease over time. In patients who have previously tested positive for penicillin allergy, there is an expected 10% decrease/year of a subsequent positive reaction. Therefore, with the avoidance of PCN, 80% to 100% of patients will ultimately test negative for penicillin allergy 10 years after the initial positive test. The presence of an underlying bacterial or viral infection with penicillin administration also often resulted in false reporting of penicillin allergies such as the exanthem seen with EBV.

Cross-reactivity with other penicillin-related compounds, specifically cephalosporins, has resulted in the avoidance of drug use. Early studies may have also over-estimated cross-reactivity between penicillin and cephalosporins as the production of early generation cephalosporins may have been contaminated with small amounts of penicillin. Penicillin has a single R side chain whereas cephalosporins have two. If the penicillin side chain is similar to either cephalosporin side chain, there is a greater risk of cross-reactivity. This more commonly occurs with first and second generation cephalosporins than with third or fourth generation cephalosporins making the latter more attractive treatment choices when a patient has a proven penicillin allergy. Overall, cross-reactivity with aminopenicillins is less than 2%, carbapenems less than 1% and cephalosporins less than 3%. There is no significant reported cross-reactivity with monobactams.