# Continuing Education Activity

The patella is the largest sesamoid bone in the human body. The posterior aspect of the patella contains a thick cartilage layer, which is the thickest cartilage in the body. A vertical ridge separates the medial and lateral facets of the articular surface and articulates with the femoral trochlea. The patella protects the anterior aspect of the knee joint, serves as the insertion for the quadriceps tendon, and functions as a fulcrum to maximize the efficiency of the extensor mechanism. Fractures of the patella account for approximately 1% of all fractures. They occur more commonly in males. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of fractures of the patella and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Recall the most common mechanisms of injury for patellar fractures.
- Summarize the diagnostic approach for an evaluation and assessment of a patient presenting with a potential patellar fracture, including any indicated imaging studies.
- Summarize the treatment and management strategies available for patellar fractures, based on the specific fracture type and severity.
- Discuss the importance of interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to aid in prompt diagnosis of patellar fracture and improving outcomes in patients diagnosed with the condition.

# Introduction

The patella is the largest sesamoid bone in the human body.

# Etiology

Fractures of the patella may be due to direct or indirect forces, and the mechanism of injury often determines the fracture pattern. The patella most commonly fails indirectly under tension. Eccentric forces from the extensor mechanism may overpower the mechanical properties of the bone.

With the demand for primary total knee arthroplasty projected to grow to 3.48 million procedures performed in 2030, a 673% increase from 2005, a rise in periprosthetic patella fractures is expected to increase.

# Epidemiology

Fractures of the patella account for approximately 1% of all fractures.

Periprosthetic fractures of the patella are devastating injuries and are the most frequent complication following total knee arthroplasty.

# Pathophysiology

The patella experiences complex, dynamic loading patterns.

Periprosthetic patellar fractures are classified on a temporal basis, intraoperative or postoperative. Postoperative periprosthetic patellar fractures are more prevalent that intraoperative fractures and have predisposing factors associated with their pathology.

Postoperative periprosthetic patellar fractures are classified as traumatic or atraumatic. Traumatic causes are similar to those described in native patellar fractures. Atraumatic mechanism of fractures is caused by surgical technique, patient factors, and implant choice. Reuben advised against the revision to a new patellar component if <10 mm of bone stock remains and advocates for the retention of a well-positioned and minimally worn prosthesis during revision total knee arthroplasty.

Contrary to intraoperative periprosthetic patellar fractures associated with aggressive reaming, postoperative stress failure of the patella is a complication associated with inadequate reaming. Overstuffing the patellofemoral joint with a patellar prosthesis larger than the bone resected or a femoral component that is too large, places abnormal stress on the patella and predispose to stress failure. Component malpositioning during the index arthroplasty has a significant role in patella tracking. Patellar maltracking places undue stress on the patella and can lead to a postoperative fracture.

Patient factors associated with periprosthetic patellar fractures are osteopenia/osteoporosis, inflammatory arthritides, inadequate bone stock, male sex, and increased activity level.

The original classification of patellar fractures characterizes them into seven common fracture patterns: nondisplaced, transverse with displacement, inferior pole, comminuted without displacement, comminuted with displacement, vertical, or osteochondral.

Classification of periprosthetic patellar fractures focuses on the stability of the patellar prosthesis, degree of fracture displacement, location and pattern, quality of bone stock, and competence of the extensor mechanism. While no universally accepted classification exists for periprosthetic patellar fractures, Ortiguera and Berry developed a classification system that can be used to dictate treatment. Type I fractures are most commonly treated non-operatively while Type II and III fractures often require operative intervention, repair/reconstruction of the extensor mechanism, and revision of patellar prosthesis.

Ortiguera and Berry Classification of Periprosthetic Patellar Fractures

- Type I: Stable implant, intact extensor mechanism

- Type II: Disrupted extensor mechanism

- Type IIIa: Loose patellar component, reasonable bone stock

- Type IIIb: Loose patellar component, inadequate bone stock

# History and Physical

A thorough history and physical examination are necessary to identify the injury mechanism and other potential injuries. Patients who sustain high-energy dashboard injuries may also present with fractures to the ipsilateral acetabulum and lower extremity. Initial inspection of the injured knee is aimed at assessing soft tissue trauma. A saline load test using 155 to 175 mL of sterile saline may be warranted if there is suspicion for open injury to the knee joint.

Periprosthetic fractures of the patella may not present the same as native patella fractures. Trauma is a significant cause of periprosthetic patellar fractures; however, some patients may not recall a single episode that is responsible for a fracture. At the time of diagnosis, forty-four percent of patients with atraumatic periprosthetic patellar fractures complained of minimal or no symptoms.

# Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation with anteroposterior (AP) and lateral knee radiographs should be obtained. Lateral views are useful to assess for the displacement of the patellar fragments. Advanced imaging of patellar fractures is rarely warranted. Imaging of bipartite patella most commonly demonstrates a fragment at the superolateral pole. They can be differentiated from acute fractures by the appearance of smooth edges. Imaging of the contralateral knee may reveal a bilateral bipartite patella in up to 50% of cases.

Patients with suspected periprosthetic patellar fractures should be evaluated with formal anteroposterior, lateral, and skyline radiographs. In rare situations, a Technetium-99m bone scan may be of use to diagnose an occult fracture or to differentiate from an acute or chronic fracture. Careful interpretation of a bone scan is required as this type of scan may be positive for 48 months following the initial injury.

# Treatment / Management

Restoration of the extensor mechanism is the primary treatment goal for patellar fractures. Nonoperative management is indicated for minimally displaced fractures (less than 2 to 3 mm of step-off and less than 1 to 4 mm fracture gap) with the extensor mechanism in continuity.

Open reduction and internal fixation are indicated for open fractures, substantially displaced fractures, and fractures with a loss of extensor function. Urgent irrigation, debridement, and antibiotic treatment are indicated for open fractures. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthesefragen (AO)/Association for the Study of Internal Fixation (ASIF) developed the technique of tension band wire fixation as the standard of care for patellar fractures.

Every attempt should be made to preserve the patella; however, resection of all (total patellectomy) or part of the patella (partial patellectomy) may be indicated in certain situations. Biomechanical studies have demonstrated that removal of the patella decreases the quadriceps strength by 50%.

Postoperatively, similar to nonoperative treatment, patients are placed in a hinged knee brace locked in extension and are allowed to weight-bear as tolerated after surgical fixation. Early knee motion is usually begun at the first follow-up visit to prevent stiffness. As the pain diminishes, knee motion is progressed, and isometric strengthening of the quadriceps is initiated. The rehabilitation protocol may vary after a partial patellectomy or a tenuous fixation by delaying knee motion to ensure adequate healing.

Treatment of periprosthetic patellar fractures are complicated and should be reserved for the skillful surgeon familiar with the various operative and nonoperative options. Of utmost importance for the success of total knee arthroplasty is the competence of the extensor mechanism.

# Complications

Postoperative complications include symptomatic hardware,

Type I periprosthetic fractures, 18% of patients developed complications consisting of nonunion, arthrofibrosis, and patellar button loosening. Type II fractures were associated with a 50% complication rate, with 45% undergoing a revision procedure for instability, pain, and weakness. Type III fractures were associated with a 66% risk of complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of patella fractures will best be achieved by a specialty orthopedic trained nurse, orthopedic surgeon, and pharmacist to assist with pain control. Physical therapy may need to be involved. Interprofessional care of this injury will produce the best result. [Level V]