- Determine appropriate type of splint, in this case, a sugar tong.

- The forearm should be in neutral rotation with elbow flexed to 90 degrees throughout the process.

- Measure the appropriate length of plaster, 8 to 12 sheets thick, from the distal palmar crease, around a flexed elbow, ending at the dorsal metacarpal heads.

- The measure, cut, and place stockinet on the forearm. Be sure to cut a hole in stockinet for the thumb. There should be at least one inch extra of stockinet distal to the distal palmar crease and extend to the mid brachium.

- Wrap forearm with cotton cast padding beginning at the distal palmar crease and ending distal to the mid brachium, ensuring 50% overlap of padding with a minimum of 2 layers. Ensure that bony prominence is well padded. Attempt to avoid bunching or wrinkles in padding.

- Dip plaster into the water to thoroughly wet.

- Wring wet plaster and bond together between fingers.

- Apply plaster to cotton cast padding on the forearm, ensuring that the plaster begins at the distal palmar crease, wraps around the elbow and ends at the dorsal metacarpal heads.

- Overwrap plaster with one layer of cotton cast padding to avoid plaster sticking to an elastic bandage.

- Fold excess stockinet over plaster and cotton cast padding so that there is a cuff at each end of the splint.

- Loosely wrap entire splint with an elastic bandage.

- Apply appropriate mold while the plaster is hardening.

- Avoid placing a splint on pillows or blanket during hardening process as this has an insulating effect.

- Once hard, re-assess neurovascular status of hand and fingers.