**Conduction of electrical impulses**

From the broadest perspective, the function of axons is to carry electrical impulses that are the means of communication within the brain and between the brain and the rest of the body. These electrical impulses are known as action potentials and are a result of the manipulation of the electrochemical gradient inside and surrounding an axon. There are two primary excitable domains in an axon, with the proximal one being the initial axon segment and the comparatively distal one being the nodes of Ranvier. The initial axon segment is the point of origin for action potentials. The nodes of Ranvier, also indicated as myelin-sheath gaps, lie in between sheaths of myelin and are highly concentrated in voltage-gated ion channels that assist the progress of ions moving into and out of the axon, consequently triggering depolarization, which will initiate an action potential if it attains the threshold voltage. The nodes of Ranvier also allow the action potential to progress rapidly across the axon through saltatory conduction.

**Axonal transport**

The axonal transport is of fundamental importance for the development, maintenance, survival, and functioning of neurons. Since the axon is devoid of the apparatus for protein synthesis and therefore is under the control of the cell body, this metabolic dependence of the axon involves a continuous movement from the cell body along the axon to its endings, of proteins, enzymes, chemical transmitters, synaptic vesicles, monomeric subunits of neurofilaments, and membrane components. In addition to the continuous exchange of the structural constituents of the axon, axonic flow is necessary to continuously supply the synapses of neurotransmitters and enzymes for their synthesis and degradation. Approximately, a volume of cytoplasmic constituents equal to three times the volume of the cell body is transported daily along the axon.There are two types of axonal transport, a centrifugal transport from the soma to the synaptic terminal and a retrograde transport that specializes in carrying molecules from the nerve terminal to the soma. Centrifugal axonal transport takes place in different ways, which are characterized by different speeds. At least as a schematic, there would be a slow transport (1 to 10 mm per day) and a transport that takes place at a higher speed (1000 mm per day). The difference is related to the different functioning of the microtubule system. In fast transport, the material to be transported is conveyed into vesicles and transported by proteins of the kinesin family that flow along the axis of the microtubules. This process involves high ATP consumption.

While the antegrade transport aims at the vehicle of substances for the functioning of the synapse and the neurotransmission, the transport in the opposite direction has a pivotal role in neuronal survival, axon guidance, and growth.