# Continuing Education Activity

Kaposi sarcoma is an interesting soft tissue tumor occurring in several distinct populations with a variety of presentations and courses. In its most well-known form, Kaposi sarcoma occurs in patients with immunosuppression, such as those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDs) or those undergoing immunosuppression due to an organ transplant. This activity reviews the cause, presentation and pathophysiology of kaposi sarcoma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of kaposi sarcoma.
- Review the presentation of kaposi sarcoma.
- Summarize the treatment options for kaposi sarcoma.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by kaposi sarcoma.

# Introduction

Kaposi sarcoma is an interesting soft tissue tumor occurring in several distinct populations with a variety of presentations and courses. In its most well-known form, Kaposi sarcoma occurs in patients with immunosuppression, such as those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDs) or those undergoing immunosuppression due to an organ transplant. Initially described in 1872 by Moritz Kaposi, an Austro-Hungarian dermatologist in 5 patients with the multifocal disease,

- Classic form occurring in elderly men of Mediterranean and Eastern European descent on the lower extremities

- Endemic African form with generalized lymph node involvement occurring in children

- HIV-related form occurring with patients not taking highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) with diffuse involvement of the skin and internal organs

- Iatrogenic form in immunosuppressed patients also with diffuse involvement of the skin and internal organs

Each form has a differing natural history ranging from indolent to more aggressive and fatal in anaplastic varieties.

# Etiology

Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) is present in all forms of Kaposi sarcoma.

# Epidemiology

Classic Kaposi sarcoma has a male: female ratio 17:1 and occurs primarily in patients over 50 years old of Eastern European and Mediterranean descent. These patients are at greater risk for secondary malignancies.

Endemic Kaposi sarcoma has the unusual predilection for the pediatric population and mirrors HHV-8 seropositivity.

HHV-8 seropositivity worldwide varies, with a high of 40% in Saharan Africa to 2% to 4% in Northern Europe, Southeast Asia, and Caribbean countries. Approximately 10% of Mediterranean countries and 5-20% of United States patients are seropositive for HHV-8.

AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma is the second most common tumor in HIV patients with CD4 counts less than 200 cells/mm3 and is an AIDs-defining illness.

Iatrogenic Kaposi sarcoma has a male: female ratio of 3:1

# Pathophysiology

HHV-8 is a double-stranded enveloped DNA virus with 6 major subtypes (A-F).

Due to HHV-8 co-evolving with the human population for centuries, cofactors of immune defects and inflammation are required for the development of malignancy.

After infecting endothelial cells, HHV-8 activates the mTOR pathway, alters the cells to have mesenchymal differentiation, and promotes aberrant angiogenesis

Interestingly, Kaposi sarcoma is not monoclonal and different nodules within a patient have different clonal origins.

Clinically, Kaposi sarcoma is a vascular lesion, and as such, often presents as a violaceous pink to purple plaque on the skin or mucocutaneous surfaces. Lesions may be painful with associated lymphedema and secondary infection.

# Histopathology

Kaposi sarcoma progresses through 3 distinct clinical stages: patch, plaque, and nodular.

The patch stage of Kaposi sarcoma is characterized by a spindle cell proliferation of irregular, complex vascular channels dissecting through the dermis with the promontory sign, defined as ramifying proliferating vessels surrounding larger ectatic pre-existing vessels and skin adnexa.

Advancement to the plaque stage of Kaposi sarcoma has an increasing prominence of the features seen in the patch stage with extension into the subcutis, and more prominence of the hyaline globules intra- and extra-cellularly.

As Kaposi sarcoma develops into the nodular form, the pleomorphism increases and mitotic figures become more prominent

Histologic variants of Kaposi sarcoma include: in situ Kaposi sarcoma, anaplastic Kaposi sarcoma, lymphangiectatic Kaposi sarcoma, bullous Kaposi sarcoma, ecchymotic Kaposi sarcoma, glomeruloid Kaposi sarcoma, and hyperkeratotic Kaposi sarcoma.

The presence of HHV-8 can be confirmed with immunohistochemistry for LANA1.

# History and Physical

A general history and physical are performed first. The skin is examined for purplish lesions or lymph node enlargement that may signal the presence of Kaposi sarcoma. Suspicious lesions on the skin or lymph nodes can be biopsied and sent to pathology for evaluation. Particular care and attention should be paid to mucocutaneous surfaces as it is a common presenting location.

# Evaluation

For a definitive diagnosis of Kaposi sarcoma, they must perform a biopsy or excision of the suspicious areas. A pathologist examines the tissue under the microscope and looks for the characteristic features: a spindle cell vascular proliferation in the dermis.

# Treatment / Management

Skin involvement of Kaposi sarcoma is treated by local excision, liquid nitrogen, and injection of vincristine.

Patients with HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma respond well to HAART,

# Differential Diagnosis

Histologically, spindle cell vascular lesions in the skin include a differential diagnosis of

- Interstitial granuloma annulare

- Spindle cell hemangioma

- Acquired tufted angioma

- Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma

- Cutaneous angiosarcoma

- Fibrosarcomatous dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans

- Aneurysmal dermatofibroma

- Acroangiodermatitis

- Spindle cell melanoma

- High-grade sarcomas

The differential diagnosis of Kaposi sarcoma on mucocutaneous surfaces includes

- Nevi

- Pyogenic granuloma

- Bacillary angiomatosis

- Hemangioma

- Angiosarcoma

- Melanoma

# Radiation Oncology

Classical Kaposi sarcoma tends to be radiosensitive, especially in early stages of the disease. Dosages recommended are 15.2 Gy for oral lesions, 20 Gy for conjunctiva, eyelids, lips, hands, feet, penis, and anal regions, and 30 Gy with hypofractionation for other parts of the body.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Thalidomide, VEGF inhibitors, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and matrix metalloproteinases are currently under investigation as single agents to treat Kaposi sarcoma.

- Intra-lesional nivolumab for cutaneous Kaposi sarcoma

- Pomalidomide with liposomal doxorubicin for refractory Kaposi sarcoma

- Pembrolizumab for relapsed and refractory HIV related neoplasms

- Ipilimumab and nivolumab for advanced HIV related neoplasms

- Nelfinavir for endemic, classic, and HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma

- Valganciclovir for HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma, particularly patients with immune reconstitution syndrome

- Recombinant EphB4-HAS fusion protein

- Selumetinib

# Medical Oncology

High-activity antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is the mainstay of treatment in patients with AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma. Not only does HAART treatment reduce the risk of development of Kaposi sarcoma, but it also can lead to spontaneous regression of the tumors.

For local disease, sclerotherapy, intralesional vinca-alkaloids, bleomycin, interferon-alpha, topical alitretinoin, or imiquimod cream have all been used with success.

Systemic chemotherapy approved for treatment of Kaposi sarcoma includes liposomal anthracyclins, paclitaxel, etoposide, vincristine, vinblastine, vinorelbine, bleomycin, or a combination of doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vincristine.

# Staging

Kaposi sarcoma is not usually staged, however, a staging system was initially developed in the 1980s for HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma by the AIDS Clinical Trials Group.

# Prognosis

Ten percent to 20% of patients with the classic form of Kaposi sarcoma will succumb from their disease, but another larger percentage will develop a secondary malignancy that may also be lethal.

# Complications

Larger lesions can be painful and lead to edema and disfigurement of the skin. Pulmonary involvement of Kaposi sarcoma can cause respiratory distress and lead to death. Classic Kaposi sarcoma has a known association with the development of a secondary malignancy.

Chemotherapy is not without side effects, including but not limited to neurotoxicity, infertility, cardiac toxicity, and nerve pain.

Radiation therapy can lead to drying of the skin, avascularity, poor healing, development of additional malignancies, and lymphedema.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Patients should be followed closely for resolution or recurrence of their disease.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- There are 4 major forms of Kaposi sarcoma: classic, endemic, HIV-related, and iatrogenic, each with a different patient population and presentation.

- All cases of Kaposi sarcoma harbor the HHV-8 virus, though this is not sufficient to cause the neoplasm.

- Histologically, Kaposi sarcoma presents as a spindle cell vascular neoplasm with extravasated red blood cells and hyaline globules.

- Immunohistochemistry for LANA-1 can confirm the presence of HHV-8 in the neoplastic cells.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Kaposi sarcoma has been definitively linked to HHV-8 infection with increased incidence in patients with HIV infection, immunosuppression, or of Eastern European or Mediterranean descent. In seropositive patients at high risk of development of Kaposi sarcoma, the primary care team should take care to perform thorough skin exams looking for the characteristic violaceous patches and plaques. Additionally, patients in these high-risk groups should be counseled to examine their skin as well for lesions. Discovery of any suspicious lesions should prompt expedient biopsy and examination by a pathologist. Patient care is enhanced by the submitting provider providing a complete clinical history and mentioning the suspicion for Kaposi sarcoma to the reviewing pathologist.

Patients who are diagnosed with Kaposi sarcoma should be closely monitored for disease regression or recurrence and need for radiation treatment or systemic chemotherapy. If the HIV-associated or iatrogenic form, the clinical team should communicate and work closely to begin HAART or help reduce the immunosuppression while treating the patients underlying condition. (Level I)

Dentists and oral health care providers should be educated about the clinical presentation in the oral cavity as this a common location.