**Acute and Subacute HP**

The primary differential for acute HP is infections of the respiratory tract. Conditions such as metal fume fever and organic dust toxic syndrome can also present similarly. Detailed history, physical examination and radiologic examination should help differentiate the conditions.

Sarcoidosis can have a similar clinical and radiologic picture to sub-acute HP. Exposure history, the presence of serum precipitins, lymphocytosis on BAL support a diagnosis of HP. Pathological examination in sarcoidosis typically reveals well-formed non-caseating granulomas along the bronchovascular bundle, without inflammatory cell infiltrate.

Organizing pneumonia and smoking-related ILDs should be considered in the differential, but history, HRCT findings, and pathological examination will help in differentiating the conditions.

**Chronic HP**

Chronic HP can appear similar to UIP/IPF clinically, radiographically and pathologically. A detailed history may provide some insight into exposure history supporting HP. BAL lymphocytosis supports the diagnosis of HP. Radiographically the reticulation and honeycombing in chronic HP tend to be predominantly upper and mid zone as opposed to UIP. Additionally, patchy ground-glass opacities and areas of air trapping support chronic HP. Fibrosis predominantly involving the upper zone, peri-bronchiolar fibrosis, the presence of granulomas, and lymphocytic interstitial inflammation are pathological features that help differentiate chronic HP from UIP. UIP will have marked sub-pleural fibrosis and microscopic honeycombing with distortion of pulmonary parenchyma.

Fibrotic NSIP can have similar radiographic and pathologic appearance. Pathologically presence of granulomas and giant cells provide supportive evidence for chronic HP. HP/NSIP overlap syndromes have also been reported.