# Continuing Education Activity

Antitubercular medications: rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol are FDA approved to treat Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections. Antitubercular medications are a group of drugs used to treat tuberculosis. Tuberculosis (TB) is a disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M-TB), an acid-fast aerobic bacteria that can grow on gram stain as either gram-positive or gram-negative. This review will outline the indications, contraindications, and other aspects of these drugs.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of antitubercular therapy.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of antitubercular therapy.
- Review the risk factors for developing drug resistance to antitubercular therapy.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance antitubercular therapy and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Tuberculosis is a disease that results from infection with the bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis. It most commonly affects the lungs but can also affect other areas of the body. The infection can be active or latent, with approximately 10% of latent infections progressing to active status. The disease is spread by droplets from speaking, coughing, and sneezing. In the past, the disease was colloquially known by the name consumption. Diagnosis is via chest X-ray, microbacterial cultures, and tuberculin skin test.

Anti-tubercular medications: rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol are FDA-approved for the treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections.

**First Line**

- Rifampin

- Isoniazid

- Pyrazinamide

- Ethambutol

**Second Line**

- Kanamycin (discontinued use in the USA)

- Streptomycin

- Capreomycin

- Amikacin****

- Levofloxacin

- Moxifloxacin

- Gatifloxacin

**MDR-TB**

- Bedaquiline

- Delamanid

- Linezolid

- Pretomanid

The information presented in this overview article is high level; for more details on each specific agent, the reader is instructed to seek the Statpearls articles on the individual agents.

# Mechanism of Action

**Rifampin**

Rifampin exerts its effects by reversibly inhibiting DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, which further inhibits bacterial protein synthesis and transcription.

**Isoniazid**

Isoniazid is a pro-drug that is converted to its active form metabolite by catalase-peroxidase and exerts its action by further inhibiting the biosynthesis of mycolic acid.

**Pyrazinamide**

Pyrazinamide's mechanism of action remains unknown and not fully understood.

**Ethambutol**

Ethambutol inhibits the enzyme arabinosyltransferases and prevents the biosynthesis of the mycobacterial cell wall.****

****Aminoglycosides (Strep**tomycin, Kanamycin, Amikacin)**

Aminoglycosides exert their action by binding to the 30S subunit of ribosomes and inhibiting the protein synthesis of the mycobacteria.

****Fluoroquinolones (Levofloxacin**, Moxifloxacin, Gatifloxacin)**

Fluoroquinolones exert their effects by inhibiting DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV, further inhibiting DNA synthesis within the bacteria.

# Administration

**Active Tuberculosis**

During active disease, there are two phases for treatment: the initiation phase and the continuation phase.

**Rifampin**

10 mg/kg /day

The maximum dose: 600mg

**Isoniazid**

5 mg/kg/day

The maximum dose: 300mg

**Pyrazinamide**

25 mg/kg/day

Dosages are adjusted according to weight

**Ethambutol**

15 to 20 mg/kg/day

Dosages are adjusted according to weightSecond-line agents such as kanamycin, capreomycin, amikacin are administered as an injection, and fluoroquinolones such as moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, and levofloxacin are administered orally. These agents are options when resistance to first-line medication develops.

**Latent Tuberculosis**

The most typical and used treatment for latent tuberculosis is isoniazid therapy for a duration of nine months.

**Isoniazid******

5 mg/kg/day

The maximum dose: 300mg

**Vitamin B6**

10 to 25 mg/day

Anti-tubercular medications should be taken in the daytime one hour before consuming any meals.

# Adverse Effects

**Rifampin**

- Hepatotoxicity

- Thrombocytopenia

- Neutropenia

- Orange/Red discoloration of bodily fluids

- CYP450 Inducer

**Isoniazid**

- Hepatotoxicity

- Vitamin B6 deficiency

- Peripheral Neuropathy

**Pyrazinamide**

- Hepatotoxicity

- Hyperuricemia

- Arthralgia

**Ethambutol**

- Optic neuropathy

- Hepatotoxicity

******Aminoglycosides (Strep**tomycin, Kanamycin, Amikacin)****

- Ototoxicity

- Nephrotoxicity

****Fluoroquinolones (Levofloxacin**, Moxifloxacin, Gatifloxacin)******

- Tendonitis

- Tendon rupture

- Arthropathy

# Contraindications

**Pregnancy**: During pregnancy, all anti-tubercular medications are useful for treatment except for aminoglycosides.

In the USA, pyrazinamide use is avoided during pregnancy because it is a possible teratogen.

# Monitoring

Liver function tests should be monitored routinely as rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol all may exert hepatotoxic effects.

# Toxicity

All first-line anti-tubercular medications, rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, can exert hepatotoxic effects.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol are first-line antitubercular medications, which are FDA-approved and indicated for the treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections. The care for patients suffering from tuberculosis prompts critical care from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals as the preventable infectious disease can lead to medication resistance and mortality. These healthcare professionals include a primary care clinician, an infectious disease specialist, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care physicians and specialists should educate the patients about the consequences of non-adherence to pharmacotherapy for the full duration and how resistance to treatment can further develop into MDR-TB and cause mortality.

Primary care clinicians should routinely monitor labs, as all four agents are hepatotoxic drugs. Counseling and careful monitoring should be conducted during pregnancy, as some second-line medications are teratogenic. Clinicians should be up to date with the newly FDA-approved MDR-TB and their effects in the event drug resistance develops. Interprofessional communication between all team members is key to building patient rapport and developing a therapeutic alliance, so the patients adhere to therapy adequately to eradicate the bacteria and prevent further spread. This interprofessional approach with open communication channels between team members will drive better patient outcomes with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]