Computed tomography (CT) is one of the major modalities used for evaluating the spleen along with ultrasound (US). The normal spleen measures approximately 40 to 60 Hounsfield units (HU) on unenhanced CT, about 10 HU less than that of the liver. On unenhanced CT, the examiner can easily appreciate splenic calcifications. Single or multiple small rounded calcifications usually represent calcified granulomas.

On an enhanced CT, the spleen demonstrates a serpentine, cordlike, irregular enhancement pattern in the arterial phase (approximately 30 seconds after injection of intravenous contrast) due to the presence of an open circulatory system in the red pulp. On portal venous phase imaging (60 seconds after injection of intravenous contrast), the spleen enhances homogenously since the contrast opacifies both the red and white pulp.

The spleen is the most frequently injured abdominal organ. Contrast-enhanced CT is necessary for a complete evaluation of splenic trauma. Nonenhanced studies are suboptimal and may miss subtle lacerations. Traumatic findings include laceration, subcapsular or intraparenchymal hematoma, vascular injury, shattered spleen, and active hemorrhage. The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) is the most widely used grading system for splenic trauma; imaging features are the basis of the grading system. Splenic trauma is usually associated with overlying rib fractures.

A splenic infarct characteristically presents on CT as a peripheral wedge-shaped hypodense lesion. The causes of splenic infarcts include cardioembolic events, vasculitis, hematologic phenomena, splenic vein thrombosis, pancreatitis, and iatrogenic causes. Chronic infarct results in notching of the normally smooth splenic contour and peripheral calcifications. In patients with sickle cell disease, numerous chronic infarcts result in autosplenectomy, seen on CT as a shrunken spleen with diffuse calcification.

True cysts are congenital epithelial lined fluid-filled structures. On CT, they appear as rounded, non-enhancing, hypodense lesions with internal attenuation similar to that of water (0 HU). Histologically, they have thin walls, but the walls are normally beyond the resolution of CT and, therefore, imperceptible. False cysts are not lined by epithelium and result from prior trauma, infection, or infarct. On CT, they often appear similar to true cysts. Distinguishing features, when present, including higher internal density due to the presence of debris or blood products and peripheral calcifications. Pancreatic pseudocysts can take on an intrasplenic location.

A pyogenic abscess occurs most commonly by the hematogenous spread of bacteria, especially in immunocompromised patients. These lesions display central hypodensity like cysts, but classically with have ill-defined, irregular, thick, enhancing walls. The additional imaging feature of anti-dependent gas in the collection is diagnostic but not always present

The most frequently encountered primary neoplasm of the spleen is a hemangioma, which is a benign tumor of vascular origin lined with endothelium and filled with red blood cells. On unenhanced CT, these lesions may look like cysts. The capillary form typically presents as a well defined homogenously enhancing nodule.

The spleen is involved in about one-third of patients with lymphoma, but primary lymphoma of the spleen is rare. The CT appearance of the spleen in this disease process is variable. The lymphomatous spleen may appear normal or enlarged on CT. Multiple hypodense, non-enhancing splenic lesions are a nonspecific finding seen in lymphoma, sarcoid, fungal microabscesses, and opportunistic infections.

Angiosarcoma is exceedingly rare; however, it is the most common primary malignant vascular tumor of the spleen. It is highly aggressive and portrays a poor prognosis, usually with metastatic disease on presentation. The imaging characteristics are varied. On CT, multiple hypervascular, heterogeneous masses in the spleen with necrosis, hemorrhage, and distant metastases would be compatible with this malignancy.