Thermal burns are classified by the depth the tissue injury. There are four classifications set by the American Burn Association:

**Superficial:**Involve the epidermal layer of the skin. These injuries do not blister but can be painful. They usually self-resolve within 1 week.

**Partial Thickness (second-degree):**Involve the epidermal layer and parts of the dermal layer. Superficial partial thickness burns blister and are painful but resolve within 21 days and usually do not cause scarring. Deep partial thickness burns always blister and cause damage to hair follicles and glandular tissue. Deep partial thickness burns are extremely painful. These burns can get infected and may need to be grafted depending on the extent of the injury. These injuries take up to 9 weeks to heal and will form hypertrophic scarring.

**Full Thickness (third-degree):**These burns go through the entire dermal layer and frequently injure subcutaneous tissue. Burn eschars, or the denatured dermal layer, is intact acutely. The wound may be anesthetic due to the necrotic nature of the burn. The appearance can be waxy or grey to black. The eschar of the burn will eventually fall off, revealing a bed of granulation tissue. If a full thickness burn does not undergo surgery, it will heal by contracture. These burns never spontaneously heal.

**Extension into deep tissues (fourth-degree):**These burns involve the underlying soft tissue that may involve muscle or bone. These injuries may be life-threatening and need to be treated immediately.