The index of refraction is given by the equation:

- n = c / v

- c = speed of light (~3,000,000 km/s)

- v = speed of light in a material

Determining the rate at which an electromagnetic wave travels through a non-vacuum substance, or the phase velocity, can be difficult considering the multitude of electromagnetic interactions occurring between charged particles. As an incident wave of light enters a dilute gas, its electric field polarizes the electrical field of the gas so that a new sine motion of the electrons is generated. The resultant energy radiates a new field onto the initial electric field, which vibrates out of phase with the original field but at the same frequency. The difference in the vibration phase is the resultant phase velocity by which light travels, thus determining that substance's index of refraction.

While the index of refraction for gas is close to one, the phase velocity of light through a gas is still less than c. As the index of refraction increases, the speed of light is inversely affected. The absolute index of refraction n is given when light travels from a vacuum into another medium, whereas the relative index of refraction is the resultant n when light travels from one non-vacuum medium into another non-vacuum medium.

**Wavelength and Energy Dependency**

The refractive index of a material affects the wavelength, energy, direction of propagation, and state of polarization of a ray of light and vice versa.v = lf, where v is the velocity of light, l is the wavelength, and f is the frequency. Thus, the index of refraction impacts wavelength by the following equation: l = lo /n, where lo is the wavelength of light in a vacuum and l is the resultant wavelength. The index of refraction does not impact the frequency of light as it travels between media. However, the refractive index does vary with the wavelength of light, and different wavelengths are bent at different angles.

This wavelength dependency illustrates that as the wavelength of light increases, the index of refraction decreases; this is known as the dispersion property of a material.

Temperature, or energy, may also impact the refractive index as higher temperatures increase the kinetic energy of materials, thus decreasing the density. The resultant refractive index decreases as light can travel faster in a less-dense medium than in that same medium at a lower temperature.

Changes in refractive index with temperature are largely due to temperature dependence of the electronic polarizability that occurs at constant volume.

**Snell Law**

The direction of propagation of a beam of light and the index of refraction interplay as shown in Snell's law, or the law of index of refraction.

Snell law is given by the equation:

- n1sin(theta1)= n2sin(theta2)

- n1= index of refraction of medium 1

- n2= index of refraction of medium 2

- theta1= angle of incidence

- theta2= angle of refraction

The law of the index of refraction states that the ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction is constant when traveling from one media to another. Light travels in the path requiring the shortest amount of time, as determined by Snell Law, which is faster via refraction than by traveling in a straight line.

When assessing a light beam's refraction, the angle of incidence and refraction are measured relative to the "normal." The "normal" is a line perpendicular (at 90 degrees) to the surface at which the refraction occurs. When traveling into a denser material, light is bent towards the normal. Similarly, light is bent away from the normal when traveling into a material with a lower refractive index. Differences in refractive index thus impact the angle of refraction of the resultant light beam and change the direction of propagation of light.

**Brewster Law**

Brewster's law states that as light travels through a medium, it is polarized so that the tangent of the angle of polarization is the index of refraction of the medium.

**Critical Angle and Total Internal Reflection**

There may be a circumstance in which a beam of light is completely reflected back into the original medium. This occurs when Snell law cannot be fulfilled, and an angle θ2 cannot exist because the incident angle is larger than the critical angle or the angle of maximum refraction. At this specific incident angle, the reflectivity of light is significantly reduced so that the light energy is not refracted into the second medium and instead undergoes total internal reflection into the original medium.

Light cannot be transmitted as the angle of incidence is larger than the critical angle, such as when going to a much less optically dense material with a lower refractive index. The critical angle is given by (theta)c= arcsin (n2/n1). As the incident angle increases towards a medium, the refracted angle gets closer to the surface of the angle. Given the equation for the critical angle, the limit for the refracted angle is 90 degrees. Therefore, the critical angle is reached when the angle of refraction reaches 90 degrees. For incident angles larger than the critical angle, the refracted angle would be greater than 90 degrees, so the resultant light undergoes total internal reflection.

**Reflection and Normal Incidence (Fresnel Equations)**

The Fresnel Equations describe the interplay between reflection and index of refraction by discussing the ratio of transmitted light versus reflected light. When a mismatch occurs between the refractive index of two media, partial reflection of light occurs at the boundary.

The intensity of the specular reflection of a material depends on both the refractive index of the material and the viewing angle or angle of the surface.

Polarization of light also plays an important role in reflection; however, at normal incidence (when the light beam is parallel to the normal and perpendicular to the surface), polarization does not play a role in reflectance. At normal incidence, reflectance is greatest when traveling from a material with a much higher refractive index into a much lower one.