The gag reflex once served as a method of detecting dysphagia in the setting of an acute stroke. In one study comparing gag reflex to bedside swallowing assessment in 242 patients, researchers found that the absence of a gag reflex was specific for, and consistent with, the inability to swallow as assessed at the bedside but not sensitive in stroke patients. This study showed that the specificity of the gag reflex in detecting dysphagia was 96%, with a sensitivity of 39%. However, an intact gag reflex indicates protection against long-term swallowing issues and predicts a decreased requirement for enteral feeding in the future.

Research has found that the posterior pharyngeal muscles, which control the gag reflex, are independent of the muscles responsible for swallowing. Therefore, clinicians should not rely upon an absent gag reflex as a predictor for aspiration in stroke patients. Indirect laryngoscopy is a better alternative to performing the gag reflex to assess airway safety. Researchers have also noted that one out of three people may lack a gag reflex through habituation or be influenced by emotions through higher centers. Pharyngeal sensation, in contrast, is rarely absent and is thus used as an alternative to gag reflex testing and could prove better at predicting future problems with swallowing.

Finally, performing the gag reflex is necessary when assessing brainstem function to determine brain death. Confirmation of brain death is done in part by absent brainstem reflexes, which include an absent gag reflex.

Patients with a hypersensitive gag reflex may state that they have issues swallowing pills or larger pieces of food. Typically, these patients may also defer going to the dentist or practicing appropriate oral hygiene due to the presence of an HGR. Numerous studies have been performed to try and find ways to lessen the gag reflex of patients with HGR in the clinical or everyday setting. These studied interventions have included anti-nausea medications, herbal remedies, acupressure, acupuncture, behavioral therapies, and sedatives. Results indicate no evidence that any of the listed interventions are adequate for maintaining the gag reflex.

As a clinician, you will likely encounter a patient suffering from an eating disorder involving forced vomiting or purging at some point in your career. These patients may use their fingers or another instrument (e.g., spoon, pencil) to stimulate their gag reflex and expel gastric contents. Patients who regularly induce self-vomiting may have a diminished gag reflex due to desensitization caused by overstimulation.