Patients will typically report pain with an insidious onset, but upon further questioning, they will often relate an overuse history without a specific inciting traumatic event. The pain commonly occurs one to three days after an unaccustomed activity that involves repeated wrist extension.

The history may reveal new equipment use or an atypical workout circumstance such as an abnormally intense or prolonged workout in an athlete. This condition can also be precipitated by an acute injury or strain, such as lifting a heavy object or performing a hard backhand swing in tennis. This acute injury can lead to a more chronic process (i.e., acute-on-chronic overuse injury). The pain is usually over the lateral elbow that worsens with activity and improves with rest. The pain can vary from being mild, for example, with aggravating activities like tennis or the repeated use of a hand tool, or it can be such severe pain that simple activities like picking up and holding a coffee cup or a coffee cup sign will act as a trigger for the pain.

On examination, the point of maximal tenderness is usually over the lateral epicondyle, occasionally in a focal, distal location about 1 cm to 2 cm from the lateral epicondyle itself. The palpation of the entire tendon may have some degree and discomfort, and the connecting muscle may exhibit significant tightness. The patient’s pain will increase or be reproduced with resisted wrist extension, especially when the elbow is extended and the forearm is pronated. Resisted extension of the middle finger while the elbow is extended is particularly painful secondary to increased stress placed on the tendon, further supporting the diagnosis. Notably, there should be an absence of radicular symptoms or numbness/tingling. These symptoms suggest an alternative process such as radial nerve entrapment, although these conditions can coexist.