As technology has improved and surgical approaches have continued to develop, complications following penile prosthesis implantation have been reduced. However, complications still remain a significant challenge for the prosthetic urologist. Infection is the most worrisome complication of prosthesis surgery. Patients may present acutely ill with fevers, constitutional symptoms, and drainage from the incision site. Alternatively, more indolent infections may not be picked up for months or even years after prosthesis placement. In either scenario, treatment typically involves the initiation of broad-spectrum antibiotics and removal of all prosthesis components. Notably, the literature does suggest that a new implant can be placed immediately following removal as long as an appropriate washout has been performed.

Another common complication of penile implant surgery is improper cylinder sizing. If the cylinders are too short, the patient may have a supersonic transporter (SST) deformity and potential for “floppy glans syndrome.”

If significant erosion is present, the device must be explanted. Cranial migration of the scrotal pump is another complication of prosthesis placement that is difficult to manage. Migration can make the pump difficult to use and can cause an abnormal appearance and feel to the penis and scrotum. This complication can be avoided by incorporating the pump and tubing underneath the closure of the Dartos fascial layer. Finally, device malfunction is a rare complication following prosthesis placement as implant technology has continued to evolve. This may present one uncommon scenario in which a single component replacement may be considered.