Baclofen is available for oral, transdermal, and intrathecal administration through pump infusion.

- Baclofen intrathecal solution is available in 10 mg/20 mL , 20 mg/20 mL, and 40 mg/20 mL in 20mL vial.

- Baclofen preservative free intrathecal solution vials are available in 0.05 mg/mL (1 mL), 10 mg/5 mL (5 mL),  10 mg/20 mL (20 mL), 40 mg/20 mL (20 mL),  and 20,000 mcg/20 mL (20 mL).

- Prefilled Syringe of intrathecal solution is available in 50 mcg/mL (1 mL), 10,000 mcg/20 mL (20 mL), 20,000 mcg/20 mL (20 mL),  and 40,000 mcg/20 mL (20 mL).

- Oral solutions are available in 5 mg/5 mL (473 mL) bottles, and oral tablets are available in 5 mg, 10 mg, and 20 mg strength.

Oral administration is initially 5 mg three times a day. The dose is increased every three days until achieving an optimal response; however, the dose should not exceed 80 mg per day. The usual dosage is 40 to 80 mg daily.

Intrathecal administration of baclofen initiates via screening. The patient receives a single dose, typically 50 mcg baclofen, and is observed for 4 to 8 hours to assess its efficacy. The screening dose that provides a positive response for the first 24 hours will then be doubled and administrated via an implantable pump with an intrathecal catheter. Daily dose adjustments will be made gradually on the order of 10% to 30% for spasticity of spinal cord origin and 5% to 15% for spasticity of cerebral origin until attaining a positive response. The dose may be increased or decreased slightly to obtain an optimum daily dose. Spasticity of cerebral origin is usually adequately managed on 90 to 703 mcg daily. Spasticity related to the spinal cord usually requires 300 to 800 mcg of baclofen daily. However, the lowest dose that produces optimal response should be maintained. The pump's reservoir is filled by percutaneous injections regularly, and the pump is programmed to deliver a precise dose automatically via simple continuous or bolus dosing.

The majority of the patients on chronic baclofen therapy require gradual dose increases over time due to a lack of response to the original maintenance dose. Up to 10% of patients become resistant to dose titrations and may need a drug holiday. Drug holidays should only be in an inpatient setting with gradual withdrawal over 2 to 4 weeks. Alternative therapy for spasticity should be administrated simultaneously.

Researchers have not established the safety and efficacy of baclofen in pediatric populations younger than 12 years old.

**Specific Population**

**Renal Impairment:**Baclofen use requires caution in patients with impaired renal function, and it might be necessary to reduce the dose.

**Hepatic Impairment:**The manufacturer’s labeling has not provided information for any doe adjustment.

**Pregnancy:**Baclofen has been shown to increase the incidence of omphalocele and incomplete sternebral ossification in fetuses of rats receiving baclofen in a significantly higher dose than recommended for humans. Baclofen is pregnancy category C; it should only be administrated in pregnant women if the benefits clearly outweigh the potential risks to the fetus.

**Breastfeeding Patients:**Limited data reports that baclofen will not cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants due to low drug levels in breast milk. However, newborn infants should be monitored for signs of sedation.