**Contraindications**

- Patients who have known hypersensitivity to diphenoxylate or atropine.

- Patients with obstructive jaundice. Due to mu receptor agonism, diphenoxylate leads to constriction of the sphincter of Oddi, which leads to the worsening of symptoms of obstructive disease.

- Children <6 yrs should not be administered diphenoxylate/atropine tablets owing to the high risk of severe CNS/respiratory depression.

- Diarrhea associated with pseudomembranous colitis (Clostridium difficile) or enterotoxin-producing bacteria due to the risk of gastrointestinal complications like sepsis and prolonged/worsened diarrhea.

**Cautions**

- Patients with electrolyte imbalance as the drug decrease GI motility, potentially leading to fluid retention and aggravating electrolyte imbalance & dehydration.

- Patients with advanced hepatorenal disease, which can precipitate hepatic coma.

- Other CNS depressants - Diphenoxylate/atropine can potentiate CNS depression when used with other drugs like barbiturates/benzodiazepines/tranquilizers/anxiolytics/antipsychotics/general anesthetics/alcohol.

- Patients with infectious diarrhea - Diphenoxylate/atropine can lead to gastrointestinal complications like sepsis/ prolonged or worsening diarrhea by decreasing GI motility and enhancing bacterial overgrowth and release of enterotoxins. These organisms include toxigenic E.coli/Salmonella/Shigella/Clostridium difficile induced pseudomembranous colitis.

- Patients with acute ulcerative colitis are at risk of developing toxic megacolon. Therefore the drug has to be withdrawn if any signs of abdominal distension appear.

- In theory, the administration of diphenoxylate/atropine in patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors can precipitate hypertensive crisis. This effect occurs as the chemical structure of diphenoxylate hydrochloride is similar to meperidine hydrochloride.