**EEG in Chronic Encephalopathies**

Chronic encephalopathies can also show EEG changes. The most common finding is slowing of the background in theta and delta range as the encephalopathy, or the disease, worsens. In neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer disease, Pick disease, Parkinson disease, and vascular dementia, EEG findings are typically normal at the initial stages.

**Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)**

CJD is a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with prion protein (PrP), an abnormal isoform of a cellular glycoprotein. The majority of patients with CJD typically die within one year of contracting the illness. Clinically, in addition to rapidly progressive dementia, there can be myoclonus, visual or cerebellar signs, pyramidal/extrapyramidal signs, and akinetic mutism with variable association. EEG changes are commonly seen in this condition and are characterized by diffuse slowing, the appearance of periodic complexes, and generalized rhythmic delta activity.

**EEG Changes in Encephalopathy Associated with COVID-19 or SARS-CoV2 Infection**

The common EEG changes noted in patients with 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) related encephalopathy include generalized slowing of the background.****In another cohort of 18 patients, there was a direct correlation between oxygen saturation levels at the time of presentation and EEG changes. Lower oxygen levels were associated with more severe EEG patterns, like the association with epileptiform discharges.