# Definition/Introduction

Grey Turner’s sign is an uncommon subcutaneous manifestation of intra-abdominal pathology that manifests as ecchymosis or discoloration of the flanks.

# Issues of Concern

In an article published in 1920, British surgeon George Grey Turner, MBBS (1877-1951), described finding subcutaneous discoloration of the flanks in patients found to have severe pancreatitis. Referring to a patient with severe pancreatitis, he wrote, “I now noticed two large discolored areas in the loins. They were about the size of the palm of the hand, slightly raised above the surface, and of a dirty greenish color. There was a little edema, with pitting on pressure, but there was no pain or tenderness.” Since that publication, the exam finding of ecchymosis of the flank in association with intra-abdominal bleeding has carried Dr. Turner’s name. However, descriptions of non-traumatic abdominal wall ecchymosis exist as far back as Hippocrates, Galen, and Leonardo da Vinci.

In severe acute pancreatitis, the injured pancreas releases pancreatic enzymes that cause fat necrosis and inflammation, occasionally resulting in peri-pancreatic bleeding. The resulting fluid collection can travel via an anatomical defect of the transversalis fascia to the space between the two leaves of the renal fascia. It then flows to the pararenal space, followed by the lateral edge of the quadratus lumborum muscle and finally to the subcutaneous tissue of the flanks.

# Clinical Significance

A careful physical examination, including visualization of the abdominal wall itself in select patients, may show a Grey Turner's sign suggesting potentially serious intra-abdominal pathology, in particular, intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal bleeding. This sign may be especially important in the setting of patients who cannot provide an otherwise adequate history or demonstrate abdominal tenderness on examination due to altered mental status or intubation with mechanical ventilation. Additionally, Grey Turner's sign may guide a clinician to consider retroperitoneal hemorrhage in unstable patients. This guidance is particularly important in an unstable patient with a bedside ultrasound that reveals no intra-abdominal bleeding, given that ultrasonography cannot reliably detect retroperitoneal bleeding.

Researchers have not adequately determined the sensitivity and specificity of Grey Turner's sign for detecting intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal pathology, although sensitivity is almost certainly low. Studies have shown it is an uncommon finding among patients with pancreatitis, present in about 1%.

In addition to the physical exam finding of flank ecchymosis, CT scanning may reveal a radiographic Grey Turner's sign. In a review of patients with severe acute pancreatitis who underwent CT imaging, researchers found that radiographic evidence of extension of retroperitoneal fluid collections laterally beyond the aponeurotic layer to the abdominal wall predicted organ failure and death with an overall mortality rate near 40%.

Other commonly cited subcutaneous manifestations of intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal hemorrhage include Cullen's sign (periumbilical ecchymosis), Fox's sign (ecchymosis of the upper thigh with a sharply defined superior border paralleling and inferior to the inguinal ligament), and Bryant's sign (blue discoloration of the scrotum).