The roles of nursing, allied health, and interprofessional teams in healthcare in identifying obesity are vital to patient-centered care. As highlighted above, the strategies for reversing obesity in patients require routine follow-up and consistent evaluation by healthcare professionals. Once the plan is implemented and approved by the patient's clinician, support staff can perform routine follow-ups, monitor A1c every 3-months, lipid panel every 6-months, and assess patients' barriers to weight loss. Support staff can communicate the results to the physician to modify the plan to ensure the patient remains on track.

Patients suffering from chronic obesity can often have an unhealthy relationship with food. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) can be a valuable tool for helping patients reconcile feelings that may lead to overeating. Various technological applications exist to assist patients with direct access to a therapist.

The use of applications to measure daily body-weight and count calories is largely effective due to its ability to draw the users' attention to lifestyle-related details which influence weight gain and loss. For most, cataloging daily caloric intake can be burdensome and arduous, so it is crucial to consistently follow up with patients during their weight-loss journey.

Follow-up is the quintessential element of ensuring adherence to a weight-loss plan. Therefore, it is crucial to set expectations that this will require consistent virtual or in-person meetings to ensure continued compliance when beginning the weight loss journey. If the patient is unwilling to agree to follow-up, the patient will likely fail and revert to previous poor lifestyle choices.