No consensus is present regarding the primary causative factor of Kienböck disease. It is multifactorial, related to the following variables:

**Ulnar negative variance (or ulna minus):**This refers to a disproportionately shortened ulna when compared to the radius. As deduced from the previous section, a shortened ulna results in excessive mechanical stress and repetitive microtrauma exerted on the lunate by the relatively long radius. In some studies, up to 78% of Kienböck cases correlate with this finding.

**Vascular supply to the lunate bone:**The lunate receives its blood supply from a variable number of dorsal and volar penetrating arteries that branch off of the dorsal and palmar radiocarpal and intercarpal arches. Intraosseous collaterals are sparse. The lower the number of penetrating arteries (especially volar branches from the radiocarpal palmar arch), the greater the likelihood of developing the disease.

**Lunate morphology:**Risk of developing Kienböck disease increases as lunate size decreases, forcing the lunate to carry a larger axial load. The lunate can either have a square/rectangular shape (type II or type III), or a more triangular shape whereby the medial articular facet is absent (type I). The latter has a weaker trabecular pattern and is a risk factor for disease development and progression.

**Radial inclination angle:**the radial inclination angle is a measurement of the angle formed between the horizontal and a line drawn from the ulnar tip of the radial articular surface to the tip of the radial styloid. The risk of developing Kienböck disease increases as the radial inclination angle decreases.