**General**

Granular cell tumors typically present as skin-colored or brown-red, solitary, painless, and slow-growing nodules in the head and neck area that are less than 3-4 cm in diameter.

They may present as multiple nodules, which should prompt an exam for other findings associated with Noonan syndrome, neurofibromatosis type I, and LEOPARD syndrome.

**Breast**

In the breast, granular cell tumors can arise in any location, including all 4 quadrants, the axilla, and nipple. Some authors previously argued that they might arise predominantly in the upper inner quadrant in the distribution of the supraclavicular nerve, although this is debated in recent literature. 70% of these present as palpable masses and others are found incidentally or during screening without a palpable mass on the exam. Most of them are painless, although some patients have reported pain, pruritis, skin retraction, thickening or dimpling, and reactive lymphadenopathy on presentation.

**Gastrointestinal Tract**

In the gastrointestinal tract, these tumors are often found incidentally during screening, and patients are usually asymptomatic. They occur most frequently in the distal esophagus, followed by the duodenum, anus, and stomach, although cases in the colon, biliary tract, and rectum have also been reported. Some patients present with non-specific symptoms such as belching, dysphagia, abdominal distension, or hematochezia. Endoscopy typically reveals a hard, isolated grey-white submucosal or mucosal nodule with normal overlying mucosa, and the lesions generally do not have unique features to set them apart from other etiologies of gastrointestinal polyps.

**Oral Cavity**

In the oral cavity, these are known to occur most frequently on the anterior tongue and are seen as a firm yellow or pink, non-painful, solitary nodule.

**Neurohypophysis**

In the neurohypophysis, they are most often asymptomatic and found incidentally at autopsy. However, they may rarely present with bitemporal visual impairment due to mass effect, headache, or hyperprolactinemia with hypogonadism. Given their rarity, they are often initially diagnosed with radiology as pituitary adenomas or craniopharyngiomas.

**Malignant Tumors**

As for the malignant counterpart, the tumors often present as subcutaneous masses, most commonly in the lower extremities.