Cardiovascular risk is associated with patients who have primary aldosteronism because these patients will have greater mass measurements of the left ventricle as well as decreased left ventricular function when compared to patients with other types of hypertension.

Metabolic syndrome is more common in those with primary hyperaldosteronism as compared to controls with similar blood pressure, sex, age, and BMI.

Increased aldosterone blood levels lead to increasing GFR and renal perfusion pressure. These patients will also have increased urinary albumin excretion. A study of a series of 50 patients with primary aldosteronism treated with either adrenalectomy or spironolactone was compared to those with primary hypertension on antihypertensive therapy. The results showed that at baseline, patients with primary aldosteronism had higher GFRs and albumin excretion than patients with primary hypertension. However, after a six-month follow-up of the treated primary aldosteronism patients, it was found that albuminuria was significantly decreased in addition to the reduction in the GFR when compared to the primary hypertension group.

Prior stroke was found to be significantly higher in patients with primary hyperaldosteronism (12.9%) than those with primary hypertension (3.4%) in a retrospective study comparing a total of 124 patients with primary hyperaldosteronism and 465 patients with primary hypertension. The two groups had similar ages, genders, and mean blood pressure of 175/107.