**Cavernous Sinus Syndrome**

Cavernous sinus syndrome is a medical emergency and life-threatening disorder that presents with different symptoms depending on what structure is affected. A severe lesion involving the entire sinus will present with total ophthalmoplegia, due to CN III, IV, and VI injury, accompanied with fixed and dilated pupils due to compression of the superficial parasympathetic fibers of the CN III. Cavernous sinus syndrome can lead to Horner’s syndrome. Horner’s syndrome occurs when the sympathetic plexus around the internal carotid is damaged. When CN V1 and CN V2 are involved, sensory loss in the face, scalp, maxilla, nasal cavity, sinuses, and palate occurs. There are several causes of cavernous sinus syndrome, including metastatic tumor, meningioma, pituitary tumor, extension of nasopharyngeal tumors, granulomatous diseases, cavernous sinus thrombosis, and aneurysms of the cavernous part of the internal carotid artery. In case of rupture of a cavernous aneurysm, a carotid-cavernous fistula is created, leading to a pulsating exophthalmos on physical examination.

**Facial veins and implication to cavernous sinus infection**

Blood from the medial angle of the eye, lips, and nose usually drain via the facial vein. However, blood from these parts may also drain superiorly through the facial vein, to the superior ophthalmic, to the cavernous sinus. By doing so, it provides a pathway for infections from the face to spread to the cavernous sinus and from the sinus to the brain.

Another way for infections to spread from the face to the brain is via the inferior ophthalmic vein. In fact, the inferior ophthalmic vein communicates with the pterygoid plexus of veins, and the pterygoid plexus communicates with the cavernous sinus via the emissary's vein. Gravity dictates the blood flow from the cavernous sinus to the pterygoid plexus; however, in the case of inflammation or obstruction, the pressure gradient can be reversed. Because there are no valves in the brain’s venous sinus, blood will flow from the pterygoid plexus to the cavernous sinus carrying bacteria with it.