The trigeminal nerve is a mixed-function nerve that provides sensation to the face through its sensory branches and innervates the muscles of mastication through its motor branches.

The trigeminal nerve originates at the annular protuberance at the limit of the cerebellar peduncles. At the level of the ganglion of Gasser, it divides into three large branches named the ophthalmic, the superior maxillary, and the inferior maxillary branches. The inferior maxillary branch exits via the oval foramen giving off collateral and terminal branches. The collateral branches consist of three external branches (deep median temporal nerves, temporomasseter, and temporobuccal, or temporobuccinator), an internal branch (internal pterygoid nerve), and a posterior branch (auriculotemporal). The terminal branches are the inferior dental nerve and the lingual nerve. From the point of view of clinical anatomy, the branches of the inferior maxillary nerve of the trigeminal can also subdivide into collaterals, anterior trunk, and posterior trunk. The temporobuccal or temporobuccinator, according to this latest classification is a branch of the anterior trunk arising from two short roots which merge into a single trunk which travels forward and passes through the two parts, (superior and inferior) of the external pterygoid muscle, later dividing into two branches named as the anterior deep temporal nerve and the buccal nerve.

It is known that sometimes buccal nerve joins with buccal branches of the facial nerve.

The buccal nerve runs downwards and forwards from the temporobuccal or temporobuccinator nerve to arrive at the external face of the buccinator muscle hidden by the fat pad of Bichat. Discussion on its relation to the tendon of insertion of the temporal muscle has led to the conclusion that it does not go through the tendon, but is situated firstly medial and then anterior to the tendon.

The dissection of the buccal nerve is located in the infratemporal fossa. The terminal branches of the facial nerve are split and rest posteriorly towards the parotid gland. The parotid duct is split instead where it penetrates the buccinator muscle and rests towards the parotid gland. It clears the lateral surface of the masseter muscle and rests inferiorly towards the angle of the mandible. The buccal nerve is located between the ascending ramus of the mandible and the anterior border of the temporal muscle. If the mandibular branch is cut horizontally to expose the lateral pterygoid muscle fibers, it shows that the buccal nerve descends between the two parts of this muscle. For surgical localization of the buccal nerve, an incision of 3.5 cm is made upwards in the mucosa of the external oblique edge of the mandibular ramus from the horizontal part of the retromolar trigone. Once the area of fat is exposed, the buccal nerve can be identified. The buccal nerve has dimensions of between 0.91 and 1.78 mm.