Endocarditis is inflammation or infection of the endocardium, the inner lining of cardiac valves and cardiac muscle. It most commonly results from bacterial infection, which is also known as infective endocarditis (IE). Non-infective endocarditis, also known as nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE) or marantic endocarditis, is caused by the aggregation of sterile vegetation at the native cardiac valves. Clinical manifestations of IE and NBTE differ due to the difference in pathology, the nature of the cardiac valves (i.e., prosthetic valves, rheumatic heart), structures of the heart, pathogens and immunologic status (i.e., Libman-Sachs endocarditis in SLE patients). There is a broad spectrum of complications associated with endocarditis, including cardiac, systemic infections, neurologic, pulmonary, and renal complications. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of neurological complications of endocarditis and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with neurological sequelae in endocarditis.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the etiology of risk factors for developing neurological complications of endocarditis

- Describe the epidemiology of neurological complications of endocarditis.
- Review the treatment considerations for patients with neurological complications of endocarditis.

- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients with endocarditis affected by neurological sequelae.