There are no serologic tests for the diagnosis of PHO. The physical findings of digital clubbing with associated dermal changes (coarsening of facial features, non-pitting, cylindrical soft tissue swelling of both legs) and thickening of tubular bones may lead one to suspect the diagnosis of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. HOA's secondary causes should be ruled out, particularly lung cancer, since HOA is often a paraneoplastic rheumatic syndrome. A chest X-ray can screen for intrathoracic abnormality in cases of isolated clubbing. If clubbing is unilateral, it is often vascular or neurologic in origin, and angiography should be considered.

Synovial fluid is thick and viscous with a tendency to clot and is without any inflammatory cells.

Plain films of extremities may show tissue and bony abnormalities even in asymptomatic patients. Clubbing is recognizable by the presence of various degrees of bulbous deformity of the soft tissues located at the distal end of the fingers and abnormal curvature of the nails. In those with long-standing clubbing, acro-osteolysis and rarely overgrowth of tufts may appear. New bone formation tends to be most evident in the subperiosteal region of the distal diaphysis of bones of the forearms and legs. Periostitis causes increased circumference of bone without changing its shape. Multiple layers of new bone are deposited, resulting in "onion skin" like lesions in affected bones. Reports also exist of ossification of ligaments and interosseous membranes.

Radionuclide bone scanning may be useful in the early diagnosis of the disease by demonstrating periosteal involvement. Even though sensitive, the findings on the bone scan are non-specific and may also present in other conditions where there is periosteal proliferation. F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in combination with CT scan may show evidence of periostitis and uptake of excess tracer in internal organs, indicating a possible etiology in cases of secondary HOA.