After establishing the diagnosis of osteomalacia, it is crucial to evaluate the etiology.

Treatment should focus on reversing the underlying disorder and subsequently correcting the vitamin D and other electrolyte deficiencies.

When the clinician has determined that vitamin D deficiency is the underlying cause, treatment may lead to significant improvement in strength and relief of bone tenderness in weeks. Serum calcium and urine calcium levels should be monitored, initially after 1 and 3 months, and then every 6 to 12 months until 24-hour urine calcium excretion is normal. Serum 25(OH)D can be measured 3 to 4 months after starting therapy. If hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria is present, the dose can be adjusted to prevent excessive vitamin D dosing. For patients with severe vitamin D deficiency, below is a possible dosing approach:

- 50,000 IU of ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) or cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) orally one day per week for 8 to 12 weeks, followed by

- 800-2000 IU of vitamin D3 daily

Ergocalciferol is present in plant sources and fortified nutritional alternatives. Cholecalciferol is usually in fish, meat, and eggs. When using vitamin D supplements, accumulating evidence favors the use of cholecalciferol over ergocalciferol because its side-chain has a higher affinity for DPB, thus conferring it a longer half-life and more potent ability to increase vitamin D levels.

Since inadequate calcium intake may have contributed to the development of osteomalacia, patients should also take at least 1000 mg of calcium per day while being treated for the vitamin D deficiency. This dose may need to be increased in patients with malabsorption syndromes, who may also have increased vitamin D dosing requirements. Patients with liver and renal disease will not be able to utilize vitamin D2 or D3 effectively, so calcidiol or calcitriol should merit consideration.

Healing of osteomalacia is achieved when there are increases in urine calcium excretion and bone mineral density. Serum calcium and phosphate may normalize after a few weeks of treatment, but normalization of bone alkaline phosphatase lags behind and those levels may stay elevated for months.