The prescription of nitisinone is reserved for patients with the life-threatening metabolic disease, hereditary tyrosinemia type 1, and can also be used in treating alkaptonuria. Nitisinone therapy is started as soon as a diagnosis is made in an infant. Monitoring nitisinone uses for potential adverse effects and possible contraindications are essential to ensuring a higher quality of life for patients with HT-1.

Due to the autosomal recessive inheritance pattern of HT-1, a symptomatic diagnosis is usually made in infancy, and nitisinone therapy must be started immediately. Due to this, developing a strong and trusting patient-physician relationship is essential, as HT-1 patients will be treated for life. Life-long therapy requires all interprofessional healthcare team members to be aware of an HT-1 patient’s diagnosis and treatment to enhance health outcomes. Treatment with nitisinone and improved healthcare team outcomes have significantly increased the life expectancy of patients with HT-1.

The interprofessional healthcare team members include all clinicians (MDs and DOs), physician assistants, nurse practitioners, the nursing staff, and pharmacists. To encourage a healthy relationship among the interprofessional healthcare team, all members should collaborate and coordinate openly, and each should have access to the same patient information. This will set the patient up to receive the most optimal care possible. Each member offers expert input from their respective disciplines, which will enhance the patient treatment strategy, improve health outcomes, and prevent undesired adverse effects from nitisinone use. [Level 5]