The cervical spine can be divided into the atlas (C1), the axis (C2), and the typical cervical vertebrae (C2-C7).****C1 has no spinous process or vertebral body. C2 has the dens that projects superiorly from its body and articulates with C1. As the union between the head and the atlas, the atlantooccipital (AO) joint's primary motion involves flexion and extension (nodding motion). The atlantoaxial (AA) joint's primary motion involves rotation. The vertebral bodies of the typical cervical segments are separated by intervertebral discs.

The pathophysiology of tenderpoints (TPs) could be explained through the interplay of muscle strain and the resulting perception of pain. A sudden muscle strain—from the overstretching of myofascial tissues—is detected by muscle spindle receptors due to the change in length of the muscle fibers that have been affected. Increased firing of the muscle spindle receptors triggers increased gamma motor neuron activity and subsequent contraction of the muscle and affiliated pain. The explanation for the effects of strain-counterstrain (SCS) in the treatment of TPs is not entirely clear, but the most common theory proposes that the positioning of the patient minimizes the tension of the tissue of interest and reduces the nociceptive input, thus preventing the pathological neural reflex arc.

TPs are most commonly located near bony attachments of tendons, ligaments, or muscle bellies. TPs should not be confused with trigger points, which are normally found within taut musculotendinous tissue bands.

**Location of Anterior Cervical (AC) TPs:**

- Anterior cervical C1 (AC1) TPs are located near the transverse processes of C1, on the posterior edge of the ramus of the mandible.

- AC2-AC6 TPs are located on the anterolateral tips of the corresponding transverse processes.

- AC7 TPs are located on the superior surface of the clavicle at the clavicular attachment of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM).

- AC8 TPs are located at the medial end of the clavicle at the sternal attachment of the SCM.

**Location of Posterior Cervical (PC) TPs:**

- Posterior cervical C1 (PC1) midline TP is located around the inion.

- PC1 lateral TPs are located on the occiput, midway between the inion and mastoid process.

- PC2 midline TP is located on the superior aspect of the spinous process.

- PC2 lateral TPs are located on the occiput, midway between the inion and PC1 lateral TPs on the occiput.

- PC3 midline TP is located on the inferolateral aspect of the C2 spinous process.

- PC3-PC7 lateral TPs are located on the posterolateral surface of the corresponding articular processes.

- PC4-PC8 midline TPs are located on the inferior aspect of the spinous process of the vertebra directly above the corresponding cervical level.