Hyperhidrosis is a condition in which patients sweat more than necessary to regulate core body temperature. There are two major types of hyperhidrosis: primary focal and generalized. In the primary focal form, patients have excessive sweating of the palms, soles, and axilla due to dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system. Generalized hyperhidrosis is not limited to these locations and is typically secondary to medications or systemic conditions. When treating primary focal hyperhidrosis, aluminum chloride is typically used first. Alternatively, botulinum toxin and systemic agents can be considered, though these treatments pose the risk of significant adverse effects. For patients with refractory hyperhidrosis, endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy can be considered.

Hypohidrosis and anhidrosis are conditions of diminished and absent sweat production, respectively. When a large surface area of the body is affected, individuals are at risk of developing heat stroke.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic condition that occurs primarily in the intertriginous skin characterized by occlusion of follicles, chronic inflammation, and progressive scarring. The pathogenesis of the condition is unknown, but plugging the follicles can lead to rupture and inflammation of the apocrine glands. HS is associated with smoking and several other conditions, including obesity, polycystic ovarian syndrome, insulin resistance, and inflammatory bowel disease. While HS initially appears as nodules, most commonly in the axilla, these nodules often rupture, releasing mucopurulent discharge. When nodules recur, sinus tracts are often formed. Treatment for HS includes preventative care as well as medical and surgical therapy. Topical and oral antibiotics are considered first-line therapy. However, systemic medications should be considered for unresponsive diseases. For patients with severe disease, surgical excision can provide permanent relief.

Bromhidrosis is a condition in which an individual has excessive body odor. There are two variants depending on whether eccrine or apocrine glands are affected. Apocrine bromhidrosis occurs only after puberty and is typically due to bacteria breaking down fatty acids in sweat. The type of skin flora present influences the odor, and Corynebacterium is thought to produce a particularly pungent scent. Eccrine bromhidrosis can be either localized or generalized. Localized eccrine bromhidrosis occurs most commonly on the feet as well as other areas that are particularly prone to maceration secondary to sweat as this leads to the bacterial breakdown of keratin and the production of odor. Generalized eccrine bromhidrosis usually occurs due to ingestion of certain substances or systemic illness. Therapies for bromhidrosis are generally targeted at reducing sweat and bacteria from the affected area, though antibiotics and surgical sweat gland destruction can be considered.

Chromhidrosis, or colored sweat, is due to the presence of lipofuscin pigment in sweat glands, most commonly apocrine sweat glands. This pigment can lead to the production of yellow, blue, green, or black sweat. Treatments include botulinum toxin injection and capsaicin cream.

Miliaria, or sweat rash, is a skin disease caused by the blockage or inflammation of eccrine sweat glands. There are three types of miliaria dependent on the level of obstruction: crystalline, rubra, and profunda. Treatment for miliaria includes maintaining a cool environment, cool compresses, and applying topical corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors.

Fox-Fordyce is a skin disorder caused by the blockage of apocrine sweat glands that leads to the formation of pruritic, skin-colored papules, most commonly in the axilla and groin. This condition can occur in any individual, but women between the ages of 13 and 35 are the most at risk. Topical therapies include corticosteroids, calcineurin inhibitors, clindamycin, and retinoids. Other forms of treatment include surgical excision and phototherapy.