History, ocular examination, and systemic examination are essential when evaluating a patient with a pediatric cataract. Various ocular and syndromic associations must be ruled out.

History

- Age of onset, duration of symptoms

- Antenatal and perinatal history

- Developmental history, milestones

- History of any change in behavior, inability to catch hold of objects thrown at them, frequent falls, squeezing eyes in bright light

- Any history suggestive of any associated systemic abnormality

- Trauma, Previous treatment, or surgery

- Family history of congenital or developmental cataract or history of consanguinity

General Physical Examination:

- Pediatric consultation – to rule out any systemic association or genetically transmitted disorder

- Head circumference. Congenital cataracts associated with dysmorphic syndromes where head circumference measurement holds importance: Trisomy 21, Hallermann-Streiff-Francois syndrome, Lowe's Oculo-Cerebro-renal syndrome, Cri-du-chat syndrome (5p deletion), Nance-Horan syndrome, Edward syndrome, etc.

- If the attending physician or the parents are not sure about when they noticed the white reflex in the eye or the onset of cataract, the family album can be reviewed. This is important because cataracts developing during the critical period of ocular and visual development have a poorer prognosis.

- Examining the family members: an ocular examination of family members, especially parents and other siblings, may reveal undiagnosed lenticular changes in them suggestive of an inherited cause of pediatric cataract. Autosomal dominant forms are the commonest. The X-linked recessive pattern may also present in children with Lowe syndrome and Nance-Horan syndrome.

Ocular Examination

- Visual acuity: 

- Preverbal Children

- Bruckner test: both eyes are visualized simultaneously with the direct ophthalmoscope. If there is a deviation of an eye, the deviated eye will have a lighter red reflex. In the presence of anisometropia, one of the reflexes may also be brighter. 
- Cover test
- Resistance to occlusion of the better eye
- Monocular fixation
- Fixation preference
- Vertical Prism Test
- Forced choice preferential looking
- Teller acuity cards
- Optokinetic nystagmus
- Pattern VEP


- Verbal Children:

- Detection acuity test:

- Catford drum test
- STYCAR graded ball test


- Recognition acuity test

- Direction identification test: Landolt C test, Snellen E test.
- Letter identification test: Snellen charts, Lippman HOTV tests.
- Picture identification charts: Allen picture cards, Domino cards tests.
- Picture identification on the behavioral pattern: Cardiff acuity test, Optokinetic drum test

- Slit-lamp examination: any associated anterior segment findings like microcornea, anterior segment dysgenesis, Iris coloboma, the morphology of cataract, any microspherophakia, ectopia lentis or lens subluxation, pre-existing posterior capsular defect. Morphological classification of pediatric cataract is as follows:
- Anterior cataracts- anterior polar, anterior pyramidal, anterior subcapsular, anterior lenticonus (Alport syndrome)
- Cataract involving whole lens – Total cataract, membranous cataract
- Posterior cataracts- Mittendrofs dot, posterior lenticonus, posterior subcapsular cataract
- Central cataract- Lamellar (zonular), pulverulent, oil drop, coronary, blue dot cataract
- Sutural cataract
- Wedge-shaped cataract

- Ocular motility evaluation: Strabismus and nystagmus should be specifically looked for in these children as sometimes these may be the presenting signs. Strabismus is usually seen in children with unilateral cataracts and develops when an irreparable visual loss has already occurred. Congenital sensory nystagmus is usually associated with pediatric cataracts. The presence of either strabismus or nystagmus indicates that cataract is visually significant.

- Intraocular pressure: To rule out glaucoma( as associated with congenital rubella syndrome) with the help of a tonometer.

- Pupillary reactions: This can give a rough idea about the health of the optic nerve head.

- Direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy: To evaluate for associated vitreous or posterior segment abnormality such as vitreous hemorrhage, remnants of primary vitreous, fundal coloboma, optic or macular hypoplasia, etc.

**Visually significant Cataract**

- Visual acuity ≤ 20/60

- Decrease in contrast sensitivity

- Increased glare

- Loss of stereo acuity

- Centrally or posteriorly located

- Size more than 3 mm

- associated strabismus or nystagmus

**Examination of The Red Reflex**

It is vital that every medical person looking after children, especially newborns and neonates, be familiar with performing the red reflex test. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, red reflex testing should be performed in all patients in the neonatal period and all routine well-child examinations and health care appointments.

The red reflex is seen commonly when photographs are taken with a flash: it is essentially a reflective phenomenon. The light that enters the eye through the pupil is reflected by the cornea creating a red glow. The presence of a red reflex confirms transparency in the optical structures of the eye, including the tear film, the cornea, the aqueous humor, the lens, the vitreous gel, and the retina.

The red reflex is performed with emphasis on the following:

- Presence of absence of the red reflex

- Color of the reflex

- Brightness of the reflex

- Symmetry of the reflex between the eyes

**Requirements to Perform a Red Reflex Test**

- Dim or turn off the room lights

- Have the child on the parent's lap so that the height of the child's eyes are aligned with those of the examiner

- The direct ophthalmoscope diopter power is set to that of the examiner's eye reading or to "0."

- After being turned on, the ophthalmoscope is held close to the examiner's eye and 12 to 18 inches away from those of the child.

- The child should be encouraged to look at the light, preferably with the aid of an assistant and toys as needed.

- The light is directed at one eye and then the other to detect and compare the light reflexes.

- Examine the symmetry by signing the light over both eyes (Bruckner test)