Radiographic imaging of stress fractures starts with plain radiography. It is readily available, inexpensive, and has low radiation exposure. In cortical bone, the changes will be a periosteal and endosteal reaction. If the athlete continues to train despite the pain, a fracture line will develop. In cancellous bone, the finding presents as sclerosis.

Plain films in spondylolysis are challenging. To best visualize the par, five views are needed.

3 phase bone scans have also been used to image stress fractures. This modality utilizes a radioactive tracer. The tracer is taken up in areas of high bone turnover. It is highly specific, so if the scan is negative, there is no stress fracture. However, its sensitivity is not high. In the right clinical setting, it can be positive for a stress fracture. However, any medical condition causing turnover will also be positive. Conditions like cancer or osteomyelitis can produce similar imaging findings. It is not a helpful modality for follow-up images.

Computer tomography is another modality used to image stress fractures. It has a lower sensitivity than magnetic resonance imaging but is more readily available. It will result in higher radiation exposure than other imaging modalities.

Magnetic resonance imaging has excellent specificity and sensitivity.  This modality has a sensitivity of 80 to 100 percent and a specificity of 100 percent. The biggest drawback is the expense of obtaining the images, and they are not readily available. Fredericson developed a classification for stress fractures. Grade 1 findings are periosteal edema only. Grade 2 findings will show mild bone marrow edema on T2 images only. Grade 3 will show moderate bone marrow edema on both T1 and T2 images. Grade 4 findings will show a fracture line.

In general, laboratory studies do not aid in the diagnosis of stress fractures unless they become recurrent and more frequent. Vitamin D levels were evaluated prospectively in a large number of military recruits, and a serum concentration of less than 20 ng/mL (50 nmol/L) is associated with a higher number of stress fractures than levels greater than 20 ng/mL.