Treatments of Charcot aim to decrease permanent foot deformity and ultimately allow for a stable and plantigrade foot that is stable and suitable for ambulation. In the acute phase, it is imperative to immobilize the foot and restrict weight bearing to prevent permanent deformity. Non-operatively, this is achieved through off weight-bearing via total non-weight bearing or protective weight-bearing devices. Assistive devices such as crutches and wheelchairs can aid with non-weight bearing. Total contact casts (TCC) with a controlled ankle motion (CAM) walker can provide protected weight-bearing. TCC redistribute and reduce pressures on the plantar foot while allowing ambulation. The hyperemic phase of the Eichenholtz classification can last for weeks. By using these types of protective measures, the foot may heal the fractures in a stable position if the stress does not exceed the rate of healing.

Pharmacological treatments also exist to control the osteoclastic activity including bisphosphonates and calcitonin supplements.  Bisphosphonates may help the acute phase of Charcot as they inhibit osteoclastic reabsorption. Calcitonin also serves as an antiresorptive agent. Alternative agents include pamidronate or zoledronic acid which act on new hydroxyapatite crystal by blocking osteoclast precursors in the newly formed bone matrix.

Surgery is also a treatment option and it remains controversial if one should intervene in the acute or chronic Charcot phase. During the acute phase, there is a firestorm of inflammatory modulators and cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin 1, and interleukin 6) that promote edema and bone resorption/fragmentation.

Medical optimization including smoking cessation, HbA1c control under 7-8%, and recognizing micro or macro-vascular disease can lessen potential complications post-operatively.