As hypercarbia is most often the result of hypoventilation, the primary method for treatment is to augment ventilation. This can be started while the investigative workup is still in process. For a breathing patient, the first-line option is non-invasive positive pressure ventilation. In most hospital settings, this is usually delivered by a full face mask with bilevel positive airway pressure settings. If effective ventilation is delivered, there should be some improvement in CO2 in a span of minutes to hours.

If non-invasive ventilation fails to improve the hypercarbia, the patient is not breathing, or there is a contraindication to the use of non-invasive ventilation, then intubation and mechanical ventilation are the next steps. After this general treatment with supplemental ventilation, closer scrutiny can be given to correcting the underlying cause. Patient-specific treatment will vary depending on the particular cause for the hypoventilation: bronchospasm from exacerbation of obstructive lung disease, illicit drug or medication toxicity, neuromuscular compromise, or other disease processes. As the hypercarbia is corrected, the patient will often become more alert and wean from ventilatory support.

Mechanical ventilation usually leads to the correction of hypercarbia in a matter of hours for cases not driven by intrinsic pulmonary pathology. For cases driven by significant lung diseases such as asthma exacerbation, severe pneumonia, or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), it may take days to gradually correct the CO2 level. In some cases, complete normalization of CO2 is not the goal immediately or at all. An important concept in treating ARDS is permissive hypercarbia. To avoid overdistention and ventilator-induced lung injury, a lung-protective ventilation strategy is employed. Tidal volumes are limited to 6-8 mL/kg of ideal body weight, which can slightly compromise ventilation. The resultant respiratory acidosis is typically well-tolerated, so long as the pH is greater than 7.25. There is not a specific cut-off for the CO2 level.

Permissive hypercarbia is also allowed for severe asthma exacerbation, though for a different reason. Due to bronchospasm, full exhalation is not possible with higher respiratory rates, which can lead to progressive air-trapping with worsening respiratory and hemodynamic consequences. Therefore, while treating the exacerbation with bronchodilators and steroids, a lower respiratory rate is set on the ventilator, which will lead to an increase in CO2, but enhance airflow dynamics.

For patients with severe hypercarbia that fail or cannot tolerate the above interventions, there is a treatment modality known as extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal (ECCO2R). It is an emerging form of life support, characterized by carbon dioxide removal directly from the blood. It is not widely available at all centers.

As hypercarbia can cause respiratory acidosis, many providers are tempted to correct this by giving alkali or basic therapy. However, while this may briefly improve pH, it is ultimately counterproductive and will worsen hypercarbia. Bicarbonate (HCO3-) is the base most often given, but after binding with a hydrogen ion (H+), it breaks down to water and CO2, which worsens the acidosis.