COX inhibitors are among the most commonly used medications in the world. Although they are available over the counter, they can have serious side effects and are associated with mortality. Patients need to speak to their physicians about taking COX inhibitors, especially if they plan to take them for an extended period. Clinicians should educate patients regarding having a list of medications, including over-the-counter medications with them available at all times. Patients at risk may require regular monitoring of kidney function as well as an endoscopy exam. The monitoring of renal function and/or coagulation has its basis on level III evidence.

If planning a procedure for a patient on aspirin, communication is essential with the prescribing physician.

When a patient does have an NSAID-associated complication such as a GI bleed, all interprofessional healthcare team members must be aware of the contraindications and possible adverse effects. This involves excellent communication between gastroenterologists, primary care providers, nurses, and pharmacists. The contraindication should be communicated clearly with the patient and made clear in the patient's chart. Nursing will carry much of this responsibility since they have more frequent contact with the patient and can assess therapeutic effectiveness and monitor for adverse effects. The pharmacist can verify appropriate dosing and check for drug interactions, and communicate any concerns to the prescriber. All interprofessional team members need to communicate and collaborate to make COX inhibitor therapy successful, optimizing patient outcomes. [Level 5]