# Continuing Education Activity

Endometriosis is a chronic estrogen-dependent chronic condition characterized by the ectopic implantation of functional tissue lining the uterus (endometrial glands and stroma) outside of the uterine cavity. Endometriosis, a word derived from the Greek endo ‘'inside'', metra ''uterus'' and osis ‘' disease,'' remains to some extent vague, with the most common clinical symptoms being pelvic pain and infertility. Most frequently endometrial tissue is found in ovaries resulting in the formation of chocolate cysts, but it can also be found in the Fallopian tubes, uterosacral ligaments, the gastrointestinal tract, and less often in the pleura, pericardium, or the central nervous system. This activity illustrates the evaluation and treatment of endometriosis and reviews the role of the healthcare team in managing patients afflicted with endometriosis.

**Objectives:**
- Review the risk factors for developing endometriosis and summarize the epidemiology of the disease.
- Explain the history and physical exam findings associated with endometriosis and describe the available ways to evaluate the disease.
- Summarize the treatment and management options available for endometriosis.
- Outline the importance of interprofessional team communication to improve the outcomes of endometriosis.

# Introduction

Endometriosis is a chronic gynecologic disease characterized by the development and presence of histological elements like endometrial glands and stroma in anatomical positions and organs outside of the uterine cavity. The main clinical manifestations of the disease are chronic pelvic pain and impaired fertility. The localization of endometriosis lesions can vary, with the most commonly involved focus of the disease the ovaries followed by the posterior broad ligament, the anterior cul-de-sac, the posterior cul-de-sac, and the uterosacral ligament.

# Etiology

There are several developed theories about the etiology of endometriosis based on the logical sequel relating the severity of symptoms with the stage of the disease, although none of these proposed models can fully explain the range of clinical manifestations of the disease.

To explain the occurrence of endometriosis in the cul-de-sac and uterosacral ligaments, the mainly used theory is the Müllerian remnant theory, suggesting that atypical migration or differentiation of these remnants could imitate endometriotic tissue in the poster pelvic floor.

Moreover, the ambiguous pathogenesis of endometriosis led the investigators to research more about the role of oxidative stress, inflammatory elements, reactive oxygen species (ROS) as long as genetic and epigenetic factors. Oxidative stress is caused by the imbalance between the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the antioxidant ability of the body. ROS have the potential to damage several components of the cell-like nucleic acids and proteins. If the enzymatic and non-enzymatic cellular antioxidant capacity is decreased, ROS do not get eliminated from the cells and can be the leading cause of endometriosis.

Endometriotic lesions present as a chronic local inflammatory disease and involve alterations in cellular immunity and the expression of inflammatory cytokines. According to previous research, patients with endometriosis have elevated serum levels of a wide number of pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8, resulting in chemotaxis, recruitment, and activation of peritoneal macrophages and proliferation of monocytes. The surgical excision of the endometriotic lesions leads to a decrease in the serum levels of the interleukins, providing evidence that their local production is the reason for the systematic inflammatory reaction. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) in the peritoneal fluid, produced by the peritoneal macrophages, amplifies the inflammatory response.

The role of steroid hormones in the pathogenesis of endometriosis is also indisputable. Estrogen is the main hormone responsible for the propagation and expansion of the endometrium. The increased action of aromatase, mainly in the deep infiltrating endometriosis, leads to the locally increased activity of estrogen.

# Epidemiology

The determination of the epidemiological measurement features sometimes becomes very difficult since a lot of women often remain asymptomatic and go undiagnosed. The exact prevalence cannot be easily defined since the definitive diagnosis of the disease; a laparoscopic examination needs to be conducted. It is estimated that endometriosis affects approximately 10% to 15% of women of reproductive age, whereas this prevalence increases by up to 70% in women with chronic pelvic pain.

The diagnosis of endometriosis in the majority of women is often delayed, and thus women unavoidably suffer from the pain and the long-term effects of this debilitating disease, including infertility. In women with infertility, endometriosis has been found to be up to 50%, whereas, in adolescents, the incidence of endometriosis is reported to be 47% of those who have experienced laparoscopy for pelvic pain.

On the contrary, there are protective factors against endometriosis, mainly acting via lowering the inflammatory process or by decreasing the levels of estrogen in the body. Parity, protracted breastfeeding, current oral contraceptive use, tubal ligation, and smoking are related to a decreased risk for endometriosis.

# Pathophysiology

The understanding of the pathophysiology of endometriosis remains incomplete in many aspects, and there is not a coherent suggested theory to explain all different types of endometriosis, integrating the epigenetic, genetic, immunological, and environmental data. From the proposed pathogenic theories, the most plausible is Sampson’s theory, suggesting that with retrograde menstruation, viable cells and menstrual fragments can migrate through the Fallopian tubes, infiltrate into the peritoneal cavity, and then proliferate and cause chronic inflammation.

# History and Physical

The peak of the disease incidence is greater in women between 25 and 29 years old and lowest in women over 44 years old, whereas the prevalence in whites is higher than the African-Americans.

Furthermore, some women suffering from endometriosis experience hyperalgesia, a phenomenon, when even with the application of a nonpainful stimulus, an intolerable painful reaction is released. This condition indicates neuropathic pain. In the case of deep infiltrating endometriosis, the neural damage is caused by the invasion of endometrial stromal cells and mediators such as serotonin, histamine, prostaglandins, and nerve growth factor. These agents are released from mast cells, activated macrophages, and leukocytes, not only damaging directly the sensory nerve fibers but also circulating in the peritoneal fluid.

The endometriotic lesions in ovaries are described as ovarian endometriomas or as pseudocysts. The frequency of ovarian endometriomas accounts for approximately 17% to 44% in women with endometriosis, are bilateral in 50% of the cases

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of the disease is usually delayed an average of 4 to 11 years from the onset of symptoms. This phenomenon occurs not only in low and middle-income countries but also in wealthy societies with universal health care access.

Nevertheless, the absence of physical findings cannot exclude the diagnosis of endometriosis. The gold standard diagnostic tool remains laparoscopy, combined with an exploration of the abdominal cavity and a histological biopsy.

Several other low invasive diagnostic methods have been evaluated regarding their diagnostic value, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS). Transvaginal ultrasound is a diagnostic tool with high sensitivity and specificity for ovarian endometriomas and permits a wide exploration of the pelvic cavity. Endometriomas appear as homogenous formations with a classic ground-glass appearance and low-level internal echoes.

In an effort to assess whether specific serum, tissue, and urine biomarkers could assist diagnostically for endometriosis, CA125 is elevated in patients with endometriosis, but this test could not stand as a single diagnostic test. The reason behind this is that CA125 can be increased in several pathological conditions except for endometriosis and is not also able to define the location of endometriotic lesions.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of endometriosis is broadly categorized into two main categories, pharmacological and surgical. Currently, there is not a specific drug that could inhibit the progress of the disease, rather than hormonal and non-hormonal agents used to alleviate the symptoms and increase the fertility rates.

The first-line pharmacological therapy proposed for the management of endometriosis consists of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, progestins, or combined hormonal contraceptives.

As a second-line medical empiric treatment is used a three-month trial of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs for the suppression of the endometriosis relating symptoms.

# Differential Diagnosis

The most common symptoms of endometriosis are infertility and chronic cyclic pelvic pain; therefore, other conditions should be ruled out from the differential diagnosis. Chronic pelvic pain is a usual symptom derived from pathologic conditions of the urologic, reproductive, and gastrointestinal systems. Pelvic inflammatory disease, adhesions, endometritis, primary dysmenorrhea, and second dysmenorrhea due to adenomyosis, myoma, cervical stenosis should be excluded from the pathologies of the genital system.

# Prognosis

Patients with endometriosis have fewer chances for childbearing and a higher risk for miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies compared to women free of the disease.

# Complications

The main complications of endometriosis include infertility or subfertility, chronic pain, and other debilitating persistent symptoms. These are entailed in a wide range, including dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, dyschezia but endometriosis can also cause a decrease in quality of life of patients, complications of surgical procedures, anatomical abnormalities due to possible adhesions, bowel or/and bladder dysfunction, but in the case of ovarian endometriomas could even lead to the development of cancer. The role of endometriosis in infertile women has been debated for a long time, with literature research showing that infertile women are 6 up to 8-fold more likely to suffer from endometriosis than fertile females.

Chronic pelvic pain is closely associated with endometriosis since endometriosis has been the cause in 71% to 87% of women suffering from chronic pelvic pain.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Recurrence is quite common in patients who discontinue their therapy or even also after the surgery.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Endometriosis remains a disease with high comorbidity, even though extensive research has been conducted and new medical treatments have been developed. Health care professionals need to join hands and work collectively when they need to work with patients with suspected cases of endometriosis. It is not random that the mean delay of a definitive diagnosis of endometriosis is approximately ten years. Public health interventions should be introduced and promote awareness among females of childbearing age for signs and symptoms of endometriosis; thus, they could seek medical care in an earlier stage of the disease.

Clinicians should work as a team regarding the management of endometriosis to achieve the most effective treatment and avoid surgical complications. Additionally, health care professionals engaged with the management of endometriosis should be up to date informed about new drugs, their indications or adverse effects to implement a successful treatment, and their attention should be drawn to the fact that the symptomatology of the disease has no direct relationship with the extent of disease.