**Medications**

The ideal agent for PSA purposes should possess sedative, analgesic, and amnestic properties as well as a rapid onset and short duration of action to allow a safe and quick recovery and discharge. Although PSA is usually the result of combining a short-acting benzodiazepine such as midazolam (sedative, amnestic, and anxiolytic properties but not analgesic effects) with an opioid (e.g., fentanyl), several drugs are also options, alone or in combination.

Midazolam

- Dose. IV: 2 to 2.5 mg initially, with further 1 mg doses repeated after 2 to 5 minutes, titrated to effect. In adults older than 60 and those chronically ill: starting dose 0.5 to 1 mg (and 1 mg over at least 30 seconds). A total dose of more than 5 mg is not usually necessary in a healthy young adult; less than 3.5 mg is the required dose in debilitated and older subjects. In patients 6 months to 5 years: IV initial dose of 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg (total dose less than 6 mg); in children 6 to 12 years: IV initial dose of 0.025 to 0.05 mg/kg (total dose less than 10 mg); rectal greater than 6 months: 0.3 to 0.5 mg/kg; IM 1 to 15 years: 0.05 to 0.15 mg/kg.

- Onset time. IV: 2 to 3 minutes. Note: the onset of sedation may vary individually depending on the physical status and other factors such as the speed of administration, and dose.

- Duration. IV: the maximum effect occurs in about 5 to 10 minutes. The elimination half-life is 1.5 to 2.5 hours.

- Comments. Midazolam should be prepared as a 1 mg in 1 ml solution, especially in children less than 15 kg of body weight where midazolam solutions with concentrations higher than 1 mg/ml are not recommended. The antidot of midazolam is flumazenil, but care must be taken as this drug may have a shorter duration of action than the sedative agent, resulting in re-sedation. In the elderly, it is necessary to pay attention to the triggering of benzodiazepine-induced neurocognitive alterations.

Fentanyl

- Dose. (IV only) Adult and children: 1 to 1.5 mcg/kg initial dose and then titrated 1 mcg/kg every 3 minutes

- Onset time. IV: 1 to 2 minutes

- Duration: IV: 30 to 60 minutes

- Comments. Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid metabolized by the liver. It presents a rapid redistribution from the central nervous system

Ketamine

- Dose. Adult and children IV: 1 to 3 mg/kg. IM: 5 to 10 mg/kg.

- Onset time. IV: 1 minute (Note: If the family is observing, prepare them for the sudden vacant stare Ketamine induction causes)

- Duration. IV: 5 to 15 minutes, IM: 15 to 30 minutes

- Comments. Adverse effects of ketamine include recovery agitation, transient airway complications such as laryngospasm, and emesis. Administration of a benzodiazepine (e.g., diazepam, lorazepam) at the time of the final dose of ketamine may blunt emergence phenomena (visual hallucinations, occasionally disturbing) and the potential sympathomimetic effects of the drug, especially in children. Avoid this agent in individuals who are predisposed to psychotic behavior.

Etomidate

- Dose. (IV only) Adult and children over ten years old: 0.3 mg/kg. (Not studied in children under ten years old)

- Onset time. 1 to 2 minutes, IM: 3 to 4 minutes (Note: A third of patients may experience myoclonic jerks on induction; this may be important for orthopedic procedures and may be lessened by pretreatment with an opioid agent)

- Duration. 5 to 7 minutes; may be longer in the elderly and patients with decreased renal function.

- Comments. There is controversy about the suppression of the adrenal production of stress hormones; this has not been shown to be meaningful with single bolus use. Additionally, etomidate is a hypnotic only as it has essentially no analgesic properties.

Propofol

- Dose. (IV only) Adult (healthy): 1 to 2 mg/kg. Adult (debilitated): 0.5 to 1 mg/kg. Children: 2 to 3 mg/kg. (Not studied in children under three years old). May be repeated at half doses several times as needed.

- Onset time: 15 to 30 seconds (circulatory time to the brain)

- Duration. 1 to 3 minutes; termination of action of this highly lipophilic drug is through redistribution/equilibration across other bodily tissues. Repeat doses prolong recovery.

- Comments. Some literature contains a verbal confusion, stating Propofol-caused hypoventilation has no reversal agent; the confusion results from conflating "agent" with "drug." Propofol's reversal agent for hypoventilation is a bag-mask. Additionally, orthostatic hypotension may occur; use IV isotonic fluids as a "reversal agent" and resume seated position cautiously. Be aware that this hypotensive effect, likely caused by peripheral vasodilation, may cause cardiac ischemia, further reducing cardiac output.

Dexmedetomidine

- Dose. (IV only) Adult and children IV: 1 mcg/kg.

- Onset time. IV: 3 to 5 minute

- Duration. IV: 15 minutes

- Comments. Dexmedetomidine does not cause respiratory suppression. Research has recently called into question the effectiveness of dexmedetomidine as a sole sedative.

Methohexital

- Dose. Adult and Children: IV: 1 to 2 mg/kg. IM: 6 to 10 mg/kg. (Note: IM route is rarely used in adults)

- Onset. IV: 15 to 30 seconds, IM: 2 to 10 minutes

- Duration. IV: 4 to 7 minutes, IM: 6 to 15 minutes

- Comments. As a barbiturate, methohexital is contraindicated in patients with acute intermittent porphyria. Methohexital may cause suppression of respiration; bag-mask ventilatory support may be needed. Transient hypotension may occur from vasodilation; administer IV fluids, and/or sit up slowly.

Nitrous oxide

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is an analgesic/anxiolytic gas causing CNS depression and euphoria with little effect on the respiratory function. The onset of action is rapid, and recovery is fast. There is a wide margin of safety. Moreover, nausea and vomiting are uncommon, and reflex integrity is maintained. It is commonly used for PSA in dentistry, especially in the pediatric setting.

**Reversal agents**

Naloxone

- Dose. (IV only) Adults: 0.1 to 2.0 mg

- Onset time. One minute

- Duration: 15 to 30 minutes

- Comments. Opiate reversal, very safe, but routine use NOT recommended

Flumazenil

- Dose. (IV only). Adults: 0.2 mg per minute. Maximum: 1.0 mg every 20 minutes

- Onset time. One minute

- Duration. 45 minutes

- Comments. Benzodiazepine reversal use is discouraged for potential benzodiazepine withdrawal or status epilepticus.