The 5 diagnostic evaluation categories are:

- Semen analysis

- Assessment of ovarian function and reserve

- Assessment of the uterine cavity

- Assessment of the fallopian tubes

- Endocrinological serum studies

The evaluation and interpretation of a semen analysis are outside the scope of this review; however, it cannot be reiterated enough on the importance of this test as part of the initial evaluation before initiating treatments.

Assessment of ovarian function can be as simple as the menstrual cycle history. Women with predictable, regular cycles and predictable menstrual flow, as well as molimina (bloating, fatigue, breast tenderness), are more than likely ovulating. At-home urinary LH predictor kits detect a mid-cycle LH surge, which is indirect evidence of ovulation and helps identify the fertile window.

There are multiple available tests to assess ovarian reserve, and this review will only discuss the two most common: Cycle day 3 FSH and estradiol, and Anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH). The theory of day 3 FSH and estradiol is that women with good ovarian reserve have early sufficient ovarian hormones from small follicles to allow FSH to remain at a lower level. According to multiple examples in the literature, it is most important to identify women with a reduced follicle count that produces insufficient hormones, causing a lack of inhibition, resulting in an elevated FSH. FSH levels less than 10 IU/mL demonstrate likely normal ovarian reserve, 10 to 20 IU/mL is intermediate, and an FSH greater than 20 IU/mL is a poor prognosis for spontaneous ovulation due to low ovarian reserve. According to one study, the pregnancy rates per natural menstrual cycle, corresponding to the FSH levels above, are 32%, 17% to 19%, and 3%.

AMH is a hormone expressed by preantral and antral follicles representing a marker of ovarian function that can be measured at any time during a woman’s cycle.

- <0.5 ng/mL predicts difficulty getting more than 3 follicles to grow

- <1.0 ng/mL shows limited egg supply that may require more aggressive ovulation induction protocols

- 1.0 to 3.5 ng/mL shows normal values

- >3.5 shows ample supply and may require mild induction to prevent ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.

It is important to remember that the ovarian reserve tests currently available are reliable in predicting ovulation induction difficulties but are not diagnostic in predicting live birth and should not be used to exclude patients from in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment.

Antral follicle counts, measuring the number of follicles less than 9mm in the ovaries with transvaginal ultrasound in the early follicular phase, is also an accurate measure of ovarian reserve and predictive of ovarian response to stimulation.

**Tubal Evaluation**

The gold standard for the evaluation of tubal patency is laparoscopy with chromopertubation. Laparoscopy is indicated as a first-line diagnostic test for suspected pelvic adhesions, endometriosis, or other pelvic pathologies; however, due to high specificity and being less invasive, the hysterosalpingogram (HSG) is more commonly used for the first-line evaluation for tubal patency and abnormalities.

**Uterine Cavity**

The gold standard for assessing the uterine cavity is hysteroscopy, which allows direct visualization of the intrauterine pathology and provides an opportunity for immediate surgical correction. Although hysteroscopy is considered the gold standard, a less invasive approach is more commonly utilize with a saline infusion sonogram (SIS). The SIS is highly sensitive and specific for all intrauterine abnormalities and is adequate as a screening tool before infertility treatment, with or without 3-D model rendering.