In PCR, amplification of DNA can be observed with fluorescent dyes that bind to double-stranded DNA or probes that are sequence-specific. The amplification reaction consists of a quantification cycle, Cq. Cq is described as the number of fractional cycles necessitated for the fluorescence to meet the preset for quantification.

After determining Cq, a qualitative conclusion can be deduced, or a quantitative analysis may be further conducted. Cq is dependent on PCR efficiency; PCR efficiency involves assessment of the amplification efficiency which is explained as fold increase/cycle with a fold value ranging from 1 to 2, with a fold value of 2 indicating 100% PCR efficiency. PCR efficiency is derived from standard curves and amplification curves.

Standard curve PCR efficiency increases the likelihood of dilution errors ultimately affecting the accurate quantification of several clinical and biological samples. However, individual amplification curves do not include confounding variables for the analysis of PCR efficiency resulting in varying results compared to standard curves for the same assay. Accurate computation of the target quantity is essential for appropriate amplification efficiency that will be reflected in the analysis.

A low PCR efficiency requires additional cycles to reach an appropriate quantification threshold resulting in a higher Cq. The presence of amplification following the utilization of a valid probe-based assay is indicative of the sample containing the particular target and subsequently concluding it as diagnostically positive. Due to the Poisson variation, the lack of amplification is not a valid criterion to classify a reaction as negative.

As mentioned earlier, qPCR measures DNA or RNA in various diagnostic and biological samples via the Cq. qPCR is often computed with the assumption that all assays are 100% efficient. Additionally, reporting of qPCR involves Cq, delta-Cq, or delta-delta-Cq. For significant and purposeful interpretation of biological, clinical, and diagnostic samples, efficiency corrected should be utilized in qPCR testing. Thus, it is essential to consider these factors when interpreting and reporting PCR efficiency to yield adequate results.

The stage and degree of a patient's ailment can be reckoned with by utilizing cycle threshold (Ct) values concurrently with clinical manifestations and disease history. Moreover, healthcare professionals can further surveillance the progression of diseases and foreshadow steps to recover and resolve ailment by repeating the PCR test and generating serial Ct values. Ct values can also aid contact tracers to focus on patients with a more elevated viral genomic load, signifying a higher risk for disease transmission.