The clinical features of neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) result from chronic in-utero exposure to certain drugs or substances of abuse and its abrupt cessation at birth. Research cites several drugs as possible etiologies, but traditionally opioids have been the number one etiological agent. Among opioids, heroin or morphine has been the most commonly abused drug since the 1800s. However, with improved drug manufacturing over the decades, neonatal withdrawal from prescription opioids like hydrocodone, oxycodone, and opioid-containing combination products has also been found. Likewise, NAS can also result from synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids like methadone and buprenorphine, which have been the standard for opioid addiction (medication-assisted therapy or MAT) during pregnancy.

During pregnancy, psychiatric medication usage like antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)/serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) antipsychotics, both typical and atypical, have been implicated in causing neonatal withdrawal signs and symptoms. However, caution is necessary while interpreting these symptoms as these studies have used Finnegan’s scoring to describe NAS, which he initially developed for babies having withdrawal from opioids. Several other substances like benzodiazepines, nicotine, alcohol, methamphetamine, and inhalants also may produce signs and symptoms consistent with NAS.

In addition to the possibility of being the sole etiology for NAS, substances like gabapentin, benzodiazepines, cocaine, and nicotine also alter the severity of NAS expression. Polysubstance abuse during pregnancy further potentiates the severity. Marijuana usage in pregnancy, which is the most commonly abused substance during pregnancy, and its effect on modifying the severity of NAS, is unclear.