There are two categories of devices: internal and external, and there are several different device manufacturers worldwide.

Internal devices are entirely implanted and affixed directly to the bone with screws, and exist as both linear (straight-line vector of distraction) and curvilinear (curved arc of distraction). There is an activator that is externalized and used to increase the distraction gap. Some surgeons feel there is a greater transmission of the distraction forces to the bone segments because the device is directly adherent to the bones, yielding a more predictable distraction. These devices may also be more aesthetically acceptable to parents and families during the distraction and consolidation periods. They are removed in a second procedure once the consolidation phase is complete.

External devices rely on titanium pins or wires that are implanted percutaneously to both the proximal and distal bone segments, and the distractor device attaches externally to the skin to these implanted pins. These also exist as both linear and multi-vector devices. The external devices were developed first, and so have the longest-term outcomes data available regarding their use. Some surgeons feel the distraction forces are not as efficiently transmitted with external devices, with some force transmission being lost due to flexion of the pins. External distraction can facilitate multi-vector distraction and allow for correction of asymmetries by adjusting the distraction vectors during the treatment period, which is not possible with implanted devices. Once consolidation is complete, the pins are removed in a minor procedure; a second open surgery is not required.