With little bony constraint, the glenohumeral joint is the most unstable in the human body. Cases of anterior shoulder instability can be found in literature dating back to the time of Hippocrates. However, posterior shoulder instability was not reported in the literature until 1741 by White et al.

Posterior instability is less common than anterior instability but is increasingly recognized in the athletic population due to a better understanding of the underlying pathophysiology and the ability to treat with arthroscopic procedures.

**Anatomy**

The shoulder joint is the least congruent joint in the body with the joint commonly described as resembling a golf ball on a tee. In fact, only about one-third of the humeral head articulates with the glenoid at any given time.

Static stabilizers of the shoulder include the glenoid labrum, which attaches to the periphery of the glenoid and increases the depth of the socket. Other static stabilizers include the articular congruity, glenohumeral ligaments, joint capsule, and negative intra-articular pressure. The most important static stabilizers against posterior translation are the posterior labrum, capsule, and the posterior inferior glenohumeral ligament (PIGHL).

The rotator cuff muscles are the most important dynamic stabilizers of the shoulder. Contraction of the rotator cuff provides a concavity-compression effect of the humeral head against the glenoid aiding stability and increasing the load needed to translate the humeral head.