The pelvic diaphragm, first named in 1861, consists of the levator ani, formed by the coccygeus muscle or ischio coccygien, ileo coccygien, pubococcygeus muscles, and the puborectal muscle.

The first 3 originate from the pectineal line of the pubic bone and from the fascia of the obturator muscle, to fit the coccyx, through the ischiatic spine, the ileum and sacrum, and the triangular ligament (or urogenital diaphragm); the puborectal muscle involves the lower middle portion of the pubic branch. Pubococcyx and rectal muscles are also called pubovisceral muscles since contractile filaments are directly linked to the urethra, vagina, perineal body, and anal canal, respectively such as pubourethral, pubovaginal, puboperinal, and puboanal muscles.

About two-thirds of the contractile fibers of these muscles are red aerobic or type 1 fibers, while the rest is formed by anaerobic white fibers or type 2. These muscles work as a single unit and are difficult to distinguish separately; furthermore, the vectorial direction of their fibers is hard to describe because they work in all planes in a functional and anatomical tridimensionality. From tractography, we can derive the organization of contractile fibers, where musculature appears as a work of art.

**The Urogenital Diaphragm**

The urogenital diaphragm, placed beneath the pelvic floor, is constituted by the perineal media aponeurosis or fascia, including the deep transverse muscle of the perineum; is a reinforcement that joins the pelvic diaphragm to the perineum. Its anterior part is crossed by the urinary and genital tracts, lying between the 2 ischiopubic branches and pointing at the apex toward the pubic symphysis. The pre-urethral area or transverse ligament of the perineum keeps in touch with the ischiopubic branches and the obturator band, while the retro-urethral area is divided into 2 layers (superior and inferior), with Guthrie's muscle or deep transverse perineum muscle placed between. The upper aponeurotic lamina continues towards the transverse perineal muscle, while the deeper lamina blends with the band of Denonviller, with the latter covering the prostate and the seminal vesicles.

**The Perineum**

The perineum is the continuation of the urogenital diaphragm posteriorly and of the elevator ani muscle inferiorly, very difficult to be delimitated; it connects with muscular fibers the urethra, the vagina or the prostate, and the rectum, up to the coccyx with an ano-coccygien Rafe. The muscles and the viscera are immersed in a web of connective tissue or fascia, where just as the spider perceives the prey imprisoned thanks to the movements; all the structures immersed and wrapped in the fascia perceive the changes of tension and function in a continuum which respects the concept of biotensegrity. The fascia is a mechanical transmission force instrument that involves the entire body system; a cervical flexion movement, for example, involving the deep cervical fascia, will affect the position of the lower limb band, dragging the connective tissue upward. The fascial system precedes the birth and organization of contractile districts.

**The Endopelvic Fascia**

Below the peritoneum the endopelvic fascia covers the upper area of the pelvic floor: it covers the inner obturator, the piriformis, the elevator ani, to continue with the transversal band merging into the pubic periosteum. In its path it merges with the pubosacral ligament posteriorly, building a connective cup covering the entire musculoskeletal structure of the pelvic floor, the urogenital diaphragm, and perineal area. The endopelvic fascia encapsulates the viscera of the pelvic floor, further connecting them with musculature and bone structures. It guides the vascular structures in connective sheaths such as the hypogastric sheath (which connects the pubic bone to the sacrum), the umbilical-prevesical sheath (which delimits the retropubic space), the vesicorectal sheath for the vesicular-deferential arteries, and the fascia mentioned above of Denonvillier wrapping the two middle hemorrhoidal arteries.