**Anesthesia:**Historically, general anesthesia and retrobulbar blocks were used for intracapsular cataract surgery. However, with the advent of phacoemulsification and small incision surgeries, clinicians have since moved to local and topical anesthesia.

**Intracapsular Cataract Extraction (ICCE):**A technique that was discovered in the 18th century that involves removing the entire lens and capsule through a single incision. Due to lower complication rates with improved surgical techniques, ICCE is rarely performed.

**Manual Extracapsular Cataract Extraction:**In this technique, the lens is extracted through an incision, and the intraocular lens (IOL) is then inserted. The incision is large, usually 9 mm to 13 mm, to accommodate extraction, and sutures are necessary. However, there is an increased risk of posterior capsule opacity, age-related macular degeneration, and corneal edema when compared to phacoemulsification.

**Manual Small-incision Cataract Surgery (MSICS):**Instead of a large incision, MSICS uses a scleral tunnel that can self-seal. The much smaller external incision (6.5 mm to 7 mm) with a larger internal incision (9 mm to 11 mm) leads to a natural seal. The lens is then delivered through the V-shaped incision, and an IOL is inserted.

**Phacoemulsification:**This is a technique developed by Charles Kelman in 1967. It involves making a small incision of 2 mm to 3 mm and the insertion of an ultrasonic probe. The probe is then able to emulsify and aspirate the lens.**(Videos 1 & 2)**

**Femtosecond Assisted Laser Cataract Surgery (FLACS):**This technique, developed in 2008, uses a laser to microscopically dissect tissue, greatly reducing the risk of collateral damage.

**Refractive Lens Exchange (RLE):**RLE uses cataract surgery techniques to replace the lens of a patient with a high refractive error when laser ablative surgery is not possible or in patients with impending cataracts. In addition to cataract procedural risks, these patients are at a higher risk of retinal detachment due to cumulative risk over time. Patients with moderate to severe myopia are at even more of an increased risk for retinal detachment. Patients with severe hyperopia are more likely to develop choroidal edema. Additionally, patients are more likely to develop early age-related macular degeneration, which is thought to be due to the loss of free-radical scavenging properties with the removal of the lens.

**Postoperative Care:**Typically, patients are prescribed topical antibiotics, corticosteroids, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drops for 1 to 4 weeks postoperatively. Patients are counseled to follow up the day after surgery, at 1 week, 1 month, and then 3 months postoperatively.