When a systemic condition is suspected due to a positive review of systems, laboratory and radiographic testing should be completed. As discussed previously, these conditions may include rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, psoriatic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, reactive arthritis, relapsing polychondritis, ankylosing spondylitis, polyarteritis nodosa, Behcet disease, Cogan syndrome, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Episcleritis may also be associated with Lyme disease, tuberculosis, syphilis, and herpes zoster.

Appropriate laboratory tests to rule out a systemic autoimmune inflammatory condition include a complete blood count with a differential, erythrocyte sedimentation rate/C reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, HLA-B27, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). If Lyme disease is suspected, then a Lyme antibody ELISA should be ordered. If tuberculosis (TB) is suspected, then a PPD skin test and a chest x-ray should be ordered. If syphilis is a consideration, then the patient should be tested with rapid plasma reagin (RPR) or VDRL and FTA-ABS or a treponemal-specific assay.

If the episcleral inflammation is persistent and does not respond to treatment (which will be discussed in the following section), then a tissue biopsy may be considered.  While rare, a presentation of episcleritis may result from a systemic vasculitis such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis or Cogan syndrome, both of which can be fatal if not treated. Thus it is important to keep these rare instances in mind.