A preoperative evaluation of a patient undergoing a mediastinoscopy is important in decreasing morbidity and mortality. Particular attention should be paid to respiratory symptoms such as wheezing, dyspnea, and orthopnea. It is important to find out whether the respiratory symptoms are exacerbated by exercise or by assuming the supine position which may indicate airway obstruction secondary to a mediastinal mass. Preoperative workup should include chest x-ray with posteroanterior and lateral views, CT scan of the chest and neck pulmonary function tests with flow-volume loops. If tracheal deviation is suspected, specific studies such as neck films or tomograms should be obtained to evaluate the location and extension of the mass as well as the degree of airway compromise. Flow-volume loops in both the upright and supine positions are useful in determining whether the obstruction is fixed, and whether it is intrathoracic or extrathoracic.

An intravenous line must be in place before proceeding to the operating room. The general anesthetic technique can involve inhalational or intravenous agents, or most commonly, a combination of the two. Following induction and intubation, the use of muscle relaxants provides the surgeon with an operative field safe from sudden movements, which might lead to injury of the adjacent organs by the mediastinoscope.  If the preoperative workup is indicative of airway compromise, the patient may be intubated via an awake fiberoptic technique where the patient remains spontaneously breathing. The patient is intubated with a standard single lumen endotracheal tube unless there are contraindications that require one-lung ventilation. In that case, the patient may be intubated with a large 7.5 mm or above a single lumen tube to allow the easy passage of a bronchial blocker or a double lumen endotracheal tube. Following intubation, additional vascular access is established in the form of another large bore IV and an arterial catheter. The arterial catheter allows for beat-to-beat blood pressure monitoring which may be able to detect vascular compression or massive hemorrhage during the procedure and also allows for arterial blood gases to be regularly checked during the procedure. To detect innominate artery compression by the mediastinoscope when inserted, constant palpation of the right radial or carotid pulse, placement of a right radial arterial line, or monitoring of a continuous plethysmographic tracing of a pulse oximeter is advocated.