Most immunocompetent patients have solitary brain mass, with multiple lesions observed in 20–40% of cases.

MRI has a low sensitivity for detecting intraocular lymphoma, so a thin section protocol is required to reveal any nodular enhancing lesions on the macula or uvea.

CT is not as sensitive as MRI but usually shows iso or hyperattenuating lesions owing to hyper-cellularity and high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio.

Additionally, CNS lymphomas are usually more hypermetabolic than gliomas, resulting in increased uptake on metabolic imaging such as Positron emission tomography (PET) as well as fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scans. The uptake area on PET imaging is often larger than the corresponding areas on conventional imaging, which reflects the infiltration of the tumor beyond the areas depicted on MR imaging. On the other hand, infectious lesions are generally hypometabolic, corresponding to lower thallium-201 uptake on SPECT and SPET as well as lower FDG uptake on PET imaging. This aids in the differentiation of primary central nervous system lymphomas in immunocompromised individuals from infectious etiologies. In patients without systemic involvement in contrast-enhanced CT, F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET revealed systemic PCNSL in 8%.

The salient radiological characteristics of these lesions include:

- High cellularity which is observed as restricted in DWI and decreased ADC)

- Blood-brain barrier disruption in Dynamic susceptibility and contrast-enhanced images (DSC)

- High glycolytic metabolism in PET scan, and

- Absent angiogenesis is observed as normal cerebral blood volume (CBV) in DSC.

The stereotactic biopsy is the mainstay of diagnosis.

When a biopsy is not possible, a diagnosis can be supported by the:

- MRI findings

- Clinical features

- Clonal B cells expansion in CSF or vitreous fluid flow cytometry, and

- IGHV gene rearrangements in PCR.

Radiomics and liquid biopsy are emerging new modalities for diagnosis.

The International PCNSL Collaborative Group has advocated the following recommendations during diagnostic evaluation for PCNSL:

- Lymph nodes as well as testicular examination

- Contrast-enhanced MRI or computed tomography brain of the complete neuraxis

- Lumbar puncture

- Ophthalmologic examination

- Contrast CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis

- Bone marrow biopsy, and

- Testicular ultrasonography in older age groups.