Any individual that lives in or has traveled to an endemic area should be considered for urogenital schistosomiasis if they present with a variety of symptoms to include dysuria, painful hematuria, urinary obstruction, vaginal discharge, or pain/bleeding after intercourse. Gross hematuria typically occurs at the end of voiding, termed terminal hematuria. Men may also experience hematospermia.

Although acute schistosomiasis is less common with S. haematobium compared to other species, it will occur more frequently in nonimmune travelers. Symptoms are generally non-specific: gastrointestinal symptoms, fever, fatigue, or respiratory symptoms. Screening all returning travelers from endemic areas should be considered as approximately 25% of asymptomatic individuals developed chronic schistosomiasis in one study.

If the individual remains untreated for approximately 3 to 4 months, he or she can present with dysuria or hematuria due to ulcerations and inflammation within the bladder and urogenital tract. Continued disease burden and egg deposits can cause polyps, nodules, and “sandy patches” to become visible during cystoscopy and colposcopy. “Sandy patches” are when the calcified schistosome ova within atrophied mucosa appear like sand. Progression can lead to fibrosis and calcification of the bladder wall, causing obstruction, bacteriuria, and bladder cancer.

Because worms do not reproduce in the human host, the burden of infection is dependent on repeated exposures and the number of cercariae encountered in exposures. Women that are responsible for domestic chores such as washing clothes in endemic waters are susceptible to increased infection rates and disease burden.

Genital tract involvement will occur in up to 75% of women affected by S. haematobium, termed female genital schistosomiasis (FGS). FGS is caused by schistosome egg deposits in the genital tract causing mucosal bleeding, abnormal blood vessels, and “sandy patches” on the vulva, perineum, or cervix. In women of child-bearing age, it is a common cause of spontaneous abortion, ectopic pregnancy, dysmenorrhea, and intermenstrual bleeding, as well as low gestational birth weight and poor birth-outcomes due to placental inflammation and infection. Due to the lesions and inflammation, women and men with urogenital schistosomiasis are also more susceptible to HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs).