Continuous training is essential for SPs to maintain a quality SBE program. SPs are often recruited to play multiple roles and case assignments during an academic term or across hospital settings. For example, an SP may be asked to portray a patient with an acute illness for a nursing program one day and a spinal cord injury patient for a physical therapy program the next. In hospital settings, an SP may play the role of an unhappy spouse in a morning session or a grieving parent during the afternoon session. Such variations within a simulation program require ongoing case-specific training to ensure SPs' understanding of complex medical equipment and the overall case content, necessitating ongoing collaboration with course faculty to ensure the meeting of learner objectives. It is also critically important for SBE programs to provide frequent SP check-ins to ascertain SP psychological safety due to the many complex roles SPs are asked to play.

To support the continuing education of SPs, one-day workshops can provide novice SPs with information on motivational interviewing or how to enhance communication skills, manage rare cases, or overcome challenges with uncooperative patients.

Other key aspects utilized to enhance continuing education for SPs include periodic skill assessment feedback and ongoing support. Formal performance evaluations should be offered annually. These evaluations provide an overview of the SP's performance throughout the year. Likely, SPs are evaluated after each performance, possibly by various personnel. If an assessment is interpreted as extremely positive or negative, it should be viewed with caution by more than one evaluator, as one evaluation does not accurately assess overall performance over a specified period. Periodic feedback for SPs to understand his/her efficacy also creates a forum to address and correct less desirable performances.  When annual and event-specific performance feedback is provided, SPs stands to gain insight that serves to enhance confidence and improve future performance.

As SPs move along the continuum and function at the expert level of performance, additional opportunities should be created for SPs to be retained and grow within their discipline. Over the last decade, the boundaries of simulation technology have expanded immensely. In healthcare education, companies like Avkin have emerged with sensor-enabled high fidelity wearable simulators for SPs, such as a tracheostomy vest or a wearable chest tube overlay.  Wearable simulation technology designed to mimic an SP's physical findings demonstrates promise for further enhanced learning experiences.

Well established SBE programs sponsor top-notch SPs to join organizations, such as the Association of Standardized Patient Educators (ASPE). Other highly qualified SPs have been selected to present their work at international conferences such as the Society of Simulation in Healthcare (SSH). The most trusted SP's are invited to co-facilitate a debriefing with faculty to provide learner feedback, thus further enriching the learner experience.  The provision of verbal or written SP feedback to learners adds a deeper understanding of performance and serves to enhance the development of self-efficacy skills for expected professional behaviors.