- Supraspinatus's blood supply is from suprascapular and dorsal scapular arteries. The supraspinatus' lymphatic drainage is through the posterior subscapular nodes, found in the posterior axillary fold.

- Infraspinatus' blood supply is from the suprascapular and circumflex scapular arteries. Infraspinatus's lymphatic drainage is also primarily through the posterior subscapular nodes.

- Teres minor's blood supply is from the subscapular artery and its branches, the circumflex scapular artery, and the posterior circumflex humeral artery.

- Subscapularis' blood supply is from the subscapular artery, which comes off the axillary artery. Lymphatic drainage is into the axillary lymph nodes.

- Teres major's blood supply comes from one of the branches of the subscapular artery, either the thoracodorsal artery or the circumflex scapular artery.

- Deltoid's blood supply is from the thoracoacromial branch of the axillary artery. Lymph drain into the deltopectoral lymph nodes located in the deltopectoral groove.

- Coracobrachialis receives vascular supply from the brachial artery.

- The biceps brachialis muscle receives blood from the brachial artery, which is the main artery of the arm. It extends from the inferior margin of the pectoralis major muscle to the fold of the elbow, where, at the height of the coronoid process of the ulna, it ends by dividing itself into the radial and ulnar arteries.

- The brachial triceps receives blood from the deep brachial artery and the posterior circumflex humeral artery.

- The latissimus dorsi muscle receives blood from the dorsal scapular artery through a descending branch that runs along the vertebral margin of the scapula.

- The pectoralis major muscle receives blood from the thoracoacromial artery; the latter is a collateral branch of the axillary artery. The artery crosses the clavicular fascia and gives the pectoral branch to the mammary gland and the skin of the chest, the acromial branch that contributes to the acromial network, the deltoid branch for the deltoid and pectoralis major muscles, and the clavicular branch for the sternoclavicular joint.

- The trapezius muscle receives blood from the dorsal scapular artery, which derives from the subclavian artery.

Venous drainage of the shoulder and neighboring muscles involves the subclavian and axillary veins; the latter comes from the subclavian vein.

The axillary lymph nodes represent the most crucial area of the lymphatic system of the shoulder; the lymphatic system constitutes a drainage system parallel to the venous system.