CTO revascularization has not shown to benefit rates of all-cause mortality, myocardial infarction, stroke, or repeat revascularization; however, it has shown to significantly improve patients' quality of life and reduce symptoms of angina.

In patients who meet the indication for a CTO PCI, informed consent is necessary before the procedure after an extensive discussion about the risks and benefits of CTO PCI for the patient. Due to the challenging nature of the CTO lesions, a successful outcome for PCI in these lesions is when the procedure obtains TIMI-3 flow, and there is less than 50% of residual stenosis in the vessel.

Multiple scoring systems are available to operators to predict technical success in CTO lesions. One of the most commonly used scoring systems is the J-CTO score, developed using the Chronic Total Occlusion Registry in Japan. A J-CTO score is used to predict the probability of crossing the CTO lesion within 30 minutes, and is inclusive of five independent factors; blunt stump appearance of the proximal cap of the occlusion, occlusion length greater than or equal to 20 mm, calcification detected within the CTO segment, the presence of a greater than 45-degree bend within the CTO segment, and prior failed PCI attempt of the CTO lesion. Each of these independent factors carries 1 point in the J-CTO score; zero is considered easy, a score of one is deemed to be intermediate, two rates as difficult, and greater than or equal to three is considered very difficult, with the probability of crossing within 30 minutes found to be 88%, 67%, 42%, and 10% respectively.

Another commonly used score to predict the technical success of CTO PCI is the Prospective Global Registry for the Study of Chronic Total Occlusion Intervention (PROGRESS-CTO) score. This predictor uses four independent factors to assess the CTO lesion, which includes CTO lesion proximal cap ambiguity, moderate/severe tortuosity of the CTO vessel, Circumflex artery CTO, and the absence of interventional collaterals. Each of these factors carries one point and correlates with technical success.  A PROGRESS-CTO score of 0 is associated with 91% technical success, a score of 1 correlates with 74%, a score of 2 is 57% percent, and a score of ≥3 is less than 4.3%.