Most diagnoses are done clinically or with the slit lamp examination because of the distinct characteristics of the infection. Laboratory diagnosis is done in atypical cases where the clinical picture doesn’t yield a conclusive diagnosis because of drug toxicity, immunosuppression, and polytherapy. The following are the methods to confirm Herpes simplex infection.

- Culture: Virus tissue culture is confirmative and yields positive results in 48 hours of inoculation. Prior rose bengal staining interferes with the culture results as it is viricidal. Immunofluorescent staining of the cells can differentiate between types 1 and 2.

- Direct Fluorescent Antibody (DFA) Testing: Rapid test but low in specificity and sensitivity. Smear over a slide could obtain results in minutes. Requires a skilled technician and ultraviolet microscope. Fluorescent antibody staining reveals herpetic antigen and is a rapid and reliable test. Fluorescein staining interferes with the test.

- Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) DNA Testing: Polymerase chain reaction test is the preferred test for ocular HSV infection to detect HSV DNA. It is more sensitive than virus culture in the diagnosis of epithelial keratitis. Real-time PCR can differentiate virus shedding from replication by viral quantification. Rapid and more sensitive than culture and can detect virus shedders. Used to identify strains for epidemiological purposes.

- Tzanck Smear: Scrapings are obtained from the corneal epithelium from open cutaneous vesicles and then stained. Giemsa stains of corneal smears show multinucleated giant cells and the Papanicolaou stain shows intranuclear eosinophilic inclusion bodies of Lipschutz (Cowdry type A). Rapid and less expensive tests but low in specificity and sensitivity with the inability to differentiate between type 1 and 2 viruses.

- Cytology: Surface cells are obtained by a brush or impression. Low-cost less sensitive rapid test.

- Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA): ELISA kits yield rapid results and use monoclonal antibodies against HSV antigens.

- Serum Antibody Testing: Most adults show positive IgG for HSV thereby making this test of less use. Antibody testing in children and infants is rarely done as most of the cases can be diagnosed clinically. IgM antibodies are seen in primary infection with seroconversion to IgG in 2 to 4 weeks after the infection.