**Quality Management Models and Approaches**

There are different Quality Management models and approaches. A recent review of existing quality management models for inpatient healthcare identified 64 different models, 17 of which gained recognition as significant to current healthcare practice.

Total Quality Management (TQM). TQM is an “integrated process involving all systems and employees in a continuous effort to improve quality, reduce cost, and enhance service to [the] customer.”

Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI). CQI involves the systematic use of tools and processes to identify and analyze strengths and barriers within an organization and continually test and improve outcomes. CQI methods started in the business and engineering fields post World War II and have been used in healthcare in the last few decades.

Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. Accreditation of healthcare organizations has been another Quality Management pathway. An example is The Joint Commission, which is a voluntary process that enforces, monitors, and improves upon the quality of healthcare in the United States and internationally.

- Patient-related issues such as care, education, and ethics

- Organization-related functions such as performance, leadership, surveillance, infection control, and prevention

- Organizational structure such as governance, management, and medical staff

The question lingers: what is accreditation, and why is it important for hospitals? When a hospital is accredited, its performance is within the range of nationally-accepted criteria based on government guidelines; this means the hospital has its system of assessment and self-improvement, resulting in compliance with the standard of care and, ideally, better outcomes. Additionally, accredited hospital enhances public confidence (i.e., satisfies the consumer).

A recent study determined whether patients admitted to accredited US hospitals have better outcomes and whether accreditation by The Joint Commission has any additional benefits for patients compared with other independent accrediting organizations.