First-generation antipsychotics bind more tightly to dopamine D2 receptors in comparison to second-generation antipsychotics, and for this reason, the typical antipsychotics have a higher tendency to cause tardive dyskinesia. Some evidence suggests the presence of extrapyramidal symptoms during neuroleptic treatment predicts the development of tardive dyskinesia. In addition to dopamine, the other neurotransmitter receptors that may be involved in causing tardive dyskinesia include 5-hydroxytryptophan receptors found in the striatum. These receptors interact with dopaminergic neurons and are considered to be involved in regulating motor activity.

Upregulation of dopamine receptors due to chronic dopamine blockade can result in an exaggerated response to the postsynaptic receptors to dopamine, causing tardive dyskinesia. Another hypothesis is the resulting oxidative stress due to antidepressants blocking dopamine receptors which causes an increase in dopamine metabolism, and this subsequently results in free radical production. The consequential oxidative stress on the basal ganglia--striatum and substantial nigra--results in the manifestation of tardive dyskinesia. Evidence also suggests that antipsychotic medications and their metabolites can also be directly toxic to neurons through oxidative stress. It is known that removing the agent that causes tardive dyskinesia can exacerbate the symptoms, and this is defined as withdrawal dyskinesia. It is theorized that this is due to dopamine D2 receptor upregulation and postsynaptic receptor super sensitivities. However, this does not explain why tardive dyskinesia remains for many years after the offending drug has been discontinued.