Tirzepatide is a glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) receptor and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, which is FDA-approved for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is important to note that tirzepatide is not approved for treating type-1 diabetes mellitus and has not been studied in patients with pancreatitis. Tirzepatide is a GIP receptor and GLP-1 receptor agonist, leading to significantly improved glycemic control in type 2 diabetics and significant weight reduction.

The FDA approved Tirzepatide in May 2022. Tirzepatide can also be used off-label for treating obesity. It is currently implemented as a second-line diabetes medication, similar to GLP-1 medications like semaglutide.

Current clinical data has demonstrated that tirzepatide is superior to placebo in improving hemoglobin A1C levels. The SURPASS-5 clinical trial showed a -2.11% reduction in hemoglobin A1C levels at 5mg per week dosing, compared to -0.86% with placebo. At the highest dose of 15 mg per week, tirzepatide led to a -2.34% reduction in hemoglobin A1C. This was demonstrated over 40 weeks. A weight reduction of 5.4 kg was seen with 5mg of tirzepatide dosing, and a 10.5 kg reduction was seen with 15 mg dosing. This dose-dependent correlation with weight loss is similar to semaglutide, a common GLP-1 medication utilized for weight loss management.

Comparatively, tirzepatide has been shown to work similarly to GLP-1 medications but with greater efficacy. Given its weight loss properties and lack of liver toxicity,