Prostate cancer is currently the second most commonly diagnosed cancer in men worldwide. It is an age-related disease, and as such, the incidence is expected to rise alongside global life expectancy. The highest risk group for prostate cancer globally are African-Americans living in the United States. The lowest risk group is Asian men living in their native country.

Both incidence and mortality of prostate cancer vary vastly across the globe and, as well as individual risk factors, much of this variation has been attributed to differences in asymptomatic disease screening patterns. For example, in a low-income area such as Western Africa, the age-standardized incidence rate is relatively low at 31.9 per 100000, but the associated mortality is high at 18.6 per 100000. In contrast, in a high-income area such as North America, the age-standardized incidence is much higher at 73.7 per 100000, but the associated mortality is relatively low at 7.7 per 100000. High detection rates for localized disease typically occur in high-income countries, likely due to PSA testing detecting earlier disease with the associated reduction in mortality from treating the lower-risk disease as well as access to higher diagnostic/treatment capabilities.

There have also been large variations in prostate cancer incidence worldwide over the past 30 years, further supporting a role for PSA screening in driving incidence data. Between 1986 and 1992, prostate cancer incidence doubled in the United States. This coincides with the initiation of widespread PSA screening. This spike was also seen in Europe and Australia. Incidence subsequently has started to fall, partially due to the loss of screening popularity due to over-diagnosis. In parallel, prostate cancer mortality, which had been falling over the previous two decades, has recently risen marginally. The recent US Preventative Services Task Force (PSTF) guidelines have clarified the position on PSA screening for men.