When planning osteotomies or other surgical procedures to correct foot deformities like pes planus, the patient’s talar morphology should be evaluated using the modified Boyan Classification. Considering the patient’s talus morphology, a surgical plan which uses great care when working near the anterior/middle facets is necessary, so they are not damaged. Damage to the articular facets may induce osteoarthritis in patients.

Arthroscopic surgery can be performed to treat patients with osteochondral defects on the talus, and when treating patients with hindfoot osteoarthritis, triple arthrodesis (fusion of the talocalcaneal, talonavicular, and calcaneocuboid joints) is a surgical option. When creating portals with arthroscopy, consideration of the location of the surrounding neurovascular structures at risk is warranted and a critical portion of the procedure.  Four different portals are options with triple arthrodesis, including the lateral portal (dorsal to the calcaneocuboid line), dorsolateral portal (medial to extensor hallicus longus tendon), dorsomedial portal medial to tibialis anterior tendon), and medial portal (distal to insertion of the tibialis posterior), all of which have corresponding neurovascular structures at risk. Each portal was found to have a good safety margin, but careful technique should still be used to prevent iatrogenic injury when performing arthroscopy.

Osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLTs) can form when patients sustain trauma to the ankle, and up to 70% of ankle injuries cause osteochondral or chondral damage. When treating OLTs surgically, the size of the OLT plays a significant role in how the surgeon is going the treat the injury. OLTs under 150 mm in size are repaired via bone marrow stimulation methods, while OLTs over 150 mm get replaced with osteochondral transplants. MRI is routinely used to diagnose and grade OLTs and to prepare for surgery. However, a significant discrepancy between OLT size on MRI and the size of the lesion while performing arthroscopy has been seen, with MRI commonly overestimating the size of OLTs. Therefore, it is essential to educate patients about the possibility of a repair or replacement is done based on the actual size of the OLT during surgery and to ensure that all the proper supplies are prepared pre-operatively, especially for lesions close to the 150 mm size.