Mycobacterial infections including Mycobacterium avium complex infections can be categorized into several clinical patterns including pulmonary disease, skin, and soft tissue infections, musculoskeletal infections, disseminated disease, catheter-associated disease, and lymphadenitis. Pulmonary disease is the most common presentation. Mycobacterium avium complex infections occur in both immunocompetent and in immunosuppressed patients. M. avium is the most frequent organism in HIV, and immunosuppressed patients, about 40% of pulmonary infections in immunocompetent patients, can be due to M. intracellulare. With the addition of new members to the Mycobacterium avium complex, the extent of involvement of each organism within the Mycobacterium avium complex is unknown.

Risk factors for Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary disease are pneumoconiosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis, other chronic lung diseases, persons with thoracic and skeletal abnormalities such as severe scoliosis, straight back syndrome, patients with mitral valve prolapse, CD4 less than 50 in AIDS patients, low CD4 in lymphoreticular malignancies, elderly women who suppress cough, immunosuppression post-transplant and in patients with deficiency in IFN-gamma production as well as IFN-gamma receptor deficiency. Siblings of an index patient have a much higher prevalence of Mycobacterium avium complex infection compared to the general population. There are no known risk factors for cutaneous Mycobacterium avium complex infection and cervical lymphadenitis due to Mycobacterium avium complex.

The Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary disease can be radiologically classified into fibro-cavitary and nodular bronchiectatic types. Case reports for atypical presentations such as pulmonary nodules, pleurisy, multiple cavitary nodules and pleural effusion with hydropneumothorax have been published. Pleural involvement may be seen in 5% to 15% of patients.

Symptoms in immunocompetent patients are nonspecific, with chronic cough as the most frequent symptom. Fever and hemoptysis are not as frequent as in tuberculosis and uncommon in HIV patients. Fibro-cavitary disease is more common in Caucasian men, occurs in the setting of underlying structural lung disease, presents with worsening cough, hemoptysis and constitutional symptoms.

The bronchiectasis with centrilobular nodules has a predilection for the middle lobe and the lingula. In the fibro-cavitary forms, the cavities are thin-walled with a predilection to the upper lobes. Elsewhere there may be tree-in-bud opacities, suggesting endobronchial spread.

A chest x-ray may not show bronchiectasis very well. A high-resolution CT (HRCT) is more sensitive to changes such as bronchiectasis, small nodules, tree-in-bud appearance, ground-glass opacities, and pleural thickening.  When compared to pulmonary tuberculosis, upper lobe cavitation is less common and middle lobe bronchiectasis more frequent in Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary infections. HRCT may show a feeding bronchus sign, which suggests that peribronchial nodules due to Mycobacterium avium complex infection evolve into focal cystic bronchiectasis and manifest as cavitary lesions; in this regard, the cavities are different from tuberculosis, where cavities are due to caseous necrosis of lung parenchyma. In the nodular-bronchiectatic form, the nodules are smaller than 5 mm to 10 mm and closely associated with areas of bronchiectasis. Both radiologic forms of Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary infections are prevalent equally, but the nodular bronchiectatic form is more common in elderly Caucasian women, who suppress a cough while the fibro-cavitary disease is more common in white men with underlying chronic lung disease.

Mycobacterium avium complex is also the most frequent nontuberculosis mycobacterial species cause of cervical lymphadenitis commonly seen in children.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis-like presentation can occur. Initially thought to be an allergic reaction only, the current opinion may be shifting towards both infection and inflammation.

Disseminated infections with Mycobacterium avium complex occur in the setting of AIDS and immunosuppression.