Prostatic abscesses are often underdiagnosed because symptoms can overlap with several other urinary tract diseases. Due to the need for subspeciality evaluation and management, primary care providers and hospitalists should coordinate with surgical services and the urology team to improve outcomes. Interprofessional team communication and care coordination between endocrinologists for underlying diabetes management, infectious diseases, and ancillary services like nutrition and the wound care team play a significant role in improving the prognosis and reducing complications. The treating clinician can also enlist the assistance of a board-certified infectious disease specialist or pharmacist, who can collaborate on agent selection, provide the latest antibiogram data, verify dosing, and perform medication reconciliation. The pharmacist or infectious disease specialist should educate the patient on antibiotic compliance. Also, it is vital that the primary clinicians adequately control the blood glucose, counsel the patient on safe sex practices, and when to seek further treatment. These educational processes can benefit from nursing staff who will not only provide training and answer questions but can perform follow-up monitoring, evaluate treatment effectiveness, and inform the physician of any concerns.

Open communication between the team is vital to minimize morbidity and mortality. Patients with prostate abscesses must be monitored closely, as they may experience a high mortality rate if proper and timely treatment is delayed.