With a rapidly growing aging population, clinicians must understand and treat age-related vascular changes. The co-morbidities associated with hypertension in this group can cause many debilitating, if not fatal, outcomes such as stroke, myocardial infarction, aortic dissection/aneurysms, chronic kidney disease, coronary artery disease, and vascular dementia.

Early detection and treatment of hypertension may prevent or slow end-organ damage while it is in a reversible stage. When encountering a patient with hypertension, many factors come into play when choosing the best treatment option. Healthy lifestyle changes (diet, physical activity, smoking cessation, and stress management) are the first-line options. If the patient continues to be hypertensive after implementing these changes on follow-up, medical management is an appropriate option.

Five major classes of antihypertensive agents available for use have been shown to reduce cardiovascular events in the elderly population. These include beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), and diuretics.

**Clinically Significant Studies**

- **Framingham Heart Study**
- Followed patients for 30 years and demonstrated that SBP shows a continuous increase between the ages of 30 to 84. In contrast, DBP has a varying pattern with aging - increasing until the fifth decade, then slowly decreasing from ages 60 to 84. This gives a steep rise in pulse pressure with aging. The outcome of this study proved that cardiovascular risk is positively, continuously, and independently associated with rising blood pressure.
- This study also demonstrated a higher prevalence of isolated systolic hypertension in older women than men. Elderly hypertensive women were shown to have stiffer large arteries and higher pulse pressure, with the increased arterial stiffness occurring after menopause.

-  **Third National Health & Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III)**
- Almost 80% of those with elevated blood pressure over 50 years of age have, at least on a single occasion, systolic HTN - characterized as SBP > 140 mmHg. Additionally, while DBP has been used as the primary determinant of hypertension-associated cardiovascular risk, studies have shown it to be an independent risk factor. In the elderly, high SBP and high PP have been shown to be more powerful independent predictors of risk.

-  **The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT)**
- This trial showed that the risk of death from coronary heart disease was greater with each increment of SBP. Individuals with isolated systolic hypertension are at the most significant risk of death from coronary heart disease. The risk of stroke was also strongly related to systolic blood pressure and isolated systolic hypertension.

A meta-analysis including data from multiple major trials concluded the danger of cardiovascular complications associated with widening pulse pressure. This meta-analysis determined that the best predictor of increased cardiovascular risk is increased pulse pressure. As pulse pressure is defined as systolic blood pressure - diastolic blood pressure, an increase in pulse pressure results from a decreased diastolic and increased systolic blood pressure.