Bacterial conjunctivitis provides a common and challenging clinical scenario for practitioners. The variability of presentations makes differentiating bacterial conjunctivitis from other etiologies difficult and has led to the over-prescribing of antibiotics.

Several studies have sought to define characteristics of conjunctivitis that make a bacterial origin more likely and have proposed these findings to improve the management of the condition.

Interprofessional consultation with pharmacists, infectious disease specialists, and ophthalmologists may provide information on local antibiotic resistance patterns and guide clinician therapy. The pharmacist should verify agent selection and dosing/duration, perform medication reconciliation to prevent any drug-drug interactions, and deliver patient counseling on the importance of medication compliance, reporting any concerns to the prescribing/order physician. Nursing can evaluate and assist in monitoring patient compliance, treatment progress, and adverse medication reactions on followup visits, or in the case of inpatients, as they administer the medications, and communicate to the prescriber any issues they encounter.

Ophthalmology referral is necessary in complicated cases, and communication with specialists may reinforce the physician's decision to start, or not to start, antibiotic therapy in uncomplicated cases.

Bacterial conjunctivitis requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]