Unlike systemic AVMs, most of the time, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) do not provoke changes in cardiac hemodynamics. Cardiac output, index, heart rate, blood pressure, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure are usually not affected. The fundamental defect comes from right-to-left shunting. Deoxygenated blood from the pulmonary artery is shunted into the pulmonary vein, which carries oxygenated blood into the left atrium. If the right to left shunt is greater than 20% of the systemic cardiac output, the patient can then develop cyanosis, clubbing, and polycythemia.

The pulmonary AVMs have been classified into simple and complex, primary, and secondary, large, and small. They are classified as large if their size is more than 5 centimeters and small if they are less than 5 centimeters. They are found primarily in the subpleural in 81% of cases, lower lobes in almost 70%, unilaterally in around 75%, and multiple in nearly 36% of the cases.

Because most pulmonary AVMs are found in the lower lobes, and during upright position, blood is directed to lower portions because of gravity, the patient with significant pulmonary AVMs demonstrates orthodeoxia, which is a fall in arterial oxygen saturation when in an upright position. If the patient becomes significantly desaturated in the upright position, the patient also demonstrates platypnea, which is dyspnea in an upright position. However, this symptom is seen only in advanced cases.

Larger AVMs allow particles of significant size to pass unfiltered from the systemic venous system to the left atrium and systemic circulation. Stroke from paradoxical embolization is a risk in patients with macroscopic AVMs.

The exact pathogenesis of pulmonary AVMs is not known. In the terminal arterial loops, a defect that allows dilatation of a thin-walled capillary sac may occur. Alternatively, pulmonary AVMs are the result of incomplete resorption of the vascular septa that separate the arterial and venous plexus, which normally anastomose during fetal development. Multiple small pulmonary AVMs develop as a result of capillary development failure during fetal growth. The large saccular pulmonary AVMs develop through progressive dilation of the smaller plexus, leading to the formation of tortuous loops and multiloculated sacs. With time the intervening vascular wall may rupture, resulting in the formation of a single large saccular pulmonary AVM.