**Serious Adverse Drug Reactions**

- The primary adverse effects of ampicillin include seizure, enterocolitis, agranulocytosis, hemolytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenia, and pseudomembranous colitis.

**Local Adverse Reactions**

- Pain at IM/IV injection site

- Thrombophlebitis

**Hypersensitivity Reactions**

- Rashes and urticaria occur frequently.

- Reports also exist of some cases of erythema multiforme and exfoliative dermatitis.

- Anaphylaxis is the most severe complication experienced and is usually associated with the parenteral form. Anaphylaxis is life-threatening and requires rapid treatment.

**Gastrointestinal Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Stomatitis

- Pseudomembranous colitis

- Enterocolitis

- Black hairy tongue

- Mainly seen with oral dose administration).

**Hepatotoxicity**

- A moderate elevation of serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT/AST) is reported, commonly in infants; its significance is unknown. Mild transient elevations are possible with repeated intramuscular administration in individuals receiving larger than usual doses. Evidence indicates that AST gets released in the intramuscular injection site, and the increased quantities seen in the blood may not necessarily be from the liver as a source.

- Isolated instances of idiosyncratic liver injury have been reported in persons receiving ampicillin. The serum enzyme pattern is a hepatocellular pattern with marked elevations in ALT and AST, minimal elevations in alkaline phosphatase, and rapid recovery after withdrawal.

- In addition, cholestatic forms of hepatic injury with marked alkaline phosphatase elevations have also been infrequently described with vanishing bile duct syndrome.

**Nephrotoxicity**

- Case reports of ampicillin-sulbactam-induced nephrotoxicity and AKI have been reported, mainly when used in combination with vancomycin.

**Neurological Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Headache

- Seizures

**Hematological Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Reports exist of anemia, thrombocytopenic purpura, thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, agranulocytosis, and leukopenia during ampicillin therapy.

- These reactions are reversible on discontinuation of therapy, the etiology being a hypersensitive phenomenon.

**Opportunistic Infections**

- During therapy, superinfection with some bacteria or mycotic organisms is possible.

- Opportunistic infection warrants discontinuation of therapy and substitution of appropriate treatment.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) has been reported due to the concomitant use of ampicillin and allopurinol.