Gestational pemphigoid is an autoimmune disease, very similar to bullous pemphigoid, almost exclusively associated with pregnancy. It may also occur with trophoblastic tumors, hydatiform mole, or choriocarcinoma. Gestational pemphigoid also recurs following intake of oral contraceptive pills and during subsequent pregnancies. It develops during the second trimester as pruritic urticarial papules, plaques, and vesicles in the umbilical region and later spreads to other areas forming bullae. It remits before delivery and resolves completely in the weeks or months following delivery.

Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPP) is usually seen in preemies in last trimester or sometimes in the second trimester. The lesions first appear as striae and later spreads to breasts, arm, or thighs. Sparing of the periumbilical area is characteristic. The lesions may be vesicular, pregnancy targetoid, annular polycyclic papules, or plaques. Bullae are not seen.

Impetigo herpetiformis is thought to be related to the hormonal changes occurring in pregnancy. It usually occurs in the third trimester and is frequently associated with hypocalcemia.

Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is seen during pregnancy. It starts as pruritus without any primary skin lesions. Secondary skin lesions like linear excoriations, erosions, and scabbing may be present. There is no active hepatitis or intake of hepatotoxic drugs. It recurs during subsequent pregnancies.

Atopic eruption of pregnancy encompasses atopic eczema, prurigo of pregnancy, and pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy. In atopic eczema, the eczematous lesions appear during the first or second trimester. In the majority, lesions are in flexures-atopic sites, and in remaining, about one-third of the lesions are distributed to the trunk and limbs. In prurigo of pregnancy, groups of excoriated papules are seen in the limbs and trunk. In pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy, occurring in the second or third trimester, erythematous follicular papules resembling steroid induced acne are seen.