**Aggressive Prostate Cancer**

Aggressive disease in prostate cancer is usually defined as either locally advanced, higher Gleason score (Gleason 4+5=9 or higher), or rapid PSA doubling time of two years or less. Treatment of aggressive prostate cancers may involve radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, high-intensity focused ultrasound, chemotherapy, oral chemotherapeutic drugs, cryosurgery, hormonal therapy, immunotherapy, or some combination of these. Early use of chemotherapy has been shown to be helpful in many patients presenting with aggressive or advanced, localized disease.

If cancer has spread beyond the prostate, treatment options significantly change. Hormonal therapy, limited radiation therapy, radiopharmaceuticals, immunotherapy, and chemotherapy are the standard treatments reserved for a disease that has spread beyond the prostate and is no longer considered curable. For example, limited radiation therapy can dramatically help control prostatic bleeding or alleviate the excruciating bone pain from a metastatic cancer deposit.

**Castrate-Resistant Disease**

Most hormone-sensitive cancers eventually become resistant to hormonal therapy and resume growth. At this point, the disease is considered castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and requires additional treatment, usually chemotherapy. It has been estimated that 106,505 men in the US have localized (non-metastatic) CRPC. Of these, 90% will ultimately progress to the bone and other metastases, potentially causing severe pain, pathological fractures, and spinal cord compression with paralysis.

**Chemotherapy**in the modern era typically consists of docetaxel in addition to modified hormonal therapy.

- Docetaxel is the standard initial chemotherapy agent used to treat CRPC with a median survival benefit of 2 to 3 months.

- The early use of docetaxel in hormone naive patients with high volume or high-grade localized disease appears to be beneficial based on significantly increased survival noted in several studies (STAMPEDE, CHAARTED, RTOG 0521, and GETUG 12).

- The second-line chemotherapy treatment is cabazitaxel.

- Enzalutamide, abiraterone, darolutamide, and apalutamide are newer, second-generation hormonally based anti-androgens that often work even when initial hormonal therapy has failed.

- Abiraterone is a CYP17 inhibitor that can block testosterone production inside tumor cells. It increases overall survival by an average of 4.6 months. This survival advantage is increased if given to hormonally sensitive patients.

- The combination of docetaxel and abiraterone for metastatic or locally advanced hormone-sensitive prostate cancer appears justified by recent studies.

- The PEACE-1 trial looked at men with newly discovered, hormone-sensitive metastatic disease. All were given full hormonal therapy. Those men given abiraterone plus docetaxel in addition to standard hormonal therapy had a median progression-free survival of 4.5 years compared to 2 years for those treated with standard therapy. The benefit was greatest in those men with the most significant metastatic burden.

- Enzalutamide works by interfering with androgen receptor binding and intracellular communication functions. It provides a 5-month overall survival advantage.

- Enzalutamide has been approved for non-metastatic CRPC, identified by at least two PSA rises. Studies show median metastasis-free survival of 36.6 months with enzalutamide and LHRH agonist therapy compared to only 14.7 months with LHRH therapy alone. This is very similar to the benefit of apalutamide (see below). However, an increase in ischemic cardiac events was noted in the enzalutamide-treated group (2.7% vs. 1.2%), so caution is necessary for patients with significant heart disease.

- Apalutamide is a newer anti-androgen that is also FDA approved for use in non-metastatic, castration-resistant prostate cancer (enzalutamide is the other.)

- Apalutamide has also shown major activity in metastatic castrate-sensitive patients when given along with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) compared to standard ADT alone. In a phase 3 clinical trial (TITAN, NCT02489318) involving over 1,000 patients, apalutamide plus androgen deprivation therapy reduced the risk of radiographic progression or death by 52% (vs. placebo plus androgen deprivation therapy) and extended survival with a 33% reduction in the mortality risk.

- The newest FDA-approved second-generation anti-androgen is darolutamide. While no head-to-head studies exist, all of the second-generation anti-androgens substantially improve overall survival over placebo. Like the other second-generation anti-androgens, improved survival was found when they were added to LHRH-agonist therapy and docetaxel compared to placebo.

- Starting a second-generation hormonal agent such as enzalutamide or apalutamide may cause a temporary increase in PSMA uptake on PET/CTs called a "flare" in about half the patients treated.

- There are no head-to-head studies comparing these anti-androgens, and it is still unclear which anti-androgen is "best" or if giving standard chemotherapy would be the better approach. This determination will require additional randomized trials.

- The presence of Androgen Receptor Splice Variant 7 (AR-V7) mRNA in circulating tumor cells predicts a relatively poor response from abiraterone, enzalutamide, or apalutamide. A blood test for AR-V7 is now commercially available and is currently recommended for patients who fail initial treatment with any of these oral hormonal agents. Interestingly, a positive AR-V7 blood test also suggests an enhanced response to chemotherapy.

- Patients who progress after treatment with second-generation hormonal agents (enzalutamide or abiraterone) should be considered for PARP inhibitor therapy (olaparib and rucaparib) if they have BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM germline or somatic mutations.

- While similar, it appears that enzalutamide and apalutamide may provide slightly better overall and metastasis-free survival, while darolutamide appears to have better tolerability with fewer side effects.

- Circulating tumor cells can be detected in the blood of CRPC patients. The critical number that significantly shortens survival appears to be 5 or more tumor cells per 7.5 ml of blood.

- Immunotherapy treatment with sipuleucel-T in CRPC has been shown to increase survival but only by five months in patients with advanced disease (PSA >50).

- Only a small subset of people respond to androgen signaling blocking drugs.

About 90% of patients with CRPC will develop bony prostate cancer metastases, which can be extremely painful; therefore, much of the therapy at this stage is directed at the bone.

Bisphosphonates like zoledronic acid and rank ligand inhibitors like denosumab have improved quality of life and reduced pathological fractures in CRPC patients. Unfortunately, these agents have not been shown to improve survival. Before using either of these agents, a dental checkup is recommended due to their association with osteonecrosis of the jaw. Calcium and vitamin D supplements are recommended when either medication is used. Calcium citrate is the preferred calcium supplement due to its increased solubility and absorption while 5,000 units of daily supplemental vitamin D is also suggested for these patients.

Radium Ra-223 dichloride is a radiopharmaceutical that works particularly well on bone metastases from prostate cancer. It has been shown to improve overall survival in CRPC patients by 30%, which sounds good but is only about 3 to 4 months for most recipients. Radium 223 specifically targets the bone and is ineffective in visceral, soft tissue, and nodal disease. Therefore it should be used in castrate-resistant prostate cancer with bone metastases but without significant organ, soft tissue, or lymph node involvement. Radium 223 therapy improves the quality of life, reduces bone fracture rates, and extends survival even if only for a relatively short time. It can be used with all other prostate cancer therapies. However, some data suggest that there may be an increased risk of fractures and deaths associated with Radium 223 when used together with abiraterone and prednisone.

Lutetium 177 vipivotide tetraxetan is now FDA approved for use in metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer in patients with positive gallium 68 PSMA-11 PET/CT scans who have failed hormonal therapy and at least one course of docetaxel or cabazitaxel. The technology binds a beta particle source with a PSMA-specific binder into a unique radioligand which seeks out PSMA-expressing cells and exposes them and their immediate microenvironment to beta radiation. The treatment has a good safety profile and is relatively well tolerated. It has been found to extend progression-free and overall survival in this extremely difficult group of patients by about 4 or 5 months.

Sipuleucel-T, a prostate cancer vaccine, has been found to result in a tangible survival benefit for men with metastatic, castrate-resistant prostate cancer, but it is quite expensive and provides only a relatively limited improvement in life expectancy except in patients with PSA levels <22 where it has improved median survival by over one year. (Note: The drug remains available even though its manufacturer, Dendreon, has declared bankruptcy.)  It is an autologous, dendritic cell-based vaccine that targets prostatic acid phosphatase.  It is the only vaccine-based therapy currently available for prostate cancer in the U.S., but a number of others are in various stages of development. We need to develop reliable prostate cancer biomarkers to help determine which future immunotherapy will offer the most benefit for each patient.

Polyadenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerases (PARP) are a type of enzyme that helps repair DNA damage in cells. PARP inhibitors, such as olaparib and rucaparib, prevent cancer cells from repairing DNA damage which facilitates apoptosis. They are considered a type of targeted therapy as they work best in patients with DDRG germline or somatic mutations. Olaparib showed a median survival benefit of about five months (more than double the median progression-free survival) compared to enzalutamide or abiraterone treatment alone and was most effective in patients with BRCA2 mutations on germline testing.

**Summary of Prostate Cancer Chemotherapy**

- All protocols start with hormonal therapy (LHRH agonist or antagonist therapy with an anti-androgen). In advanced or aggressive cases, a second-generation anti-androgen should be used and possibly docetaxel.

- Docetaxel is the recommended first-line chemotherapy.

- Second-line chemotherapy is cabazitaxel. While similar in efficacy to docetaxel, cabazitaxel is preferred in patients at risk for neutropenia, extremely frail, or older patients as it is better tolerated. However, cabazitaxel is more costly than docetaxel.

- Platinum-based chemotherapy can be used next, such as carboplatin, oxaliplatin, or cisplatin which are usually used together with paclitaxel, capecitabine, or estramustine.

- Mitoxantrone only has a minor role in prostate cancer chemotherapy, although a few patients who've failed docetaxel have responded to it. It may have a greater effect on symptom relief than survival.

- Docetaxel or cabazitaxel together with carboplatin is often recommended in more aggressive cancers.

- Etoposide, together with carboplatin or cisplatin, is suggested for neuroendocrine tumors, which are often very aggressive.

- Patients with ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, FANCA, and PALB2 germline mutations that involve DNA damage repair genes (DDRG) tend to have an unusual sensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy and are likely to respond to PARP inhibitors such as olaparib and rucaparib.

- Patients who fail enzalutamide or abiraterone may be candidates for PARP inhibitors. Check for BRCA1, BRCA2, and ATM germline status. Also, consider obtaining an AR-V7 blood test.

- Patients with BRCA1 and BRCA 2 mutations respond better to PARP inhibitors than those with ATM or other mutations.

- Patients with MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 that involve DNA mismatch repair genes may respond to an immunotherapy drug such as pembrolizumab.

- Patients with castrate-resistant prostate cancer and bone metastases will benefit from either zoledronic acid or denosumab to minimize bone pain and fractures.

- Sipuleucel-T, Radium 223, Lutetium 177, and PARP inhibitors (olaparib, rucaparib) should be used appropriately in castrate-resistant prostate cancer patients for both palliative and therapeutic benefits as they have all shown improvements in the quality of life, clinical symptom reduction, and cancer-specific as well as overall survival. They are often used too late in the course of the disease for optimal patient benefit.

- Whenever possible, patients who are failing initial chemotherapy should consider participation in a clinical trial. The most complete listing of all open clinical trials in prostate cancer in the United States can be found at clinicaltrials.gov.

**Areas of Future Research**

The activity of various protein kinases is associated with the development of androgen-independent (castrate-resistant) prostate cancer. Protein kinases are involved in the growth, proliferation, aggressiveness, and metastases of prostatic cancers. Some are also involved in the androgen receptor signaling pathway and offer the possibility of changing the cellular response to androgen deprivation through specific protein kinase inhibitor therapy.

Another PARP inhibitor (niraparib) shows good efficacy and safety in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer clinical trials.

Research is ongoing in the challenging area of identifying molecular biomarkers that could potentially predict the response to immunotherapy to allow for individual customization of such treatment for patients with advanced, aggressive, or metastatic prostate cancer. New immunotherapy treatments, such as immune checkpoint inhibitor combinations, bispecific T-cell engager immunological therapies, and chimeric antigen receptors, are under development and early test results appear promising.

Another promising area of research involves prostate cancer stem cells. These are small populations of prostate cancer cells that induce tumor onset, growth, and development. They contribute to the development of resistance to chemotherapy and promote metastasis. Upregulation of cell surface markers found on these prostatic cancer stem cells is closely associated with more rapid cancer growth, metastases, and an overall poor prognosis.

The development of hormonal-resistant prostate cancer involves several families of chromatin modifiers. Targeting the bromodomain and extra-terminal protein family would be a promising, new, and novel approach to treating castrate-resistant prostate cancer. Our relative lack of knowledge of androgen resistance mechanisms and genetics means that such therapies are not likely in the near future.

Second-generation anti-androgens fail at least in part due to androgen-receptor mutations or splicing adjustments. These actions result in cell reactivation. Various mechanisms of reducing androgen receptor protein levels and activity are being investigated, including androgen receptor nuclear localization inhibition, N-terminal suppression, heat-shock protein blockage, and proteasome-mediated accelerated degradation.

Ipilimumab is a type of monoclonal antibody that activates cytotoxic T lymphocytes by direct blockage of CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen) T-cell receptor sites, which would otherwise downregulate the immune system. Ipilimumab is primarily used as immunotherapy for melanoma but has been found to have some activity in prostate cancer. Two large ipilimumab prostate cancer trials showed an improvement in progression-free survival, but overall survival was not statistically improved.

Nivolumab is another monoclonal antibody cancer therapy that inhibits the activity of PD-1 receptors on T-cells. This results in a net increase in T-cell activity and an enhanced anti-tumor immune response. Nivolumab plus ipilimumab showed minimal additional efficacy in treating prostate cancer, but when combined with docetaxel, there was an improved response in castrate-resistant prostate cancer patients.

Targeted, individually customized anticancer therapies offer great potential for controlling the malignancy and reducing side effects by delivering cytotoxic material selectively only to malignant cells. One way of doing this is by using designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARP). These are non-immunoglobulin-based scaffold proteins designed to deliver a cytotoxic payload exclusively to prostate cancer cells. Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is over-expressed in 40% to 60% of prostate cancers and is associated with more rapid tumor growth, higher risk of metastasis, resistance to chemotherapy, and decreased cancer-specific survival. Experimentally in vitro, it was possible to use a specially designed DARP molecule to deliver a Pseudomonas exotoxin A variant into EpCAM-expressing prostate cancer cells. The toxin was rapidly internalized, and normal prostatic cells were left unharmed.

**Germline Testing in Prostate Cancer**

We know that up to 17% of men with prostate cancer will demonstrate germline, inheritable abnormalities and that about 10% of patients with metastatic castration-resistant disease carry inherited gene mutations.

Germline testing intends to identify heritable, genetic cancer predispositions, inform individual patients and family members of any increased cancer risks, suggest customized screenings for selected, affected individuals, help guide prognostic predictions, and assist in treatment decisions.

Hereditary prostate cancer due to germline mutations has an autosomal dominant pattern or transmission and is typically characterized by early onset.

- Overall, the most commonly found germline mutation in prostate cancer is BRCA2. This is followed by ATM, CHEK2, and BRCA1.

- Patients with germline mutations of BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM were found to have a higher likelihood of cancer upgrading during active surveillance.

- BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have been found in up to 11.8% of men with metastatic prostate cancer and 5% to 7% of patients with localized disease.

- BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status has been found to be an independent prognostic indicator of metastasis-free survival in patients with localized disease undergoing definitive therapy (either radiation or radical prostatectomy).

- Men with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations are also at higher risk for male breast cancer, melanoma, and pancreatic cancer.

- Men with these mutations face an overall increased risk of prostate cancer (3.8 times higher risk for BRCA1 and 8.6 fold higher risk for BRCA2) and are more likely to present with advanced disease. a higher Gleason Score, and tend to have shorter cancer-specific survival than non-carriers.

- They also have worse outcomes after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy.

- Germline mutations were found in 43% of younger prostate cancer patients (<55 years) compared to only 9% in men over 85 years with similar clinical disease.

- Higher Gleason scores have been associated with BRCA2, ATM, and NBN mutations.

- The NCCN recommends that men with a BRCA2 mutation should start annual prostate cancer screenings at age 40. A cutoff of 3 ng/ml has been suggested for this group. The same is suggested for men with BRCA1 mutations.

- Patients with metastatic castration-resistant cancer and a BRCA1, BRCA2, or ATM mutation that has progressed despite hormonal therapy including either enzalutamide or abiraterone will benefit from a Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, such as olaparib or rucaparib.

- Mutations in the HOXB13 gene, usually found in people of West African descent, are associated with an eight to tenfold increase in the lifetime risk of prostate cancer as well as an earlier presentation than non-carriers.

- Patients with Lynch syndrome enjoy an increased risk for several malignancies, including colorectal, melanoma, pancreatic, urothelial, prostate, skin cancers, and ovarian and uterine cancers in women.

**Who Should Undergo Germline Testing and When**

Germline testing should be offered to any prostate cancer patient when the results could have a therapeutic or clinical impact on that individual or any of his family.

**Germline testing is strongly recommended for patients with advanced or metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer to see if they have DNA damage repair genes (DDRGs) such as ATM, BRCA1, and BRCA2, which typically respond well to PARP inhibitor medications (olaparib and rucaparib) as well as platinum-based chemotherapy.**

The optimal timing for discussing germline testing with patients is unclear. We prefer to discuss it as early as possible once the patient becomes eligible. There are often delays in getting the tests and obtaining appointments with genetic counselors. Trying to deal with these issues at the same time as receiving bad news about newly metastatic disease or increased cancer spread may be too much for many patients and families to handle. As long as patients meet the criteria, germline testing can be done at any time.

Germline testing is not the same as somatic or tissue-based biomarkers and genetic alterations. While they are often complementary, the two tests are different, although they can be done simultaneously.

Internationally, about 75% of physicians have access to germline testing, but only about 18% of patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer are currently being tested.

As the indications for germline testing have expanded, the number of genetic counselors has not caused significant delays. This puts a greater burden on primary care practitioners, urologists, and oncologists to discuss germline testing with patients and causes difficulties ordering the tests themselves. It is helpful to develop a working relationship with a genetic counseling service or a specific counselor to better coordinate patient management and identify optimal testing parameters, screening criteria, mutation panels, and laboratories.

**Registry and Research Opportunities in Germline Testing for Patients:**

- Patients who undergo germline testing are encouraged to consider joining the PROGRESS Registry at Thomas Jefferson University. The registry is being used for research purposes and provides a free newsletter to participating patients.

- A multi-institutional registry of genetic information together with clinical data collected from prostate cancer patients treated with PARP inhibitors called the PRECISION Registry is being initiated as an international collaboration between Duke University, Thomas Jefferson University, and the University of British Columbia.

**Current NCCN Prostate Cancer Guidelines recommend germline Testing for all men with****metastatic prostate cancer, regional (node-positive) disease, or high-risk/very high-risk localized disease, regardless of age.**

**OR With Any of the Following:**

Any first, second, or third-degree relative who developed:

- Breast, endometrial, or colorectal cancer by the age of 50

- Pancreatic, ovarian, or male breast cancer at any age

- Metastatic prostate cancer, regional (node-positive) disease, and high-risk or very high-risk localized disease at any age

Father or brother with prostate cancer by age 60.

Two or more relatives with breast or prostate cancer at any age.

Three or more first or second-degree relatives with Lynch-syndrome-related cancers (especially if diagnosed by age 50), including biliary, colorectal, endometrial, gastric, glioblastoma, ovarian, pancreas, small intestine, or urothelial cancer of the upper urinary tracts.

Known family history of pathogenic germline variants such as ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, EpCAM, PALB2, PMS2, MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6.

Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry.

Personal history of male breast cancer.

The NCCN also suggests that germline testing should be considered in intermediate-risk patients with intraductal/cribriform histology or a personal history of cancer of the biliary tract, colorectal area, endometrium, stomach, glioblastoma, melanoma, ovary, pancreas, small intestine, or urothelial malignancy of the upper urinary tracts regardless of age.

Curiously, African American men have shown a relatively low incidence of germline mutations despite their well-known genetic predisposition to aggressive prostate cancer compared to the general population. However, a higher incidence of RAD family mutations (RAD51, RAD54L, RAD54B), as well as PMS2 and BRCA1 in African Americans (but not White race individuals in the US), might explain this difference and offer an opportunity for better risk-stratification as well as opportunities for research into targeted therapies for this high-risk group.

Knowing and understanding germline status will help clinicians adjust their monitoring and cancer screening protocol appropriately for specified groups and individuals, offer more aggressive adjunctive treatment earlier to affected patients identified with certain high-risk germline mutations, ensure their ability to offer new treatment approaches (such as targeted genetic therapies) at some point in the future to advanced cancer patients, and be able to counsel individual family members who have a higher inherited, genetic risk of malignancy.

**Specific Germline Mutations**

There are about 170 germline mutations that have been identified and linked to prostate cancer.

**The NCCN recommends at least the following nine mutations for germline testing in prostate cancer:**ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, PALB2, PMS2, MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6. Some experts have recommended adding EpCAM, HOXB13 (especially in African Americans), FANCA, P53, and NBN.

Germline mutations are mostly of two general types. DNA Damage Repair Genes (DDRGs) and DNA Mismatch Repair (MMR) genes.

- DDRGs would include ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, FANCA, and PALB2. This group often responds to PARP inhibitor therapy (except possibly ATM). These patients also appear to respond to cisplatinum which is currently being investigated and looks promising but is somewhat toxic.

- MMR mutations would include MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. Patients with these genetic defects tend to respond to immunotherapy such as pembrolizumab.

ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) is a key DNA damage control response gene that is also associated with an increased risk of breast, colorectal, pancreatic, and stomach cancers and prostate. ATM carriers have a high relative risk of metastatic prostate cancer of 6.3%.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 (breast cancer susceptibility gene) mutations have been associated with a number of cancers, particularly breast and ovarian cancer. These are tumor suppressor genes that are involved in the repair of damaged DNA strands. Men of Ashkenazi Jewish heritage are more likely than the general population to be carriers of these genetic mutations, which will have a penetration of about 2% to 2.5%. Of Ashkenazi Jewish men who develop prostate cancer, 3.2% to 4% will be carriers.

CDK12 (cyclin-dependent kinase 12) is an important enzyme involved in regulating genetic transcription, translation, cell growth, RNA splicing, and DNA damage response (DDR).

CHEK2 (checkpoint kinase 2) is a tumor suppressor gene involved in the DNA-signaling pathway. Mutations in this gene have been associated with an increased risk for breast, ovarian, colon, thyroid, renal malignancies, and prostate cancer.

EpCAM (epithelial cell adhesion molecule, also known as CD326) is over-expressed in many rapidly growing cancers, including prostate cancer. It is involved in cell signaling, migration, cellular adhesion, proliferation rate, invasion capacity, metastatic potential, and differentiation.

FANCA (Fanconi anemia) is associated with prostate cancer as well as Fanconi anemia. Increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents is caused when the FANC complex is disrupted by the FANCA mutated protein.

HOXB13 (homeobox B13) is a chromosome 17 transcription factor that has been found in 6% of all early prostate cancers and is generally considered a highly specific gene for prostate cancer risk, especially in the African American population.

KLK3|179T appears to have only a relatively modest negative effect on prognosis by itself unless it is also associated with DDRG mutations where much more rapid progression of cancer is noted.

MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 are all DNA mismatch repair genes. They are most often associated with Lynch syndrome.

P53 mutations in localized prostate cancer are relatively rare and are more frequently seen in metastatic disease. P53 is generally considered a tumor suppressor gene. Its activity produces p21 protein, which acts to slow cell division. Loss of P53 activity reduces tumor androgen sensitivity, increases prostate cancer cell proliferation, and promotes tumor growth. Therefore, P53 mutations are generally considered late and ominous findings in prostate cancer.

PALB2 (partner and localizer of BRCA2) is closely associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 as it is an essential component involved in creating the BRCA complex that launches homologous recombination processes.

NBN (nibrin) is the gene responsible for producing nibrin, a protein involved in critical DNA repair. NBN mutations are found in 2.21% of all malignancies but are most prevalent in breast cancer, followed by lung, colorectal, and prostate cancer. NBN is a relatively uncommon germline mutation but, when present, has a significant three-fold negative prognostic impact on prostate cancer survival.

The validity of the NCCN guidelines on screening criteria and which mutations to include in germline testing has been called into question.

**Some experts have suggested testing for all the above-listed germline mutations as recommended by the NCCN (ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, PALB2, PMS2, MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6) as well as EpCAM, HOXB13 (especially in African Americans), FANCA, NBN, KLK3|179T, CDK12, and p53.**This will depend on commercial availability, cost, insurance coverage, potential usability of the resulting information, availability of quality genetic counseling, and the overall reliability of the testing provided. If genetic counseling services are limited in your area, contact the National Society of Genetic Counselors at NSGC.org for assistance and a directory of their members. Genetic counseling services are also available online.

Three sets of germline mutations have been associated with rapid biochemical recurrence following definitive cancer therapy. These are PI3K/AKT/mTOR, KRAS signaling (up), and Inflammatory response.

KISS1 (Kisspeptin 1) has been shown to promote tumor angiogenesis. It also significantly increases malignant tumor growth while facilitating tissue invasion and malignant cell migration.

Other germline mutations that appear potentially beneficial to patients with prostate cancer but require more study to determine their significance include APC, BRIP1, BARD1, CHEK1, FOXA1, KMT2D, PMS2, POLG, PPP2R2A, RAD51, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, RAD54B, RAD54L, and ZFHX3.

**Caution:**Physicians who order germline tests are ultimately responsible for discussing the results with their patients and arranging for genetic counseling if appropriate. This extra burden on physicians, as well as a general lack of knowledge about germline testing, result interpretation, how to counsel patients, the need for outside laboratory resources for the actual testing, questions about insurance coverage, and the lack of genetic counselors, are all impediments to the more widespread and effective use of germline testing.