There are side effects that commonly correlate with busulfan use and that are common among all alkylating agents. Common side effects associated with all alkylating agents include intestinal mucosal damage, alopecia, pancytopenia, anemia, amenorrhea, impaired spermatogenesis, and increased risk of malignancy.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease is a side effect commonly associated with busulfan. It typically occurs 10 to 20 days after hematopoietic cell transplantation, but it can present as late as 30 to 75 days with newer therapeutic regimens. Frequency ranges from 20 to 50%, but the incidence has decreased due to better therapeutic regimens. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease typically presents with abdominal pain, liver tenderness, and jaundice. There is also associated with weight gain due to fluid accumulation. Serum enzyme and serum aminotransferase concentrations typically become elevated, with a minimal increase in alkaline phosphatase concentrations. If severe enough, it can cause hepatic failure. With the fatality rate being as high as 50%, it is important to bear in mind how much busulfan a patient is receiving because hepatic veno-occlusive disease is dose-dependent. Doses higher than 16 mg/kg, for instance, would put the patient at more risk of hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

Other side effects of busulfan include interstitial pulmonary fibrosis. This side effect is commonly referred to as busulfan lung, and while it is rare, it is an important side effect to note. Research has not established the exact mechanism, but it is believed to be due to chemically induced inflammation of the alveoli. This inflammation then causes granular pneumocytes to proliferate, which causes the lungs to become fibrotic.

Busulfan-induced seizure is also another side effect to note. The seizures are generally tonic-colonic. Incidence is reported to be 10% and is associated with high concentrations of busulfan. Busulfan has the capability of rapid distribution into the CSF. CSF concentration can be approximately equivalent to the concentration in plasma when using busulfan in high doses. It is highly recommended that physicians prophylactic treat patients with phenytoin. Other medications that have been useful as a prophylactic treatment for busulfan-induced seizures are clonazepam, lorazepam, valproic acid, and levetiracetam. Some physicians have chosen to use benzodiazepines like the antiseizure medications previously suggested because phenytoin can increase the metabolism of busulfan by upregulating many P450 enzymes. Further research into this area is underway.

Other notable side effects of busulfan include hyperpigmentation, emesis, wasting syndrome, thrombocytopenia, and sometimes medullary aplasia.