Angiotensin is a peptide endocrine hormone and an important part of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, an inter-related endocrine system important in volume and blood pressure control. Angiotensinogen, an alpha-globulin, and the peptide prohormone is synthesized primarily by the liver and circulates in plasma. When blood pressure drops, or when sympathetic signals reach the kidney, renin, a peptide produced primarily by the renal juxtaglomerular cells, is released and enzymatically cleaves off two amino acids forming angiotensin I (ATI), a decapeptide. ATI is further cleaved into an octapeptide, angiotensin II (ATII) by the action of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), primarily in the pulmonary endothelium, though this enzyme is present in the endothelium of other organs including the heart.

ATII has recently received FDA approval for use in patients in shock. ATII is the active hormone and acts at ATII receptors. Animal studies suggested that ATII was safe and effective in increasing blood pressure in shock. Furthermore, after a small human trial showed success, the direct use of angiotensin II as a vasopressor was studied in critically ill patients. The results of the ATHOS-3 trial results were published in the August 2017 New England Journal of Medicine. Researchers studied the drug in a placebo-controlled, double-blinded protocol with 321 subjects in the intensive care unit setting. Multiple hospitals in nine countries recruited severely ill patients with septic and vasodilatory shock who were not adequately responding to fluid and high-dose norepinephrine or equivalent standard of care pressors. Treatment with synthetic human angiotensin II resulted in statistically significant improvements in mean arterial pressure in the treatment group. The primary endpoints included achieving mean arterial pressure greater than or equal to 75 mm Hg in the first 3 hours of infusion and blood pressure maintenance with decreased use of vasopressors, including epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine at 48 hours. While the originally published analysis of the data did not show a statistically significant mortality benefit, additional analysis has shown a statistically significant reduction in mortality at 28 days in a subgroup of treated patients.

In December of 2017, after a priority review, intravenous (IV) synthetic human angiotensin II was approved by the FDA for the treatment of septic and other distributive, vasodilatory shock in adults. The timing of initiation of this medication as used in ATHOS 3 trial was when the norepinephrine dose was 0.2 mcg/kg/min dosing, or cumulative catecholamine dosing was 0.2 mcg/kg/min within first 48 hrs of patients presentation. The patient in the trial was adequately resuscitated with 25 ml/kg of crystalloid before initiation of this medication.

Clinical trials for the use of this drug in pediatric patients with refractory shock are currently recruiting patients.