Spontaneous resolution of pseudocysts is common, especially for those that occur after an episode of acute pancreatitis. Since stable, non-enlarging pseudocysts rarely cause any symptoms, the gold standard for the treatment of uncomplicated pseudocysts is conservative management. This includes analgesics and antiemetics as needed and a low-fat diet. Such patients usually have interval imaging for early detection in case the size of the pseudocyst does increase or if complications develop.

On the other hand, pseudocysts that develop as a complication of chronic pancreatitis rarely resolve spontaneously. Specific factors that correlate with a lower chance of spontaneous resolution include the presence of multiple cysts, cysts located near the tail of the pancreas, coexistence of other local anatomic complications such as strictures or calcifications of the pancreatic ducts, and the progressive increase in the size of the cyst. Urgent intervention may be needed if patients develop peritonitis, infection, bleeding, or gastric outlet obstruction. Alarming symptoms that should raise the suspicion for these complications include acutely worsening abdominal pain, persistent nausea, vomiting, inadequate oral intake, fevers, chills, or hypotension.

The three categories of invasive interventions are percutaneous, endoscopic, and surgical drainage or excision. Ideally, any intervention should be delayed to around six weeks after the inciting pancreatitis episode, in the absence of complicating factors, to allow the pseudocyst wall to thicken and mature. At this point, the pseudocysts are more amenable to penetration and drainage. It is important to note, however, that pseudocysts of any size or duration require more immediate intervention if it is thought to be the cause of life-threatening illness.

**Percutaneous Drainage (PD)**

Percutaneous drainage is performed with either ultrasound or CT guidance. A pigtail catheter is placed into the pseudocyst and is left in place until the fluid output is minimal. PD can cause significant discomfort to the patient as the catheter tends to clog and may need frequent repositioning. It is contraindicated in patients with strictures of the pancreatic duct and those who cannot manage catheter care at home. There have been multiple studies evaluating the efficacy of PD compared to the other treatment modalities available. One of the most extensive studies comparing Surgical Drainage (SD) and PD found that, although they had similar success rates, SD had fewer complications in terms of mortality, duration of hospital stays, and rates of re-intervention. Compared to endoscopic drainage, PD was inferior with regards to residual fluid collections, frequency of re-intervention, and the need for surgery. Based on these studies, PD should only be considered in critically ill patients who cannot tolerate surgical or endoscopic procedures or for patients with an immature infected or complicated pseudocyst as PD does not require wall maturation before the intervention.

**Endoscopic Drainage**

Endoscopic drainage methods are becoming the preferred treatment approach because it is less invasive than surgery and yields high long-term success rates. The aim is to create a canal that helps to drain the pancreatic pseudocyst into the gastrointestinal tract, avoiding the need to place an external drain. Construction of the canal can be done either through the trans papillary method (TPD) using ERCP or directly across the stomach or duodenal wall with transmural (TSM) drainage.

**1.Transpapilliary Drainage (TPD)**

Transpapillary drainage is an option when there is a communicating tract between the pseudocyst and the main pancreatic duct or when the cyst is too far away from the gastrointestinal lumen to pursue TSM drainage. In this technique, a catheter is threaded through the pancreatic duct, and a stent is deployed within the communicating tract between the pseudocyst and the lumen of the pancreatic duct under ERCP guidance. This facilitates pseudocyst drainage and decompression. If strictures are encountered along the pancreatic duct, balloon dilation is performed to open the lumen and allow passage of the catheter. TPD is less likely to be successful for cysts located distally if multiple cysts are present, or multiple pancreatic duct strictures impair the ability to pass the catheter.

An advantage of using the TPD technique is the ability to dilate other pancreatic duct strictures encountered while threading the catheter to access the pseudocyst-pancreatic duct communicating tract. Alleviating strictures along the pancreatic duct could potentially reduce the chance of further pseudocyst formation in the future. TPD has a success rate, which ranges from 81% to 94%. However, a recent multicentre study published in 2016 showed no benefit in treatment outcomes in patients undergoing TPD vs. EUS-guided transmural drainage. TPD was associated with lower rates of long-term cyst resolution after a mean follow up of 200 days.

**2.Transmural Drainage (TSM**)

TSM is performed across the stomach or the duodenal wall using EUS or the conventional endoscope to guide drainage of the pseudocyst. With recent advances in technology, EUS guided drainage has mostly replaced the use of conventional endoscopy. Conventional endoscopy relies on the presence of a bulge in the gut wall caused by a compressing pseudocyst to identify an ideal puncture site. The advantage of using EUS is the ability to identify and access a pseudocyst that is non-bulging (which occurs in approximately 42% to 48% of cases), pseudocysts that are adjacent to, but not directly abutting the gastrointestinal wall and pseudocysts that are located more distally along the pancreas. Additionally, EUS helps identify and avoid overlying blood vessels, and thus, decreasing the risk of bleeding complications. Once the puncture site is established, a needle is inserted into the pseudocyst, and positioning is confirmed using fluoroscopy. After the cyst-gut tract is confirmed, it is dilated pneumatically, and multiple pigtail stents are deployed for drainage. In two randomized control trials comparing EUS with non-EUS guided transmural drainage, the technical success rates were better in EUS guided drainage; ~95% versus 59%. The major adverse events associated with TSM are hemorrhage, perforation, and infection. In summary, TSM is indicated when the pancreatic duct anatomy is disrupted or complicated with stricture formation. With management archetype moving towards less invasive techniques, the endoscopic approach is gaining popularity for treating pseudocysts. EUS assisted techniques are associated with a higher success rate and a decreased percentage of serious complications.

**Surgical Drainage**

Historically surgical drainage, which includes cystogastrostomy, Cystoduodenostomy, or cystojejunostomy, was the method of choice for pancreatic pseudocyst drainage. However, with evolving endoscopic techniques, surgical drainage is now limited to certain situations such as recurrent pseudocysts, pseudocysts of uncertain origin, resection of a malignant cyst, or pseudocysts that are difficult to access endoscopically. Clinical features that should raise concerns for malignancy are weight loss, a palpable mass, multilocular pseudocysts, thick walls, and an elevated CEA level in the pseudocyst fluid.****For surgical drainage, either the open or laparoscopic method can be opted for as both are effective; however, the laparoscopic approach carries lower morbidity and mortality.****A systematic review found that laparoscopic drainage is associated with a 98.3% success rate, 2.5% recurrence rate, a mean hospital stay of 5.7 days, and a less than 2% complication rate. A retrospective study done in 2009 comparing endoscopic drainage with surgical drainage (open or laparoscopic) found a similar rate of complications, but surgical drainage was associated with a higher treatment success rate.****In conclusion, surgical drainage is a safe alternative to other less invasive procedures and is reserved for cysts that need a wider stoma for drainage, resection of pancreatic necrosis, or cysts of unknown etiology.

In summary, the treatment of choice depends on the individual patient profile, and it is essential to understand the risks and benefits associated with each treatment modality.