A thorough history, detailed ophthalmic and systemic examination must be carried out to reach the diagnosis. The primary intraocular condition must be diagnosed and treated.

**History**

- Diminution of vision

- Duration of onset
- Mode of onset
- Progression
- Nature 
- Diurnal variation
- Associated symptoms such as pain, redness, watering of the eyes
- Associated flashes, floaters, colored haloes, glare, diplopia

- History of recurrent episodes of pain, redness in the eyes

- Treatment history of steroids, immunosuppressive drugs, any surgical procedure, any chemotherapy for intraocular tumors

- Trauma

- Systemic illness such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, any autoimmune disease, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis

**General Physical Examination**

- Pulse rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure

- Systemic examination - to look for any systemic illness

**Comprehensive Ophthalmic Examination**

- Visual Acuity

- Uncorrected visual acuity
- Refraction
- Best-corrected visual acuity
- Near vision

- Intraocular pressure (IOP) – by Goldmann applanation tonometry to rule out  glaucoma and hypotony

- Examination of the lacrimal system- to rule out any lacrimal system obstruction

- Pupillary reactions - direct and consensual to assess the status of the optic nerve

- Slit-lamp Examination – should be meticulously carried 

- Cornea: Edema, keratic precipitates, corneal ulcer, opacities, scars.
- Anterior chamber: Depth, cells, and flare in the anterior chamber, hypopyon.
- Iris: Heterochromia, atrophy, iridodonesis, vascularisation, synechiae.
- The crystalline lens – anterior and posterior capsular status, grading of the cataract, zonular status, phacodonesis The cataract typically begins as a posterior subcapsular cortical cataract. The opacity is irregular in outline, appearing as 'BREADCRUMB' in the slit lamp. A characteristic sign is the appearance of iridescent colored particles "polychromatic lusture" of reds, greens, and blues. Gradually the opacity spreads in the remaining cortex, finally developing into a total cataract. Deposition of calcium is commonly seen in the later stage. In some anterior segment lesions, the anterior cortical cataract may occur. Anterior cortical cataracts may be seen in the presence of glaucoma, hypopyon corneal ulcer, and acute iritis.
- Vitreous – Anterior 1/3 of the vitreous can be examined by slit lamp for any opacities, cells in the vitreous cavity.
- Slit-lamp biomicroscopy - To look for macular status. For example, macular ischemia, chronic macular edema, or any macular scar might result from the choroidal neovascular membrane. The status of the optic disc should also be assessed for glaucomatous optic disc changes.

- Dilated fundus examination- Carried out using indirect ophthalmoscopy to look for retinal pathologies. In the presence of retinal detachment, the extent of the detachment should be ascertained, and retinal breaks identified. Macular involvement is documented. The peripheral retina and the pars plana should be examined by scleral indentation for intermediate uveitis. The retina is examined for degenerative retinal conditions: retinitis pigmentosa is commonly associated with the development of cataracts.