The other most common etiologies of long QT syndromes, which must be considered in the differential diagnosis, include the following:

- Romano-Ward syndrome (RWS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by a prolonged QTc interval in the absence of congenital deafness. The mechanism of action is similar to JLNS in that it also affects the sodium and potassium channels. The diagnosis of RWS is made based on a prolonged QT interval on ECG, clinical presentation, and family history. The most common genes associated with the syndrome are KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A. Only the KCNQ1 and KCNE1 genes have been linked to both JLNS and RWS.

- Timothy syndrome is a rare autosomal disease characterized by:

- Cardiac abnormal rhythm including QTc prolongation, functional 2:1 AV block with bradycardia, tachyarrhythmias,
- Congenital heart defects (patent ductus arteriosus, patent foramen ovale, ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy)
- Syndactyly,
- Developmental delays, autism spectrum disorders.

The diagnosis is made by clinical features and a defective CACNA1C gene, which encodes a calcium channel. The prognosis is dismal, with an average age of death in patients with this disease is 2.5 years.

- Andersen Tawil syndrome is also a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a triad of :

- Episodic flaccid paralysis, 
- Prolonged QT interval/ventricular arrhythmias
- Physical abnormalities including low-set ears, hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes), small jaw, fifth-digit clinodactyly, syndactyly, short stature, and scoliosis.

The diagnosis is made by clinical characteristics and a pathogenic variant in the KCNJ2 gene.

- Acquired causes of QTc interval prolongation are most often caused by specific drugs (antiarrhythmics, pro-motility, antimicrobial, and antipsychotics), hypokalemia, hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia.

- Myocardial problems such as myopathies and ischemia and central nervous system injuries.