**Urinalysis**is the initial and most useful test to perform. Although urine dipstick is widely available and can be performed quickly, it can give false-positive or false-negative results and warrants urinalysis and urine microscopy to establish the diagnosis. Presence of 3 or more RBCs per High Power Field on urine sediments is defined as microscopic hematuria although there is no "safe" lower limit of hematuria.

**Urine microscopy**examines urine sediments for RBC morphology, and RBC casts are the single most significant test which can differentiate between glomerular and non-glomerular bleed.

**Renal parameters**should be obtained to rule out acute kidney injury.

**Imaging:**Initial imaging could be in the form of an ultrasound of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder. It can assist in diagnosing anatomical causes of hematuria such as a kidney stone or bladder or renal mass. It can also detect renal cysts. Abdominopelvic CT scan with or without contrast is the preferred modality to detect renal stones and other morphological abnormalities of kidneys. MRI abdomen and pelvis is another useful modality if CT scan is contraindicated or not helpful.

**Cystoscopy:**After ruling out urinary tract infection and having negative imaging of kidneys and ureters to detect any abnormality, cystoscopy by a urologist is the next step in the evaluation of hematuria. It can detect urothelial carcinoma, bladder wall inflammation or mucosal thickening. It can also be therapeutic to remove bladder stones.

**Urine Cytology**can be performed to detect malignant cells or to detect urothelial carcinoma, but it is not a substitute for a cystoscopy.

**Kidney biopsy:**The gold standard to diagnose a glomerular cause of hematuria is a kidney biopsy by a nephrologist or interventional radiologist.