**Gross Anatomy of the Nail Unit**

The nail unit of a human digit includes the nail plate (surface and free edge), nail bed, nail matrix (proximal and distal/germinal), proximal nail fold, lateral nail folds, the cuticle (i.e., distal crease of eponychium), the paronychium, and the hyponychium.

The nail matrix has a proximal and a distal (also called keratogenous or germinal) component. The distal portion often has a visible part called the lunula—a pale white, crescent-shaped portion most apparent on the thumb with relatively less exposure in other digits. The whitish hue of the lunula is created by the light reflected off the nuclei in the keratogenous zone. The proximal portion of the nail matrix composes most of the nail plate overall, specifically the superficial/dorsal portion of the nail plate, while the distal portion contributes to the ventral nail plate.

The nail bed extends from the distal margin of the lunula to the hyponychium, a space between the distal ridge and the nail plate. The nail bed matrix is located under the keratogenous zone of the nail plate matrix, obstructed from view by the lunula, and produces the nail bed epidermis. The onychodermal band is the name given to the distal margin of the nail bed, where a brown transverse band is present, which varies in color based on ethnicity.

**Vascular Supply of the Nail Unit**

The arterial supply of the fingers and toes is broadly similar. In the upper extremity, the radial and ulnar arteries supply deep and superficial palmar arcades that act as large anastomoses.

The venous drainage of the fingers is through deep and superficial systems, with the former corresponding to the arterial supply. The nail fold capillary network is like the normal cutaneous plexus, though the capillary loops are more horizontal and visible throughout their length.

Glomus bodies are thermoregulatory plexuses of cavernous blood vessels and smooth muscle cells. They are constituted by an arteriovenous anastomosis that includes the afferent artery and the Sucquet-Hoyer canal, surrounded by epithelioid cells, smooth muscle cells, nervous supply, and an efferent vein, which connect outside the glomus capsule. The nail bed is richly supplied with glomus bodies, where they are presumed to function in thermoregulation.

**Nerve Supply of the Nail Unit**

The periungual soft tissues are innervated by the dorsal branches of paired digital nerves, with the palmar and plantar surfaces supplied by corresponding palmar and plantar nerve branches.

**Histology of the Nail Unit**

The nail plate is characterized by a modified stratum corneum.

The nail bed epithelium is composed of a monocellular basal layer and a spinous layer. Scant melanocytes with a basal distribution may be present.

The hyponychium refers to the epidermis underlying the free margin of the nail. Histologically, the hyponychium shows thick epithelium, including the stratum granulosum and basal melanocytes. The isthmus is the transitional zone between the distal nail bed and the hyponychium. It is characterized by longitudinal ridges (similar to the nail bed), discontinuous and thin granular layer, a thin compartment of pale corneocytes, and transitional keratin expression.

**Dermoscopic Correlation with Anatomy, Physiology & Histology of the Nail Unit**

At lower magnification, the nail folds appear pale pink with a smooth surface, and the cuticle is a transparent, transverse band that seals the nail plate to the proximal nail fold. At higher magnification, there are hairpin-shaped capillary vessels parallel to the skin surface. Nailfold capillaries are best visualized with the aid of polarized video-dermatoscopes on the fourth or fifth digits (as these have the thinnest nail folds).

The nail plate appears pale pink with a smooth, shiny surface, though some longitudinal striations are normal in elderly individuals.

The hyponychium is best visualized using tangential dermoscopy, in which the dermatoscope is fixed at an angular slant.