# Continuing Education Activity

Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome is a rare lung disorder characterized by a reduction in the pulmonary vasculature and alveolar hyperdistention, with or without the presence of bronchiectasis. It is believed to be the result of childhood bronchiolitis obliterans. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in prompt diagnosis and improving outcomes of patients affected by this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the radiological features of Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome.
- Summarize the usual presentation of Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome.
- Describe the management strategies available for Swayer-James-MacLeod syndrome.
- Outline the role of the interprofessional team in improving the management and outcomes in patients with Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome.

# Introduction

Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome (SJMS), also known as Swyer-James syndrome or hyperlucent lung syndrome, is an uncommon syndrome of unilateral functional hypoplasia of the pulmonary vasculature and emphysema, with or without associated bronchiectasis.

This rare lung condition is characterized by the radiographic hyperlucent appearance of a single pulmonary lobe or the entire lung. It is considered to arise as a postinfectious complication of bronchiolitis obliterans in childhood.

# Etiology

Initially, Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome was believed to be congenital in origin, secondary to inborn hypoplasia of the pulmonary artery. Although its definitive cause remains uncertain, it is now widely accepted to be a rare complication of childhood respiratory infections, most commonly bronchiolitis obliterans or pneumonitis. The causative agents implicated in the recurrent pulmonary infections include viruses (measles, respiratory syncytial virus, influenza A, Paramyxovirus morbillivirus, adenovirus types 3, 7, and 21) and bacteria (Bordetella pertussis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae).

# Epidemiology

Due to its rarity, little is known about the overall incidence of Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome. Despite its first characterization in 1953, the available literature comprises mostly individual case reports and series. One study reported a prevalence of 0.01% in a series of 17,450 reviewed chest radiographs.

# Pathophysiology

**Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome**, also known as**Swyer-James syndrome**and**Bret syndrome,**is considered a result of postinfectious obliterative bronchiolitis.

Bronchiolitis obliterans (or obliterative bronchiolitis) describes a clinical syndrome of small airway obstruction that is irreversible to bronchodilators. It is triggered by the injury of the bronchiolar epithelium and possibly the adjacent alveoli. This damage, which occurs during early childhood, hinders the normal development of the alveolar ducts.

The injury may be caused by a range of factors, with respiratory infections playing a major role in Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome. While complete recovery is possible, the repair process may lead to a surplus proliferation of granulation tissue, resulting in narrowing or complete obliteration of the small airways. Unilateral recurrent small airway obstruction involving terminal bronchi and bronchioles occurring early in life triggers an inflammatory response, which leads to the development of submucosal fibrosis.

The other, and perhaps more important, factor responsible for the radiographic hyperlucency of a single hemithorax is the reduction of the pulmonary blood flow. Fibrosis of the interalveolar septae leads to obstruction of the pulmonary capillary bed and reduces blood flow to the major pulmonary artery branches. Moreover, hyperinflation of alveoli, as seen in emphysema, creates additional mechanical resistance to blood flow through the capillary beds. Since this process occurs early in life, arterial development is thwarted, resulting in hypoplastic pulmonary vasculature.

Additionally, reduced ventilation of the diseased lung or segment also leads to compensatory vasoconstriction of the pulmonary vessels, leading to a functional restriction of the arterial flow, which contributes further to the radiographic hyperlucency.

# Histopathology

Histopathological studies in patients with Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome (SJMS) are scarce and based solely on the limited number of cases that required surgical intervention.

Histological studies of the diseased lung frequently demonstrate emphysema with dilated bronchioles and cystic dilatation of the alveoli, as well as constrictive bronchiolitis.

# History and Physical

Many patients with Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome are asymptomatic, whereas some suffer from recurrent pulmonary infections. Some patients are diagnosed in childhood, others incidentally during adulthood when undergoing investigations for a different reason (such as the symptoms of asthma or recurrent chest infections).

When symptomatic, patients most often present with recurrent pulmonary infections or exertional dyspnea.

The main physical findings include reduced chest expansion, hyper-resonant on percussion, and decreased breath sounds on the affected side.

# Evaluation

Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome has a broad spectrum of clinical presentations. Because of its rarity, there are no recommended guidelines regarding diagnostic work-up.

- The first line investigation is usually a posteroanterior chest radiograph, which will reveal reduced bronchovascular markings, a small hilar shadow, and hyperlucency of the diseased segment or lobe.

- Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is usually the modality of choice used to assess the extent and distribution of the disease. It may demonstrate emphysema, bullae, bronchiectasis, atelectasis, and scarring.

- A ventilation/perfusion scan may reveal a unilateral matched ventilation and perfusion defect of the diseased area. Some advocate it as the first-line investigation (following a chest radiograph) in the evaluation of patients with suspected Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome.

- CT pulmonary angiography is not essential but would demonstrate hypoplasia of the pulmonary vasculature in the affected lung or segment.

- SJMS commonly shows a restrictive pattern on pulmonary function tests. Patients with bronchiectasis may have a mixed restrictive-obstructive or even predominantly obstructive defect, where the airflow obstruction is irreversible with bronchodilators.

- Testings such as alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency are helpful to exclude rare inherited causes of bronchiectasis/emphysema.

The diagnostic criteria for this syndrome require one of the following:

- Unilateral loss of lung volume with hyperlucency as demonstrated by chest X-ray

- Unilateral reduction in vascularity on a computed tomographic scan of the chest

- Unilateral loss of perfusion on technetium Tc 99m lung scan

# Treatment / Management

The management of Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome is patient-centered and delivered using the interprofessional team approach.

Conservative management is the mainstay of treatment.

Prevention and prompt treatment of recurrent respiratory infections: Primary prevention such as pneumococcal and influenza vaccination is necessary.

Surgical intervention is reserved for (1) patients with recurrent pulmonary infections, (2) patients who fail to respond, or (3) patients whose symptoms are not adequately controlled with optimal medical management. Surgical options include pneumonectomy or lung volume reduction surgery, such as lobectomy or segmentectomy.

An interesting new approach has also been proposed in one study, where patients underwent occlusion of the main bronchus while the lung was left in place.

# Differential Diagnosis

The unilateral hyperlucency of the lung can be due to reduced pulmonary blood flow or hyperinflation of terminal airways. Therefore, conditions with one or both of those features can mimic Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome.

The differential diagnosis includes both congenital and acquired lung disorders.

- Congenital lobar emphysema (CLE) is a developmental condition of the lower respiratory tract characterized by alveolar overdistention within one or multiple pulmonary lobes.

- Localized pulmonary interstitial emphysema is similar to CLE but develops as a complication of mechanical ventilation at high airway pressures in infants.

- Pulmonary development abnormalities include pulmonary agenesis, aplasia, and hypoplasia, where a lobe or lung, its bronchi, or vasculature fails to develop completely or partially.

- Poland syndrome is a spectrum of congenital chest wall anomalies of unclear etiology, comprising hypo- or agenesis of the anterior chest wall muscles (such as pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior and intercostal muscles), hypoplasia or absence of ipsilateral ribs, and hypoplasia or aplasia of mammary tissue.

- Finally, SJMS may be mistaken for pneumothorax in severe cases, with reduced breath sounds and hyperlucency on a chest radiograph.

# Prognosis

Patients with SJMS generally have a normal life expectancy. While Swyer-James-MacLeod syndrome has a spectrum of manifestations, its clinical course is largely determined by the presence or absence of bronchiectasis. Patients without or only with cylindrical bronchiectasis often suffer from mild respiratory symptoms and tend to improve spontaneously.

# Complications

The major complication of SJMS is the development of bronchiectasis accompanied by chronic productive cough. Bronchiectasis predisposes patients to further respiratory infections. The presence of bullae also increases the risk of developing a spontaneous pneumothorax and limits the patients' activities in diving or air travel.

As the lung function gradually declines with time, patients may develop type I respiratory failure and require long-term oxygen therapy. This situation has a significant impact on their independence and quality of life.

Finally, patients requiring surgical procedures are at risk of surgical complications such as infection of surgical sites, nerve damage, pneumothorax, emphysema, and surgical emphysema. However, the risks are extremely small, and in all cases reported to date, patients experienced no morbidity as a result of the surgery, and their lung function improved significantly.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- The etiology of SJMS should be explained to patients. Patients should be counseled that the condition was acquired as a result of childhood infections (and not congenital or genetic), and it could not be passed on to patients' offspring; it should thus have no impact on family planning.

- Patients should receive reassurance that they are not to blame for the development of this disorder, as there was nothing they could do to prevent it.

- Smoking cessation is advised to prevent further deterioration of lung function, worsening of emphysema, and development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

- Education on how to recognize the development of respiratory infections early and given a rescue pack of antibiotics to keep at home as prompt treatment of chest infections is crucial. The importance of influenza and pneumococcal vaccination also requires emphasis. During follow-up appointments, the inhaler technique and adherence should be checked, and patients should be given contact details for their community nurse.

Finally, patients should be referred for chest physiotherapy and educated on the importance of adherence to regular chest clearing exercises.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

It is essential for clinicians at outpatient, inpatient, or emergency settings to keep Swyer-James-Macleod syndrome in the differentials for adult or pediatric patients presenting with shortness of breath. A hyperlucent lung field on radiography is alarming; early and correct diagnosis avoids unnecessary invasive procedures (such as chest drain insertion for misdiagnosed pneumothorax) and reduces further deterioration of lung function. The most common and concerning long-term complication of SJMS is recurrent pulmonary infections. Sputum culture following by prompt and effective antibiotic therapy along with symptomatic management is the treatment of choice. In most patients with Swyer-James-Macleod syndrome, treatment is managed by chest physiotherapy, low-dose inhaled corticosteroids, and inhaled bronchodilators. Few recent studies have proposed that lung volume reduction surgery (LRS), including pneumonectomy, lobectomy, or segmentectomy, has been shown to be effective for improving pulmonary function and symptoms.