Dyslipidemia is a risk factor for atherosclerosis and could cause asymptomatic coronary artery or peripheral arterial diseases.

- Causes of dyslipidemia include sedentary living with diets rich in calories, saturated and trans fats, cholesterol, and/or familial (genetic) abnormalities in metabolizing fats.

- Diagnosis is by measuring serum lipid levels (assessing total cholesterol, TGs, and HDL cholesterol and quantified LDL cholesterol and VLDL).

- Screening exams should take place at 9 to 11 years old, then at 17 to 21 years old and 2 to 8 years old (for a significant family history of serious hyperlipidemia, premature coronary artery disease, or other risk factors); adults should have screening starting at 20 years of age, and then every five years.

- Total and HDL cholesterol are assessable while not fasting; however, most patients should have all lipids assessed during fasting, often for 12 hours, for optimal validity and precision.

- The American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology recommend treatment for all patients in the four key risk groups and those who have raised lipid profiles and other risk factors combinations to decrease atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk.

- Management relies on the particular abnormalities in the lipid profile. However, it should always cover optimizing compliance, changing lifestyle (diet modification and physical activity), controlling diabetes and hypertension, quitting smoking, and sometimes in cases with an elevated risk of myocardial infarction or death because of coronary artery disease, low-dose of daily aspirin.

- Lomitapide is a microsomal triglyceride transfer protein inhibitor, which affects secreting TG-rich lipoproteins in the intestine and the liver. The dose starts low and step-by-step, raised almost bi-weekly. Patients should adhere to diets with less than 20% in fat calories.

- Lomitapide might lead to gastrointestinal side effects such as diarrhea, raised liver fats, and increased hepatic enzymes.  Efficacy and safety in patients who lack homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia remain unproven.

- Apheresis is also a frequently used treatment in patients suffering from the HoFH who have limited or no response to medications.

- However, elevated HDL levels have links with lower cardiovascular risk, and it is unclear if therapies that raise the levels of HDL cholesterol would reduce cardiovascular events or death risks.

The above management activities are best accomplished by an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, all working collaboratively and sharing their findings with the other team members to drive optimal patient outcomes with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]