The term "bug bite" is commonly used to denote both bites and stings inflicted by members of the phylum Arthropoda. Arthropods make up the largest division of the animal kingdom, representing approximately 80% of all known animals. Defining characteristics include the presence of an exoskeleton, jointed appendages, and a body composed of specialized regional segments. The four medically significant classes of arthropods are Chilopoda, Diplopoda, Insecta, and Arachnida. Of these, the insects, which represent more than half of all living organisms, and the arachnids have the greatest clinical impact on humans. Erythematous and edematous eruptions along with other dermatological findings such as papules and urticaria represent the most common clinical manifestations of arthropod bites and stings. In some cases, the delivery of toxic venom can result in significant systemic reactions including autonomic instability, neurotoxicity and organ failure. The acute development of anaphylactic reactions can be rapidly fatal, most commonly due to angioedema or circulatory collapse. In these cases, rapid recognition and treatment with epinephrine are critical. The most clinically significant impact of arthropod bites is their ability to serve as vectors for numerous bacterial, viral, and protozoal diseases. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management/prevention of various insect bites, and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the four medically significant classes of arthropods and the members of each class.
- Describe the most common presentations and clinical findings associated with arthropod bites and stings. 
- Identify the historical, symptomatic, and clinical findings associated with acute life-threatening anaphylaxis or severe envenomation. 
- Discuss the role of the health care team in assessing a patient's risk of exposure to arthropods and in educating patients regarding the prevention of arthropod bites and stings.