The pathophysiology of atopy characteristically demonstrates by mast cell activation. Antigen binding to IgE cross-links Fc epsilon RI proteins on mast cells. It activates protein tyrosine kinases (Lyn and Syk) that in turn cause activation of a MAP kinase cascade and a phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C, which catalyzes the release of the following molecules: IP3 and DAG from membrane PIP2. Inositol trisphosphate (IP3) causes the release of intracellular calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum. DAG and calcium activate PKC that phosphorylates substrates such as myosin light chain molecule and thus leads to degradation and release of preformed mediators. MAP kinases and calcium react to activate the enzyme cytosolic phospholipase A2, which stimulates the synthesis of lipid mediators including PGD2, LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4. Ras/MAP kinases in the presence of calcium and PKC cause cytokine gene expression, which releases TNF and other cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13 among others). Lipid mediators, cytokines and histamine cause an inflammatory response.

Basophils and mast cell mediators include biogenic amines and enzymes stored preformed in granules, cytokines and lipid mediators, which are mainly newly synthesized on cell activation. Histamine and other biogenic amines, as well as lipid mediators, induce vascular leakage, and intestinal hypermotility, which are all components of immediate allergic responses. Cytokines and lipids mediators add to inflammation that is part of a late-phase reaction. Enzymes presumably contribute to tissue damage. Activated eosinophils release enzymes as well as cationic proteins that are toxic to parasites and host cells. The thinking is that some eosinophil granule enzymes participate in tissue damage in chronic allergic disorders.

Defective lymphocyte regulation is a possible explanation in allergic dermatitis. Delayed hypersensitivity skin test responses to allergens, in vitro lymphocyte responses to mitogens or allergens, and autologous mixed lymphocyte reactions have all been reported to be defective. It has been reported in atopic dermatitis an increased susceptibility to vaccinia virus, molluscum contagiosum, warts, herpes simplex virus, and dermatophyte skin infections are in harmony with a defect in the T lymphocyte effector mechanism. There are suggestions that an anomalous or defective CD4+ helper T cell population could explain the failure of CD8+ T cells to function as immunosuppressors of the production of IgE.