# Continuing Education Activity

Lacerations occur frequently in childbirth and can involve the perineum, labia, vagina and cervix. Most lacerations will heal without long term complications, but severe lacerations can lead to prolonged pain, sexual dysfunction and embarrassment. Severe lacerations need to be identified and properly repaired at the time of delivery. This activity reviews the prevention, evaluation and repair of perineal lacerations that can occur during childbirth.

**Objectives:**
- Identify multiple different perineal lacerations.
- Identify the risk factors associated with severe perineal lacerations.
- Explain the long term complications associated with severe perineal lacerations.
- Describe the available techniques to prevent severe perineal lacerations.

# Introduction

Perineal trauma is an extremely common and expected complication of vaginal birth. Lacerations can occur spontaneously or iatrogenically, as with an episiotomy, on the perineum, cervix, vagina, and vulva.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The female external genitalia includes the mons pubis, labia minora and majora, clitoris, perineal body, and vaginal vestibule. The perineal body is the region between the anus and the vestibular fossa. It contains the superficial and deep muscles of the perineal membrane and is the most common site of laceration during childbirth.

Perineal lacerations are classified into four basic categories.

First Degree: superficial injury to the vaginal mucosa that may involve the perineal skin.

Second Degree: first-degree laceration involving the vaginal mucosa and perineal body.

Third Degree: second-degree laceration with the involvement of the anal sphincter. This is further classified into three sub-categories:

- A: Less than 50% of the anal sphincter is torn.

- B: Greater than 50% of the anal sphincter is torn.

- C: External and internal anal sphincters are torn.

Fourth Degree: third-degree laceration involving the rectal mucosa.

Severe perineal lacerations, which include third- and fourth-degree lacerations, are referred to as obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS).

# Indications

More than 53-89% of women will experience some form of perineal laceration at the time of delivery.

# Contraindications

Risk factors for perineal lacerations include nulliparity, operative vaginal delivery, midline episiotomy, Asian race, and increased fetal weight.

An episiotomy is a surgical procedure performed at the bedside during the second stage of labor which causes enlargement of the posterior vagina.

The two most common types of episiotomies are midline and mediolateral.

There is insufficient evidence to support the routine use of episiotomy.  Both the World Health Organization and the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists recommended restricted use of episiotomy.

# Equipment

When preparing to repair a vaginal laceration, the health care provider will need appropriate lighting, tissue exposure, and anesthesia for examination and repair.

# Preparation

After every vaginal delivery, the perineum, vagina, and cervix should be carefully examined.

# Technique or Treatment

Most perineal lacerations are sutured, but there is limited evidence to support this practice for first and second-degree lacerations.

When repairing second-degree lacerations, continuous or running suture should be used over interrupted suturing to decrease post-partum pain and the possibility of the patient requiring suture removal.

Third- and fourth-degree lacerations are repaired in a stepwise fashion. In a fourth-degree laceration, the rectal mucosa is reapproximated starting at 1 cm above the apex of the laceration. Care is taken to not penetrate through the rectal mucosa. The anal sphincter is then reapproximated with attention paid to include the fascial sheath of the muscle with the repair. The internal anal sphincter should be repaired separately from the external anal sphincter when possible.

A single dose of a second-generation cephalosporin can be given after any OASIS repair to decrease the patient’s risk of infection and wound breakdown.

Care after any perineal laceration repair, but especially after an OASIS injury, should include pain management, laxatives or stool softeners to avoid constipation and monitoring for signs of urinary retention.

# Complications

The most common complication of a perineal laceration is bleeding. Most bleeding can be quickly controlled with pressure and surgical repair.

Beyond bleeding, immediate complications also include pain and suturing time leading to delayed mother-child bonding.

Long term complications include pain, urinary or anal incontinence, and delayed return to sexual intercourse due to dyspareunia.

Approximately 25% of women who suffer from an OASIS injury will experience wound dehiscence in the first six weeks post-partum and 20% will suffer from a wound infection. Rectovaginal and/or rectoperineal fistulas may develop in women who had an unidentified or poorly healed OASIS injuries.

The time it takes a woman to return to normal sexual function after perineal trauma varies but has been correlated to the severity of the laceration. The more severe the laceration, the longer the return to normal sexual function.

# Clinical Significance

Perineal trauma can have long term effects on a woman's life and well being. Multiple studies have found that some women who experience severe perineal lacerations suffer long term psychological trauma and social isolation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Multiple strategies have been proposed for the prevention of perineal trauma at the time of vaginal delivery. There is no consensus on the best ways to prevent or reduce the severity of lacerations.

Perineal massage has been shown to decrease the incidence of lacerations requiring suture, although the reduction was minor.

Perineal support or a “hands-on” approach, can be protective of the perineum and decrease the severity of perineal lacerations at the time of delivery.

Delayed or immediate pushing after a woman reached ten centimeters of dilation showed no difference in the incidence of perineal lacerations. However, there was a higher incidence of delivery with intact perineum in women who delivered in the lateral position with delayed pushing compared to immediate pushing in the lithotomy position.

Warm compresses can be used during the second stage of labor to decrease the risk of third- and fourth-degree lacerations.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Post-partum care providers must ensure they are addressing and validating any concerns a woman may have about her perineal trauma experienced during childbirth. A woman's physical and psychological health should be discussed. Severe perineal trauma can have long term effects on a woman's sexuality, overall wellbeing, and relationship with her partner.

Women who have suffered an OASIS injury in a previous pregnancy need to be counseled about the risk of recurrence of injury with subsequent pregnancies. Elective cesarean section can be discussed as an option, but the low risk of another OASIS injury should be carefully weighed against the risk of cesarean delivery.

The health care team should be prepared and willing to ask about and treat any complications a woman may have after childbirth. Some women feel embarrassed and ashamed about the problems they encounter and will not bring up concerns to their care providers.