# Introduction

Fetal circulation is unlike adult circulation as it uses physiological shunts to carry oxygenated blood to tissues and bypass developing organs. The viability of the fetus heavily relies on these shunts to adequately perfuse developing tissues and organs, especially the brain and heart. The ductus venosus is a shunt that allows oxygenated blood in the umbilical vein to bypass the liver and is essential for normal fetal circulation.

# Development

During fetal development, when fetal-placental circulation gets established, blood flow between the fetus and placenta occurs through the paired umbilical arteries and the unpaired single umbilical vein. The umbilical vein directs oxygenated blood from the placenta towards the fetus, and the umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood back to the placenta (see figure). When the umbilical vein enters the fetal umbilicus, it branches into a large ductus venosus and a small portal sinus. The ductus venosus carrying oxygenated blood enters the inferior vena cava directly and subsequently empties the well-oxygenated blood into the left side of the heart through the foramen ovale between the right and the left atrium. The small portal sinus supplies the liver itself with oxygenated blood, which returns to the inferior vena cava with deoxygenated blood through the hepatic vein.

Fetal rat liver models illustrate the development of the hepatic vascular system by gestation day 14 with one ductus venous in the liver parenchyma.

# Function

The primary function of the ductus venosus is to carry oxygenated blood from the umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava and, ultimately, the left heart for systemic circulation while the portal sinus supplies oxygenated blood to the liver itself.

# Testing

In utero, ductus venosus blood flow waveforms are assessed using Doppler ultrasound to determine the patency of the shunt. It is recommended to use two positions for optimal results.

1. A midsagittal view with the fetus supine to identify the ductus venosus, umbilical vein, and inferior vena cava.

2. A transverse plane abdominal Doppler to identify the ductus venosus.

Flow patterns may vary even in normal pregnancies.

# Pathophysiology

Abnormal fetal venous circulation is observable in patients with the absence of the ductus venosus with the main abnormalities being

- Umbilical vein bypasses the hepatic system and draining into the right atrium

- Umbilical vein connects directly to the inferior vena cava via iliac veins

- Umbilical vein drains into the portal circulation

Researchers have noted that decreased or abnormal blood flow through the ductus venosus during the first trimester has links with aneuploidies such as trisomy 13, 18, 21, and Turner syndrome.

# Clinical Significance

The absence or dysfunction of the ductus venosus can lead to various disease states, fetal anomalies, and adverse outcomes. The absence of this shunt is associated with fetal hydrops, chromosomal aberration, in utero heart failure, and portal vein absence.

Failure of this shunt to close postpartum leads to a condition called patent ductus venosus, which may lead to galactosemia, hypoxemia, hepatic dysfunction, and encephalopathy with hyperammonemia.

Rare familial cases of patients with liver disease were found to have a patent ductus venosus, which suggests an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.

Maternal diabetes may also adversely affect flow through the ductus venosus with an increased risk for fetal macrosomia and perinatal complications.