The causes of lens-induced inflammation include immune response to lens proteins following exposure due to conditions including:

- Hypermature or mature cataract with leakage of lens protein through an intact capsule,

- Incomplete removal of cataracts, and

- Trauma.

Most cases of lens-induced inflammation are reported in developing nations due to less access to medical facilities and delays in cataract surgery.****The retained cortical matter was also more common with older surgical procedures. Improvement in microsurgical techniques has led to a lesser incidence of phacogenic uveitis.

Chronic uveitis may still occur after modern surgery due to either retained cortex or nucleus pieces in the anterior segment, even after uncomplicated surgery where the posterior capsule is intact. Dislocation of the lens matter (partially or as nuclear pieces and/or cortical matter) into the vitreous cavity may occur due to posterior capsular rupture or zonular dehiscence and may induce an inflammatory reaction, the extent being determined by the size of the fragment, intraocular manipulations, patients' inflammatory response, and other comorbidities. In recent times, common causes of lens-induced uveitis after phacoemulsification include lens matter drop in the vitreous cavity or a small overlooked piece of nucleus or lens matter in the inferior angle of the anterior chamber. These complications are more common in eyes with small pupils, floppy iris, pseudoexfoliation, hard cataracts, and zonular weakness.

Trauma causing rupture of the anterior capsule of the lens and exposure of lens proteins to the ocular tissues also causes an inflammatory reaction. Initially, uveitis may be unrecognized after trauma due to the presence of hyphema and corneal edema. Small perforation of the lens capsule may present later with a total cataract and severe inflammation. Cases of lens-induced uveitis have been reported in sympathetic ophthalmia, microphthalmia (persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous), after metastatic endophthalmitis in septic pneumonia, choroidal melanoma, in association with intraocular inflammatory mass, congenital cataracts, and after repeated intravitreal injections for diabetic macular edema in a patient with a history of surgery for congenital cataracts.

The proposed mechanism in most such cases is a violation of the lens capsule resulting in exposure of the lens proteins. Though dropped lens (with an intact capsule) in the vitreous cavity usually does not incite inflammation (as noted in Marfan syndrome), lens-induced inflammation has also been reported in cases of posterior dislocation of the lens that did not have a compromise of the lens capsule.