**Kidney Development**

Embryonic folding during the fourth week of development marks the beginning of the urinary tract with the formation of a longitudinal mass known as the urogenital ridge. The ridge can divide into parts depending on the system it forms; the nephrogenic cord will form the urinary tract while the gonadal ridge will develop into the reproductive system. Beginning rostrally and progressing caudally, three kidneys will form over a few weeks within the nephrogenic cord: pronephros, mesonephros, and metanephros.

Pronephros development begins in the fourth week; however, they will not form functioning kidneys in humans. Pronephric ducts develop in the cervical region of the nephrogenic cord before extending and fusing with the cloaca. Adjacent to the pronephric ducts, the intermediate mesoderm will condense to form non-functional nephron units, known as pronephroi, which will regress by day 25.

The mesonephric duct, also known as the Wolffian duct, now begins development in the next most caudal region of the nephrogenic cord. Similarly, the adjacent intermediate mesoderm condenses to form mesonephroi. Although approximately 40 pairs of mesonephroi form, only those located between L1-L3 continue to differentiate to form functional excretory units.

The third and final kidney, the metanephric kidney, begins development during the fifth week and will continue to differentiate to form the permanent kidneys. The mesonephric duct extends to fuse with the cloaca, thus inducing the sacral intermediate mesoderm to form an aggregate known as the metanephric blastema. At the beginning of week five, the metanephric blastema secretes a protein known as glial-cell derived neurotropic Factor (Gdnf), thus inducing an outgrowth in the mesonephric duct known as the ureteric bud; Gdnf acts as a ligand for cell surface receptor RET and on its co-receptor, Gdnf Family Receptor alpha 1 (Gfr-alpha1) which are both strongly expressed in the mesonephric duct.

During the sixth week of development, the ureteric bud begins a branching cascade which will subsequently create collecting tubules and the basic renal architecture. The first bifurcation occurs during the sixth week and forms the renal pelvis as well as the cranial and caudal lobes of the kidney. The next four bifurcations coalesce to form the major calyces, while the following four bifurcations coalesce in the seventh-week form the minor calyces. Branching gets induced by Gdnf acting on the RET expressing cells in the tips of the ureteric bud; each individual branch acquires a blastemal cap from which Gdnf gets secreted. This cascade continues until week 32, thus producing approximately 1 million to 3 million collecting tubules.

Functional nephrons begin to develop when the tip of each collecting tubule induces the blastemal caps to form nephric vesicles. These will then develop into nephric tubules consisting of an S-shaped Bowman’s capsule, proximal and distal tubules, and the loop of Henle. Development of glomerulus begins when podocyte precursors lining the S-shaped body secrete VEGF2, thus attracting endothelial cells and generating a primitive vascular tuft

During early development, the kidneys lie close together in the sacral region of the embryo. However, as the abdomen enlarges, the kidneys are drawn apart and ascend to their final position in the lumbar region between weeks six to nine. The kidneys receive vascular supply from branches of the dorsal aorta called renal arteries; during their ascent, the caudal branches degenerate, and the kidneys receive their blood from successively higher branches.

**Bladder and Ureter Development**

The development of the bladder begins during week four when the urogenital septum divides the cloaca into two parts, the rectum posteriorly and the urogenital sinus anteriorly. The urogenital sinus will continue to grow to form the bladder, with the inferior end forming the urethra. As the mesonephric duct fuses with the cloaca, part of the duct gets incorporated into the posterior wall of the bladder. Although the ureteric bud is an outgrowth from the mesonephric duct, it has a separate opening into the urinary bladder. As the kidneys ascend, the ureters elongate and open into the bladder superiorly, while the roots of the mesonephric ducts are carried inferiorly, before fusing to form the trigone region. Endodermal cells from the urogenital sinus soon replace the mesodermal cells epithelium of the trigone region, thus completing development.