Cannabis sativa or Indian hemp (subfamily Cannaboideae of family Moraceae) is an annual herbaceous plant native to central and western Asia. The plant is cultivated for its medicinal properties, and hemp is a natural textile fiber. The plant contains over 400 chemical compounds, of which approximately 80 are biologically active chemical molecules. The most important cannabis compounds are cannabinoids formed by a terpene combined with resorcinol or, according to a different nomenclature, by a benzopyranic ring system. There are about sixty cannabinoids, of which the most important psychoactive compound is tetrahydrocannabinol (TCH), particularly the isomer delta (Δ9-THC). Other identified compounds are cannabidiol (CBD), cannabigerol (CBG), cannabinol (CBN), cannabichromene (CBC), and olivetol. In addition to cannabinoids, the plant contains terpenoids such as beta-myrcene, beta-caryophyllene, d-limonene, linalool, piperidine, and p-cymene, as well as flavonoids such as quercetin.

Of note, in contrast with Δ9-THC, CBD is nonintoxicating as it does not present psychoactive activity. Again, it exerts several beneficial pharmacological effects. The compound, in fact, has analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities mediated by the inhibition of cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase. The anti-inflammatory action is several hundred times higher than that of acetylsalicylic acid. Furthermore, cannabidiol inhibits the synthesis of leukotriene TXB4 in polymorphonuclear cells.

To date, although in a recent document the FDA highlights the potential beneficial effects of cannabis derivatives, the agency has not approved a marketing application for cannabis, whereas it approved three synthetic cannabis-related drug products: a product containing dronabinol, dronabinol, or nabilone) and the cannabis-derived compound CBD. A licensed healthcare provider must prescribe these approved drugs per an FDA report.

In brief, the FDA-approved products are:

- Synthetic cannabis-related drug products

- Two products containing the active ingredient dronabinol (a synthetic Δ9-THC) for the treatment of anorexia associated with weight loss in AIDS patients.
- Another product that contains nabilone and is prescribed for the treatment of nausea and vomiting associated with anticancer chemotherapy

- The cannabis-derived compound CBD

Currently, CBD has only been approved for children ages two and older who suffer from the seizure disorders Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome.

Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is first diagnosed between the ages of 3 and 5 and persists into adulthood. It is characterized by multiple types of seizures, with the most common being tonic seizures. On EEG, it has a characteristic slow spike-wave (<3 hertz) with a spike or sharp wave. The exact pathophysiology is unknown. First-line treatment consists of various anti-epileptic drugs, with CBD being adjuvant therapy. Children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome usually have learning and intellectual disabilities.

Dravet syndrome is a diagnosis rendered around age 1 in children with frequent febrile seizures. Throughout the course of the disease, other seizures may develop, including status epilepticus. EEG will initially be normal before progressing to slowing and severe generalized polyspikes. Dravet syndrome appears to be caused by a nonsense mutation in the SCN1A gene, though there are cases without this mutation. Treatment was purely symptomatic, with benzodiazepines and anti-epileptics prescribed to prevent the development of status epilepticus. Children with Dravet syndrome often have motor, intellectual, and psychological disabilities.

Current clinical studies are investigating the use of CBD in mood disorders such as anxiety, control for chronic pain, anti-inflammatory diseases, neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer and Parkinson disease, and antitumorigenic properties. However, none of these trials have yet resulted in FDA approval of CBD oil to treat.