Vestibular rehabilitation therapy is most effective when origins are peripheral, but benefits for central disorders have been demonstrated, with further research needed to solidify these findings.

Central vestibular hypofunction, depending on the nature of origin, may require medication management throughout care.

Several oculomotor assessments exist and should be used in conjunction with the patient's history to differentiate peripheral versus central disorders. Central disorders typically display oculomotor disturbances, including difficulties with smoothing pursuit, saccades, gaze-holding, and nystagmus specific to central disorders.

Vestibular rehabilitation exercises fall into two main categories:

- Exercises for canalith repositioning for BPPV, and

- Exercises for vestibular hypofunction.

BPPV screening largely includes Dix-Hallpike testing, as posterior canal involvement is the most common form, as well as side-lying testing for those who cannot tolerate neck extension (with tests also appropriate for anterior canal involvement, though this is rare).

The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is completed as follows:

- Position the patient in long sitting with the head rotated 45 degrees toward the tested side.

- Assist the patient into a supine position with the head held in 45 degrees rotation, and the neck extended 30 degrees (typically off the edge of the plinth).

- Observation of nystagmus/reports of vertigo.

The Sidelying test is completed as follows:

- Position the patient seated with the head rotated 45 degrees away from the tested side.

- Briskly assisted the patient into a side-lying position, with the side being tested in contact with the support surface.

- Observation of nystagmus/reports of vertigo.

The horizontal roll test is utilized to screen for horizontal canal involvement, with the testing procedure as follows:

- Position the patient in a supine position with their head in midline and flexed to 30 degrees.

- Examiner quickly rotates the patient's head 90 degrees to one side.

- Observation of nystagmus is completed noting direction.

- Examiner returns the head to the midline.

- The examiner rotates the head 90 degrees to the opposite side as initially tested.

- Observation of nystagmus is again completed, with the side eliciting the strongest symptoms being the affected side.

Through test findings, including onset, direction, and duration of nystagmus, clinicians should be able to determine if the nature of the involvement is canalithiasis (otoconia displaced in semicircular canal) or cupulolithiasis (otoconia adhered to cupula), with canalithiasis thought to be more common. Canalithiasis demonstrates symptoms with a latency of onset as well as decreased severity with prolonged positioning due to the otolith moving and settling within the canal, whereas cupulolithiasis typically does not demonstrate latency in onset of symptoms nor a reduction of symptom severity with prolonged positioning due to the otoconia continually dragging the cupula down throughout positioning. Regarding horizontal canal involvement, depending on the direction in the nystagmus beats, the type of BPPV can be determined. Geotropic nystagmus, or nystagmus that beats toward the earth, corresponds with canalithiasis, while ageotropic nystagmus, or nystagmus that beats away from the earth, corresponds with cupulolithiasis.

Treatment maneuvers for canalithiasis include the Epley maneuver for posterior canal involvement and the barbecue (or barrel) roll, and the Gufoni (sometimes referred to as Appiani) maneuver for horizontal canal involvement, with the roll maneuver having reduced use in certain demographics due to advanced positioning requirements.

The positioning for the Epley maneuver is as follows:

- Position the patient in long sitting with the head rotated 45 degrees toward the affected side.

- Assist the patient into a supine position with their head held in 45 degrees rotation and neck extended 30 degrees (typically off the edge of the plinth).

- Hold this position for 1 to 2 minutes.

- While maintaining extension, assist the patient in rotating their head 90 degrees to the opposite side.

- Assist the patient in continuing to roll their body into side-lying on the side opposite of their affected ear, with their head rotated an additional 90 degrees (facing down).

- Hold this position for 1 to 2 minutes.

- Assist the patient in the seated position.

The positioning for the Gufoni maneuver is as follows:

- Position the patient in a sitting position.

- Assist the patient in quickly lying on the unaffected side.

- Hold this position for 1 minute.

- Quickly rotate the patient's head 45 degrees down.

- Hold this position for 2 minutes.

- Slowly assist the patient into the sitting position.

Treatment maneuvers for cupulolithiasis include the Semont liberatory maneuver for posterior canal involvement and various treatments for horizontal canal involvement, including the new Gufoni maneuver, Zuma maneuver, head shaking maneuver, and modified Semont maneuver, with horizontal cupulolithiasis being less prevalent and thus the less established treatment protocol. Anterior canal involvement is considered rare, and as such, data on treatment maneuvers is lacking, some of which include the reverse Eply or Yacovino maneuvers. It should be noted that in treating cupulolithiasis, the adhered otoconia should be detached from the cupula and thus converted into canalithiasis with the follow-up canalithiasis maneuver required to transport the otoconia back to the utricle successfully.

Exercises for vestibular hypofunction include two subcategories: gaze stabilization exercises and habituation exercises. Gaze stabilization exercises include adaptation and substitution exercises. Recall that the vestibulo-ocular reflex allows the body to maintain focus on a target while the head is in motion.

The gain refers to the ratio of head-to-eye movement that allows a target to stay stable in the field of vision, which should be 1 to 1.

Habituation exercises involve repeated exposure to noxious stimuli to decrease symptoms related to stimuli over time. It is important to note that habituation exercises must be specific to patient symptoms, depending on the type, intensity, and direction of provocative stimuli. Through repeated exposure to these stimuli, the central nervous system can undergo compensation, and relief from noxious symptoms will follow. This is potentially achievable through therapy-driven exercises incorporating specific noxious stimuli and the use of technology (virtual reality immersion, optokinetic discs, videos of busy environments, etc.).

Vestibular rehab also encompasses walking for endurance and exercises to improve gait and overall balance. These exercises are intended to facilitate improvement in somatosensory and visual systems to substitute for missing or injured vestibular functions. This can be achieved through a variety of methods, including the use of foam or uneven surfaces during gait and functional tasks, decreasing base of support (such as Romberg or tandem stance, narrow stance, or single leg stance), perturbations/weight shifting to facilitate balance recovery, and balance activities under changing visual stimuli (such as a busy background or eyes closed). General conditioning is often included in vestibular rehab as well because many individuals avoid provoking motion and thus become deconditioned. Though a critical component to address a possible undesirable side effect of vestibular hypofunction, general conditioning alone has not been proven beneficial to those with vestibular hypofunction.