- Ultrasound should be performed to localize the crystals and the skin marked at the planned needle entry site.

- The skin should be sterilized with a topical solution such as chlorhexidine, and a sterile drape should be placed around the procedure site.

- The ultrasound probe should be covered with a sterile cover.

- The skin should be anesthetized with 1% lidocaine. The subcutaneous soft tissues can also be anesthetized at the site of the proposed needle tract.

- Under ultrasound guidance, an 18-gauge needle should be advanced to the location of the coarse calcifications seen on ultrasound. Aspiration of the crystals should be attempted first without lavage.

- After attempts at aspiration, sterile saline should be pulsed through the needle, and then aspiration should be attempted through the same needle (lavage). The saline injection helps in the aspiration of calcium deposits. Care is necessary to confirm the visualization of multiple aspirate samples of calcifications.

- Lavage can be continued (with multiple needles) until a significant amount of calcium is felt to have been fragmented and aspirated.

- Upon completing the barbotage and lavage, a small volume of lidocaine can be injected into the residual calcium crystal deposits. However, the steroid should not be injected into the tendon as it can weaken the tendon and lead to rupture.

- A mixture of 1 mL of betamethasone 6 mg/mL and 2 mL of bupivacaine 0.5% should then be injected into the subacromial/subdeltoid bursa. This helps with pain relief in the event that calcium crystals are released into the bursa.

- Hemostasis should be achieved, and the placement of a sterile dressing is the final step.

**Points to Consider**

- A two-needle technique can also be employed, with two needles placed at the site of the calcific deposits: one needle is used to inject saline and the other used for aspiration. This would require an assistant to either hold the ultrasound probe or control/place one of the needles.

- A high-frequency (5 to 12 MHz) transducer is often preferred in performing the procedure. This is because high-frequency transducers allow for better resolution of superficial structures, while lower frequency transducers are used for the assessment of deeper structures such as abdominal or pelvic ultrasound.

- Residual calcifications can (and usually do) persist after the lavage. However, the procedure generally results in decreased pain and more rapid resorption of the crystals, although some literature suggests similar outcomes with conservative treatment and barbotage.

- If the needle tip is difficult to visualize when situated at the crystal, needle movement can help localize the needle tip. Visualization of the needle is also improved by having the needle more parallel to the probe. This can be accomplished by "heel-toeing" (depressing one side of the transducer more than the other). Alternatively, some ultrasound machines and transducers allow for beam-steering, which can have a similar effect.

- Visualization of the needle tip can be difficult due to the acoustic features of the crystalline deposits.

- Fragmented calcium often appears as milk-like fluid or punctate solid debris within the lavage syringe.

- Ill-defined calcification, which suggests early and acute disease, is most responsive to this procedure.