The majority of patients with a parathyroid adenoma present with hypercalcemia and complaints of bony pain, depression, and abdominal pain. The diagnosis is often made by the presence of hypercalcemia in blood, followed by an imaging test of the neck. If the condition is missed, it has very high morbidity. Thus, an interprofessional approach is recommended. A streamlined approach consisting of a radiologist, endocrinologist, surgeon, and internist are necessary to make the diagnosis. After the surgery, the role of the pharmacist and nurse is important. The nurse must be fully aware of the symptoms of hypocalcemia, which often occur within the first 24 to 72 hours following surgery. The other two complications that a nurse must know include hoarseness due to injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve and a hematoma around the neck from bleeding. The latter requires an immediate call to the surgeon for the evacuation of the blood as if delayed, it can lead to respiratory arrest. The pharmacist plays a role in the management of hypocalcemia with either oral supplements or IV calcium gluconate. The pharmacist must educate the patient on the importance of compliance with calcium; otherwise, it can lead to significant bone wasting.

**Evidence-Base Outcomes**

The prognosis for a cure of hyperparathyroidism with traditional bilateral neck exploration is over 95%, with complication rates under 3%. With the advent of minimally invasive techniques, several randomized clinical trials have been conducted in the past ten years to assess if a minimally invasive technique is as efficacious as a traditional treatment. These studies have shown that a minimally invasive technique has similar cure and complication rates as traditional therapy and additionally confers decreased operative time with better cosmetic outcomes.