Several associations have been reported along with nevus comedonicus and as part of the nevus comedonicus syndrome. Nevus comedonicus syndrome refers to nevus comedonicus presenting with extra cutaneous manifestations usually involving the central nervous system, skeletal system, teeth, and eyes.  Common central nervous system abnormalities reported include- seizure disorders, delayed mental development,  electroencephalogram abnormalities, microcephaly and transverse myelitis. Skeletal abnormalities include syndactyly, supernumerary digits, scoliosis, and spina bifida. The most common ocular manifestation described is a cataract. Oligodontia is the most reported dental abnormality.  Nevus comedonicus syndrome is considered to be a part of the epidermal nevus syndrome which covers extra cutaneous manifestations occurring in association with conditions like nevus comedonicus, verrucous epidermal nevus, and nevus sebaceous. The other syndromes considered to be part of the group of epidermal nevus syndromes include Schimmelpenning syndrome, phacomatosis pigmentokeratotica, angora hair nevus syndrome, and Becker nevus syndrome.

Hidradenitis suppurative can occur along with nevus comedonicus. Hidradenitis suppurative-like lesions complicating nevus comedonicus have been described and mechanical stress has been postulated as a trigger for their development. Other rare systemic associations reported with nevus comedonicus include Alagille syndrome, spinal dysraphism, hypothyroidism, and Paget bone disease. Primary dermatological conditions occurring in association with nevus comedonicus include basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, linear morphea, lichen striatus, accessory breast tissue, epidermolytic hyperkeratosis, nevoid hyperkeratosis of areola, hidradenoma papilliform, syringocystadenoma papilliform, epidermoid cysts, cutaneous horns, hemangiomas, ichthyosis, leukoderma, pilar sheath tumor, dilated pore of Winer, trichoepithelioma, and other epidermal nevi.