The beginning of coronary artery disease is generally attributed to a chronic inflammatory process, from the earliest formation of the fatty streak to the final formation of a fibrous-atheroma. This process gets incited by endothelial dysfunction. It can result from one or a combination of multiple of the following factors – sheer stress, oxidation injury due to free radicals, genetic alterations, chronic infection, or hypercholesterolemia. These inciting factors are thought to be due to uncontrolled hypertension, diabetes, smoking, and certain genetic factors.

After initial insult, the endothelium releases inflammatory cytokines and becomes highly receptive to the leukocytes, especially monocytes, and platelets. The monocytes attracted to the endothelium, mature to become macrophages and engulf the oxidized LDL particles to form lipid-laden foamy macrophages. Due to continuous inflammation, there is also migration and proliferation of smooth muscles, which finally form a fibrous atheroma. The core of the fibrous atheroma consists of oxidized lipid with macrophages and necrotic tissue that is surrounded by collagen-rich matrix and proliferative smooth muscles.

The continuous process of chronic inflammation and atheroma formation causes the arterial wall to thicken. This thickened arterial wall leads to a compensatory dilation of the artery with no change in the lumen (also called “remodeling”). However, after a prolonged period of remodeling, the arterial wall can no longer dilate. Finally, the lesion alters the blood by intruding in the lumen and decreasing the area.

**Evolving plaque Complications**

- Thin cap or large lipid atheroma (greater than 40% of plaque volume) increases the chances of coronary plaque disruption followed by thrombotic occlusion plaque

- Thrombus in the lumen caused by endothelial erosion

- Intra-plaque hemorrhage causing expansion of plaque volume

- Lumen thrombus caused by protruding calcific nodules from complex fibro–lipid–calcific architecture and calcified shell