There is a lack of agreement among ophthalmologists on optimal pterygia management in both medical and surgical terms. Medical care is given to relieve the patient from the inflammatory symptoms and reduce the persistent discomfort that persists. Throughout the years, medical treatment for pterygium made use of relatively benign agents such as bile and urine and more toxic agents such as lead-acid, mercuric lanolin, radiotherapy, thiotepa, 5-fluorouracil, and more recently, mitomycin C in a search for a safe and effective therapy.

Medical treatment in modern times includes lubrication with artificial tear drops or decongestants to provide short-term comfort and a slight improvement in cosmetics. Topical NSAIDs, eye drop loteprednol, brings added comfort. Vasoconstrictive agents minimize redness and enhance the appearance and add antihistamines to the decongestant drops to help prevent the effect of histamine associated edema and itching.

However, surgical treatment remains the preferred option. Operation with pterygium was mentioned as far back as 1000 B.C. In patients with pterygium, the reasons for surgery are decreased vision due to visual axis encroachment, chronic pain, persistent inflammation, abnormal astigmatism, restrictive ocular motility, and cosmesis.

The patient was prepared to lie recumbent on an operating table during Susruta's surgical operation, and the pterygium was loosened and irritated by sprinkling powdered salt into the eye.

Few examples of past surgeries include Celsus's procedure (Rome—50 A.D.), which used a thread with a sawing motion to separate the pterygium from the ocular tissues toward the pupil. Paul's operation (Paulus Aegineta, Eye Surgeon, Greece, 7th century) used a small hook to seize the pterygium.

Many surgical techniques have been used since past to present, though none is universally accepted because of variable recurrence rates. In most of the studies, it has been seen that 90% recurrences occur between the first and the third month.

Pterygium surgery has always remained a concern for the operating surgeon because of its recurrence and cosmesis post-surgery.

Grading of the cosmetic results after pterygium surgery was done in the study conducted by Prabhasawat et al. which is as follows:

- Grade 1: Appearance of the operated site is not different from the normal appearance

- Grade 2: Some fine episcleral vessels are seen in the excised area extending up to but not beyond the limbus and without any fibrous tissue

- Grade 3: Additional fibrous tissues are seen in the excised area that does not invade the cornea

- Grade 4: A true recurrence with fibrovascular tissue invading the cornea is seen

Hirst, in his study, graded the cosmetic results post-surgery into 6 grades, which is as follows:

Normal: Eye, which is quiet and white with no abnormal vasculature, conjunctival changes, or corneal opacities.

Excellent: Eye in which a white opacity in the cornea is visible.

Good: Eye in which there may or may not be a white corneal opacity, but where the eye exhibits some conjunctival vascular injection, not only nasally at the possible pterygium site but also temporally, suggesting nonsurgical attribution.

Fair: Eye in which conjunctival vascular changes i.e., injection or plexus, is present only at the nasal surgical site.

Poor: Eye in which there are not only nasal conjunctival vascular abnormalities but also a spectrum of other conjunctival changes, from simple scarring to puckering nasally.

Upgradeable: Eye, where the nasal area is out of focus, making a true grading difficult.

Regardless of the problem of recurrence of pterygium, various surgical methods have been described for the removal.

**Avulsion Technique**

The bulbar conjunctiva at the edge of the scleral portion of pterygium is incised with Westcott scissors, and this portion is freed from the underlying sclera by blunt dissection. The freed portion of the pterygium is then grasped with toothed forceps and torn from the cornea, and a second forceps grasps the perilimbal tissue away to give counter traction. Residual tissue is scraped from the - corneal surface with a beaver blade, and the surface is then polished with a diamond burr. The recurrence rate (23% to 75%) is similar to other techniques for primary removal.

**Simple excision technique**has a recurrence rate of 30 percent to 100 percent.

**The Bare Sclera Technique**

This method was described by D'Ombrain in 1948.

Verma et al. reported the recurrence rate as 48% when applied together with the bare sclera technique on the cases with recurrent pterygium and around 3% with the use of intraoperative mitomycin C.

In the 1960s, radiotherapy with strontium 90 application was used commonly and did reduce the recurrence rate to a range of 6.4% to approximately 12%. However, it was not realized until decades later that there was an unacceptable rate of scleromalacia of 13%, pain, and even secondary endophthalmitis. Although these published series do not seem to favor bare sclera resection alone, this technique is still in use both for therapeutic and research purposes. It is difficult to rationalize the use of these agents for a disease that can be successfully treated with extremely low complication rates with a conjunctival autograft when the reason for their use is speed and simplicity only.

**Primary Closure**

Head and mid-body of the pterygium are excised. It is followed by a tenonectomy. Tenonectomy is extended beneath the conjunctiva to the adjacent rectus muscle. Relaxing conjunctival incisions are created around the limbus, both superiorly and inferiorly. The conjunctiva is then primarily and carefully closed.****The uncommon recurrences (2.1 percent) happened only in 2 cases of wound contamination and in 15 cases of wound dehiscence.

**Transplantation of the Head of the Pterygium**

The hypothesis is that the pterygium's head is the source of its development. In the procedure defined by Mc Reynolds,

**Stocker**described a method of conjunctival z-plasty for primary closure.

**Conjunctival Autograft**

It was first done by Kenyon et al. in 1985.

The use of autologous blood fibrin can be used as an alternative as fibrin glue is costly, and it has the risk of causing infection. Autologous blood fibrin is a synthetic tissue adhesive prepared from a donor plasma, and it was first described for pterygia surgery by Cohen in 1993.

Complications seen with this technique are corneoscleral dellen, graft edema, epithelial cysts, suture granuloma, flap retraction, and necrosis.

**Conjunctival Rotational Autograft (CRA)**

Spaeth first described the advantage of CRA over other graft techniques, namely the preservation of normal conjunctiva in other non-affected areas.

**Limbal Conjunctival Autotransplant (LCAT)**

It is probably the most common procedure to be combined with bare scleral pterygium removal, where the bare area is covered with conjunctiva removed from another area of the bulbar surface.

Limbal conjunctival autograft contains approximately 0.5 mm of limbal and peripheral corneal tissue. A better anatomic and functional result will be achieved by including limbus epithelium in the conjunctival graft, and thus, the barrier function in the limbus will have been ensured once again, and the pterygium recurrence will be minimized.

- The **superior conjunctival autotransplant**has been used widely since the early 1980s and has been associated with a recurrence rate of approximately 2% to 12%, very few complications, and none associated with loss of all vision but is a lengthier and more complex procedure.

- The **inferior conjunctival autotransplants**result in 3.3% to 5.25% recurrence rates with either no recurrence or regrowth of more than 1.5 mm onto the cornea.

The important causes for recurrence after LCAT are cross-graft recurrence, outflanking, reproliferation of previously unexcised pterygial tissue, and transformation of the epithelial graft into the pterygial tissue.

**Limbal Stem Cells Transplantation**

This procedure seems likely to enable the epithelialization of the peripheral cornea, the limbus, and also the neighboring denuded sclera by the corneal epithelium. Maybe the limbal region can then benefit from circumferential migration of limbal cells. Limbal stem cells are not needed to preserve a phenotypically stable limbus until the underlying tissue threatens it.

**Amniotic Membrane Grafting**

It is also used to avoid the recurrence of pterygium. However, the exact mechanism which confers its beneficial effect on the amniotic membrane has not yet been established. Due to their anti-inflammatory properties, their encouragement of epithelial development, and their suppression of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), these grafts are believed to facilitate healing and minimize recurrence levels and fibroblast proliferation. The amniotic membrane controls the cytokine rates and growth factors. It presents benefits in wide-area lesions or in situations such as wounds in which conjunctival grafts can not be done, and even in patients for which no transplant can be conducted afterward in terms of glaucoma surgery. Unfortunately, levels of recurrence differ greatly between current research, somewhere between 2.6 percent and 10.7 percent for primary pterygia and as high as 37.5 percent for recurrent pterygia.

Postulating that the reduced risk of recurrence could be attributed to mitomycin or tenonectomy, and not the amniotic membrane, would appear reasonable. A distinct value of this procedure, though, is the protection of the bulbar conjunctiva.

**Lamellar or Penetrating Keratoplasty**

In cases of recurrent pterygium, there is significant residual scarring and thinning of the cornea. In these scenarios, tissue from the lamellar corneal graft can be used. It helps remove thin, or scarred corneal parts. Corneal trephine (normally 8 mm) is used after superficial excision to incise the limbus to a depth of 0.3 mm. The host bed is then dissected, and then a smooth surface is created. The defect is filled with a 0.4 mm thick fresh donor button, sutured in place with interrupted 10-0 nylon. In the study carried out by Laughrea PA and Arentsen JJ, recurrence occurred in three of ten cases.

**Adjuvant Treatments**

To prevent a recurrence, these treatments are performed along with surgical treatments to prevent the recurrence. They can be combined with all the surgical methods.

**Cautery**

Since the growth of the blood vessels at the operation site leads to the recurrence of a pterygium, some people have recommended the intensive use of intraoperative cautery, particularly at the limbus, to improve the pterygium's surgical removal. With this approach, however, there is no data available about the risk of recurrence. Excessive cautery can trigger the development of hypertrophic scar tissue, scleral thinning, and necrosis.

**Laser Therapy**

The use of the **Argon**laser may be done in postoperative cases. 50µm spots are applied to early neovascular fronds to minimize conjunctival epithelial damage.

**The excimer**laser was used to ablate irregularities in the bare scleral surface after pterygium excision. The recurrence rate was 91% (20 cases) at 1 year.

**MMC (Mitomycin C)**

Because of its potential to suppress fibroblasts, it was used as an adjunctive therapy. MMC is an alkylating agent, which prevents the synthesis of DNA. By inhibiting DNA synthesis, this results in the death of cells triggered by the failure to fix the alkylation-caused genotoxic injury. DNA synthesis inhibition results in a reduction in the number of mitoses, particularly when MMC comes into contact with cells that are in the cell cycle's late G1 and early S stages. It can be administered locally or in the form of eye drops before or after pterygium surgery. The delivery of the injection directly on the pterygium has the advantage of preserving the corneal endothelium and epithelium.

Subconjunctival injection enables a more effective dosage to be administered to the patient's eye. The application of sponges directly on the sclera during surgery with MMC doesn't have the same efficacy. Its action to prevent the recurrence of pterygium occurs by inhibition of fibroblast proliferation in the episcleral region. The minimum acceptable and successful dosing rates, however, are yet to be established. MMC may be used in different ways, including the intraoperative application of MMC directly to the scleral bed following excision with pterygium, and postoperative use of topical MMC eye drops. Kunimoto et al. originally used MMC for the first time as a topical treatment postoperatively, but it caused detrimental complications.

Topical MMC use after pterygium surgery was popularized in the USA by Singh et al.

**Thiotepa**

It is an alkylating agent comparable to nitrogen mustard. It inhibits mitosis and division within the rapidly multiplying tissues. After excising the pterygium, it is used for 6–8 weeks in a frequency of four times a day, in the form of a drop in 0.05 % concentration. The recurrence rates have been reported to be between 0 and 28 %.********Ngoy et al.

**Fluorouracil**

This is a pyrimidine analog that interferes with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis and inhibits fibroblast proliferation, thus acting as an anti-metabolite.

**Topical Monoclonal Antibodies Against Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (anti-VEGF)**

****More recently, the use of topical monoclonal antibodies against vascular endothelial growth factors (anti-VEGF) has been advocated as an adjunctive therapy postoperatively, either in drop form or as sub-conjunctival injections. VEGF level in the pterygium tissue was found to be higher than normal conjunctiva. This suggests the fact that the use of anti-VEGF drugs during the treatment could be effective. Ranibizumab and bevacizumab, as the anti-VEGF drugs, are applied to the eye. In a meta-analysis, topical bevacizumab was relatively safe, associated only with an increased risk of the subconjunctival hemorrhage, but it had no significant effect on preventing pterygium recurrence.

**Radiotherapy**

High-energy, beta-emission radioactive substances are used in this technique. The radiation suppresses fibroblast proliferation. Ruthenium 106 and Sr 90 are more commonly used as radioactive substances. Radiotherapy is one of the oldest methods used as adjuvant therapy in the treatment of pterygium. In this technique, after the excision of pterygium, the radioactive plaque is sutured on the sclera and is kept there until the desired dose is reached. The radiotherapy can be given in different regimens and dosages as described in the literature. The recurrence rates reported in the literature vary between 0 and 50 %.

**Tenon's Layer Excision**

In the 1980s, Barraquer introduced the concept that removal of Tenon's layer may be important in reducing the recurrence rate after pterygium removal.

In the currently described method of excision, this area of Tenon's layer is excised no matter what it is thickness.PTERYGIUM technique, results in a low recurrence rate with this procedure.

**P.E.R.F.E.C.T. [pterygium extended removal followed by extended conjunctival transplantation]**

This methodology produces an exceptional outcome, with a recurrence rate close to zero and a reasonable complication rate, according to Lawrence W. Hirst.

There is tacking of the graft to the sclera without regrowth of the layer of Tenon or vascularization under the graft. There is limited concealment of the upper and lower wounds under the lids. It is possible because of the large size of the graft and intensive postoperative steroid administration.

**P.E.R.F.A.M.T. (pterygium extended removal followed by amniotic membrane transplantation)**

H. Liu et al. conducted extensive removal of pterygium with thorough removal of Tenon's layer as in P.E.R.F.E.C.T.

Allam WA published a study in 2016 on recurrence and complications of P.E.R.F.E.C.T. for primary pterygia in Europe.

In 2017, Cornelius carried out an independent analysis of the efficacy of P.E.R.F.E.C.T. for pterygium removal in avoiding recurrence after pterygium surgery.