Intra-abdominal infections usually occur following the breach in the mucosal defense barrier that would cause the normal bowel flora to inoculate the abdominal cavity. The microbiological spectrum depends on the specific gastrointestinal source, including the small versus large intestine.

Four to six main colonic flora are generally common in intra-abdominal abscesses and infections, reflecting the frequency of associated diseases originating from this anatomic site, including, but not limited to acute appendicitis, complicated diverticulitis, colon malignancies, inflammatory bowel disease, and former colon surgeries. Accordingly, the predominant organism involved in such infections is coliforms bacteria (including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp, Proteus spp, and Enterobacter spp), streptococci, enterococci, and the spectrum of anaerobic bacteria.Bacteroides fragilis and E. coli are the two major organisms isolated from abdominal cavity infections and abscess formations.B. fragilis, as an obligate anaerobic gram-negative bacillus, is a highly invasive anaerobic pathogen in abdominal infections.

Considering the phases of the early abdominal sepsis and intra-abdominal abscess, coliform bacteria mainly contribute to early sepsis and anaerobes implicated in the late sequelae and complications with abscess formation.

Perforation of the proximal intestines and peptic ulcer results in ubiquitous infections with aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive bacteria or Candida spp.Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other drug-resistant organisms.

Moreover, candida infections have been reported in both the small and large intestines-originated infections, particularly in the following patient groups; 1. history of antibiotic therapy, 2. immunocompromised patients, and 3. history of recurrent infection.

Collectively, the most common organisms cultured from an abdominal abscess includes aerobic and anaerobic bacteria originating from the gastrointestinal tract.Escherichia coli, 2. Bacteroides, 3. Neisseria, 4. Chlamydia, and 5. Candida.