Healthcare is a service offered to persons who are simultaneously patients in a traditional sense and customers in a modern sense. This article focuses on the delivery of health services and products in both senses. Therefore, when referring to patients, who are also always simultaneously customers, the article primarily refers to them as "patient-customers." Healthcare providers (HCPs) should retain this concept while reading this article and while delivering healthcare.

The field of the delivery of quality services and goods to consumers is a field of study unto itself, and this article serves only as an overview.

The history of quality delivery in healthcare can be traced to the earliest texts concerning physician ethical obligations, which are reviewed elsewhere.

In the modern sense of evidence-based medicine and objectively measuring and tracking data to determine whether quality has been delivered and/or how to improve quality, Ernest Codman (1869-1940) may be the most notable American pioneer.  Codman, a surgeon who began practicing medicine in 1895, advocated for record-keeping enabling retrospective analysis of how processes affected outcomes. He also advocated for practice standardization, and he helped lead the founding of the American College of Surgeons (ACS) and its Hospital Standardization Program, which became the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. Codman, like Ignaz Semelweiss, the pioneer of antisepsis in hospitals, serves as a historical example of a physician being rejected by other physicians for insisting that the status quo was detrimental to patients. He resigned from the Massachusetts General Hospital due to his colleagues' rejection of his quality measures and continued to practice and advocate for quality measures elsewhere.

The deliberate study, quantification, and practical application of data to achieve quality in business originated outside of healthcare. Walter Shewart (1891-1967) pioneered modern statistical process control (SPC) while working in telecommunications engineering. Edwards Deming (1900-1993), a physicist by training who became a business consultant and a professor of statistics and business, expanded Shewart's work and has been called the originator of quality management.