There are 2 main types of breast implants: saline-filled or silicone-filled, but both have an outer silicone shell. Saline-filled implants are filled with sterile saline. These implants are usually inserted empty and then a small port is used by the surgeon to add the desired amount of sterile saline to inflate the implant. The port is then removed, and the implant has a self-sealing tab for the port insertion site. Saline implants give the surgeon a large degree of variability to fill to different amounts as the implants will usually have a 25 to 50 mL range specified by the manufacturer. Some saline implants are filled by the surgeon during surgery while some manufacturers prefill other saline implants, but these prefilled saline implants are not commonly used in the United States.

The outer shell of the implant may be smooth or textured. Texturing is used in shaped implants and some round implants as well. The texturing helps prevent rotation in shaped implants and has been shown in some studies to lower the incidence of capsular contracture when the implant is placed in the subglandular pocket. Texturing does not seem to offer this decreased incidence of contracture when placed in the submuscular pocket. Saline implants are currently approved by the FDA for use in patients 18 years and older for breast augmentation and any age patient for breast reconstruction. Silicone-filled implants have an outer shell that is comprised of solid silicone. They are then filled inside with a viscous silicone gel. Silicone gel implants, as is also the case with saline implants, may have a smooth surface or a textured surface on the outer shell. Silicone gel implants are FDA approved to increase or enhance breast size in any patient over the age of 22. Many surgeons will still use the gel-filled implants "off-label" in patients under the age of 22 if they are indicated for the patient. Patients with small amounts of soft tissue coverage in their breasts will see the most benefit from a silicone implant as opposed to a saline implant that gives the silicone's softer or more natural feel. Also, in thin patients, silicone implants will show less rippling of the implant edges when compared to saline implants.

The implants can be placed above or beneath the pectoralis muscle. This is also referred to as subglandular and submuscular respectively. There are advantages and disadvantages to each approach. Patient anatomy, as well as surgeon preference, play a role in the decision. There is not one placement method that is uniformly accepted as the best location, and this should be determined by collaboration between the patient and the surgeon. Common access incisions include the inframammary crease, transaxillary, and the peri-areolar locations. General anesthesia is most common for this procedure, but it can also be done under sedation or even local anesthesia in select cases. Breast augmentation is considered an outpatient operation generally takes 45 to 90 minutes to perform. Recovery is usually rapid with a return to light work and activity within a week. Return to full activity may take up to 6 weeks.