# Continuing Education Activity

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is one of the most common fatty acid ß-oxidation disorders. It is an autosomal recessive disorder that has a good prognosis if management is started early. If not managed correctly, a metabolic crisis may result. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of MCAD deficiency and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency.
- Identify common presenting symptoms of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency.
- Outline the management of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency.
- Summarize the importance of communication and coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency.

# Introduction

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency (MCADD or MCAD deficiency) is one of the most common mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation disorders and is typically caused by a mutation in the ACADM gene.

The inability to provide energy to tissue when glycogen stores are depleted secondary to MCADD, particularly in neonates, may present with various symptoms due to hypoketotic hypoglycemia, including jaundice, cardiomyopathy, hepatopathy, altered mental status, seizure, and even death. Newborn screening has improved diagnosis before dangerous sequelae, but one study finds that it has not completely stopped the metabolic crisis or death.

# Etiology

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder that is primarily caused by a homozygous mutation of 985A→G in the ACADM gene in roughly 80% of clinically symptomatic patients. Other gene mutations result in MCAD deficiency, but nearly 18% of affected patients will carry at least one allele with 985A→G mutation.

# Epidemiology

The frequency of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency can vary, with different studies publishing frequencies based on location. In North America and northern Europe, studies have shown an estimated prevalence of 1:5,000 to 1:20,000.

# Pathophysiology

Affected patients are unable to synthesize ketone bodies for energy during times of fasting or acute stress; therefore will present in metabolic crisis due to hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Although widespread use of newborn screens has decreased the acute crisis, these patients continue to present to the emergency department.

# History and Physical

Patients usually present in the neonatal period between 3 and 15 months after a period of fasting, acute illness, or a combination of the two. Altered mental status, emesis, dehydration, drowsiness, and poor feeding may all be presenting symptoms. On exam, hepatomegaly may be identified, and neurologic exam may be abnormal if encephalopathy is present. Breastfeeding infants are particularly high risk in the first 72 hours, depending on maternal breastmilk supply. If supply and milk let down has not occurred, then neonates may experience prolonged periods of fasting resulting in an early presentation of metabolic crisis.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of MCAD deficiency is typically prompted after positive newborn blood screening showing elevated acylcarnitines.

# Treatment / Management

Early diagnosis of MCAD deficiency has been shown to reduce nearly half of medical care costs.

Management of children with MCAD deficiency who require anesthesia can pose additional risks. Patients who require a surgical procedure will need to be fasting and would benefit from overnight admission prior to the procedure to administer glucose-containing maintenance fluids. Providing intravenous fluids with glucose and close perioperative monitoring of blood glucose levels reduces the risk of metabolic crisis typically seen with fasting periods in this population.

# Differential Diagnosis

The initial presentation of lethargy, emesis, and encephalopathy in patients with MCAD deficiency may be concerning for other etiologies like Reye syndrome, sudden infant death syndrome, or other metabolic diseases.

Other fatty acid oxidation disorders such as short-chain and long-chain fatty acid β-oxidation disorders may have similar presenting symptoms but may also have cardiomyopathy, developmental delays, and muscle involvement. Furthermore, other fatty acid oxidation disorders can be definitively differentiated based on mutation analysis and specific enzyme activity.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is generally good for patients with MCAD deficiency if diagnosed early in life. Early management via specialty centers has reduced mortality and morbidity to nearly zero.

# Complications

Complications of MCAD deficiency can vary in severity from drowsiness to death. Complications unrelated to cardiac functions include muscle weakness, fatigue, and poor exercise tolerance. Other complications include long-term neurologic sequelae (e.g., learning and behavior issues) caused by encephalopathy. Arrhythmias have has been reported.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although the prognosis of MCAD deficiency is good, the diagnosis requires patients to live a lifestyle different from their peers, which can add increased stress to the patient and family. One study reported that nearly 75% of parents felt a substantial burden due to metabolic disorders and treatments.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

MCAD deficiency may be a difficult disease to manage, but with early diagnosis and intervention, this population may avoid life-threatening sequelae during times of illness. Newborn blood screening is highly sensitive and specific for the initial assessment of MCAD deficiency and is an essential screening tool. [Level 3] Further diagnostics using genetic tests (assessing for severe mutations i.e., 985A→G) and biochemical tests (elevation of C8/C10:1) are used to confirm the diagnosis. [Level 3]