Symptoms of hypercalcemia are usually seen when serum calcium levels are more than 12 mg/dl. Irrespective of the etiology, the broad signs and symptoms can be summarized as "groans, bones, stones, moans, thrones and psychic overtones".

- Groans: Gastrointestinal symptoms like pain, nausea, and vomiting. Hypercalcemia can lead to peptic ulcer disease and pancreatitis.

- Bones: Bone related complications like bone pain. Hypercalcemia can lead to osteoporosis, osteomalacia, arthritis and pathological fractures.

- Stones: Renal stones causing pain.

- Moans: Refers to fatigue and malaise.

- Thrones: Polyuria, polydipsia, and constipation (sitting on the toilet as you are sitting on a throne).

- Psychic overtones: Lethargy, confusion, depression and memory loss.

Severe hypercalcemia inhibits neuromuscular and myocardial depolarization leading to muscle weakness and arrhythmias. Cardiovascular effects include prolonged PR interval, short QT interval, widened QRS complex, and bradycardia. Increased thirst with polydipsia and polyuria is seen initially, progressing to nephrolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis in chronic cases. Neurologic features include impaired concentration, altered mental status ranging from confusion to irritability. Levels of more than 14 mg/dL can cause encephalopathy and levels above 15 mg/dL is a medica emergency. Severe acute abdominal pain should be a clue to evaluate for pancreatitis. Osseous changes can lead to bone pain, gait abnormalities, and fractures and are seen radiologically as subperiosteal and endosteal bone resorption. In infants and young children, hypercalcemia can cause poor weight gain and failure to thrive.