Complications related to using inferior vena cava filters fall into the following categories; those occurring during the procedure, following the procedure, and during retrieval.

- Procedure: During the vascular access for IVC filter insertion, bleeding and thrombosis are the most common complications. Other complications that can occur during this time include filter tilt (angulation of more than 15 degrees along the longitudinal axis of IVC), filter migration (change in position of the filter by more than 2 cm) or operator error (filter placement in the inaccurate location or incorrect orientation); these can result in a difficult to retrieve as well as an ineffective IVC filter.

- Post-procedure: 1) IVC thrombosis can occur, resulting in pain and edema of bilateral lower extremities; this can also result in an increased risk of a pulmonary embolism due to the thrombus extending above the filter and embolizing to the lungs. 2) Renal failure is another dreaded complication that can occur in case the thrombus extends to the suprarenal IVC. 3) There is a possibility of inferior vena cava penetration by the IVC filter. Hooks were added to the filters to decrease the incidence of filter migration, but this has shown to increase inferior vena cava perforation rates significantly. 4) Filter fracture can occur, resulting in fragmentation of the filter. These fragments can embolize to the heart and lungs.

- Retrieval: The longer the time that the filter remains in place, the greater the rate of complications during retrieval. Some of the most commonly noted complications during filter retrieval include fracture and IVC injury (e.g., dissection). Thus removal of IVC filter as soon as it is no longer needed is highly recommended.

As compared to permanent IVC filters, complications occur much more frequently with the use of retrievable IVC filters.