Behavior modification can be effective with 15 to 20 minute long naps strategically scheduled throughout the day and maintaining an adequate nighttime sleep schedule. First-line pharmacologic treatment for excessive daytime sleepiness is modafinil (twice-daily dosing) or armodafinil (once-daily dosing). Second-line treatment would be amphetamines. First-line treatment for cataplexy is sodium oxybate, a form of gamma-hydroxybutyrate, or GHB. The medication is taken while in bed due to the short onset of sleepiness, usually 5 to 15 minutes. A second dose is given 2.5 to 4 hours later. Xyrem is a restricted medication distributed from a central pharmacy. While there are concerns about abuse, dependence, and illegal use of sodium oxybate, post-market research has not proven these concerns to be valid. Tricyclic antidepressants (protriptyline, clomipramine) and SNRI/SSRIs (venlafaxine, fluoxetine) have also been used with some success in treating cataplexy.

Nonpharmacological treatments

Besides encouraging good sleep hygiene, the following measures are important:

- Provide emotional support

- Provide mental health counseling

- Assist with disability forms and obtaining medications

- Educate about the harms of alcohol and illicit drug use

Drug therapy

While several CNS stimulants are used to treat narcolepsy, none is 100% effective in all patients. Methylphenidate does improve sleep but it also has undesirable side effects like anxiety, headache, and irritability. Modafinil does induce wakefulness but its safety in children has not yet been established. Armodafinil is also effective for narcolepsy and has the same side effect profile as methylphenidate. Sodium oxybate is the only FDA-approved treatment for cataplexy but it should not be combined with other CNS depressants or alcohol. Just recently, the FDA approved pitolisant (a histamine H3 receptor antagonist) for narcolepsy. Early studies indicate that it can improve sleep.

Currently, there is no medication that has been approved by the FDA for use in children.