The respiratory system constitutes an efficient delivery system of inspired oxygenated air to all portions of the lungs within an enclosed space. The lungs provide a large surface area for gas exchange with the cardiovascular system. The lungs can provide adequate gas exchange at rest or while withstanding mechanical stresses such as when exercising. Sophisticated regulatory mechanisms at every level of the process work together to ensure that the constantly changing capacities of perfusion, ventilation, diffusion and chemical binding to hemoglobin are optimal for every aspect of demand encountered by the human body.

The right ventricle pumps deoxygenated blood to the lungs through the pulmonary valve via the main pulmonary artery. The short but wide artery then splits into the right and left pulmonary arteries at the level of the T4 vertebrae. The right pulmonary artery supplies deoxygenated blood to the right lung, while the left pulmonary artery supplies deoxygenated blood to the left lung. The arteries continue to subdivide and eventually become capillaries. While in the capillaries, the blood gives off carbon dioxide through the capillary wall into the alveoli of the lungs.  Simultaneously, the blood takes up oxygen from the air in the alveoli, and oxygenated blood is returned to the left atrium via pulmonary veins. It is a very efficient system, making the pulmonary circulation ideal for the highest level of gas exchange.

During inspiration, the diaphragm and external intercostal muscle contractions cause lung volume expansion.  Following inspiration, the inspiratory muscles relax, and laryngeal muscles constrict to slow the lung compression. During active expiration, internal intercostal muscles and abdominal muscles contract depending upon metabolic needs.