The incidence of diverticulitis continues to increase in all age groups, placing a substantial burden on the healthcare system. The interprofessional healthcare team, consisting of primary care physicians, NPs, PAs, gastroenterologists, nurses, pharmacists, and dietitians, must educate the public and patients that obesity, inactivity, and a poor diet contribute significantly to epidemiologic factors.

Pharmacists will perform medication reconciliation when drug therapy is part of the treatment; they can also counsel patients on their medications, assist with dosing, and report any concerns to the prescribing clinician. Nurses will coordinate activities between the various clinicians and specialists on the case and also offer patients counsel on their condition. They are also responsible for assisting during surgery and monitoring patients post-procedure.

A positive paradigm change in diverticulitis treatment has resulted in the widespread use of outpatient management for non-complicated diverticulitis. However, many patients with a history of non-complicated diverticulitis are improperly managed empirically with antibiotics every time they call their clinician’s office with abdominal pain. This misuse of antibiotics must be corrected. For patients undergoing surgery, a colostomy nurse should educate the patient on the care of the stoma. All care team members must utilize meticulous record-keeping so that every caregiver on the case can access the same updated patient information.

Better and more sophisticated imaging modalities have allowed us to accurately classify disease severity and allocate different patients to more effective treatment algorithms.

The current emphasis on individualizing the need for elective sigmoid colectomy after resolving non-complicated diverticulitis will result in fewer unnecessary operations and better outcomes. [Level 5]