The pathogenesis of primary biliary cholangitis is thought to be related to the interaction between genetic predisposition and environmental triggers. The genetic predisposition is suggested by a strong prevalence of the disease in first-degree relatives, with an odds ratio of 11. There is also a high degree of concordance in monozygotic twins. Daughters of index women have the highest relative risk for the development of primary biliary cholangitis. Several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles associations have been reported with primary biliary cirrhosis, which includes DRB1, DR3, DPB1, DQA1, and DQB1. HLA-DRB1*08 is common in European and Asian descent, whereas HLA-DRB1*11 has been found to be protective.

The environmental triggers include toxic waste, cigarette smoking, nail polish, hair dye, and various xenobiotics (e.g., Escherichia coli, Mycobacterium gordonae, Novosphingobium aromaticivorans). These environmental triggers induce the autoimmune reaction in genetically susceptible patients, which is evident by the presence of a humoral and cellular response to an intracytoplasmic antigen, the presence of anti-mitochondrial antibody (highly specific) and involvement of T lymphocytes in the destruction of bile ducts. In addition, bacteria containing lipoylated proteins lead to immune response targeting their own lipoylated proteins via molecular mimicry. When apoptosis occurs in somatic cells, the exposed epitope is blocked by the attachment of a glutathione residue.

Primary biliary cirrhosis is associated with highly specific autoantibodies. The anti-mitochondrial antibody is found in 85% of the cases. The anti-mitochondrial antibody binds to lipoic acid containing the E2 component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex that is located on the mitochondrial inner membrane. Other antibodies highly associated with primary biliary cirrhosis are antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-multiple nuclear dot antibody (anti-MND), anticentromere antibody, and antinuclear envelop antibody. Especially, ANA and anti-MND are considered to be surrogate markers in AMA-negative primary biliary cirrhosis.