**Pain:**

The most common complications following refractive surgery are mild pain or discomfort and keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or “dry eye.” Discomfort and pain may be described as the sensation of having “sand in my eye” and should be managed with medications as listed above. Dry eye is one of the most common complications in patients receiving refractive surgery and a major cause of patient dissatisfaction. Risk factors for dry eye development after refractive surgery include older age and female gender.

**Infection:**

Corneal infection and sterile infiltrates are rare early complications of laser refractive surgery. A 2017 study found that approximately 0.0013% of cases resulted in definite or probable microbial keratitis.

Re-epithelialization is typically complete by postoperative day 3; delayed epithelial healing will present as persistent blurred vision symptomatically and epithelial defects with well-defined borders on slit-lamp examination. If the surface remains not intact by postoperative day 4, discontinue all medications except for the topical antibiotic, and replace the BSCL. Topical steroids may restart once epithelialization is complete.

Pseudodendrites are considered a normal part of the healing response and should not be confused with dendrites seen in herpes simplex keratitis (HSK). Pseudodendrites typically appear on postoperative day 3 or 4 and may cause blurring of vision if present in the visual axis. As they are part of the normal healing pattern and generally self-resolve within a matter of days, no changes in treatment are warranted.

**"Halo effect":**

Patients may experience a “halo effect” during the first 4 to 6 weeks following PRK as the epithelium continues to heal. This phenomenon is more likely to occur at night when pupillary dilation allows for the transmission of light at the edge of the ablation zone. This symptom tends to diminish with time and generally does not warrant a change in treatment. Pilocarpine drops may be administered to promote pupillary constriction, but many patients do not tolerate these drops well.

**Central corneal islands:**

The formation of central islands along the cornea is an incompletely understood and likely multifactorial complication that may result in blurred vision. Central islands may be visible as small central shadows on retinoscopy, and the diagnostic confirmation is by computed videokeratography showing elevations within the central or pericentral zone. Theorized causes of central island formation include emission of debris during laser ablation that interferes with laser pulses, uneven intraoperative corneal surface hydration that reduces central corneal ablation rate, and a higher degree of postoperative epithelial hyperplasia in the central cornea. Notably, the incidence of central islands following PRK has significantly decreased with the advent of new technology specifically designed to prevent their formation.

**Ectasia:**

Ectasia is a very rare complication in the modern era due to strict adherence to the inclusion criteria, technical improvements in the excimer laser, and increased ability to interpret and assess preoperative surface data.

**Decentration:**

Decentration may occur due to poor pupil fixation and significant eye movements. Decentration may result in increased astigmatism, glare, haloes, and worse visual outcomes. Decentration tends to occur more often in eyes with higher attempted corrections due to the longer period required for fixation.

**Corneal erosion:**

Persistent corneal erosion is an early complication that presents as pain, tearing, and photophobia upon awakening. Corneal erosion tends to occur outside the area of ablation. Symptoms are manageable with hypertonic drops and ointment. If these do not succeed in reducing symptoms, placement of a BSCL or phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK) is another option.

**Corneal haze:**

Corneal haze is a late complication that typically peaks in intensity at 1 to 2 months following laser refractive surgery and disappears within 6 to 12 months. Histological studies from animals and humans have demonstrated that haze is likely due to migration of keratocytes and deposition of abnormal glycosaminoglycans and nonlamellar collagen in the anterior stroma during the wound healing response.

**Persistent refractive errors:**

Persistent refractive errors may occur following laser refractive surgery due to under-correction, overcorrection, or regression. Refractive errors are more likely to occur at higher corrections. Undercorrection may arise from insufficient initial treatment, significant myopic regression, or an excessively moist cornea during refractive surgery. Factors that promote regression include preoperative flat keratometry, small optical zones, steep wound edge, and secondary UV exposure.

Options for treatment of persistent refractive errors include further surface ablation, LASIK, and PTK depending on the amount of desired correction, corneal thickness, and the amount of corneal haze. These enhancement procedures generally get delayed until achieving stable refraction for at least 3 to 6 months.