While not all patients with APLA develop APLS, there is a strong association between the presence of APLA and venous thrombosis, myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke.

Antiphospholipid antibodies are considered pathogenic as they play an important role in thrombosis, and they are not just a serological marker of APLS.

A “two-hit” thrombosis model is proposed to explain thrombus formation in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome. A “first hit” injury to the endothelium needs to happen to have a “second hit” that potentiates the thrombus formation. Beta-2 glycoprotein I do not bind unstimulated endothelium in vivo. One of the postulates, when causes of endothelial injury are not identified, is a redox balance disturbance in the vascular beds that may prime the endothelium. Patients with antiphospholipid syndrome have lower levels of the reduced, protective, and non-immunogenic beta-2 glycoprotein I. Annexin A2, an endothelial cell surface receptor, is upregulated with oxidative stress. Smoking can lead to endothelial injury and increase the pro-thrombotic susceptibilities in patients with lupus anticoagulant.

Plasma nitrite levels are decreased in patients with APLS when compared with healthy controls. The decreased expression and activity of endothelial nitric oxide synthase results in the generation of peroxynitrite and superoxide. Preclinical models have shown how the domain I of beta-2 glycoprotein I autoantibodies antagonize the activity of endothelial nitric oxide synthase with resultant monocyte adhesion and inhibition of nitric oxide-dependent arterial relaxation.

Tissue factor expression is upregulated by antiphospholipid antibodies through some intracellular signaling pathways after binding the anti-beta 2 glycoprotein I autoantibodies to the monocytes' surface and endothelial cells' multiprotein complexes. Autoantibodies from patients with APLS disrupt the mitochondrial function of neutrophils and monocytes and increase the production of reactive species of oxygen, resulting in the subsequent expression of tissue factor.

Intraplacental thrombosis, complement pathway activation, interference with trophoblast growth and differentiation and impaired trophoblastic invasion, and hormone production are considered to play a role in APLS associated pregnancy loss.