T. pallidum enters the body through areas that have undergone “microtrauma,” most commonly mucous membranes. As such, sexual intercourse remains the most common route of transmission, including oral sex and oral-anal intercourse. The disease is most likely to spread while individuals have primary and secondary syphilitic lesions.

Syphilis is classified by its clinical manifestations into primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary syphilis.

Primary syphilis is associated with the highest probability of transmission and is characterized by a single painless chancre, although multiple lesions may present in a minority of patients.

Secondary syphilis is defined by a maculopapular rash on the palms and soles bilaterally. Patients may also have bacteremia with fevers and fatigue. If secondary syphilis goes untreated, individuals improve within three to six weeks. Secondary syphilis recurs in approximately 25% of infected patients within 1 year.

Patients then progress to latent syphilis, in which they are asymptomatic but have positive serology. Latent syphilis is further classified into early latent and late latent syphilis. According to WHO, patients with early latent syphilis have been infected for less than two years, and patients with late latent syphilis have been infected for over two years.

Approximately 35% of patients with late latent syphilis will progress to tertiary syphilis, which is characterized by chronic end-organ damage several years after inoculation. This includes neurosyphilis, gummatous syphilis, and cardiovascular syphilis. In those with neurosyphilis, T. pallidum has traveled to the brain and spinal cord 5 to 20 years after primary syphilis. The dorsal columns are primarily affected. In tabes dorsalis or spinal cord syndrome, individuals exhibit ataxia, loss of vibration and proprioception, urinary and fecal incontinence, and absent limb reflexes. They may also show psychiatric disease and dementia. Gummatous syphilis manifests as granulomatous lesions of the bone or skin 3 to 12 years after primary syphilis. Cardiovascular syphilis is characterized by aortitis of the proximal aorta approximately 15 to 30 years after primary syphilis.

Approximately one-third of infants born to infected mothers are diagnosed with congenital syphilis. Syphilis can be transmitted to the fetus by a transplacental transmission during pregnancy if the mother is infected. This is more likely to occur within the first two years of the mother becoming infected. Spontaneous abortions and stillbirths occur in one-third of syphilitic pregnancies. Children with congenital syphilis commonly exhibit hepatosplenomegaly, abnormal dental development, nasal chondritis (“snuffles”), deafness, and craniofacial abnormalities.