Eye development begins at day 22 of embryogenesis with the evagination of the neural tube from bilateral grooves in the neuroectoderm, forming the optic vesicles. Around five weeks as the neuroectodermal outpouchings form, a depression forms at their distal aspects leading to auto-invagination, which creates a double wall of neuroectoderm. This double-walled ectoderm gives rise to the optic cup. As the neural tube expands and involutes, the surface ectoderm at bilateral lens placodes simultaneously invaginates into these bilateral depressions, forming the lens vesicles. The interaction between the optic cup and lens vesicle results in the development of the **optic fissure**as the optic cup drapes over the hyaloid artery. In this way, a groove (fissure) is formed along the entire length of the invaginated double-wall neural tube, termed the optic stalk, which is the future optic nerve. This groove contains the hyaloid artery, allowing it to supply the future inner chamber of the eye without having to invade the neuroectoderm. During week 7, the edges of the**optic fissure**fuse, with the most distal apposition of these edges becoming the pupil. While the edges of the fissure close, the two layers of neuroectoderm comprising the stalk continue to proliferate to the point of apposition and fusion. Cells from the inner layer of neural tissue interact to form a neural network, and thereby the optic nerve is born. A narrow hollow space remains inside the stalk containing a remnant of the hyaloid artery, which gives rise to the central artery of the retina.