The normal spinal cord development during embryogenesis occurs in three stages between the second till the sixth week of gestation. These stages include gastrulation, primary, and secondary neurulation. Usually, defects in primary neurulation result in open and closed spinal dysraphisms. The neural plate forms in the first stage of gastrulation, which occurs at the end of the third week of gestation. It happens when the endoderm and ectoderm form the bilaminar embryonic disc. With rapid cell division of the embryonic disc, the cells are then migrated to form the mesoderm which eventually will convert to a trilaminar disc. Finally, the notochord interacts with the ectoderm to form the neuroectoderm, and neural plate which begins at the midline then proceeds cranially and caudally. During primary neurulation, the neural folds arise with a small central depression called the neural groove. The neural folds are then going to be gradually fused to convert the neural plate to the neural tube. The primary neurulation ends with the closure of the cranial and caudal ends of the neural tube. Any defects in caudal neural tube closure would result in exposed neural tissue called placode. The presence of neural placode and the meningeal lining is mostly associated with myelomeningocele. It is one of the main essential features to distinguish between myelomeningocele and myelocele.

Furthermore, the caudal end is composed of pluripotent cells, which eventually will form a caudal cell mass that contains neurons and vacuoles. In a process called cavitation, the neurons and vacuoles are will developed further and connect to create the central canal. Eventually, these cells will undergo apoptosis to form filum terminale, ventriculus terminalis, and conus medullaris.