The first and foremost step in any suspected case of compartment syndrome or early Volkmann contracture is the removal of all external dressings, splints, or casts. This meager but crucial step might halt the development of Volkmann contracture if extrinsic compartment syndrome is the prime culprit. It is shown that casts may restrict compartment expansion by up to 40% and should always be removed, a step that reduces pressure elevation by about 40 to 60%.

The primary emergency treatment for acute compartment syndrome leading to Volkmann contracture is emergency fasciotomy. It is generally agreed that intracompartmental pressures above 30 to 40 mmHg necessitate this. Decompression can be achieved by volar or dorsal approach, both of which release compartmental pressure. The median nerve needs decompression throughout its course, especially in the high-risk areas (deep to lacertus fibrosus, in the carpal tunnel, and between the heads of pronator teres).

Physicians must also be wary of myoglobinuria that is a result of prolonged ischemia. Reperfusion syndrome can cause significant systemic abnormalities leading to multiorgan failure.

If Volkmann contracture has already developed, the treatment approach depends on the degree of contracture. Mild Volkmann contracture may be treated with physical therapy, dynamic splinting along with tendon lengthening, and slide procedures. These are associated with a relatively favorable outcome. Moderate contractures may require tendon slide, neurolysis, and extensor transfer operations. Severe contractures affecting both extensor and flexor groups necessitate extensive and radical debridement of the scar tissue. After debridement, tendon transfer procedures may be used to regain motion of the digits. Brachioradialis is often used to regain the movement of the thumb by transferring the tendon to flexor pollicis longus. Extensor carpi radialis longus is transferred to flexor digitorum profundus to regain finger flexion. Free muscle transplantation may also be needed if the belly of the muscle is necrosed. A necrotic muscle can be identified by its color, contractility, consistency, and capacity to bleed.