The available options for the management of KCN are highly dependent on the stage of the disease and its progression. If the disease is stabilized (no progression), the emphasis is given in correcting the vision. If the disease is progressing, the emphasis is to slow (arrest) the procession.

Since the effects of KCN in cornea shape distortion and stromal thinning are highly asymmetric, vision correction with spectacles and with spherical/toric soft contact lenses is suboptimal and only applicable to the early stages of KCN.  Custom-designed soft contact lenses which incorporate aberration-controlled designs may provide some control of the primary aberrations associated with KCN such as coma and spherical aberration.

Rigid gas permeable (RGP) contact lenses and scleral lenses are the mainstays of vision treatment for modest-to-advanced KCN. Their main advantage is the creation of the tear pool between the lens and the cornea, which naturally neutralizes the ocular aberrations associated with the keratoconic ectasia, thus possibly providing nearly excellent corrected vision.

Corneal collagen cross-linking (CXL) is a minimally invasive outpatient procedure that has been shown to be effective in the arrest of the progression of KCN.

When activated with UVA light (365 nm), riboflavin 5‘-phosphate functions as a photo enhancer and generates singlet oxygen and reactive species which are responsible for cross-linking. The classical, or Dresden protocol,

Other CXL protocols have been suggested and are in use outside the United States, which involve the use of increased irradiation and shorter exposure time. CXL has also been combined with topography-guided laser-ablation corneal surface normalization (Athens protocol)

While CXL does not necessarily improve the quality of vision, it is important to stress that early diagnosis may make a significant difference in the success of keratoconus management.  If the disease is diagnosed at an early stage, then both the corneal irregularity and thinning may be only minimally affected. In those cases, the effect of biomechanical stabilization provided by CXL will prevent future vision loss.

Other treatment modalities include intra-corneal ring segments (INTACS). This is a small curved PMMA ring or set of rings that is implanted in the cornea to help flatten corneal curvature in an effort to improve vision.

Corneal transplant is considered the last resort when the cornea is too thin to receive CXL and the symptoms are severe. The cornea is replaced fully (penetrating keratoplasty) or in part (lamellar keratoplasty) with healthy donor cornea tissue.