Upper lid blepharoplasty involves the excision of a wedge of the skin of the upper lid. The lower edge of the skin wedge excision approximates the point of the supratarsal crease, stretching from 4 to 5 mm superior to the medial and lateral canthi with its highest point in the center of the line extending 10 mm above the central aspect of the lid margin. The upper part of the wedge excision is marked as a gentle curve following the natural upward slant of the eyelid and orbit and is determined intra-operatively by pinching the skin of the upper lid. The surgeon must take care to leave approximately 1.5 to 2 cm of skin between the upper part of the excision and the brow, as this will prevent lid hollowing and lagophthalmos from excess skin resection. The excision markings may be extended approximately 1 cm lateral to the lateral canthus to excise lateral hooding.

There are several variations of upper lid blepharoplasty. The first involves variable excision of orbicularis muscle along with the overlying skin. Advocates of significant orbicularis resection will point to the fact that it contributes to upper lid fullness and should be resected. Over resection, however, can hollow the upper lid and destroy the attachments of the levator complex to the overlying skin. These complications could cause postoperative lagophthalmos or ptosis, respectively. Postseptal fat may also be removed during this procedure. The nasal fat pad is most often the offending agent in upper lid blepharoplasty and may be accessed through a 1 cm incision in the orbital septum medially. The surgeon will know he or she is in the correct compartment due to the white hue of the fat compared to the yellow color of other fat compartments. Again, avoiding overcorrection is key.

Upper lid blepharoplasty is often combined with the correction of upper lid ptosis. The most common form of this procedure involves removing the levator aponeurosis from the tarsus, advancing the entire aponeurotic complex, and resecuring the tarsus to the aponeurosis complex. Following the advancement and securing of the levator complex, the patient is asked to open and close his or her eyes. The degree of lagophthalmos is assessed. Up to 2 mm is considered acceptable. If the degree of lid lag is found to be appropriate, the excess muscle and tendon are resected, and the skin and orbicularis flap is closed.

Lower lid blepharoplasty is one of the most variable procedures in plastic surgery, and a full review of this technique is outside of the scope of this article. In general, the technique involves skin resection, postseptal fat resection, blunting of the lid-cheek junction, and tightening of the lower lid tarsoligamentous complex. Not all patients will require every aspect of this procedure. However, each will be addressed separately.

The amount of skin resection should be assessed pre-operatively to determine which incision will be used to access the lower lid. Those patients requiring skin resection will need an external incision on the lid, most often from a subciliary approach. Those patients not requiring skin resection may have postseptal fat resected from the transconjunctival approach. Excess skin resection of the lower lid may contribute to post-operative ectropion.

The excision of postseptal fat is common in lower lid blepharoplasty, as steatoblepharon is one of the main features of many seeking a lower lid blepharoplasty. Each compartment may be accessed separately from either the external or transconjunctival approach. When excising fat in the central or nasal fat pads, care must be taken to not injure the inferior oblique muscles. Meticulous hemostasis is crucial in all aspects of blepharoplasty but is particularly important in the fat resection. As fat resection occurs in the postseptal compartment, bleeding may contribute to retrobulbar hemorrhage, and in severe cases can cause blindness.

The treatment of the lid-cheek junction is a complex aspect of the procedure and can be accomplished in many different ways. The fundamental concept of this procedure is to cause blunting and a more gradual, youthful appearance of a facial line that has been caused by aging. To accomplish this, fat released from the postseptal compartment may be spread over the angle to cause a more gradual transition from the cheek to the lower eyelid. Conversely, the arcus marginalis may be completely released and then sutured over this angle to cause a more obtuse angle. Though there are countless other methods for addressing this problem and it is impossible to review them all here, it is important when evaluating these patients postoperatively to understand that this junction has likely been manipulated in some way.

Tightening of the lower lid tarsoligamentous complex is accomplished by traditional canthopexy or canthoplasty techniques. This typically involves a lateral canthotomy with inferior cantholysis. Part of the lateral tarsoligamentous complex may be resected utilizing a lateral tarsal strip procedure. It is imperative to inset the lower lid partially inside of the orbit and at a superior angle to the medial canthus to approximate the actual position of the lower eyelid. Some surgeons will choose to temporarily support the repair of the lateral tarsoligamentous complex with an external suture, tape, or gentle upward massage.

Both upper and lower blepharoplasty techniques may differ greatly between surgeons. However, being aware of the principles outlined above should give both specialist and general practitioners general guidelines on upper and lower lid blepharoplasty procedures.