Stroke is an emergency, and the timing of the onset of symptoms is the most important information in acute settings. Time of onset can be challenging in posterior circulation strokes because patients may be unaware of their symptoms. If a patient is unaware of having symptoms, at practitioner should ascertain when the patient last appeared and behaved in the manner that they were known or accustomed. Once this question is answered, a brief history of presentation and complete physical exam should be obtained. When taking a history, there should be an emphasis on determining the risk factors for stroke in the patient's past medical history. The two main categories of risk factors are non-modifiable and modifiable.

- Non-modifiable risk factors include age, gender (male>female), race (higher in African-American), history of transient ischemic attack (TIA), cerebrovascular disease (CVA), and hypercoagulable states, as well as a family history of hypercoagulable state or CVAs.

- Modifiable risk factors include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, smoking, heart disease (atrial fibrillation, endocarditis) oral contraceptives, substance abuse (cocaine), poor diet, obesity, immobility, and sleep apnea.

Patients may present in a comatose state via ambulance or may walk to an emergency department without assistance. Patients with a PCA stroke may present with only a headache and mild visual changes such as vision loss, diplopia, inability to see half of the view, or difficulty reading perceiving colors, or recognizing familiar faces. Mild symptoms in the setting of a PCA stroke may delay a patient from getting medical treatment. Many times, they are also unaware of their visual problems. Patients may report visual problems such as grayness, spots, voids, and difficulties focusing.

A physical exam is performed as soon as a physician sees the patient. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) is a systematic assessment tool that provides a quantitative measure of stroke-related neurologic deficits. NIHSS gives us a brief evaluation of acuity, determination of appropriate treatment, and can predict patient outcomes. It should be completed in less than 10 minutes and ranges from 0 (no deficit) to 42 (maximum). Posterior circulation strokes, including PCA strokes, may be underestimated by NIHSS when compared to anterior circulation strokes.

A full neurological exam is still essential for a better understanding. A cardiovascular exam also should be performed to check for carotid bruits and abnormal rhythm or heart sounds as well as signs of a DVT. The physical exam may show:

- Homonymous Hemianopia with macular sparing

- Superior or inferior quadrantanopia

- Paresthesia

- Visual complete loss or visual anosognosia

- Visual Agnosia

- Prosopagnosia

- Alexia without agraphia (pure alexia)

- Achromatopsia

- Transcortical sensory aphasia

- Amnestic aphasia

- Memory impairment

- Aggressive behavior

- Hallucinations

- Palinopsia

- Hemiparesis with/without ataxia

- Oculomotor or pupillary deficits

- Hypersomnolence

- Optic ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, and simultagnosia