Werner syndrome patients appear unaffected at birth and develop normally until the adolescent period or second decade of life when they start to exhibit signs and symptoms of accelerated aging. Patients develop skin ulcers, cataracts, graying or even loss of their hair, and hypogonadism. The loss of subcutaneous fat and dermal atrophy produces a scleroderma-like appearance. They typically have a bird-like face with short stature, high pitched voice, dental abnormalities, decreased body weight, and body mass index (BMI).

Patients also experience a rapid loss of muscle mass, most notably in the limbs with sparing of the trunk. They also have a decrease in their grip strength and skeletal muscle index, reaching the level of sarcopenia before the age of 40. They have impaired mobility and suffer from osteoporosis of the distal limb bones more so than the vertebral column. Soft tissue calcifications can occur, most commonly in the Achilles tendon. Pes planus, hallux valgus, and flexion contractures can occur in the feet with subsequent development of ulceration, osteitis, and osteomyelitis.

Metabolic abnormalities also occur, including the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus and an increase in visceral fat accumulation.

Cardiovascular abnormalities develop as well, which can include atherosclerosis, mitral regurgitation, and aortic stenosis.

WS patients are at an increased risk of tumor formation, with up to 10% of patients developing a malignancy. However, the types of tumors that develop are unusual compared to the aging population. Up to 50% of the malignancies reported are soft tissue sarcomas, such as schwannoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, leiomyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma of the upper extremities. Patients have also been reported to develop meningiomas, malignant melanoma, and thyroid carcinomas.