Each member of the trauma team is vital in providing a high standard of care to the patient. The nursing role within this team is pivotal to a full perspective of the situation at hand. Familiarity with the environment means that nurses can be an invaluable resource to other team members. Usually, two nurses are a requirement in a trauma team.

If there is a hospital pre-alert received by the hospital, it is essential that the information given is clarified and any further questions asked before alerting the trauma team in the receiving unit. More information about expectations means that better preparation can take place; for example, advance notice of a suspected major hemorrhage could prove helpful in accessing blood products promptly.

Once the trauma alert has gone out, an appropriate area to receive the patient should be prepared and checked. A nurse should be ready to remove the patient's clothing upon arrival in the emergency department so that all possible injuries may be fully exposed. Clothing may need to be cut off. Initial monitoring should include non-invasive blood pressure cycling 3 to 5 minutes, electrocardiogram (three-lead), and pulse oximetry. Other monitoring, such as end-tidal CO2 or invasive blood pressure monitoring, may be requested by the team and should be available. A second nurse can take handover from the pre-hospital crew and document treatment given so far. Communication is vital, and once the initial monitoring and transfer have taken place, further treatment may necessary; the team leader should receive notification once other team members are free to complete other tasks.

A vital role of the nursing staff in the polytraumatized patient is to act as an advocate for the patient, where they can voice particular concerns to the team, with important regard given to the patient's pain level.

The trauma nurse is expected to have many skills and needs to be adaptable to the often rapidly changing clinical situation. To keep the trauma team progressing requires rapid switching from task to task. Communication with the patient, and possibly family, during this time, will help reduce anxiety.