The diagnosis and management of pericarditis is not always simple and is best done with an interprofessional team that includes a cardiologist, radiologist, cardiac surgeon, infectious disease expert, the primary care provider and nurse practitioner. The majority of patients will present with vague chest pain and the diagnosis may be confused with a heart attack, pleurisy or angina. It is vital to consult with a cardiologist before embarking on treatment.

In most cases, conservative treatment with NSAIDs will help resolve the disorder but an echo is usually done to ensure that the patient does not have pericardial fluid and/or tamponade. If drainage of the pericardial fluid is required, the patient needs to be kept NPO and educated about the treatment options. Patients with uremic pericarditis need to be closely followed up as recurrence of pericardial fluid and signs of pericarditis are not uncommon. Patients need to be told to limit strenuous activity which may increase the risk for hypotension and arrhythmias. The pharmacist should educate the patient about medication compliance. If colchicine is used as a preventive remedy, the patient should be informed about the adverse effects and the importance of follow up. A cardiology nurse should follow up on these patients until all symptoms have subsided. At all times, members of the interprofessional team should communicate with each other to ensure improved outcomes.

The prognosis for most patients is good but often recovery can take weeks or months.