The management approach includes patient education, effective prophylaxis, discontinuation of the overused analgesic, and follow-up to prevent a recurrence.

**Prevention**

MOH is felt to be a preventable disease; therefore, the emphasis should be on educating patients on the importance of appropriate medication administration and the risks not only of its side effects but also the potential development of chronic headaches with excessive medication use is essential.

Specific transitional strategies can be used to help discontinue the overused medication and hence reduce MOH.

**Replacing the overused medication with an alternative symptomatic therapy:**The overused magic medication is stopped,  preventive therapy is started or optimized, and alternative symptomatic medication is used for less than or equal to 2 days a week. This is particularly helpful for patients who have a higher risk of drug toxicity from overused medication than experiencing withdrawal symptoms. This approach is supported by evidence from open-labeled clinical trials.

**Continuing overused medication during initial treatment:**This approach is particularly beneficial for patients who are reluctant to stop the medication and are not at risk of toxicity.

**Using bridge therapy (temporary medication):**A transitional therapy is advised for the patients with severe or frequent headaches and who are more likely to experience headaches while discontinuing the overused medication with start of symptomatic and preventive therapy.

To help minimize a patient's withdrawal symptoms and maximize comfort during this phase several medication therapies have demonstrated usefulness.  Keep in mind that the offending drug should not be an option. Several NSAIDs have been trialed and demonstrated effective such as naproxen, indomethacin, and ketorolac.

The "Raskin protocol" is one such regimen that compared intravenous DHE and metoclopramide every 8 hours versus diazepam in patients with MOH and it demonstrated that DHE was beneficial (89% headache free in 48 hours and 71% at 16 months) during the detoxification phase of MOH, however it should not be utilized in patients with vascular disease.

**Discontinuing the overused medication before starting prophylactic therapy:**And alternative strategy includes stopping the overused medication for two months prior to the start of preventive medication.  However, patients may not tolerate this approach. Therefore,  this route is usually not advised.

**Treatment approach based on discontinuation of the specific offending drug:**

- Discontinuation of the drugs other than opioids, barbiturates, or benzodiazepines:

- Start or optimize preventive therapy
- Switch from overused medication to an alternative medication from a different class. The use of acute medication should be limited don’t know more than two days per week.OR Slowly taper the acute medication as the frequency of headaches decreases in response to preventive therapy. However, for patients who still experience headaches, bridge therapy with a long acting NSAID or steroid should be added.

- Discontinuation of opioids, barbiturates, or benzodiazepines: Drugs are gradually tapered (in 2-4 weeks) if used at higher dosages. However, they may be withdrawn abruptly if lesser dosages are taken.

- Treatment with once a week transdermal clonidine patch (0.1 to 0.2 mg/24 hours) may be advised for one to two weeks to manage opioid withdrawal symptoms.
- Phenobarbital is particularly recommended for patients discontinuing butalbital. A 30 mg of phenobarbital is equivalent to 100 mg of butalbital. Therefore, it corresponds with maximum dose of 90 mg of phenobarbitol with 300 mg of butabital.