Specular microscopy gives a peculiar and distinctive endothelial picture in various corneal endotheliopathies, which are discussed below. The corneal endotheliopathies are divided into primary and secondary. Primary endotheliopathies are not secondary to any ocular or systemic pathology. In secondary endotheliopathy, the endothelial damage is secondary to an underlying ocular or systemic insult.

**Examples of Primary Endotheliopathies**

- Corneal guttata

- Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy

- Posterior polymorphous endothelial dystrophy

- Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy

- Iridocorneal endothelial syndrome

- Senile endothelial degeneration****

**Examples of Primary Endotheliopathies**

- Endothelial changes after surgery

- Contact lens endotheliopathy

- Pseudoexfoliation induced endotheliopathy

- Endotheliopathy after Ocular Inflammation (Uveitis, Endothelitis)

- Endotheliopathy after forceps injury

- Endotheliopathy in corneal dystrophy

- Drug-induced endotheliopathy

**Corneal Guttata**

The most common primary corneal endotheliopathy is corneal guttate. They are seen as a part of the normal aging process.

- **Stage 1 Guttae**- Nodular, small, dark structure in the endothelial cell center

- **Stage 2 Guttae**- Nodule are of the same size as endothelial cells, surrounding cells stretched

- **Stage 3 Guttae**- Very large, multiple guttae may be seen, and one nodule has many endothelial cells; the adjacent cells lose their boundaries

- **Stage 4 Guttae**- The guttae coalesce, and endothelial cells in between appear abnormal

- **Stage 5 Guttae**- There is a continued coalescence of guttae, and the endothelial mosaic becomes challenging to visualize

**Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy**

FECD is characterized by the presence of guttae, which are focal excrescences of DM in the central cornea.

These appear as drop-out areas on the endothelial image. In the specular images with few discrete and nonconfluent guttae, the endothelial cells between the dropout areas can still be made to make a precise diagnosis. However, when there are numerous guttae, the endothelial cells cannot be imaged, and the specular images are not readable to make a correct diagnosis.

The functionality of endothelium should be associated primarily with the patient's signs and symptoms, such as early morning blurring of vision, subepithelial haze, and central versus peripheral pachymetry changes. The changes in the FECD endothelium start from the center and progresses towards the periphery.

One method of assessment of endothelium is to perform Descematorhexis without endothelial keratoplasty. Specular microscopy should be obtained in different gazes to have a preoperative workup of the patient and helps in decision making.

Good specular count with minimal guttae can be managed with cataract surgery with a good viscoelastic cover of the endothelium. While subjecting the patient to cataract surgery, guarded prognosis and chances of corneal decompensation should be explained to the patient.

Sometimes, the guttae can be misleading and mimic many conditions such as pigments in anterior uveitis, pseudoguttae or secondary guttae as in ocular inflammation, infection or endothelial swelling, Hassal Henle bodies, which are DM excrescences in the peripheral cornea. Pseudo guttae are transient and reverse when the pathology reverses. Hence the specular finding should always be correlated with slit lamp imaging.

**Posterior Polymorphous Endothelial Dystrophy**

This condition is characterized by the presence of vesicles, band-shaped structures, and placoid mosaics on the endothelium. The pathology can be bilateral or unilateral. In many patients, the endothelial changes are subtle and can be easily overlooked.

Posterior polymorphous endothelial dystrophy can be mistaken for keratoconus due to steep cornea, and unilateral cases may result in amblyopia. Specular microscopy picks up these cases. The endothelial cell density is reduced in these cases compared to age-matched eyes, and endothelial cells are missing in the areas of vesicles and bands.

**Congenital Hereditary Endothelial Dystrophy**

Stromal haze in CHED acts as a barrier in specular imaging and precludes a clear image of the endothelium. Hence it is not possible to obtain a clear image in these cases.

**Iridocorneal Endothelial Syndrome**

ICE syndrome comprises Chandler syndrome, Progressive iris atrophy, and Cogan Reese syndrome. Specular microscopy gives distinct morphological changes in these cases.

**Senile Endothelial Degeneration**

With advanced age, there is an abnormal reduction in endothelial cell density and an increase in pleomorphism, polymegathism, and proliferation in guttae.

**Endothelial Changes after Surgery**

A variable degree of endothelial cell loss has been reported after intraocular surgeries such as cataract surgery and phakic IOLs.

Approximately 4 to 10% of endothelial cell loss occurs after routine cataract surgery. The cell loss postoperatively is called iatrogenic endotheliopathy. This results in corneal decompensation and stromal edema. The various risk factors for iatrogenic endotheliopathy are ocular surgery, diabetes mellitus, uncontrolled glaucoma, uveitis, polymegathism, pleomorphism, and corneal guttae in FECD.

In a study by Armitage et al., there was biexponential cell loss after keratoplasty. In another study, endothelial cell loss was 7.8% per year between 3 to 5 years post keratoplasty and 4.2 per year between 5 to 10 years. The mean five-year endothelial cell loss after endothelial keratoplasty has been reported to be 47 to 48%.

**Contact Lens Endotheliopathy**

Regular contact lens wear has been reported to cause acute and chronic corneal endothelium changes as contact lens wear duration increases and the rate of polymegathism increases.

However, the changes reverse over an extended period or if an alternate contact lens is used with higher oxygen permeability. Contact lens-induced endotheliopathy results in corneal edema, foreign body sensation, photophobia, reduced visual acuity, and corneal exhaustion syndrome.

**Pseudoexfoliation Induced Endotheliopathy**

Pseudoexfoliation is known to cause endothelial cell alteration. This result in reduced cell density and guttae.

**Endotheliopathy after Glaucoma**

Uncontrolled IOP may reduce endothelial cell density and morphological changes in the endothelium. Another school of thought is physiological alternation in the glaucomatous eyes, reduced aqueous outflow, or decreased oxygen concentration of the aqueous.

**Endotheliopathy after Ocular Inflammation (Uveitis, Endothelitis)**

Uveitis can result in reduced endothelial cell loss and cell function. In uveitis, immune-reactive proteins are released in the anterior chamber, leading to endothelial cell loss.

**Endotheliopathy after Forceps Injury**

Forceps trauma can lead to DM rupture and result in corneal edema at birth. The tear heals, and corneal edema is resolved with the migration of endothelial cells to cover the defect. The endothelial cell density is lower in the eyes compared to the normal.

**Endotheliopathy in Corneal Dystrophy**

In macular corneal dystrophy (MCD), there is the deposition of GAGs in the stroma and corneal endothelium. In MCD, guttae similar to FECD are observed. Endothelial morphological changes and reduced cell density can occur in these cases after cataract surgery. Hence a proper preoperative workup is necessary.

**Drug-Induced Endotheliopathy**

Patients who are on antidiabetic drugs and chronic kidney disease who are on hemodialysis can have endothelial abnormalities.

**Role of Specular Microscopy in Eye Banks**

Assessing the donor corneal endothelial status before subjecting the tissue to keratoplasty is a regular and standard practice.

The endothelial count is an imperative assessment parameter to decide donor suitability for optical penetrating or lamellar keratoplasty. The cut-off taken for OPK is 2000 cells/mm, and for lamellar transplant, it is 2200 to 2500 cells/ mm, which varies based on the eye bank and surgeon preference.