Because of criteria that encompass both psychotic and mood symptoms, schizoaffective disorder is easy to mistake for other mental disorders. Disorders that must be ruled out during the workup of schizoaffective disorder include:

- Schizophrenia

- Major depressive disorder with psychotic features

- Bipolar disorder

**Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder:**There has to be a definite period of at least two weeks in which there are only psychotic symptoms (delusions and hallucinations) without mood symptoms to diagnose schizoaffective disorder. However, a major mood episode (depression or mania) is present for the majority of the total duration of the illness. Once the psychotic symptoms predominate the majority of the total duration of the illness, the diagnosis leans towards schizophrenia. Also, schizophrenia requires 6 months of prodromal or residual symptoms; schizoaffective disorder does not require this criterion.

**Major Depressive Disorder Psychotic Features and Schizoaffective Disorder:**Patients with major depression with psychotic features (MDD with PF) only experience psychotic features during their mood episodes. In contrast, schizoaffective requires at least 2 weeks in which there are only psychotic symptoms (delusions and hallucinations) without mood symptoms. Patients with MDD with PF do not meet criterion A of schizoaffective disorder.

**Bipolar Disorder and Schizoaffective Disorder:**Similar to the contrasts of MDD w/ PF, patients with bipolar disorder with psychotic features only experience psychotic features (delusions and hallucinations) during a manic episode. Again, schizoaffective requires a period of at least 2 weeks in which there are only psychotic symptoms without mood symptoms. Psychotic features in bipolar disorder do not meet criterion A of schizoaffective disorder.