Normal breast ducts terminate into a terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU). The duct ends into lobules made up of small glandular structures called acini. There is a bilayer of cells lining the ductal-lobular systems consisting of inner luminal epithelial cells and outer luminal myoepithelial cells. The majority of breast lesions (benign or malignant) develop in the TDLU.

Atypical ductal hyperplasia is an intraductal clonal epithelial cell proliferation. ADH and LGDCIS involve the TDLU or the interlobular ducts.  ADH and LGDCIS have the same atypical histological features of small, round, monomorphic, non-overlapping cells that are evenly spaced, with uniform nuclei, rare mitosis, and inconspicuous nucleoli.  ADH is differentiated from LGDCIS by size or volume; if the atypical cells involve ≤ 2 mm, ≤ 2 spaces, or a portion of a duct a diagnosis of ADH is made. Although size is helpful there is no universally accepted size criterion for ADH.

ADH has similar architectural features to DCIS, such as arcades, rigid bridges, bars of uniform thickness, a solid growth pattern, and micropapillae (papillae with a broad tip and a slender base and lack fibrovascular cores). ADH commonly grows in the cribriform architecture where cells bridge across and fill the duct, and form pseudo-lumens that appear as punched-out spaces. In ADH the spaces are not as uniform as in DCIS and the bridges may be thin and show streaming cells, versus the polarized cells in DCIS.

Benign cell changes may be present such as spindle cells, columnar cell change (some with apical snouts), or cuboidal cells. Benign cellular proliferations like usual ductal hyperplasia can also involve ADH. ADH is often associated with secretory material that fosters the development of microcalcifications, that are commonly identified on mammography. ADH can involve benign lesions such as apocrine metaplasia, papillomas, fibroadenomas, sclerosing adenosis, and gynecomastia. ADH involving a papilloma is termed papilloma with atypia.

Large nuclei with conspicuous nucleoli and frequent mitosis, such as those seen in intermediate or high-grade DCIS, are never present in ADH. If high-grade nuclei are identified, regardless of size, a diagnosis of high-grade DCIS is rendered.

ADH is typically present as a single focus or involves a small area on a core biopsy. However, ADH is occasionally found in close proximity to DCIS when multiple level sections of the core biopsy are performed (however, this is not routinely done). Patients with a diagnosis of ADH on a core biopsy sometimes have worse lesions on surgical excision (DCIS or invasive carcinoma). For this reason, surgical excision is indicated when a diagnosis of ADH is made on a core biopsy.

The immunohistochemistry staining for ADH and LGDCIS is similar. Both lesions stain negatively for Cytokeratin 5/6 (but it is positive in the myoepithelial cells surrounding the duct or lobule due to the in situ nature of the lesions). ADH is typically diffusely and strongly positive for estrogen receptor (ER).

Not all pathologies are consistent when diagnosing ADH or LGDCIS. A diagnosis of ADH is applied only to lesions when LGDCIS is highly considered, but the histological features present or the size is not sufficient for it. In true borderline cases, a diagnosis of ADH is made, and the pathologist should relay the complexity of the case to the treating clinician.