Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT) is one of the most frequent autoimmune diseases and has been reported to be associated with gastric disorders in 10% to 40% of patients. About 40% of patients with autoimmune gastritis also present with Hashimoto thyroiditis, according to research by Cellini et al. Chronic autoimmune gastritis (CAG) is characterized by the partial or complete disappearance of parietal cells leading to impairment of hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor production. The patients go on to develop hypochlorhydria-dependent iron-deficient anemia, leading to pernicious anemia, and severe gastric atrophy.

Thyrogastric syndrome was first described in the 1960s when thyroid autoantibodies were found in a subset of patients with pernicious anemia and atrophic gastritis. The latest guidelines have incorporated the two aforementioned autoimmune disorders into a syndrome, now known as a polyglandular autoimmune syndrome (PAS). This is characterized by two or more endocrine and nonendocrine disorders. The thyroid gland develops from the primitive gut, and therefore the thyroid follicular cells share similar characteristics with parietal cells of the same endodermal origin. For example, both are polarized and have apical microvilli with enzymatic activity, and both can concentrate and transport iodine across the cell membrane via the sodium/iodide symporter. Iodine not only plays an essential role in the production of thyroid hormone but it is also involved in the regulation of gastric mucosal cell proliferation and acts as an electron donor in the presence of gastric peroxidase and assists in the removal of free oxygen radicals.

It is important to note that due to the pharmaceutical formation of thyroxine available worldwide, there can be problems with absorption in patients with disorders of the gastric mucosa. Most levothyroxine is obtained by salification with sodium hydroxide, making sodium levothyroxine. The absorption of T4 occurs in all areas of the small intestine and ranges from 62% to 84% of the ingested dose. Decreased gastric acid secretion can disrupt this percentage and may cause issues with decreased absorption of most pharmaceutical grade forms of levothyroxine, except for liquid-based or soft gel formations.

Clinically, it is important to note the association between thyroid and gastric autoimmune diseases. The presence of iron-deficiency anemia and thyroxine absorption issues should encourage further diagnostic workup.