# Continuing Education Activity

Cannabinoids are biologically active compounds used in the management and treatment of appetite/weight loss from HIV/AIDS and chemotherapy in addition to epilepsy. According to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), it is in the anti-emetics and anti-epileptic class of medications per the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, and contraindications for cannabinoids as a valuable agent in managing the before-mentioned diseases. Moreover, this activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with appetite or weight loss or epilepsy.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of cannabinoids.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of cannabinoids.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients on cannabinoid therapy.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance cannabinoids and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Cannabinoids, broadly speaking, are a class of biological compounds that bind to cannabinoid receptors. They are most frequently sourced from and associated with the plants of the Cannabis genus, including Cannabis sativa, Cannabis indica, and Cannabis ruderalis. The earliest known use of cannabinoids dates back 5,000 years ago in modern Romania, while the documentation of the earliest medical dates back to around 400 AD.

- Phytocannabinoids - derived naturally from flora

- Endocannabinoids - produced endogenously

- Synthetic Cannabinoids – created artificially

Of all known cannabinoids (hundreds of which have been isolated and identified), arguably the most commonly notable are the phytocannabinoids tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) - the former being responsible for Cannabis’s psychoactive effects. Throughout their storied history, cannabinoids have been renowned for their psychotropic and physiological effects. In tandem, the effects, as mentioned above, have made them the target of medical, cultural, and recreational uses, of which the former will be the focus of this article. Cannabinoids are frequently the targets of pharmaceutical innovation, with most being either structurally related to or mimicking the ligand-receptor activity of THC and CBD. These biochemical innovations have found extensive application in clinical studies for a variety of diseases, where cannabinoids have shown mild to strong efficacy:

- Chronic pain, opioid dependence

- Epilepsy (e.g., Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome)

- Appetite stimulation in HIV/AIDS and cancer patients

- Tourette syndrome

- Multiple sclerosis

- Chemotherapy-related nausea/vomiting

Clinical studies notwithstanding, in the United States (US), only a small number of cannabinoids have been approved for medical use by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Those are:

- Dronabinol

- Nabilone

- Cannabidiol

Finally, as a point of clarification for this review, Cannabis refers to the plants mentioned above of the Cannabis genus, marijuana refers to parts of Cannabis containing notable concentrations of THC, and hemp refers to cannabis plants often designated for industrial use containing less than legal threshold of THC in the US. These distinctions are important, inasmuch as many people, both laypersons, and even medical personnel, blur the lines between them.

This article focuses on systemically ingested cannabinoid formulations and does not address topical cannabinoid products, which are available over the counter.

# Mechanism of Action

Cannabinoids function by stimulating two receptors, cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) and type 2 (CB2), within the endocannabinoid system. This system is a complex network of organs throughout the body, expressing the cannabinoid receptors and playing a homeostatic role. Functions of the endocannabinoid system include pain,

Endogenously, endocannabinoids serve as neuro-regulatory modulators responsible for retrograde neurotransmission. Here, a post-synaptic neuron releases endocannabinoids that bind to predominantly CB1 receptors on the presynaptic neuron. This binding results in inhibited presynaptic calcium channel activation and subsequent presynaptic neurotransmitter release.

Binding to the different parts of the central nervous system mediates different psychotropic properties of cannabinoids, particularly THC. These areas and end-effects include

- Hippocampus: impairment of short-term memory

- Neocortex: impairment of judgment and sensation

- Basal ganglia: altered reaction time and movement

- Hypothalamus: increased appetite

- Nucleus accumbens: euphoria

- Amygdala: panic and paranoia

- Cerebellum: ataxia

- Brainstem: anti-emesis

- Spinal cord: analgesia

Other end-effects of CB1 activation peripherally include dry mouth, conjunctivitis, tachycardia, hypotension, and bradypnea.

# Administration

Depending on the cannabinoid, the route of administration will vary. Medical cannabinoids are generally administered orally as a capsule or liquid suspension. Dronabinol is available as a capsule in 2.5mg, 5mg, and 10mg strengths in addition to an oral 5mg/mL formulation. The medication is generally taken twice daily an hour before meals with titration from the initial dose performed gradually based on tolerability and response.

Cannabinoids may also be administered orally via incorporation in consumed food products such as infused teas or oils or via inhalation by smoking cannabis or marijuana.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse effects of cannabinoids exist on a spectrum, ranging from mild to lethal, and vary on the mode associated risks of administration. The most frequently encountered side effects of cannabinoids are generally those from recreational sources.

Over the long-term, heavy cannabinoid abuse has correlated in numerous adverse health conditions, including:

- Addiction, altered brain development, and cognitive impairment in adolescents

- Chronic bronchitis, ARDS, lung cancer

- Increased risk for myocardial infarction, stroke, and thromboembolic events

- Exacerbation of mood disorders (anxiety, depression) and psychotic disorders (schizophrenia)

- Exacerbation of neurodegenerative diseases (multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease)

In addition to the above, other adverse effects of cannabinoids include hypersensitivity reactions to active cannabinoids in specific formulations or constituent components (e.g., capsules or inactive additives) or disulfiram reaction (nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and headache) with concurrent disulfiram or metronidazole use.

# Contraindications

Contraindications to cannabinoids are few but include hypersensitivity to specific medications, cannabinoids generally, constituent components of specific formulations (e.g., sesame seed oil in capsules or other inactive ingredients), and recent administration of products containing disulfiram or metronidazole within two weeks.

# Monitoring

Cannabinoids are generally not monitored regularly except for some patients who require routine drug screening or present with suspicion of drug overdose or abuse. The most common diagnostic test for cannabinoid detection is the urine drug screen (UDS), which detects THC and CBD metabolites. Otherwise, owing to differences in metabolism, mode of administration detection, and frequency of use may cause detection times to vary significantly between patients. Besides UDS, monitoring is otherwise based mainly on symptoms of intoxication and overdose.

# Toxicity

In the event of cannabinoid drug toxicity, as described above, treatment and management are largely supportive and focused on symptom relief.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cannabinoids have served numerous roles in medicine, culture, and recreation for almost as long as recorded human history. With pharmaceutical and illicit forms available to patients, healthcare providers and other interprofessional healthcare team members must be equipped with the knowledge to identify symptoms of cannabinoid abuse and toxicity and take steps to mitigate adverse outcomes. However, medical professionals must also understand medical conditions that may respond to treatment with appropriately dosed and administered cannabinoids.

Cannabinoids can be recommended or prescribed by clinicians (physicians such as MDs and DOs, and mid-level providers like NPs and PAs) in accordance with the current evidence-based information. Nursing staff can also play a role in counseling patients and answering questions. As with any medication, the pharmacist should verify dosing, check for any potential drug-drug interactions, perform complete medication reconciliation, and provide any additional counseling the patient may need regarding dosing, administration, monitoring for adverse events, and answer any questions the patient may have. This approach demonstrates how all members of today's integrated, interprofessional health team must demonstrate full engagement regarding the entire spectrum of cannabinoids' ability to help and harm patients so that they can achieve an optimal balance. [Level 5]