# Continuing Education Activity

Somatostatinoma is a rare neuroendocrine tumor (NET) with an incidence of 1 in 40 million individuals and accounts for less than 5% of pancreatic NETs (pNETs). This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of somatostatinoma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of somatostatinoma.
- Outline the typical presentation and common exam findings of a patient with somatostatinoma.
- Summarize the typical imaging findings associated with somatostatinoma.
- Explain the importance of care coordination among the interprofessional team to decide management based on prognosis.

# Introduction

Somatostatinoma is a rare neuroendocrine tumor (NET) with an incidence of 1 in 40 million individuals

# Etiology

Somatostatinoma can be sporadic or may occur in association with neurocutaneous syndromes such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (the commonest, 40 to 50% of cases), neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), and Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.

# Epidemiology

Somatostatinoma commonly presents in late adulthood between 40 and 60 years of age with no gender predilection.

# Pathophysiology

Somatostatinoma can be functional or non-functional. Non-functional tumors are common in the duodenum and are identified incidentally or from mechanical obstruction of the biliary tree.

# Histopathology

Pancreatic tumors are generally larger and more malignant than their duodenal counterparts.

# History and Physical

Non-functional tumors are frequently asymptomatic. Later in the course of the disease, they may present with abdominal pain, vomiting, jaundice, and steatorrhea due to the mechanical effects of the tumor on the biliary and pancreatic drainage.

# Evaluation

Early diagnosis of somatostatinoma can be difficult as non-functional tumors often produce no symptoms, and functional tumors present with non-specific symptoms that can masquerade other clinical conditions. Hence most non-functional tumors are discovered incidentally or during the workup of vague gastrointestinal symptoms.

Since somatostatinoma usually presents late, tumors are large at diagnosis and are easily visualized using imaging modalities such as CT, MRI, or MRCP.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment depends upon the functionality, operability, and staging of the tumor. Surgery with the excision of the primary tumor and all the metastasized lymph nodes is the only curative treatment.

Isolated liver metastasis should have treatment with resection or selective hepatic transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE).

# Differential Diagnosis

Symptoms related to the obstruction of the biliary tree require differentiation from other extrahepatic causes of cholestasis such as choledocholithiasis, choledochal cyst, sclerosing cholangitis, cholangiocarcinoma, pancreatic pseudocysts, and pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Similarly, symptoms secondary to pancreatic insufficiencies such as steatorrhea and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus should raise suspicion of somatostatinoma in addition to chronic pancreatitis and other pancreatic tumors.

# Medical Oncology

Somatostatin analogs such as octreotide and lanreotide are indicated in functional tumors of any size.

Chemotherapy is recommended in metastatic grade 2 and any grade 3 tumors. Streptozocin with 5–fluorouracil or doxorubicin is recommended in grade 2 NETs.

# Staging

Around 75% of the tumors are metastatic at presentation, with liver involvement early in the course of the disease.

# Prognosis

The 5-year survival rate of patients with pancreatic or periampullary somatostatinoma is 60 to 100% with localized disease and 15 to 60% with metastatic disease.

# Complications

Systemic complications include diabetes mellitus, cholelithiasis, iron deficiency anemia, macrocytic anemia, deficiency manifestations of fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K such as night blindness, osteopenia, and bleeding, respectively. Diabetes mellitus is usually mild, and ketoacidosis is rare. It is treated with diet and/or oral hypoglycemic agents or with small doses of insulin.

Locally, the tumor can lead to obstructive hyperbilirubinemia and gastrointestinal bleeding.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Follow-up is recommended for a minimum of 10 years.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Provider awareness and patient education are necessary for prompt diagnosis of the disease and early initiation of treatment. Reliable online resources such as the American Cancer Society can provide evidence-based information to providers and patients.

# Pearls and Other Issues

The rarity of the tumor and the wide variation in the non-specific symptomatology requires a high index of suspicion for initial diagnosis. Early diagnosis is imperative as a significant majority of these tumors are metastatic at presentation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Advanced cases of somatostatinoma with hepatic metastases often require an interprofessional approach inclusive of a gastroenterologist, surgeon, and oncologist to evaluate the prognosis and treatment choices between curative procedures and palliative therapy. Pharmacologists review treatment with somatostatin analogs or chemotherapy. Specialty-trained nurses assist with surgery, monitor patients preoperatively, and administer treatment.