Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) disorders are considered to be a very challenging obstetric condition that mandates the coordination and collaboration among the members of the interprofessional team. These teams should include perinatologists to assist with diagnosis, intensivists for postpartum and post-surgical care in the intensive care unit, and neonatologists to care for the preterm infant. Additionally, the provider performing the surgery should be comfortable performing cesarean hysterectomies and have access to surgeons who can assist in the case of percreta or damage to surrounding organs. This may include gynecologic oncologists, general surgeons, or urologists. A well-equipped blood bank should be available for the possibility of a massive transfusion.

The presence of an interprofessional approach has been shown to decrease reoperation rates, intensive care admissions, and large-volume blood transfusion rates. The nurse plays a paramount role in the evaluation and management of women with PAS disorders. The nurse should monitor and update the clinician regarding vital signs and fetal cardiotocographs. The nurse should assist the obstetric provider in educating women with PAS disorders and their families about the nature of their condition and any anticipated challenges during their antenatal, natal, and postnatal periods. Patient education is key to the successful management of women with PAS disorders, and women should be provided with patient information leaflets that are easy to understand.

Women should be given adequate time to discuss decisions with their families and friends. Fertility preservation options should be carefully discussed with women with PAS disorders. Women should be encouraged to express their wishes about preserving fertility with a thorough discussion of risks and benefits. Throughout these discussions and the patient's antenatal and postpartum course, members of the interprofessional team should coordinate to optimize maternal and fetal outcomes. [Level 5]