The hyoid functions as an anchor for the suprahyoid muscles (digastric, stylohyoid, mylohyoid and geniohyoid) as well as the infrahyoid muscles (sternohyoid, sternothyroid, omohyoid, and thyrohyoid).

**Suprahyoid Muscles**

The suprahyoid muscles are four in number on either side of the anterior midline above the level of the hyoid (Media Image, Table 1). They attach the hyoid to the mandible, tongue, and skull. The digastric muscle has two bellies, posterior and anterior. The anterior belly originates from the digastric fossa of the mandible, while the posterior belly originates from the mastoid notch. Both the digastric bellies insert to the intermediate tendon of the digastric muscle which is attached to the hyoid. The stylohyoid muscle originates from the temporal styloid process; it is a thin and long muscle that lies parallel to the posterior belly of the digastric. The mylohyoid muscle originates from the mylohyoid line of the mandible; it is a thin muscle that upholds and makes up the floor of the mouth while also creating a sling inferior to the tongue. The geniohyoid muscle is a narrow and short muscle that originates from the interior mental spine of the symphysis menti. The stylohyoid, mylohyoid, and geniohyoid insert on the body of the hyoid.

**Infrahyoid Muscles**

The infrahyoid muscles are four pairs of muscles located in the anterior part of the neck (Media Image, Table 2). They are found between the hyoid above and the shoulder girdle below. The sternohyoid muscle primarily originates from the back of the manubrium and inserts on the medial part of the inferior border of the hyoid body. The sternothyroid muscle originates primarily from the back of the manubrium and inserts on the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage. The omohyoid muscle has a superior belly and an inferior belly. The superior belly of the omohyoid arises from the intermediate tendon of the omohyoid and inserts on the hyoid. The inferior belly of the omohyoid originates from the scapular superior border and inserts to the intermediate tendon of the omohyoid. The thyrohyoid muscle originates from the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage and inserts at the inferior aspect of the body of the hyoid and the greater cornu.

**Other Muscles Related to the Hyoid**

The hyoglossus and the middle pharyngeal constrictor originate from the hyoid. These muscles do not form the group as mentioned above of muscles related to the hyoid.

**Elevation of the Hyoid**

The digastric, stylohyoid, mylohyoid and geniohyoid function in elevating the hyoid.

**Depression of the Hyoid**

The sternohyoid, sternothyroid, omohyoid, and thyrohyoid function in depressing the hyoid.