Episodes of acute otitis media may be over-diagnosed, and antibiotics prescribed for otherwise sterile middle ear effusions. Such overdiagnosis increases the administration of antibiotics, increasing the likelihood of antibiotic resistance in the community.

A comparative study done involving pediatricians from Greece, Italy, South Africa, and the USA showed pediatricians often confuse otitis media with elusion (OME) for acute otitis media (AOM). Another study, carried out by Pichichero and Poole, to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of tympanocentesis skills in a conference including both pediatricians and otolaryngologists showed that 50% of pediatricians correctly diagnosed otitis media (AOM) vs. otitis media with effusion (OME) while 73% of otolaryngologists did the same. However, the use of tympanocentesis was at 83% for pediatricians and 89% for the otolaryngologists, reflecting the cultural and practical preferences of the respondents' countries of origin.

In a survey carried out among Canadian pediatricians and family physicians, only 4% of those that participated in the study have been trained to perform tympanocentesis, and none of them currently perform it. The study also shows that of those that were trained, a good number of them graduated medical school before 1970, thus indicating that they might have had post-grad training abroad or the procedure was much more common in times back, thus necessitating training.

Steinbach et al. showed that few pediatric and family medicine residency training programs across America and Canada included tympanocentesis training in their curriculum. Current practice patterns in the west often favor empiric treatment of AOM with antibiotics and treatment of OME with watchful waiting (unless the patient is in the language-development years, where treatment with PE tubes/grommets is common). Tympanocentesis is a valuable skill for the clinician who is practicing in an environment where antibiotic compliance/stewardship and patient follow-up are not easy, and it can direct or avoid antibiotic treatment to provide relief and curb resistance patterns by avoiding over-prescription. In any clinical environment, it behooves the clinician to know this technique to address their most difficult and refractory patients, or to treat patients with SSNHL.