MALToma frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma due to its varied presentation involving almost any organ system. These patients may present with non-specific signs and symptoms. History and physical exam very rarely suggest the presence of a MALToma; hence it is difficult to make a diagnosis without proper diagnostic studies. While the oncologist is almost always involved in the care of patients with a MALToma, it is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes specialists, pharmacists, and nurses. Care is necessary while taking a biopsy, as conventional biopsies may miss the diagnosis because sometimes the tumor can infiltrate the submucosa without affecting the mucosal layer. Proper technique with jumbo biopsies and snare biopsies can lead to a diagnosis more efficiently. The most sensitive of all is ultrasound-guided endoscopic fine-needle aspiration biopsy or endoscopic submucosal resection.

The pharmacist should have involvement in the medical management, working with the clinician on agent selection, appropriate dosing, and checking for interactions. Nurses monitor the patient on follow-up visits, with an eye for adverse drug reactions, assessing patient compliance, and answering patient questions, while keeping the other clinicians informed of their findings.

The outcomes of MALToma depend on the organ system involved and the stage of the disease. However, to improve outcomes and obtain an early diagnosis, the involvement of an interprofessional group of specialists is the optimal approach. [Level 5]