Three separate mechanisms regulate the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex: covalent modification (the primary form of regulation), allosteric regulation, and transcriptional regulation. Covalent modification occurs as phosphorylation on the PDC’s first subunit, pyruvate decarboxylase. Phosphorylation by PDC kinase results in a reduction of PDC activity and an excess of ADP or pyruvate (indicating a need for more acetyl-CoA in the citric acid cycle) downregulates the PDC. Note that PDC kinase isoforms are tissue-specific. Dephosphorylation by phosphatase thus renders PDC active; the presence of calcium ions upregulates phosphatase's activity. Allosteric regulation of PDC involves the direct mechanism of product inhibition or substrate activation. For example, if E2 releases an excess of Acetyl-CoA or E3 an excess of NADH, these products will directly inhibit the PDC. On the other hand, an excess of CoASH (precursor to acetyl-CoA) or NAD+, these substrates will serve as direct activators of the PDC. Finally, transcriptional regulation is dependent on the amount of enzyme produced in fasting and fed conditions; enzyme production is reduced in the fasting state and increased in response to insulin in the fed state.

After the PDC synthesizes acetyl-CoA, it enters the metabolic process known as the citric acid cycle (or the tricarboxylic acid cycle). This cycle has eight steps, seven of which are within the mitochondrial matrix and the outlier, succinate dehydrogenase is associated with the electron transport chain on the inner mitochondrial membrane. As stated above, this cycle results in the final oxidative steps of acetyl groups, resulting in the release of two molecules of carbon dioxide gas. The citric acid cycle further yields reduced coenzymes with each oxidative step; these coenzymes include NADH, GTP, and FADH2. The details of these redox reactions are in the Molecular subsection, as the discussion of these reactions should take place at the molecular level for best comprehension.