Pravastatin is available as an oral tablet and is administered once daily with or without food. It is available in 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg, and 80 mg strength tablets. HMG Co-A inhibitors are most effective when taken at bedtime due to their effect on hepatic cholesterol synthesis. The drug should be swallowed whole with water and not crushed. The clinician can make dose adjustments at 4-week intervals based on individual patient responses to the drug.

Hyperlipidemia, hypercholesterolemia, and mixed dyslipidemia:

- In the adults and geriatrics population: 40 mg orally once daily (do not exceed 80 mg per day)

- In children eight to thirteen years age: 20 mg orally once daily (do not exceed 60 mg per day)

- In adolescents fourteen to eighteen years age: 40 mg orally once daily (doses higher than 40 mg are not studied in this population)

Stroke or myocardial infarction prophylaxis and secondary prevention of cardiovascular mortality and acute coronary events:

- In adults: 40 mg orally once daily (do not exceed 80 mg per day)

**Special Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**A starting dose of 10 mg pravastatin once daily is recommended in patients with severe renal impairment.

**Patients with Liver Impairment:**Liver function tests are recommended to be performed before the initiation of pravastatin therapy and when clinically indicated.****Patients with hepatic impairment should avoid HMG Co-A inhibitors.

**Pregnancy Implications:**After a comprehensive review of all available data, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has removed the strongest warning against using HMG-co-A Reductase Inhibitors in pregnant women. However, most women should stop taking pravastatin once they become pregnant. Assess the risk vs. benefits to the pregnant patient.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Pravastatin is excreted in low levels in human milk. Maternal exposure to statins can have serious adverse reactions in nursing infants. It can disrupt infant lipid metabolism, so women who require treatment with pravastatin should refrain from breastfeeding their infants. Pravastatin has low oral bioavailability and has a lower risk to infants. Children with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia can be treated with statins beginning at 12 months of age. There is a lack of data, and hence alternative medicines are preferred especially when nursing preterm or newborn infants.