The nerves of the cavernous sinus are the oculomotor nerve (CN III), trochlear nerve (CN IV), ophthalmic nerve (V1), maxillary nerve (V2), abducens nerve (CN VI), and the sympathetic plexus around the internal carotid artery.

The CN III exits the midbrain ventrally at the interpeduncular fossa, pierces the dura, and enters the cavernous sinus, where it runs on the roof and lateral wall. After exiting the cavernous sinus, it goes through the superior orbital fossa. Within the superior orbital fossa, it splits into the superior and inferior division.

The CN IV is the only nerve exiting the midbrain dorsally. It originates from the trochlear nerve nucleus; it crosses the midline and emerges inferior to the inferior colliculus, situated in the posterior part of the midbrain. It then travels anteriorly around the midbrain, pierces and enters the dura mater near the tentorium cerebelli, and continues its course in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus. After exiting the cavernous sinus, it enters the orbit through the superior orbital fissure to innervate the superior oblique muscle.

The ophthalmic nerve (V1) and the maxillary nerve (V2) are divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The CN V exits the brainstem from the ventrolateral pons and enters the Meckel’s cave, where the trigeminal ganglion lies. The V1 branches of the trigeminal ganglion pass through the inferior part of the cavernous sinus and after exiting the cavernous sinus, they enter the orbit via the superior orbital fissure. Also, the V2 branches of the trigeminal ganglion enter the cavernous sinus and exit the skull via the foramen rotundum.

The CN VI exits the brainstem ventrally at the pontomedullary junction, pierces the dura, and travels the longest intracranial distance of all the cranial nerves. After its long intracranial course, it enters the cavernous sinus, where it is surrounded by venous blood, like the internal carotid artery.

The sympathetic plexus around the internal carotid artery originates from the superior cervical ganglion, travels with the internal carotid artery, enters the skull through the carotid canal, and enters the cavernous sinus through the jugular foramen. Within the cavernous sinus, it gives sympathetic fibers to the CN III and V1.