Patients with facial burns are often left with significant scarring and lasting effects. These are both cosmetic and functional. The initial management of facial burns is centered around restoring function. Subsequent restoration of appearance is also a critical piece of the healing process as we effectively use our face in communicating with the rest of society. This may require patients to undergo multiple procedures or, in the extreme, consider facial transplantation.

The eyelids require early attention. They are both cosmetic and functional, and early intervention improves outcomes. Burns to the eyelids can occur in as many as 20% of flame injuries to the face. They can lead to ocular damage and blindness. Sequelae include corneal ulceration secondary to eyelid deformities and exposure keratopathy. These are preventable but do require urgent ophthalmologic consultation and ongoing lubrication.

Oral burn contractures can cause significant functional impairment, but surgical intervention with splinting and skin grafting can result in a successful outcome.

Nasal contracture is a complication of facial burns. This is particularly true in children due to facial growth. Staged surgery is sometimes necessary to release scar contracture and reconstruct the nose.

Auricular involvement is common with burns to the face. Unlike the eyes and mouth, however, conservative management of auricular burns works for the majority of patients. At one center in which they were able to follow 89 patients with partial burns to the ear to healing, only one required skin grafting.

From a cosmetic standpoint, it is important to line up hairlines such as the eyebrows and scalp. Significant hair loss may be treated with transplantation. Attempts at hair transplantation have met with some success though it remains difficult to graft hair onto scar tissue due to poor blood circulation and stiffness. About three-quarters of the patients were able to achieve some sort of favorable outcome.

The psychological aftermath of a major burn can be significant, with up to 30% experiencing symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It is sometimes difficult to predict who will develop symptoms, and screening should be done in all patients with significant burn injury; this is particularly true to burns to the face. PTSD-related symptoms are not isolated to the patients either. One study looking at close relatives of burn patients found high rates of PTSD.

Mortality from a burn injury can be estimated by looking at various risk factors. A retrospective review of 1665 patients presenting to a major burn center was analyzed, and researchers identified three risk factors for death: age greater than 60 years, greater than 40% TBSA, and inhalation injury. The mortality percentages of 0.3%, 3%, 33%, and 99% correlate to 0, 1, 2 or 3 factors present.