**Ranula**

A ranula is a pseudocyst caused by either the extravasation of saliva or the retention of mucous of the sublingual gland

Diagnosis involves a thorough clinical history and physical exam. Ultrasound helps to differentiate between a simple or deep ranula as it can confirm the depth above or below the mylohyoid muscle and the overall quality of the lesion. Ultrasound can also identify rupture or herniation of the sublingual gland. Treatment options include removal of the sublingual gland with ranula excision, marsupialization, or sclerotherapy. Excising the sublingual gland helps to minimize recurrence. This lesion usually presents in children and is the most common pathologic lesion of the sublingual gland

**Neoplasia**

Neoplastic diseases may affect the sublingual gland as 3% to 4% of head and neck cancers involve salivary glands. The larger the size of the gland, the higher the odds of a mass being benign

Sublingual gland tumors are usually malignant and comprise about 1.6% of all salivary gland malignancies. Adenoid cystic carcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma count as the most common sublingual gland malignancies reported. Most tumors present with an asymptomatic floor of mouth swelling and present similarly to benign conditions making diagnosis difficult. Treatment course most commonly includes surgical tumor excision. Neck dissection and radiation therapy may be indicated in advanced tumor staging or aggressive pathologies

**Sialolithiasis**

Salivary stones (calculi) obstructing an excretory duct is a common salivary gland disease. The pathophysiology of salivary calculi is related to salivary stasis and overall inflammation of the excretory duct. Salivary stones may cause swelling of the duct or gland causing colicky peri-prandial pain. Salivary calculi are manually palpable when lodged in a duct. Ultrasound can aid diagnosis along with adjunctive CT or MR sialography if workup is negative, but suspicion remains high. Initial treatment is conservative, which comprises oral hydration and sialagogues. Surgery is only recommended when a conservative approach fails, and symptoms persist. Sialolithiasis mainly impacts the submandibular gland and rarely occurs in the sublingual gland

**Sialadenitis**

Acute sialadenitis refers to salivary gland inflammation and may be caused by bacterial or viral infection. The inflammation may be accompanied by fever, pain, and gland swelling. If the etiology is a bacterial infection, then antibiotics are recommended. Otherwise, oral hydration and sialagogues are indicated. If the formation of an abscess complicates the infection, surgical intervention may be required. Chronic inflammation of the salivary glands can be related to recurrent infections, autoimmune conditions (e.g. Sjogren's syndrome), or radiation exposure. The sublingual gland is rarely affected by any of these acute or chronic problems in isolation

**Regeneration of the Salivary Glands**

After surgical resection of tumors of the salivary glands and radiation therapy of head and neck cancers, patients may have a residual long-term loss of function of the salivary glands. This is where regenerative medicine comes into play, with the possibility of restoring the lost glandular function. It could also potentially help patients suffering from gland disfunction, like in Sjögren syndrome