Blood product safety has been an improving area of focus for many countries over recent decades. The World Health Organization promotes efforts for improving access to safe transfusion and safe blood products across the world. Safety of blood products begins with blood donor recruitment and includes:

- Emphasis on pre-donation information;

- Blood component collection, preparation, and testing;

- Post-donation information collection;

- Labeling of the blood products for distribution;

- Handling of blood products in the hospital inventory;

- Blood transfusion into the patient by hospital staff; and

- Culminating with hemovigilance and clinical quality improvement to ensure patient safety and to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with blood transfusion.

Several methods have been employed to reduce the risk of blood transfusions and improve blood product safety.  There have been interventions in every step of the process from before blood donation collection through post-procedure follow-up of blood product recipients. There have been improvements made in the collection, storage, management, distribution, utilization, and monitoring of transfusions.

The measures for improved safety begin even before blood collection. It is important to have government and professional organization commitment to improving blood product safety. Other important aspects of improving safety include proper training of staff, along with a dedicated and diligent blood transfusion organization overseeing donation, testing, and eventual transfusion.  Blood donor recruitment is the next important piece in securing blood product safety. Voluntary unpaid donors have the lowest rates of transfusion-associated infections and are the ideal population from which to recruit donors.  'Replacement' and 'family' donors are falling out of favor.  Donor screening questions add a layer of defense to improve blood product safety. These screening questions are responsible for the single most significant reduction in transfusion-transmitted infections. Donors are deferred based on criteria developed to enhance safety for both the donor and the potential recipient. Donors can be deferred for a period (as in the case of anemia) or indefinitely (as in the case of a donor screened positive for HIV and confirmed to have HIV). Laboratory testing of blood donations also adds a layer of protection against transfusion-associated adverse events. Blood group compatibility testing along with additional antibody testing and molecular testing for known transfusion-transmitted infections occurs. Guidelines to ensure the diligent and appropriate use of blood transfusion improve safety and reduces adverse outcomes for patients receiving a transfusion. Close clinical correlation and monitoring of symptomatic responsive also improve patient outcomes. Monitoring of transfusion has improved over time, with more emphasis placed on accurate detection and evaluation of transfusion reactions.  Transfusion alternatives and extended shelf life options have expanded the scope of transfusion and have the potential to improve the blood supply.  A summary of the strategies for reducing the risks associated with blood and blood products is shown in Figure 1.