In Chiari I malformation, the most common presentation is suboccipital headaches and/or neck pain (80%). Symptoms are exacerbated when asked to perform the Valsalva maneuver. Other common presentations include ocular disturbances, otoneurologic symptoms (dizziness, hearing loss, vertigo), gait ataxia, and generalized fatigue. Although much less common, the literature reports multiple case studies in which patients have presented with isolated extremity pain or weakness, one such report including a presentation of unilateral shoulder pain with isolated muscle weakness presenting to a sports medicine clinic.

Myelopathy classically presents with “dissociated sensory loss” (loss of pain and temperature sensation, preserved fine touch and proprioception) and motor weakness.

Cerebellar signs, including ataxia, dysmetria, and nystagmus, and lower cranial nerve deficits (IX, X, XI, XII CN) result either from direct compression of the cerebellum or medulla at the foramen magnum or from syringomyelia or syringobulbia.

Sleep apnea can occur in a patient with Chiari malformation due to a weakness of pharyngeal muscles elicited by the brainstem, upper spinal cord, or lower cranial nerve compression.

It is not an uncommon scenario to find patients with radiological findings compatible with Chiari malformation with no clinical manifestations of the disease (incidental Chiari malformation). Therefore, nonspecific symptoms such as generalized fatigue or classic pattern migraines are not necessarily related to the Chiari malformation.

The remaining variants (with the exception of Chiari 0 and 1.5) are diagnosed often in utero or at birth.