**Time of Administration**

Pralidoxime and atropine administration should take place as soon as the patient is decontaminated, stabilized, and there is a provisional diagnosis of organophosphate poisoning. Earlier it was believed that pralidoxime is more or less ineffective after 24 to 48 hours of exposure. The reason for this is the phenomenon of aging.

Recent studies, however, have shown that a delayed administration of pralidoxime may still be beneficial due to instances of prolonged absorption of the compound or high lipid solubility. OP compounds like fenthion and fenitrothion are notorious for the same. Sometimes it is a metabolite of the original OP compound that is toxic. All these factors form the rationale for the late administration of pralidoxime.

**Dose**

Traditionally, the recommended dosage of pralidoxime has been 1 to 2 g in 100 mL saline as an intravenous infusion over 15 to 30 minutes. The same can be repeated after 1 hour if the nicotinic symptoms like muscle fasciculations persist. Additional doses require caution. Recent updates dictate that pralidoxime should be administered intravenously at 30 mg/kg initially over 30 min, followed by a constant infusion of 8 mg/kg/hr in dextrose 5% solution.

However, even the upper limits of these WHO-recommended dosage regimes have been questioned by several clinicians.

**Route of Administration**

Besides the intravenous route mentioned above, pralidoxime can also be administered via the intramuscular route. An autoinjector is now available that combines it with atropine and diazepam. Drug delivery using an autoinjector has shown to be better than using a needle and syringe—this autoinjector co-administers pralidoxime and atropine. The synergism of pralidoxime with atropine has been described later under drug interactions. Militaries worldwide now issue these autoinjectors to their soldiers for quick administration in the event of a nerve agent attack.

The intraosseous route of administration of pralidoxime has been explored in recent years. Studies have shown that utilizing this route can reduce the time required to reach therapeutic plasma concentrations by more than eight times.

A recent novel breakthrough utilizing an infusion micropump for delivery of pralidoxime has shown better results than the traditional routes.

**Administration in Pediatric, Pregnant/Nursing Females and Geriatric Age Group**

Studies have shown minimal or no adverse effects when using the pralidoxime-atropine autoinjector in children as young as 15 months, but only atropine is recommended for children under one year of age.

Data regarding the use of oximes in pregnant and nursing females is scanty and inconclusive.

Studies highlighting dosages in the geriatric age group are also sparse. The clinician must weigh the potential benefits and harms before deciding on the course of therapy. Co-morbidities like renal insufficiency merit consideration.