The primary goal of treating neurogenic bladder is to protect the upper urinary tract from damage and minimize permanent harm to the bladder. A secondary goal is maintaining urinary continence and improving the patient's quality of life.

**Behavioral and conservative measures**can be helpful in selected individuals, such as those with cognitive impairment. The treatments include timed voidings (especially for sensory neurogenic bladder patients), habit retraining, verbal prompting, prompted voiding, pelvic floor exercises, and pelvic floor physiotherapy. Pelvic floor physiotherapy, for example, has shown some benefits, especially in women with multiple sclerosis.

**Medications**

**Alpha-blocker medications**, both selective and non-selective, can be partially successful in selected neurogenic bladder situations as they decrease bladder outlet resistance, lower urine residual volume, reduce incontinence, improve bladder capacity, and may help reduce or somewhat mitigate autonomic dysreflexia.

**Anticholinergic medications**have been the mainstay of treatment for patients with detrusor overactivity and are generally considered first-line therapy for this neurogenic condition. They work by interfering with the muscarinic acetylcholinergic receptors of the detrusor muscle and cause bladder muscle relaxation with reduced intravesical pressures and improved storage. Maximal detrusor pressures are reduced by 30% to 40%, while bladder capacity is increased by a similar amount.

In some individuals, anticholinergic medications may unacceptably increase post-void residual urine volumes. Patients with Parkinson's, post-stroke, and multiple sclerosis are the most likely to develop this complication.

Anticholinergic medications are usually started at a low dose and then gradually increased (after 4 to 6 weeks) to optimize symptoms or urodynamic parameters until maximum tolerability is achieved.

Anticholinergic therapy can also be used to reduce bladder spasms and leakage in patients with indwelling catheters, minimize the risk of kidney damage, hydronephrosis, or renal failure, and reduce episodes of autonomic dysreflexia due to uninhibited detrusor contractions.

Anticholinergic therapy's most common side effects typically include constipation and dry mouth. Other side effects of this class of medication include tachycardia, mental confusion, and short-term memory loss. Specific drugs in this class will have different side effects, which should be considered when selecting a particular medication for individual patients. For elderly patients and individuals with memory or cognitive issues, anticholinergic drug selection should include medications that do not significantly affect brain activity (such as trospium and darifenacin) or use a beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonist as described below.

**Underutilized Anticholinergic Medications**

- Oxybutynin is available as a transdermal patch which has minimal side effects. It is often marketed "for women" and can be expensive, although it is available commercially for about $30 per month.

- Oxybutynin is also available as a liquid for patients who cannot take pills or tablets.

- Intravesical anticholinergic therapy should be considered in patients doing self-catheterization to minimize side effects.

- Trospium is a relatively underutilized anticholinergic medication with many favorable qualities; it is generic, relatively inexpensive, and has no brain or adverse cognitive effects. However, it is not covered by many commercial insurance plans and is therefore frequently overlooked.

- Darifenacin is an effective anticholinergic that also does not affect memory or cognitive functions as well as being extremely safe but has a relatively high rate of constipation, making it unsuitable for some patients.

**Beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonists**(mirabegron and vibegron) are newer agents designed to relax overactive detrusor activity. By targeting and stimulating the bladder's natural sympathetic nerve-calming mechanism, they effectively relax detrusor activity without the complications associated with anticholinergic medications.

**Desmopressin**is a synthetic form of vasopressin that reduces urine production by promoting water reabsorption in the distal and collecting tubules of the kidney. It has no direct effect on bladder function but is useful for patients with nocturnal polyuria and volume-dependent detrusor overactivity symptoms, particularly for those individuals with multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's, or high spinal cord disorders that are associated with increased urine production overnight.

**Onabotulinumtoxin A (botulinum toxin)**detrusor injections were first used in 2000 for intractable bladder overactivity that was unresponsive to anticholinergic medications.Clostridium botulinum. It blocks the release of acetylcholine from axons in neuromuscular junctions resulting in muscle paralysis. More specifically, it disrupts synaptosome-associated protein 25 kD (SNAP-25), which is necessary for the release of intracytoplasmic synaptic vesicles containing acetylcholine from the axon terminals in the neuromuscular junctions.

Botulinum toxin injection therapy has been shown to reduce the mean detrusor pressure by 40% to 60% and significantly reduce incontinence and bladder overactivity.

**Catheters**

**Clean intermittent self-catheterization**is the gold standard and recommended first-choice therapy for neurogenic bladder patients who exhibit urinary retention, an inability to adequately drain their bladders, or have larger post-void residual volumes (typically >200 mL). It is most useful in patients with the manual dexterity, strength, and cognitive ability to perform self-catheterization independently.

Clean intermittent self-catheterization combined with anti-muscarinic agents, beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonists, botulinum toxin, or sacral neuromodulation is the preferred gold standard for complicated neurogenic bladder disorders with both detrusor overactivity and incomplete bladder emptying not adequately managed adequately or safely with single-modality therapy.

**Foley catheters**are used in those situations where there is no other reasonable choice, and intermittent catheterization is not possible. Typical situations would be urinary retention or sustained high post-void residual volumes in selected patients with poor hand function, dementia, active substance abuse, high detrusor pressures, vesicoureteral reflux, failure of other treatment modalities which are not candidates for any surgical options, and those with limited help available support staff, family, or caregivers. Urethral catheters are contraindicated for urge incontinence with uncontrolled detrusor overactivity. Long-term catheterization should be avoided whenever possible as it has been associated with a three-fold increase in mortality in nursing home patients compared to those without catheters.

**Suprapubic tubes**are generally preferred over urethral Foley catheters if it appears that catheter drainage will be a long-term therapy. Compared to a standard Foley catheter, a suprapubic tube reduces urethral irritation, eliminates discomfort at the urethral meatus, avoids ventral penile erosions, is easier to change, allows for the use of larger-sized catheters, is far more comfortable for the patient, and decreases the risk of urinary tract infections.

Asymptomatic bacteriuria should not be treated in patients with neurogenic bladder or catheters unless they have pyuria and signs or symptoms of an infection.

Cystoscopic screening of patients with long-term catheters has been recommended historically, but there is no clear evidence that such surveillance is effective.

**Sacral Neuromodulation**

**Sacral neuromodulation**is a safe and effective, minimally invasive therapy that moderates poorly regulated or unregulated spinal cord reflexes and activity by blocking afferent input to the sacral spinal, primarily through S3 stimulation.

Overall success rates with sacral neuromodulation have been reported at about 80%, and it may be combined with other treatment modalities as needed.

Potential candidates for sacral neuromodulation must have failed behavioral measures and maximum tolerable pharmacological therapy for at least 8 to 12 weeks.

A relative contraindication would be a rapidly progressive or severe neurological disease.

The American Urological Association Guideline on Adult Neurogenic Lower Urinary Tract Dysfunction (2021) does not generally recommend sacral neuromodulation for spina bifida or spinal cord injured patients due to the high degree of variability in disease progression and bladder dysfunction in this population.

Early use of sacral neuromodulation in a small number of spinal cord injured patients appears to have prevented the development of detrusor overactivity and incontinence, allowing for a normal bladder capacity and preservation of erectile function as well as bowel function.

Randomized studies, including adequate numbers of patients with long-term follow-up, are required to better identify and predict the response of various neurogenic bladder patients to neuromodulation therapy either alone or in combination with other treatments.

**Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation**has been shown to improve symptoms and urodynamic parameters in Parkinson disease and multiple sclerosis.

**Surgery**

**Augmentation cystoplasty**is no longer recommended by some experts for intractable neurogenic bladder dysfunction due to detrusor overactivity in adults because of poor long-term reported success rates and significant complications in over 10% of patients.

Modern bioengineering technology is looking at creating a suitable, functional tissue suitable for bladder augmentation. This requires a high degree of biocompatibility, compliance similar to normal bladder tissue, and a urothelial layer to prevent extravasation, leakage, encrustation, stone development, and upper urinary tract deterioration.

**Sphincterotomy**is a destructive procedure in which the external urinary sphincter is incised, rendering it useless. The benefit is substantially lower bladder pressure which protects the upper urinary tracts, minimizes reflux, and reduces episodes of autonomic dysreflexia, but it causes continuous, uncontrollable urinary incontinence, which is irreversible. The incontinence is best managed with a condom catheter, usually preferable over Foley catheters or pads.

**Urinary diversion surgery**can be done to divert urine from the urinary bladder altogether. These major surgeries are intended for the most difficult and intractable neurogenic bladder situations not adequately managed with other treatment modalities. Continent diversions utilize either a pouch, which acts as an internal reservoir, or a bladder substitute for internal urinary storage. These can then be emptied periodically, usually by intermittent self-catheterization. A cutaneous stoma may be used to allow catheter access to the reservoir.

Incontinent urinary diversions use a portion of the bowel or intestine, usually the ileum, to create a passage to the skin surface, where it is used to create a continuously draining stoma. Patients who cannot tolerate longer surgeries, have pre-existing renal failure, or are unable to manage continent stomas are potential candidates for incontinent diversions.

**Special Cases**

**Autonomic dysreflexia**patients will require special attention during urodynamics and other procedures. Extra attention may be necessary to avoid bladder overactivity, spasms, distension, urinary retention, and high detrusor pressures. Botulinum toxin detrusor injections should be considered in patients with bladder spasms or overactivity not responding well to oral pharmacotherapy.

**Cauda equina syndrome**will usually develop quickly after an injury. It will demonstrate urinary retention and require clean, intermittent self-catheterization.

**Detrusor dyssynergia**patients may respond to oral therapy with baclofen or diazepam, but most will require intermittent self-catheterization, detrusor overactivity pharmacotherapy, botulinum toxin sphincteric injections, sphincterotomy, permanent catheterization, or urinary diversion surgery.

**Treatment Summary**

- Identify patients with autonomic dysreflexia, cauda equina syndrome, and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia early so their treatment is optimized and not delayed unnecessarily.

- Patients with significant detrusor overactivity should initially be treated with behavioral modifications and pharmacotherapy, including anticholinergics and/or beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonists.

- Beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonists are generally preferred if possible due to their improved efficacy and low side effect profile.

- Bladder relaxing medications should be given at least 4 to 6 weeks before readjusting.

- Dosages of oral pharmaceuticals for bladder relaxation should be adjusted for efficacy and tolerability.

- Physicians should be familiar with the individual characteristics and costs of these medications to optimize their use for specific patient populations and individual patients.

- Combination therapy is encouraged when a single medication is inadequate to control symptoms or urodynamic parameters.

- Alpha-blocker medications may be of some use in patients able to void but who still have high post-void residual levels.

- Desmopressin can be used to diminish nocturnal polyuria but may cause fluid retention and hyponatremia, so it should be used with caution in elderly patients and those prone to congestive heart failure.

- Periodic 24-hour voiding diaries and post-void residual determinations can help monitor progress.

- Self-catheterization schedules should be adjusted so that the maximum urinary volumes drained should optimally not exceed 500 mL.

- Post-void residual volumes should be as low as possible but are generally considered "acceptable" at 200 mL or less.

- Botulinum toxin detrusor injections and sacral neuromodulation should be considered in patients with detrusor overactivity refractory to pharmacotherapy alone.

- Clean intermittent self-catheterization is the first-line recommended therapy for incomplete bladder emptying or urinary retention due to neurogenic bladder disorders.

- Patients unable to perform self-catheterization will need alternate therapy, such as an indwelling catheter.

- Suprapubic tubes are recommended over urethral Foleys if long-term urinary catheter drainage is required.

- Bladder relaxing therapy with oral pharmaceuticals, intravesical anticholinergics, botulinum toxin detrusor injections, or sacral neuromodulation can suppress bladder spasms in patients with permanent indwelling catheters.

- Even very complicated neurogenic bladders can usually be managed with a combination of bladder relaxation treatments and self-catheterization.

- Persistent detrusor pressures over 40 cm of water are likely to cause upper urinary tract damage if they cannot be controlled with bladder relaxing treatment modalities.

- For intractable cases, sphincterotomy, augmentation cystoplasty, or urinary diversion surgery may need to be considered, as the primary goal of neurogenic bladder treatment is to maintain kidney function and prevent renal failure.

- An individualized, patient-tailored approach is required for the optimal management of lower urinary tract dysfunction in this unique population.