Stool tests to rule out infections include culture and sensitivities, ovum and parasites, Clostridium difficile toxins, leukocyte count. Stools for calprotectin can detect active Crohn disease and are also used for monitoring disease.

Blood tests including complete blood count and a metabolic panel can highlight the presence of anemia (B12  or iron deficiency) or liver disease. Special serology such as normal anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and raised anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) can distinguish Crohn disease from ulcerative colitis. C-reactive protein (CRP) or erythrocyte sedimentary rate (ESR) can reflect the severity of the inflammation.

A computed tomography scan/magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) of the abdomen and pelvis can detect abscesses and fistulization. The choice between CT or MRE is largely directed at minimizing radiation exposure in younger populations. Both give a higher definition of the diseased intestine. However, MRI can provide more detail when investigating the fistulizing disease. The use of video capsule endoscopy (VCE) can visualize the small bowel for CD when regular endoscopy or colonoscopy cannot reach to visualize these areas. Capsule endoscopy can only detect mucosal changes, whereas MRI can detect transmural inflammation and also identify other complications.

Plain x-rays are ordered when bowel obstruction is suspected.

Small bowel follow-through is often used to assess the involvement of the terminal ileum and can also detect fistulas. The classic string sign due to stricture formation or spasm is often seen.

For those patients too ill to undergo colonoscopy or CT scan, nuclear imaging may reveal sites of inflammation.

Before initiation of any treatment, vaccination history (tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, human papillomavirus, influenza, pneumococcal, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, measles, mumps, rubella, varicella-zoster virus) should be known, if no prior history titers of hepatitis A, hepatitis B, measles, mumps, rubella, and the varicella-zoster virus should be checked. Baseline Mantoux test with chest radiograph should also be checked before any treatment. Baseline thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) levels should be checked before deciding on treatment options. Low levels of TMPT may result in an increased risk of side effects, whereas very high levels may decrease the effectiveness of prescribed treatment.