The thyroid gland is composed of thyroid follicles that synthesize and store thyroid hormone. These follicles have lost all luminal connections with other parts of the body. They are the primary units of the organ that are responsible for the secretion of the thyroid hormone. The epithelium of the normal gland is cuboidal. Blood vessels surround follicular epithelial cells, and the colloid is within the follicular lumen, where the thyroid hormone is synthesized.

The acinar surface of thyroid parenchymal cells is smooth and is covered with tiny villi and some pseudopods. Each cell has a cilium in the follicular lumen. The colloid is eosinophilic in hyperactive follicles resorption vacuoles scallop the margin of the colloid.

The thyroid epithelial cells organize into thyroid follicles. The follicle lumen consists of a single layer of polarized cells that forms the envelope of a spherical structure with an internal compartment in the follicle lumen. The cell polarity of the gland allows for targeting of the membrane protein on the external side of the follicle facing the blood capillaries or on the internal side of the follicle at the cell-lumen boundary. The cell polarity and the tightness of the follicle lumen, which allow for the gathering of substrates, and the storage of thyroid hormone, modulate thyroid hormone synthesis.

The expression of thyroid hormone receptor subtypes appears in different tissues. The thyroid hormone receptor alpha (TRa) is predominantly expressed in the brain, heart, and bone. The thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRb1) is expressed in the liver, kidney, and thyroid. The TRb2 is primarily in the retina, cochlea, and pituitary. Mutations in TRa or TRb can result in disease, which is beyond the scope of this review.