**Pathophysiology**

**Biomechanical Effects**

It is widely accepted that the additional load to the skeletal system, as seen in obesity, produces altered body mechanics that unfavorably affect the function of joints. Obesity has been identified as a top risk factor for the initiation and progression of osteoarthritis in load-bearing joints, primarily the knee, but also the hip and ankle.

Studies have shown that reduced muscle strength and unfavorable skeletal alignment predispose the knee to osteoarthritis regarding osteoarthritis of the knee. It has been demonstrated that the volume of articular cartilage in the knee positively correlates with local muscle mass around the knee. Furthermore, a lower muscle mass in the quadriceps is associated with a greater loss of articular cartilage over a given time period.

In addition to altered joint loading, skeletal alignment has also been shown to influence the onset and progression of osteoarthritis, particularly in the knee. Obesity influences the skeletal alignment of the knee by increasing load in the medial compartment of the knee through varus deformity. A study has shown that increasing BMI correlates with a decreasing medial joint space, narrowing in the medial compartment of the knee, and resulting in an increasing varus deformity.

**Metabolic Effects**

Obesity is thought to cause a chronic, low-grade, proinflammatory state.

**Complications**

**Soft Tissue**

Multiple studies have shown the correlation of obesity as a risk factor in multiple soft tissue injuries, which the orthopedic surgeon must consider. A systematic review broadly looking into the incidence of tendinopathies concluded that obesity was a significant risk factor.

Within the upper limb, rotator cuff tendonitis and shoulder impingement are more common in the obese population.

The incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome correlates with obesity, yet weight loss does not improve symptoms.

Plantar fasciitis, Achilles tendonitis, and posterior tibial tendon dysfunction are more common in the obese population within the lower limb.

**Bone**

The association between fracture risk and obesity is less well documented. It was previously thought that obesity was a protective measure against fractures. However, reports over the last decade have suggested a higher incidence of fractures in those with obesity, especially in the elderly population. It must be noted that to date, obesity is a proven risk factor for ankle, leg, and humeral fracture but a protective factor for wrist, hip, and pelvic fractures.

**Other Complications of Obesity**

Studies have indicated that obesity leads to worsening outcome measures in the peri-operative period. Lack of anatomical landmarks may make the surgical intervention more difficult and prone to unfavorable outcomes. Obesity also increases the risk of post-operative infection, non-union, chronic pain, and failure of implants.  The reduced vascularization to adipose tissue and the higher incidence of protein malnutrition can adversely affect wound healing. Further to this, comorbidities associated with obesity, such as type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, cardiovascular disease, stroke, sleep apnea, hyperuricemia, gout, and others, can adversely affect the perioperative period, anesthetic risk, and surgical outcome.

Advanced imaging such as MRI and CT scans have weight limits that obese patients may occasionally exceed. Delay or lack of imaging in orthopedic patients may adversely affect management outcomes.