Rupture of atherosclerotic plaque or injury to the vessel wall exposes the subendothelial matrix of the coronary blood vessel to circulating platelets. This event triggers a platelet signaling cascade that leads to the activation of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor (GpIIb/IIIa). The activation of Gp IIb/IIIa receptors leads to cross-linking of fibrinogen to attach multiple platelets to form a durable secondary platelet plug. The secondary platelet plug is essential for the progression and stability of the clot. The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors, including abciximab, eptifibatide, sibrafiban, and tirofiban, block the activation of Gp IIb/IIIa receptors, ultimately preventing clot formation/progression.

GP IIb/IIIa heterodimer contains a large extracellular region, a transmembrane domain, and a short intracellular cytoplasmic tail. The Gp IIb/IIIa receptor is a calcium and manganese-dependent heterodimer protein with an alpha- and a beta-subunit. The alpha-subunit is characterized by three or four divalent Ca- or Mn-binding domains crucial in the GP IIb/IIIa heterodimer. The beta-subunit comprises disulfide bonds, binding sites including lysine-glycine-aspartic acid (KGD) bindings binding sites, or arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) for attachment of fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor (vWF) and prothrombin. The binding sites of GP IIb/IIIa are hidden as latent and become active on the surface by undergoing a conformational change via inside-out signaling.

The eptifibatide is a natural disintegrin from snake venom. It has a highly specific binding to the Gp IIb/IIIa receptor because of the structural resemblance of the KGD (Lys-Gly-Asp) sequence. Eptifibatide binds to the KGD binding sites on Gp IIb/IIIa receptor and competitively fights against the receptor's binding with fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor (vWF), and prothrombin. Higher plasma levels of eptifibatide are needed to competitively inhibit the target of over 80% block of KGD binding sites. Eptifibatide can competitively inhibit the KGD (Lys-Gly-Asp) sequence binding site in active and inactive states. The low affinity for direct binding with GP IIb/IIIa is responsible for rapid states. Furthermore, high doses of eptifibatide provide additional antithrombotic benefits by blocking the vitronectin binding site, the ligand for alpha-beta in vascular cells, which may offer other antithrombotic benefits.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Eptifibatide has linear pharmacokinetics, proportional to the bolus drug for bolus doses ranging from 90 to 250 mcg/kg with an infusion rate from 0.5 to 3 mcg/kg/min. Therefore, administration of a 180-mcg/kg bolus dose combined with an infusion produces an early peak, followed by a slight decline before attaining steady-state (within 4 to 6 hours). Clinicians can prevent this by administering a second 180-mcg/kg bolus dose 10 minutes after the first dose.

- The onset of action is rapid (inhibition of platelet aggregation 15 min after bolus 84%)

- Plasma elimination half-life is 2.5 hours. The plasma protein binding is about 25%.

- In healthy patients, renal clearance is approximately 50% of total body clearances because most of the drug is excreted in the urine as eptifibatide, deaminated eptifibatide, and other, more polar metabolites.