The different endotypes and phenotypes of nasal polyps will determine further management. For patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis, initial therapy with intranasal corticosteroids and nasal saline irrigations for approximately 2-3 months should be attempted. High-volume, low-pressure nasal saline irrigations are safe and non-expensive and increase the clearance of antigens, biofilms, and inflammatory mediators. Intranasal corticosteroids improve nasal congestion and decrease polyp size. When CRSwNP is refractory to adequate medical treatment, functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is planned; however, there is still some debate among otolaryngologists on when surgery should be implemented. Topical intranasal steroids form an essential part of CRSwNP treatment postoperatively. Surgery removes the anatomic obstruction and restores more normal mucosal drainage, but the underlying allergic etiology must be addressed. Topical nasal steroids +/- topical antihistamines are a mainstay, together with formal allergic testing and targeted immunotherapy if available.

At a more specialized level, biodegradable steroid-eluting stents can be implanted during surgery. These stents keep the sinuses open while releasing steroids over the subsequent 30 or more days, thereby decreasing inflammation and recurrence. As a result, there is a decrease in post-operative interventions and oral steroid use. It is mandatory to continue nasal saline irrigations and intranasal corticosteroids even after surgery, as this will improve the likelihood of long-term success. The role of surgery is to decrease the inflammatory burden of the disease and to enhance the effects of local medications in the post-surgical sinus cavities.

If a patient continues to be symptomatic despite the aforementioned strategies, oral corticosteroids are occasionally used. The mindful use of systemic steroids should be implemented to avoid unwanted side effects. Aspirin desensitization is another strategy that might be beneficial for patients with AERD (nasal polyps, asthma, and aspirin sensitivity). Antibiotics are typically used if there is evidence of an acute bacterial exacerbation. The role of antifungals in the treatment of CRSwNP is controversial.

Lastly, biologic drugs (monoclonal antibodies) can be used in refractory disease. Candidates for biologic drugs must have bilateral nasal polyps and three of the following criteria: severe anosmia, severe QOL, diagnosed asthma, need for systemic steroids or a contraindication to these, or evidence of type II inflammation (eosinophilia >250 cells/microliter, blood IgE >100 UI/mL, or tissue eosinophils >10 HPF). For patients with a systemic disease with nasal polyps such as EGPA or CF, the underlying condition should be treated. For instance, patients with CF may be treated with ivacaftor, a CFTR potentiator, which has been shown to improve QOL in patients with rhinologic disease.