A significant benefit of olanzapine is its multiple routes of administration, giving it potential use in many patients.

It is available in tablet form, which is beneficial in compliant patients who can take medications orally. The tablet form is available in 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 7.5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 20 mg dosages. In addition, olanzapine is also available in a disintegrating tablet form. This form is especially beneficial for patients who cannot swallow pills but wishes to take an oral form, patients who have an aversion to taking medications by not swallowing the tablet, or those who are agitated. The bioavailability of orodispersible forms has been found to be considerably greater than their standard dosage forms.

Olanzapine is also available in an injectable dosage of 5 mg/mL. This form may be best for the agitated patient who is not medication compliant and refuses or cannot swallow the oral formulation of the drug.

Clinicians should monitor patients for post-injection delirium/sedation syndrome with extended-release olanzapine injections.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic impairment:**Patients with hepatic impairment do not require a dosage adjustment. Patients with Child-Pugh Classification A and B cirrhosis did not majorly influence the metabolism of this medication. Because of this extensive metabolism of olanzapine, only 7% of the drug remains unchanged upon excretion. However, olanzapine can increase aminotransferase levels; hence use with caution in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Patients with renal impairment do not require special dosing for this medication because of its metabolism.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Extrapyramidal symptoms, feeding disorders, and respiratory distress have been documented in neonates exposed to olanzapine during the third trimester of pregnancy. Monitor neonates for extrapyramidal or withdrawal symptoms, as some neonates need prolonged hospitalization while others recover spontaneously. However, there is a risk to the pregnant mother from untreated schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, including the risk of relapse, deterioration leading to hospitalization, and suicide. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are also associated with increased adverse perinatal outcomes. Consequently, olanzapine may be used for bipolar disorders and schizophrenia, but the clinician needs to carefully evaluate the risk-benefit in consultation with an obstetrician and psychiatrist.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Higher maternal doses of olanzapine produce low concentrations in human milk and trace levels in the serum of breastfed infants. Sedation is the major adverse drug reaction in infants. Systematic reviews of second-generation antipsychotics concluded that olanzapine is the preferred agent during breastfeeding.

**Pharmacogenetic Considerations:**Smokers may need a 30% higher daily dose than nonsmokers due to CYP1A2 induction, per American Psychiatric Association(APA) guideline 2020.