Teeth can have physiological variants in terms of number, size, and shape. Tooth anomalies in number size and shape happen during development. The number of teeth can be decreased with hypodontia, or the condition of congenital absence of teeth, and increased with hyperdontia, or the condition of the presence of supernumerary teeth. Tooth size alters with conditions like megadontia, the relative enlargement of teeth, and microdontia, the relative decrease in size of teeth. The shape of a tooth can vary when it has a Carabelli cusp, which is an additional, non-functioning, mini cusp found on the side of the tooth facing the inside of the mouth.

The structures of teeth can have physiological variants as well. Given the vast amount of environmental influences or genetic mutations that can affect the development of enamel, the general population reports a high prevalence of enamel defects. Excessive exposure to fluoride can cause fluorosis, which in mild cases is characterized by a white, lacy appearance of the enamel and, in severe cases, can cause enamel to be hypomineralized with a characteristic brown color. Hereditary conditions like amelogenesis imperfecta can cause enamel defects in the absence of a systemic condition, which causes hypomineralization of the enamel. Dentin defects can happen with conditions like dentinogenesis imperfecta, which causes blue-gray to yellow-brown discoloration of the dentin, which shoes through the translucent enamel. It also can lead to enamel fractures due to the lack of support of poorly mineralized dentin.

Physiological changes can happen in teeth due to normal aging. However, changes can happen at different rates due to multiple factors like lifestyle, environment, and genetics that influence them. The changes in the appearance of teeth that occur over time are due to the wearing of the enamel, chipping, fracture lines, staining, exposure of dentin, and reduction in the size of the pulp chamber and root canals. These changes result in teeth that are generally darker in color. Also, periodontal support can modestly decrease with age, which results in gum recession on the buccal surface of teeth. With regular care, dentition should function effectively throughout a lifetime.