For anesthesiologists, emergency medicine, pulmonary or critical care physicians, learning how to intubate is a foundational and life-saving procedural skill. Preparation should include reviewing the patient’s history, presenting pathology, doing a multi-faceted airway examination, and assembling needed equipment. There should be a primary plan and backup plans in the event of failure.  Unfortunately, there are findings of clinician poor judgment and suboptimal preparation resulting in negative outcomes.

There will also be patients where difficult intubations cannot be predicted in advance.

Some findings from the Fourth National Audit Project (NAP4) of the Royal College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society (DAS) executive summary (2011) include:

- Failure to assess the airway

- Failure to have a plan B or plan C when the initial plan fails

- Failure to proceed with awake fiberoptic intubation even when indicated

- Repeated attempts at intubation despite deteriorating oxygenation

- Obesity as a risk factor for difficulty

- Failure of emergency percutaneous cricothyrotomy

- Aspiration with repeated intubation attempts resulting in death

- Failure to recognize an esophageal intubation

The incidence of severe complications including death, hypoxic brain injury, or emergency surgical airway was 1 in 22,000 in a database of 2.9 million general anesthetics. This database showed the incidence of complications was 35 times higher in emergency departments and 55 times higher in intensive care units. It is likely that not all critical events were reported and that the incidence was higher than stated.

There were similarly discouraging conclusions found in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) closed-claims analysis.

It is important to be precise in terminology when documenting an airway procedure. Is there a difficult or failed mask ventilation?  Is there a difficult or failed direct or video laryngoscopy? Is there difficult tracheal intubation due to endotracheal tube delivery?  Is there a difficult or failed supraglottic airway placement? These questions must be answered in detail so that the next provider will have the necessary information to proceed safely with the patient's airway management.