**Viral Hepatitis**

Viral Hepatitis is considered a major public health issue. Viral hepatitis infects millions of people annually causing significant morbidity and mortality. Chronic Hepatitis B and C infection can cause liver damage that includes liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and features of portal hypertension. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that 1.3 million people have died due to hepatitis in 2015, and 1 in 3 people in the world have had infections with either hepatitis B or hepatitis C virus. Reportedly, infection rates show that 2 billion people infected with the hepatitis B virus, 185 million with the hepatitis C virus, and 20 million with the hepatitis E virus

**Hepatitis A**

Typically, people who have access to safe drinking water and regions with stronger socioeconomic levels have very low levels of hepatitis A virus infection with less than 50% of the population being endemic while people who do not have access to safe drinking water & regions with low-income have high levels of hepatitis A virus infection with more than 90% of the population being endemic.

**Hepatitis B**

Estimates are that about one-third of the World's population has had an infection with hepatitis B, and around 5% of this population remain carriers of hepatitis B. About 25% of these carries develop chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. The documented number of global deaths annually from hepatitis B virus infection is 780000.

**Hepatitis C**

Hepatitis C virus is the most prevalent cause of parenteral hepatitis worldwide. It is prevalent in the 0.5% to 2% population around the world, with most commonly being affected are IV drug users and hemophiliacs. However, with the advent of safer screening and viral elimination techniques for blood transfusion, the incidence of transfusion-associated hepatitis C virus infection is going down. Approximately 71 million people globally have chronic hepatitis C infection, and this accounts for close to 400000 deaths every year

**Hepatitis D**

Hepatitis D occurs in patients who are positive for HBsAg, and hepatitis D either occurs as a coinfection with Hepatitis B or patients who are chronic Hepatitis B virus carries can get superinfection with hepatitis D virus. Hepatitis D is not a reportable disease in the USA; therefore, accurate data is not available, but it is estimated to affect 4% to 8% of cases of acute hepatitis B and 5% of global chronic hepatitis B patients. Approximately 18 million patients are infected with the hepatitis D virus globally. Prevalence remains high in South America and Africa as well prevalence also remains high in sex workers in Greece and Taiwan, where it has been well studied.

**Hepatitis E**

Hepatitis E virus is associated with worldwide outbreaks of food and waterborne diseases and commonly seen in developing countries with restricted access to sanitation, clean water, and poor hygiene. About 20 million people are estimated to be infected with the hepatitis E virus globally, and there have been approximately 44000 deaths due to hepatitis E virus infection. In that regard, the hepatitis E virus carries a higher risk of mortality at about 3.3% compared to hepatitis A virus infection despite a similar route of transmission and lack of chronicity.

**Hepatitis G**

Global infection with the hepatitis G virus is common, and the virus is detectable in all ethnicities.  The worldwide prevalence of hepatitis G is around 3%, and researchers believe that 1 to 4% of blood donors worldwide are carriers of the virus.  The belief is that around 25% of the global population carries an antibody to the virus.  Infected blood products increase the prevalence of hepatitis G virus, and persistent infection is a present insignificant number of healthy blood donors, and 35% of the patients had HIV infection; however, donor blood is not tested for hepatitis G. Reports indicate that about 10% to 20% of adults with chronic HBV or HCV infection have hepatitis G infection, indicating that coinfection is a common occurrence. Still, it does not increase the severity of the disease. There is some suspicion for sexual transmission of hepatitis C as high detection rates exist in men who have sex with men and professional sex workers.  Vertical transmission of the hepatitis G virus from an infected mother to the newborn has also been documented, but it is very rare.

**Autoimmune Hepatitis**

The prevalence of autoimmune hepatitis is estimated to be 0.1 to 1.2 cases per 100000 people in Western Europe. Autoimmune hepatitis accounts for about 6% of liver transplantation in the United States, while it accounts for about 3% of liver transplantations in Europe. Prevalence in Japan is estimated to be 0.08 to 0.015 cases per 100000 persons and causes 1.9% of cases of liver cirrhosis.

**Alcoholic Hepatitis**

The precise prevalence of alcoholic hepatitis is unknown, but it is known to be high, with a rising rate of mortality. It is difficult to assess the correct prevalence as alcoholic hepatitis may remain undiagnosed and completely asymptomatic. The prevalence of alcohol use disorder is about 8% of the population of the United States or 16 million people. However, approximately 35% of those with the diagnosis have changes consistent with alcoholic hepatitis, which means that around 5 million patients may have alcoholic hepatitis.