**Approach and Access**

- **Transradial**- Generally preferred for acute coronary syndromes. In this approach, access is gained via the right or left radial artery, with sheath insertion to maintain vascular access. Diagnostic and guiding catheters are then used from this approach for both diagnostic and therapeutic management. Transradial approach has been shown in a large meta-analysis of multiple trials to be safer with significantly less bleeding risk and vascular complications (hematoma formation, pseudoaneurysm formation, retroperitoneal bleeding) to a transfemoral approach. However, transradial is associated with high radiation to both the patient and the operator compared to a transfemoral approach.

- **Transfemoral**- Left or right common femoral artery is accessed and sometimes preferred over transradial access because of less anatomical variations and the ability for large bore access if needed; however, associated higher rates of major adverse cardiovascular events driven by significant bleeding. It also correlates with increased mortality in acute coronary syndrome when compared to a transradial approach.

- **Transbrachial -**A seldom-used approach; this is due to possible limb occlusion with compromised vessel patency.

- **Transulnar -**Very rarely used due to the size of the vessel and lack of evidence and operator experience. Emerging literature does suggest that transulnar can be a viable option if needed.

- **Distal Radial Access**- Very rarely used due to the size of the vessel and lack of randomized control trials and operator experience. Emerging literature does suggest that the distal left or right radial can be a viable option if needed. Evidence, though limited, does support less radial artery occlusion post-procedure compared to transradial as well as improved operator and patient comfort.

**Types of Coronary Wires**

- Coronary wires are generally 0.014mm in diameter and are introduced to the coronary tree via a guiding catheter.

- Multiple different coronary wires exist- described as "workhorse," "extra supportive," or "hydrophilic,"  among many other terms that are beyond the scope of this article.

**Types of Coronary Catheters**

- **Diagnostic Catheter**- Smaller sized (5F-6F) and only used for diagnostic purposes for coronary angiograms and hemodynamic assessment.

- **Guiding Catheter**- Large size (5-8F)  and used primarily to deliver coronary interventional equipment (i.e., coronary wires, balloon, and stent catheters, etc.)

- **Balloon Catheter (monorail)**- Used for percutaneous balloon angioplasty. Often described by their ability to comply with the vessel. Compliant balloons are useful for the pre-dilation of a lesion and sizing purposes. Noncompliant balloons are often used for post-dilation to ensure stent apposition and full deployment or for dilation of severely stenotic lesions non-responsive to other therapies.

- **Balloon Catheter (over the wire)**- Often smaller in size when compared to the monorail system and are generally used for pre-dilation. These catheters can also be used for wire exchanges, medication injection, and delivery to the distal coronary bed, as well as for extra guide and wire support.

- **Stenting Catheter**- A stent (bare-metal or drug-eluting) mounted on a balloon is inserted via a monorail system and used for percutaneous coronary intervention

**Adjunctive Catheter Therapy**

Multiple other adjunctive catheter therapies exist; however, they are beyond the scope of this document and are not discussed in detail. Some examples of these therapies are listed below:

- **Thrombectomy Catheter**- Used for aspiration of thrombus during acute coronary syndrome.

- **Atherectomy Catheter**- Used for plaque debulking before angioplasty and stenting. However, multiple different atherectomy technologies exist beyond the scope of this document and are not discussed in detail. These are but are not limited to rotation, orbital, laser, and excisional atherectomy.

- **Intravascular Ultrasound Catheter (IVUS)**- An imaging catheter; allows deep penetration of vascular tissue with ultrasound within the coronary tree. It is often used to visualized and assess target vessels pre and post-intervention. Further description of this device is beyond the scope of this document.

- **Optical Coherence Tomography Catheter (OCT)**- Similar to IVUS, this catheter is used for intravascular imaging with the use of light waves, allowing for excellent spatial resolution within the coronary vasculature. Excellent visualizing within the vessel lumen for assessment for intraluminal irregularities such as dissection, stent thrombosis, etc. Further description of this device is beyond the scope of this document.

- **Scoring Balloon Catheters**- These devices are also known as cutting balloons. Their predominant use is for balloon angioplasty in severely diseased and calcified lesions in which balloon slippage is an issue. These devices are also useful in areas of in-stent restenosis.

- **Distal Embolization Device**- A wire "basket" device, which is placed distally in the target vessel in cases in which distal embolization of vascular debris (atheroma, thrombus, etc.) is expected to avoid the no-reflow phenomenon. Most commonly indicated in cases involving atherectomy or saphenous vein graft interventions.

- **Guideliner**- This is a coaxial guiding catheter extension delivered to the target vessel over a guidewire monorail system. This device is useful in cases where guide support due to guide catheter seating is an issue.

- **Support, Micro, and Crossing Catheter**- These are small catheters that can be inserted into a guiding catheter via an over-the-wire system to assist in crossing a complex and often chronic total occlusion in the coronary and peripheral vascular tree.

**Mechanical Support Devices**

Mechanical support catheters and therapies exist; however, these are beyond the scope of this document and not discussed in detail. These are but are not limited to intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation therapy, ventricular support devices, tandem heart support devices, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.