Hearing loss is common in the United States, with approximately 13% of people over the age of 12 reported to experience hearing loss in both ears on clinical testing.

A pure tone audiogram is a behavioral test of hearing, where a tone at a specific frequency is presented to the test ear by over-ear headphones or inserted earphones. The loudness of the tone is altered to find the quietest tone in decibels (dB) which can be heard 50% of the time, and this is termed the 'threshold.'

Clinical masking in audiology refers to the introduction of noise to the non-test ear during a pure tone audiogram. This aims to ensure that the test ear hears the presented tone and is not 'cross-heard' by the non-test ear. Cross-hearing occurs when a tone presented to the test ear overcomes interaural attenuation, which refers to the loss of acoustic energy as sound waves travel transcranially to the contralateral ear. The presented tone can then be perceived by the cochlea of the non-test ear and give rise to false-positive results. This occurs less readily when testing air conduction through insert earphones than supra-aural earphones, as insert earphones cause increased interaural attenuation.

Therefore, clinical masking is required when the difference in hearing thresholds between the ears is greater than the interaural attenuation. More specifically, for air conduction testing, masking is employed when the difference between unmasked thresholds in both ears is greater than 40 dB (or 55 dB when using insert earphones), which is thought to be the minimum interaural attenuation for pure tones.

There are three key situations where masking is required, termed "rules of masking." These are detailed below.