Koilonychia is a deformity of the nails where the central portion of the nail is depressed and the lateral aspects of the nail are elevated. This symptom can be a sign of an underlying disease process or a congenital process. Patients should be advised to trim their nails short and clean to prevent spoon nails, and also to prevent infection in the damaged areas. Further, regular use of a moisturizer or oil on the nails post showering or bathing helps to keep the nails in good condition.

Educational efforts towards the health and agricultural organizations of the country need to be undertaken in the long-term considering iron deficiency anemia which remains the common cause of koilonychia. Adequate educational national programs with changes in the economic and socio-cultural may aid in alleviating iron deficiency anemia and malnutrition among the low socio-economic classes. For such programmes to be effective, attention should be paid to the nutritional properties of foods, nutrient needs, environmental sanitation, personal hygiene and health and cost values of various foodstuffs. Other programs providing iron supplementation and parasitic control may also serve as motivational stimuli for millions towards nutrition and health education.

Moreover, to combat iron deficiency anemia and any other nutritional problem, adequate intake of affordable and acceptable nutritious foods needs to be encouraged. This necessitates to improve the availability of foods and upgrade the economic level of the population to purchase them in adequate quantity.

Similarly, the benefits of birth spacing and education of parents regarding the special needs of young mothers may additionally reduce the problems of anemia.  In addition, the use of more complex laboratory methods in institutions should be encouraged to assist further more research groups with more resources and capabilities in developing countries.

PVS is an extremely rare condition, hence, deterrence of this condition is difficult. Further discussions should be held with the physician for any other questions or concerns.