# Continuing Education Activity

The term "whiplash" injury was first coined by Harold Crowe in 1928 to define acceleration-deceleration injuries occurring to the cervical spine or neck region. Later modified to an all-encompassing term known as whiplash-associated disorders (WAD), these clinical entities have been refined to describe any collection of neck-related symptoms following a motor vehicle accident (MVA). The elusive difficulty that remains in describing these injuries is secondary to the fact that there is, by definition, no structural pathology identified following a comprehensive diagnostic workup. Therefore, WADs remain a diagnosis of exclusion. Treatments include rest, analgesia, soft braces, and early physical therapy. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of cervical sprain ("whiplash") and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for those with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanisms of injury and pathophysiology of cervical sprain/strain syndromes.
- Outline the components of a proper evaluation and assessment of a patient presenting with a cervical whiplash injury, including any indicated imaging studies.
- Summarize the treatment options available for cervical sprain/strain syndrome covering both conservative and possible surgical care.
- Describe how an optimally functioning interprofessional team would coordinate care to enhance outcomes for patients with cervical sprain/strain syndrome.

# Introduction

The term "whiplash" injury was first coined by Harold Crowe in 1928 to define acceleration-deceleration injuries occurring to the cervical spine or neck region.

# Etiology

Whiplash-associated disorders describe a constellation of neck-related clinical symptoms manifesting after an MVA or car crash-related mechanism.  The pathophysiologic cascade remains poorly understood and ultimately elusive.  Previous speculated underlying mechanisms had attributed multifactorial elements including vertebral distraction to the facet joint capsule region of the cervical spine causing pain.  Other plausible explanations can include any combination of minor (i.e., clinically irrelevant) injuries to either the facet joint(s), spinal ligaments, dorsal root ganglia/nerve roots, intervertebral discs, cartilage, and paraspinal muscle spasms or contusions of the intraarticular meniscus hemarthrosis may cause symptoms consistent with WADs or "whiplash" injuries.

# Epidemiology

As of 2018, whiplash injuries are estimated to affect 0.3% of people a year in the US sustained during sporting injuries, falls, and most commonly motor vehicle accidents.

# Pathophysiology

The injury occurs in three stages with a rapid loss of lordosis.  Both the upper and lower spines experience flexion in stage one. In stage two the spine assumes an S-shape while it begins to extend and eventually straighten to make the neck lordotic again. The final phase shows the entire spine in extension with an intense sheering force that causes compression of the facet joint capsules.

# History and Physical

The mechanism of injury is essential in the diagnosis of a whiplash-associated disorder. Typically the patient will report a history of an injury that shows rapid acceleration and deceleration forces such as an MVC, or a sports injury with a collision similarly affecting the neck.

A comprehensive examination and trauma evaluation are necessary with the cervical spine in a neutral position and while the provider palpates the spine and the paraspinal muscles.  Any midline tenderness or step off dictates further imaging and that the collar remains in place. Distracting injuries or intoxication are prohibiting factors that serve as absolute contraindications to c-spine clearance in the acute traumatic setting. Serial and follow-up examinations are warranted once the patient is appropriately alert and oriented to participate in a comprehensive physical examination.

In otherwise normal patients presenting with a low clinical suspicion of injury with no midline tenderness and unremarkable physical examination allows for clearance of the c-spine precautions without additional imaging. A neurological exam of the upper extremities including strength and sensation is necessary to rule out any deficits. NEXUS [Neuro Emergency X-ray Utilization Study], validated cervical spine criteria or Canadian Cervical Spine Rule are used to help rule in and rule out the need for additional imaging.

# Evaluation

The Canadian cervical spine rules or NEXUS criteria are useful for the evaluation of cervical spine injuries in the emergency department.

# Treatment / Management

Immobilization with a soft cervical collar, resumption of normal activity, and mobilization exercises are generally the treatment of choice.  Immobilization has shown the least improvement

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for cervical spine injuries includes cervical spine fracture, carotid artery dissection, herniated disc, spinal cord injury, subluxation of the cervical spine, muscle strain, facet injury, ligamentous injury.  Whiplash is an injury associated with trauma; remote trauma should dictate evaluation for other causes, such as mass, tumor, infection, etc.

# Prognosis

Prognosis varies secondary to comorbidities prior to the injury, severity of WAD, age and socioeconomic environment.  Full recovery has been shown to occur in a few days to several weeks.

# Complications

Though cervical pain is the most common symptom, dizziness and/or headaches can be chronic, persistently reported symptoms.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

In a retrospective analysis, seatbelt restraints have been shown to reduce the incidence of WAD.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Diagnosis and treatment of WAD are complex and associated with many complex issues.  Legal environment, prior injury, comorbidity, age, and defensive medicine all play roles in the management and outcomes.