Before establishing the AJCC staging system, Ohngren attempted to classify infrastructure versus suprastructure tumors based on a theoretical line drawn between the angle of the mandible to the medial canthus. By separating the superomedial/superolateral and inferomedial/inferolateral sites of the paranasal sinuses, he theorized that those with suprastructure involvement of the eye, skull base, pterygoid musculature/bone, and infratemporal fossae had a poorer prognosis.

The 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual describes primary tumor staging for sinonasal tumors of the maxillary sinus and nasal cavity/ethmoid sinus only since the involvement of the frontal and/or sphenoid sinuses automatically qualifies the tumor as being T4a.

Only staging for the nasal cavity and ethmoid subsites will be reviewed since BSNS has not been reported in the maxillary sinus. A T1 tumor involves only the nasal cavity or an isolated ethmoid sinus and may or may not invade bone.

Tumors within the T4 category are divided into T4a and T4b. T4a involves anterior orbital contents, the skin of the nose and/or cheek, and to a minimal extent, the anterior cranial fossa, pterygoids, frontal sinuses, or sphenoid sinuses. T4b indicates that the tumor has extended into the cranial vault, involving the orbital apex, cranial nerves, nasopharynx, dura, brain, middle cranial fossa, and/or the clivus.

Nodal staging guides overall staging. Metastasis to a single node on the same side as the tumor, as long as it measures less than 3 cm, is staged as N1.

An overall stage is assigned based on the tumor, nodal, and metastasis (TNM) staging. A T1N0M0 tumor is stage 1, and T2N0M0 is stage 2. Stage 3 includes both T3N0M0 tumors and T1/2/3 tumors with N1 nodal staging.

Stage 4B tumors are any T stage with N3 nodal status and T4b tumors with any nodal status N0/1/2/3, without metastasis. If the patient has a distant metastasis, they are staged as M1 with an overall stage of 4C, regardless of the T or N staging.