The upper third of the face exhibits many characteristic signs of aging, including:

- Horizontal midforehead lines, secondary to the vertical action of the frontalis muscle.

- A fullness of the upper lateral eyelid, caused by downward migration of the upper facial soft tissues resulting in brow ptosis.

- The vertical and oblique glabellar lines secondary to the action of the corrugator supercilii and the depressor supercilii (i.e., superomedial orbicularis oculi muscle).

- Horizontal lower midforehead lines, secondary to the action of the procerus muscle.

**Brow Lift Methods**

As mentioned previously, multiple surgical approaches have been created to address the ptotic brow, including:

- Direct Brow Lift: superior brow incision used to camouflage at the level of the eyebrow hair follicles.

- Allows for the most precise repositioning of the brow 
- Best suited in cases of unilateral facial paralysis.

- Midforehead Brow Lift: Incision planned at the level of the midforehead, ideally within the confines of a preexisting horizontal rhytid.
- Allows for bilateral brow repositioning with a single incision
- Best suited for men with a receding hairline and deep forehead rhytids.
- May consolidate multiple rhytids into one transverse rhytid.

- Hairline Brow Lift: Incision planned either within (trichophytic) or just in front (pretrichial) of the hairline.
- Allows for the bilateral elevation of the periorbital soft tissues
- Useful in patients with elongated foreheads as this may lower the patient's hairline
- It may be combined with a hairline advancement if warranted.

- Coronal Incision Brow Lift: Incision made several centimeters behind the hairline.

- The incision is completely hidden within the substance of the hair.
- Avoid in patients with elongated foreheads, as this will elevate the patient's existing hairline.
- Avoid this procedure in bald patients, as this may leave an unsightly scar.

- Endoscopic Brow Lift: Multiple small incisions made within the frontal and temporal hairlines to allow for the insertion of the endoscope and surgical instruments.
- Minimally invasive approach with a theoretically decreased risk of injury to neurovascular structures and quicker healing times
- Not well-suited for patients with receding hairlines or convex forehead structure, which may restrict endoscopic visualization 
- Requires fixation, typically with absorbable materials (e.g., sutureless bioabsorbable implants, sutures), to reposition and stabilize the forehead soft tissues 
- A technical learning curve exists.
- Only provides moderate brow elevation (several millimeters)

**Pertinent Anatomic Structures**

- Supraorbital Nerve (SON): Exits a notch or foramen roughly 2.7 cm lateral to the midline forehead (may be approximated to the level of the medial limbus). The SON further divides into deep and superficial branches that provide sensory innervation to the frontoparietal and upper eyelid skin, respectively.

- Supratrocheal Nerve: Usually identified 1 cm medial to the exit point of the supraorbital nerve. This provides sensory innervation to the medial upper eyelid, glabella, and a small portion of the conjunctiva.

- The Temporal Branch of Cranial Nerve VII (Facial Nerve): Provides motor innervation to the forehead (frontalis) and upper orbicularis oculi. The path of this nerve may be approximated by Pitanguy’s line, which is a line drawn from 0.5 cm inferior to the tragus to a spot 1.5 cm superolateral to the lateral brow).

**Ideal Brow Location and Shape**

- For women, the ideal brow position takes the shape of an arch with its peak roughly at the level of the lateral limbus.

- In men, the ideal brow remains relatively flat and positioned at the level of the supraorbital rim.