Treatment begins with standard resuscitation based on the patient's vital signs.  Airway, breathing and circulation must be supported in a patient in extremis. Fluid resuscitation is indicated for hypotension. In the event of respiratory failure, the patient may need endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Pediatric Advanced Life Support guidelines should be followed for resuscitation in circulatory collapse.

The first intervention when necrotizing enterocolitis is suspected is to stop all enteral feedings and maintain the patient NPO. A nasogastric tube should be placed for decompression of the dilated bowels. Intravenous antibiotics should be started, with broad-spectrum coverage. The suggested antibiotic regimen includes ampicillin, gentamicin, and either clindamycin or metronidazole. While the patient is NPO, total parenteral nutrition must be provided. If this conservative therapy is effective, infants may resume enteral feedings once signs of infection have resolved. This may take several days to a week in some cases. The presence of normal bowel movements determines the return of bowel function.

In infants who have worsening condition or bowel perforation or who do not respond to medical therapy, surgical intervention is indicated. Laparotomy is the standard approach, and surgery is as conservative as possible, with removal only of portions of unquestionably necrotic or perforated intestine in an attempt to preserve as much intestine as possible

Laparotomy may be contraindicated in patients who are extremely small and ill, as they may not be stable enough to tolerate the surgery

Future treatments are currently being studied, including probiotics