Anthracyclines administration is generally by injection or via an intravenous infusion. The type of cancer and its stage will influence the dose and duration of chemotherapy. As an example, treatment may be daily for two weeks followed by an off week to permit the body to recover and regenerate new cells. This 3-week cycle may then be repeated. There are numerous time and administration sequences used; this one given is only an example. Clinicians need to explain the administration process to the patient so they can understand the schedule, and also receive counsel on factors that may alter the administration regimen.

**Mode of Administration**

- Injectable

- Intravenous

- Intraarterial - Not FDA approved for chemotherapy; used for hepatic artery chemoembolization

- Intravesical - Used in early bladder cancer

**Dosage**

The dosing of anthracyclines is by body surface area and varies with indication and type of anthracycline. general dose ranges for anthracyclines are listed below; specific indications will vary the dose. Clinicians should consult facility-specific dosing regimens and consult package inserts for specific agents.

The following shows the dosing regimens for doxorubicin, as an example of how agents in this class may be dosed and administered.

**IV Route**

**Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia**

- 60 to 75 mg/m repeated every 21 days as a single agent

- 40 to 75 mg/m repeated every 21 days if combined with other chemotherapeutic agents

- Cumulative dose not to exceed 550 mg/m

- The dosing is the same for adults, adolescents, and children

**Acute Myelogenous Leukemia**

- 60 to 75 mg/m repeated every 21 days as a single agent

- 40 to 75 mg/m repeated every 21 days if combined with other chemotherapeutic agents

- Cumulative dose not to exceed 550 mg/m

- The dosing is the same for adults, adolescents, and children

**Hodgkin Lymphoma**

- **Stanford V regimen**
- 25 mg/m^2 on weeks 1,3,5,7,9, and 11 in combination with mechlorethamine, vinblastine, vincristine, bleomycin, and prednisone. The total duration of treatment is 12 weeks

- **BEACOPP regimen**
- Adults and adolescents 15 years or older: 25 mg/m on day 1 in combination with bleomycin, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone

- **ABVD/MOPP regimen**
- 25 mg/m^2 on days 1 and 15 repeated every 28 days in combination with vinblastine, bleomycin, and dacarbazine
- It is also used with vinblastine, brentuximab vedotin, and dacarbazine as well.

- The dosing is the same for adults, adolescents, and children

**Intravesical**

- Rapidly recurrent (stage Ta or T1) or in situ transitional cell bladder cancer

- 50 to 150 mg  in 150 ml of normal saline is instilled into the bladder and retained for at least 30 minutes