Ethacrynic acid is a loop diuretic that gained FDA approval for widespread use in 1967. Unlike other loop diuretics, ethacrynic acid is a novel drug due to the absence of a sulfonamide group in its structure, allowing its use in critically ill patients with life-threatening sulfa-allergies.

Ethacrynic acid is also indicated during diuretic renal scintigraphy in patients with sulfonamide allergies. Previously, diagnosing renal obstruction in this patient group was limited to two options: 1) using furosemide regardless of hypersensitivity because, in most cases, allergic reactions are practically mild or 2) resorting to the less accurate non-diuretic route for patients with known severe reactions to sulfa drugs. An article from the Journal of Nuclear Medicine discusses how this dilemma led to ethacrynic acid replacing furosemide during diuretic renal scintigraphy. In looking for an alternative to furosemide, researchers discovered that many loop diuretics, including thiazides and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, are composed of sulfonamide moieties. Because of this, in addition to intravenous ethacrynic acid's nearly 100 percent bioavailability and rapid onset of action, it has become a favorable option for these patients.[4]

In recent research, ethacrynic acid may be useful as adjuvant anticancer therapy. Glutathione transferase is often overexpressed in tumor cells, conferring resistance to many antineoplastic regimens. In vitro studies have showcased ethacrynic acid's ability to inhibit glutathione transferase. Clinical trials for its efficacy as an adjuvant for multiple myeloma have also shown promise.