As described above, an anomalous internal carotid artery is an essential surgical consideration while operating in the pharyngeal area. There is a variety of disease pathologies that may occur in the RPS that could warrant surgery as one of the treatment options. These include:

- Retropharyngeal abscess: The two most common causes of RPS abscess are pyogenic lymphadenitis and peritonsillar abscesses. However, any cervical infection encompassing lymphatic drainage in the pharynx, prevertebral space, middle ear, or paranasal sinuses may lead to this pathology. Symptoms that can raise concern for a RPS abscess include fever, dysphagia, and a sore throat. These symptoms are non-specific and diagnostic imaging should be done to confirm a suspected abscess. A CT scan with contrast of the neck is the diagnostic imaging of choice and it will show a collection of fluid under tension in the RPS with rim enhancement. The retropharyngeal lymph nodes are also typically enlarged. An abscess in the danger space of the RPS can lead to spreading of the infection into the mediastinum. A RPS abscess requires surgical drainage as the first line of treatment.

- Primary lesions of the RPS: lipoma, liposarcoma, synovial sarcoma.

- Direct spread and metastasis: nasopharyngeal carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma (pharyngeal, laryngeal, sinonasal, oral cavity), lymphoma, melanoma, esthesioneuroblastoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, chordoma, primary spinal tumors, and thyroid goiters.

- Fluid collection: There are a variety of disease pathologies that may cause a fluid collection in the RPS. These include foreign body ingestion, hematoma, angioedema, retropharyngeal lymphadenitis, vertebral osteomyelitis, Kawasaki disease, pyriform sinus, calcific tendinitis of the longus colli muscle, and cystic tumor caused by lymphatic malformation. The majority of these conditions will be referred to a surgical specialist for management.