A reno-vascular mechanism is the commonest pathway and is operative in the majority of conditions leading to NH. Systemic causes that might decrease renal perfusion vary. Catheterization of the umbilical artery causes endothelial cell injury and the formation of thrombi in the renal vessels. The resultant decrease in kidney perfusion activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAS), thus causing hypertension.

An inability to excrete free water and an increase in the serum aldosterone levels have been reported in BPD, which might contribute to systemic hypertension.  Recently, an increase in the peripheral arterial wall thickness and abnormal vasomotor functions have been demonstrated as the etiopathogenesis for NH in infants with BPD.

Infants of diabetic mothers or those with Factor V Leiden mutation may present with renal vein thrombosis (RVT) and decreased renal perfusion. Neonatal asphyxia may result in renal tubular necrosis (ATN) and secondary to that in NH. Neonatal tumors, such as pheochromocytoma, neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, and mesoblastic nephroma, can cause NH by compressing the renal vessels or ureters, or by producing vasoactive substances, such as catecholamines. COA and PDA lead to decreased forward blood flow, diminished renal perfusion, and the activation of RAS. The closure of abdominal wall defects results in increased intraabdominal pressure that may compress renal vessels.

Hypertension in ECMO is thought to be secondary to the increased stroke volume caused by the increased aortic return from ECMO pump blood, and as a result of abnormal sodium or water handling in response to the non-pulsatile arterial flow through the infants’ systems.