In serum sickness, a complete blood count (CBC) with a differential count may show neutropenia, eosinophilia, or thrombocytopenia. Hepatitis serologies can be performed to assess for hepatitis B infection. Inflammatory markers, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) are elevated. Complement consumption will result in low C3, C4, and CH50 levels. Urinalysis may show mild proteinuria. Skin lesions, when biopsied, may show leukocytoclastic vasculitis that is non-specific. There is no single test to diagnose serum sickness definitively. The diagnosis primarily rests on the temporal association of antigen exposure to classic clinical manifestations, such as fever, arthritis, and rash.

Peripheral eosinophil count is usually normal in HP. Total IgG levels are often elevated. Precipitating antibodies in the patient’s serum against the suspected causative agent can be tested, though this test has a low sensitivity. In the acute phase of HP, a chest X-ray can show patchy or homogeneous, bilateral interstitial and alveolar nodular infiltrates. In chronic cases, fibrotic changes are noted. A High-resolution CT scan (HRCT) has higher sensitivity than a chest X-ray and can help demonstrate the architectural changes in detail. Greater than 50% of lymphocytes in bronchoalveolar lavage are suggestive of HP. There is no gold standard test to diagnose HP.

An evaluation of SLE may include CBC with a differential metabolic panel, complement levels, and confirming the presence of antibodies. ANA is sensitive and is almost a universal finding in SLE. Anti-dsDNA and anti-smith antibodies are specific to the diagnosis of SLE. The urinalysis with microscopy and urine spot protein to creatinine ratio must be ordered to evaluate for possible nephritis and quantification of proteinuria. A renal biopsy is needed for the definitive diagnosis and classification of lupus nephritis. Appropriate imaging studies are required for the evaluation of pulmonary and joint symptoms.

In PSGN, antibodies against streptolysin O, streptokinase, or deoxyribonuclease B can be elevated in up to 94.6% of cases.

The common investigations relevant to the evaluation of immune complex-mediated diseases are summarized below:

**Blood**

- CBC with a differential count, complete metabolic panel

- Peripheral blood smear

- ESR, CRP

- Complement levels

- Quantitative serum immunoglobulins - IgG and IgM

- Hepatitis serology and serum cryoglobulins

- Antibody testing - ANA, anti-ds DNA, rheumatoid factor, anti-histones, anti-Smith, anti-(SS-A), anti-(SS-B), anti-RBC, antiplatelet, and anti-neutrophil antibodies

- Streptozyme test (measures five streptococcal antibodies) - antistreptolysin (ASO), antinicotinamide-adenine dinucleotidase (anti-NAD), antihyaluronidase (AHase), antistreptokinase (ASKase), anti-DNAse B antibodies

**Urine**

- Urinalysis with microscopy

- Urine spot protein/creatinine (PC) ratio

- 24 -hour urine protein

**Imaging Studies**

- X-ray

- CT scan

**Allergic Skin Testing**

- Skin prick tests are performed using various allergens from animals, food, plants, pathogens, and environmental pollutants.

**Special Procedures**

- Skin biopsy

- Renal biopsy

- Bronchoscopy

**Cultures**

- Blood cultures

- Skin culture

- Throat culture