The Jarisch Herxheimer Reaction (JHR) is often unrecognized and is underreported. The symptoms of fever, chills, body ache and skin rash are often present before treatment with an antibiotic, so worsening symptoms after treatment can be overlooked simply as signs of the underlying infection. Another common reason for underdiagnosis is confusing JHR with an allergy to antibiotics. Providers should anticipate JHR while treating spirochetes and be prepared with proper monitoring of vital signs and supportive care. Usually, the clinical scenario is of a patient who presents with fevers, worsening rigors and rash several hours after starting antibiotics for a spirochetal disease.

JHR is characterized by a triad of transient events:

- Fluctuation in body temperature

- Symptom flare

- Physiological changes

Fluctuation in body temperature is usually evidenced by cycles of fever (38-41 degrees Celcius), accompanied by flu-like symptoms including malaise, headache and chills, and pharyngitis, followed by sweating and resolution of fever.

In the flare stage, there is an aggravation of symptoms. This can vary in different stages of syphilis. There may be edema and ulcerations around the chancre in primary syphilis. In secondary syphilis, there is prominence in the appearance of the rash. In late syphilis, exacerbation of features related to the different affected organ systems might occur. The JHR in patients with general paresis of insane (GPI) may manifest differently. There can be an aggravation of existing psychoses, convulsions, or focal neurological deficits. Those with tabes dorsalis may complain of intensification of their symptoms, including lightning pains, constipation, and urinary retention. Late syphilitic lesions and organ involvement have been associated with potentially lethal complications during JHR.

Physiological changes in JHR include vasoconstriction, a rise in blood pressure, and hyperventilation, which occur in the early phase of the reaction. Later, there is hypotension due to vasodilatation and decreased peripheral resistance.

JHR occurs within a few hours of the administration of the first dose of antibiotics and usually resolves within 24 hours without any intervention. The severity of JHR depends upon the organism load in the body. The definition of JHR could be broadened from fever, chills, and intensification of skin rash to include pulmonary failure, meningitis, renal and liver dysfunction, cardiac injury, premature uterine contractions in pregnant women, and worsening cerebral function in some cases.