There are no guidelines for the treatment of solar urticaria. Different treatments have been used with variable success. Sun exposure avoidance is logically recommended, as well as photoprotection with the use of broad-spectrum sunscreens and dark clothing.

By analogy with idiopathic chronic urticaria treatment, second-generation antihistamine one receptor antagonist agents are largely used and are generally accepted as first-line. These include loratadine, fexofenadine, and cetirizine. They may induce relief in most cases but usually require higher doses, two to four times higher than the conventional ones. 2nd generation antihistamine 1 receptor antagonists seem to have greater efficacy in delayed onset urticaria but no effect on the erythema in solar urticaria.

Since chronically exposed areas seem relatively tolerant to sun radiations, phototherapy (UVA, UVB, visible light) and photochemotherapy (PUVA) have been used to induce tolerance (hardening) to sunlight. This hardening process should be based on the spectrum of action and the minimal urticarial dose. PUVA seems to give a longer-lived response than phototherapy alone.

Intravenous immunoglobulins, plasma exchange, cyclosporine, afamelanotide, and omalizumab have been used in patients with refractory solar urticaria with some success.

Oral steroids, leukotriene receptor antagonists, antimalarial drugs, prostaglandin inhibitors, and oral beta-carotene have shown little or no effect in the management of solar urticaria. Combination therapies are frequently needed to achieve and maintain acceptable clinical relief.