Misoprostol has four primary effects.

- Cytoprotection of the gastrointestinal mucosa

- Uterotonic

- Diarrhea

- Abdominal pain (diarrhea and abdominal pain fall under adverse effects).

Currently, misoprostol is FDA approved only for the prevention and treatment of NSAID-induced gastric ulcers in patients taking NSAIDs and at high risk for ulceration. It has an indication (but not FDA approved) in the short-term treatment of active duodenal or gastric ulcers with other etiologies.

Although clinicians use misoprostol around the world in gynecology and obstetrics, however, none of these indications are FDA approved.

The combination of misoprostol and mifepristone has reported widespread use for medical abortions with an acceptable safety profile. Unfortunately, reports of significant adverse events without significant data have hindered FDA approval. Therefore, there is an extensive debate between the governing societies regarding the dosing standardization of this regimen. It may receive approval once there is additional research, and there is an agreed dosing strategy.

It is used for termination of pregnancy in the first and second trimesters as either monotherapy or combination with intramuscular methotrexate.

At much smaller doses, misoprostol is useful for inducing cervical ripening and induce labor in full-term pregnancies. It may also be employed to induce labor following intrauterine fetal demise.

After labor, it also has a use for the treatment of postpartum uterine bleeding upon failure of uterine massage, and/or when other uterotonic medications are not readily available.