The differential diagnosis for CTK is varied and based on conditions that may present with central or paracentral opacifications or changes in visual acuity. As stated above, the previous thinking was that CTK was a severe form of DLK. While we now better understand the difference between the two pathologies, distinguishing CTK from DLK by the localization, response to steroids, or hyperopic changes is important as the two may coexist. Additionally, unlike DLK, in which the opacification remains contained within the interface, the amorphous opaqueness of CTK can be found expanding into the corneal flap anteriorly, and residual stromal bed posteriorly.

Infectious keratitis may also result in a dense central opacity with infiltrate. However, CTK does not result in an infiltrate due to the lack of inflammation and also lacks the characteristic off-yellow dullness of inflammatory lesions. Furthermore, infectious keratitis may present with other signs that are not associated with CTK, such as a progressive spread, conjunctival hyperemia, purulent discharge, inflammatory cells, and an anterior chamber reaction.

Corneal cross-linking (CXL) and photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) are also associated with postsurgical haze, which can be confused with CTK. Post-procedural haze differs in its time course and generally develops more than a month after surgery, whereas CTK most often presents within nine days.

In patients with previous LASIK surgery, epithelial ingrowth may occur, resulting in opacification. These opacifications are distinguishable from CTK due to their delayed onset and peripheral location around the flap edges.