The treatment of periorbital cellulitis differs based on the severity of disease and age of the patient. The mainstay of treatment is usually antibiotic coverage against S. aureus, the Streptococcus species, and anaerobes. Patients who are over one year of age with mild symptoms can be treated as an outpatient with oral antibiotics. Those with more severe disease or are less than one year of age, should be admitted to the hospital.

Prior treatment of periorbital cellulitis included amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, cefpodoxime or cefdinir. However, this is no longer recommended due to the rise of MRSA. For MRSA coverage, it is recommended that patients receive Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), Clindamycin, or Doxycycline, however, TMP-SMX and doxycycline do not cover group A Streptococcus and doxycycline is not recommended for children under eight years of age. The current recommendation is Clindamycin or TMP-SMX plus Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid or Cefpodoxime or Cefdinir. If the patient is unimmunized by H.influenzae, antibiotic coverage with a beta-lactam is recommended. The antibiotic course is usually for five to seven days or longer if the cellulitis persists.

Response to antibiotics is usually rapid and complete. If outpatient therapy fails to show improvement after 24 to 48 hours, patients should be hospitalized with broad-spectrum antibiotics, CT scan, and a surgical consultation should be considered for possible incision and drainage. No studies have shown an association between steroids and the recurrence or complication of orbital cellulitis, and thus steroids are not routinely prescribed.

For patients with group 3, 4, or 5 of the Chandler classification, surgery is necessary for drainage. Also, if a clinician is unsure if a patient has periorbital or orbital cellulitis even with a CT scan, it is recommended to treat as orbital cellulitis.