**Anterior Triangle**

The anterior triangle of the neck contains several important nerves that not only innervate local structures but also pass through the region on their way to other destinations. The vagus nerve runs in the carotid sheath between the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein. It gives off its pharyngeal branches at the superior margin of the anterior triangle supplying motor input to the internal pharyngeal muscles. The superior laryngeal nerve branches from the vagus nerve just inferior to the pharyngeal branches and divides into the external and internal laryngeal nerves. The internal laryngeal nerve pierces they thyrohyoid membrane and provides sensory innervation to the larynx above the vocal cords. The external laryngeal nerve innervates the cricothyroid muscle.

The hypoglossal nerve, or cranial nerve XII, descends posterior to the internal carotid artery and first appears in the carotid triangle as crosses the lateral surface of the internal and external carotid arteries. The nerve continues medially and passes superficial to the lingual artery before it dives deep to the posterior belly of the digastric and stylohyoid muscles. It then courses deep to the mylohyoid muscle and runs beneath the submandibular triangle en route to innervate the intrinsic muscles of the tongue.

The ansa cervicalis is a part of the cervical plexus and forms a loop of nerves that occupy the anterior triangle. It is composed of a superior and inferior root. The superior root arises from the anterior ramus of the first cervical spinal nerve. It briefly travels with the hypoglossal nerve before it descends along the anterior surface of the carotid sheath. However, the nerve to the thyrohyoid is a branch of the superior root that travels with the hypoglossal nerve for an extended distance before it separates to innervate the thyrohyoid muscle. The inferior root originates from the anterior rami of the second and third cervical spinal nerves and descends along the lateral surface of the carotid sheath. The superior and inferior loop join around the level of the fifth cervical vertebra to form a loop. This loop gives branches to innervate the omohyoid, sternohyoid, and sternothyroid.

Branches of both the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves are responsible for the innervation of the carotid body and carotid sinus, which function to regulate blood pressure and blood oxygen content, respectively. This article will cover the clinical implications of each of these structures in the upcoming sections.

**Posterior Triangle**

The spinal accessory nerve, or cranial nerve XI, can be found within the posterior triangle as it innervates the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. After exiting the skull via the jugular foramen, the nerve descends along the deep surface of the sternocleidomastoid and gives off motor branches to the muscle. It then appears from posterior to the sternocleidomastoid and traverses the posterior triangle in an inferior and posterior direction before it passes deep to the trapezius.

The nerves that supply cutaneous sensation to the majority of the cervical region are also related to the posterior triangle. Along with the ansa cervicalis, these four nerves also arise from the cervical plexus and are derived from the anterior rami of the second, third, and fourth cervical spinal nerves. The nerves emerge from the investing fascia near the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid near its midpoint and course between the investing and superficial fascia toward their final destinations. The greater auricular and lesser occipital nerves ascend to innervate the skin of the parotid, mastoid, and lesser occipital regions. The transverse cervical nerve crosses medially over the sternocleidomastoid and innervates most of the skin of the anterior neck. The supraclavicular nerve courses inferiorly and branches broadly to supply cutaneous sensation to the area over the clavicle and the first two ribs.