In surgery, knowledge of the anatomy of the female external genitalia is crucial when it comes to repairing, reconstructing, or preventing undesirable defects to the genitals. Some common procedures done to the female external genitalia are episiotomy, labioplasty, and vaginoplasty.

**Episiotomy**

In episiotomies, the vaginal opening is enlarged by an incision that is done either midline or laterally during delivery of a child that risks tearing and damaging the vaginal opening. If the incision is performed midline, the perineal body will be the target of the incision. While the lateral episiotomy targets the transverse perineal muscle. The reason for performing episiotomies is that an incision can be easily repaired and decrease healing time, in contrast with a torn vaginal opening that could potentially involve the perineum muscles and the rectum. The repair of a torn vaginal opening due to a large child delivery has a longer healing time. Episiotomies are done as procedures to aid in vaginal delivery of large offsprings and the prevention of vaginal tearing into other perineum structures.

**Labioplasty**

Labioplasty is a surgical procedure with emphasize on altering the size and shape of the labia majora and labia minora. Indications for labioplasty include multiple reasons, such as congenital defects, aging, cancers, and cosmetics. The focus of this procedure is to create a more desirable appearance of the labial folds.

**Vaginoplasty**

Vaginoplasty is a surgical procedure used to reconstruct or construct the vagina. Vaginoplasties are necessary for several reasons, such as pelvic organ prolapse, congenital defects, neoplasms, sex reassignments, and cosmetics. The goal of the vaginoplasty is to surgically make a vagina that is desirable for the patient.