**Classification of Heart Failure**

Classification is one of the key determinates of how to evaluate and treat heart failure. When a patient is in acute or decompensated heart failure, our focus is on expeditious identification and treatment of life threats. When evaluating chronic heart failure, different classification schemes are available. The classification scheme used to categorize the type and degree of heart failure is based on the presentation and will affect the treatment and prognosis of the condition. Heart failure classification schemes are generally based on one of the following:

- Anatomic findings (i.e., heart failure with different degrees of ejection fraction)

- The chamber of the heart involved (including functional)

- Symptoms of the patient

All heart failure patients should also be classified based on the ACCF/American Heart Association stages of heart failure, a New York Heart Association functional classification.

**ACCF/AHA Stages of Heart Failure**

The ACC/AHA stages of heart failure are defined by the risk of heart failure, the presence of active heart failure, and whether structural heart disease is present. In general, the higher the classification, the greater the treatment and interventions that the patient may require.

- A  - No structural heart disease present, high risk for heart failure, and asymptomatic

- B  - Structural heart disease present, asymptomatic

- C  - Structural heart disease present and current or previous symptoms of heart failure

- D  - Heart failure that is refractory and requiring specialized interventions

**NYHA Functional Classification of Heart Failure**

The NYHA classification is a functional classification of heart failure and based upon how much the patients' symptoms limit their physical activity and to what degree physical activity can cause the person to become symptomatic.  The grading scale is from I up to the most severe of grade IV where the patient is unable to carry on physical activity and has symptoms at rest.

**Diagnostic Tests**

Testing for heart failure patients should be focused on the patient's symptoms, clinical suspicion, and the current and any pre-existing or current stage of heart failure. The ordering of multiple routine tests should be avoided in all heart failure patients. Basic tests that should merit consideration for all patients evaluated for heart failure are the following:

- Serum electrolytes and kidney function

- Complete blood count

- Lipid level

- Liver function tests

- Troponin level - if there is concern that myocardial injury as the cause for symptoms

- Thyroid-stimulating hormone

- An electrocardiogram should also be performed in all heart failure patients

Other tests that may be considered based on severity and classification of patient condition are:

- Chest x-ray to assess for signs of pulmonary congestion or edema in acute decompensated heart failure

- Biomarkers - used to assess patients with more complex symptoms than acute heart failure (i.e., B-type natriuretic peptide and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide)

For further information on the recommendations for evaluating heart failure, please see the American Heart Association and New York Heart Association classification based heart failure guidelines.