The essential normal findings for a polysomnogram (PSG) are the sleep stages, which are crucial to interpretation. Sleep stage scoring is based on EEG, EOG, and submental EMG criteria. Sleep stage scoring was initially being detailed by Rechtschaffen and Kales (R&K) but has since been replaced by the AASM scoring manual.

The AASM scoring manual uses new nomenclature for the wake and sleep referred to as stage W for wake, stage N1, N2, and N3 for the non-rapid eye movement (NREM) stages of sleep, and stage R for REM sleep. Stage N3 replaces stages 3 and 4 in the new classification. Sleep is staged in 30-second sections, known as epochs. Traditionally, PSGs were recorded on paper, and an epoch of sleep was a standardized length of paper given standard recording time. Today, digital PSG has virtually replaced recording on paper, and sleep is scored in sequential epochs that can be manipulated on the screen. If more than one sleep stage occurs in an epoch, the epoch is generally scored based on the sleep stage occupying most of the epoch.

To identify the sleep stage in an epoch, the EEG plays a central role. The EEG demonstrates several recognizable wave patterns from wake through the stages of sleep. These wave patterns are described in terms of frequency, amplitude, and morphology. Frequencies include:

- Alpha 8 to 13 Hz

- Beta > 13 Hz

- Theta 4 to 7.99 Hz

- Delta < 4 Hz

Amplitude is a measure of the voltage of the EEG waves and varies across different sleep stages. The overall morphology of the waves can also provide insight into the sleep stage. For example, K-complexes and sleep spindles occur in N2 sleep. K-complexes are waves with a sharp initial negative deflection, followed by a positive deflection typically with maximal amplitude in the frontal derivations. Sleep spindles are sinusoidal 11-16 Hz waves lasting at least 0.5 seconds with their maximal amplitude generally in the central derivations. Sawtooth waves, which are 2-6 Hz waves with a serrated appearance with maximal amplitude in the central leads, may be seen during or before stage R.

Stage W scoring on a PSG depends on whether the patient has their eyes open or closed. With eyes open, the EEG demonstrates low amplitude mixed-frequency (LAMF) waves predominantly 4-7 Hz. With eyes closed, the EEG demonstrates an alpha (posterior dominant) rhythm in most patients. Alpha rhythm is generally most prominent in the occipital leads. The EOG shows blinking, reading eye movements or irregular, conjugate, sharply peaked rapid eye movements. EMG shows a high chin tone. Stage W is scored when greater than 50% of an epoch is alpha with patterns consistent with the above.

Stage N1 is the transition from wakefulness into sleep. LAMF theta waves predominate on EEG. The EOG shows slow, rolling eye movements. Chin EMG tone is lower than stage W but higher than stage R. An epoch with over 50% of these characteristics is scored as stage N1 in the absence of evidence of another sleep stage.

K-complexes characterize stage N2 and sleep spindles with a background of low amplitude mixed-frequency EEG activity. There are usually no eye movements on EOG. EMG is generally lower than during wake. N2 is scored when a K-complex without associated arousal or sleep spindle occurs in the first half of the current epoch or the last half of the previous epoch with less than 20% slow-wave activity. N2 continues until a transition into stage N3 or stage R, arousal, a major body movement followed by slow eye movements, or an awakening.

Stage N3 is the deepest sleep stage, has high-amplitude, and slow waves. The delta frequency predominates between 0.5 and 2 Hz with amplitudes greater than 75 microvolts. There are generally no eye movements on EOG, and EMG is variable, but often the tone is lower than N2. This stage is scored when greater than 20% of an epoch (6 seconds) meets these frequency and amplitude criteria.

Stage R represents REM sleep. As the name implies, the EOG demonstrates rapid eye movements, similar to wakefulness. The EEG is LAMF without K-complexes or sleep spindles. The chin EMG falls below previous amplitude levels in the recording. Sawtooth waves, although often associated with stage R, are not always present. Stage R is scored when the combination of the three EOG, EMG, and EEG criteria are satisfied.