Ropivacaine is FDA-approved for surgical anesthesia and acute pain management. It is used in an epidural block for surgery—such as cesarean sections. It is also used in major nerve blocks and local infiltration. In acute pain management, ropivacaine is used in epidurals (continuous infusion or intermittent bolus) for postoperative or labor pain control. More recently, ropivacaine’s use in chronic pain management has also been evaluated by researchers.

In epidural administration for cesarean section, clinical trials show that ropivacaine (0.75% or 0.5%) has a clinically similar onset of sensory and motor block to bupivacaine 0.5%. The median duration of analgesia that ropivacaine supplied to the T6-S3 dermatomes is similar to bupivacaine but with a much shorter duration of motor block (0.9 hrs vs. 2.5 hrs). For intrathecal administration, hyperbaric solutions of ropivacaine are faster in onset and recovery than isobaric ropivacaine, but the spread and duration of the hyperbaric ropivacaine block are very variable. Co-administration with opioids reduces the amount of local anesthetic needed and prolongs analgesia without lengthening the period of the motor block.

An outpatient study looking at bupivacaine and ropivacaine in managing chronic low back pain found there were no significant differences in analgesia, motor blockade, or hemodynamic changes between bupivacaine 0.125% and ropivacaine 0.2%. Ropivacaine was also found to be effective for severe refractory migraines through trigger point inactivation.