Ifosfamide is an alkylating agent and an analog of cyclophosphamide, used as a single agent or in combination with other agents to treat a wide variety of malignancies. These malignancies include

- Germline tumor of the testis

- Soft tissue sarcomas

- Ewing sarcoma

- Cervical cancer, either recurrent or metastatic

- Advanced bladder carcinoma

- Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

- Hodgkin lymphoma

- Small and nonsmall cell lung carcinoma

- Osteosarcoma

- Ovarian cancer

- Thymic cancer

Among all these cancers, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the drug only for germline tumors of the testis. The indications for the use of ifosfamide include:

**Germline Tumor of the Testis**

The FDA-approved regimen is ifosfamide and mesna at a 1.2 g/m²/day dose for five days, repeated every three weeks or following count recovery. When using ifosfamide and other chemotherapeutic drugs, mainly cisplatin, paclitaxel, or etoposide, there has been complete remission in about 21 to 26% of the treated population. Aggressive hydration (at least 2 liters oral or IV) is necessary during administration.

**Soft Tissue Sarcomas (off label use)**

Noncomparative studies have shown that combination therapy with ifosfamide/mesna has demonstrated objective response rates of around 40% when used as induction therapy.

**Ewing Sarcoma (off label use)**

Doses of ifosfamide vary based on the age group. Used alongside vincristine, etoposide, doxorubicin along with mesna in different regimens. Overall, survival is better with combination therapies.

**Cervical Cancer, Recurrent, or Metastatic (off label use)**

Ifosfamide is dosed along with mesna at 1500 g/m2/day every three weeks. When used along with paclitaxel and cisplatin, the response rate was 18 to 45%.

**Bladder Carcinoma: Mainly Advanced Carcinoma (off label use)**

**Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (off label use)**

Used in Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) as salvage therapy.

**Hodgkin Lymphoma (off-label use)**

Used in relapsed or refractory cases in the RICE regimen (rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide) along with mesna.

**Small and Non-small-cell cancer**

When used as maintenance or consolidation has been shown to have more benefit than standard regimens.

**9. Osteosarcoma (off label use)**

**Ovarian Cancer**

Used in advanced stages that are platinum-resistant. Many additional trials are underway. Response rates have been more than 40% when used as a combination.

**Thymic Cancer**

Used in advanced stages of thymic cancer.