The female patient should be educated by the gynecologist, primary care provider, and gynecology nurse that endometrial biopsy is a procedure that, without debate, has clinical importance when evaluating abnormal uterine bleeding or postmenopausal bleeding. This education is part of the collaborative, interprofessional healthcare team approach to preparing for and performing this procedure. However, there is currently a debate on whether an endometrial biopsy should be used to evaluate infertility. Chronic endometritis is a bacterial infection of the endometrium that causes an increased prevalence of immune cells in the endometrium, and this change in histology can adversely affect fertility. There is a prevailing opinion that because chronic endometriosis is often asymptomatic, it can only be diagnosed through an endometrial biopsy. Therefore endometrial biopsy should be performed in the evaluation of infertility.

However, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine and the Choosing Wisely Campaign recommend against endometrial biopsy in evaluating infertility. They cite evidence that the endometrium's histological dating does not determine infertility, and the presence of chronic endometritis does not affect the cumulative live birth rate.

For abnormal uterine bleeding, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists support recommendations that include differences in the indications for endometrial sampling in women based on age. In women younger than forty-five, an endometrial biopsy is only indicated if abnormal uterine is persistent. Endometrial biopsy should also be considered if there is a history of unopposed estrogen exposure, failed medical, or women at high risk of endometrial cancer. Any abnormal uterine bleeding in women over the age of forty-five should include an endometrial biopsy in the diagnostic workup.

There is another special subset of pre and postmenopausal women in whom the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists provide specific guidance in their recommendations for endometrial biopsy. This includes women who are on tamoxifen therapy. An endometrial biopsy should be performed for all postmenopausal patients on tamoxifen therapy who have abnormal uterine bleeding. It is common for premenopausal women to experience menstrual irregularities, most commonly amenorrhea, while taking tamoxifen. The guidelines do not suggest routine endometrial biopsy in these women. Unless there are risk factors for endometrial cancer, premenopausal women treated with tamoxifen do not require any additional screening or workup beyond routine gynecologic care.