**Tympanic Membrane**

The tympanic membrane (TM), approximately 1cm in diameter, is a thin ovoid semitransparent pearly-grey membrane separating the external ear canal from the tympanic cavity of the middle ear. The membrane consists of the pars tensa, which is much larger, and the thinner pars flaccida. The pars tensa is thicker and more fibrous because it has three layers. It consists of the outer layer, continuous with the skin on the external canal; the inner layer, continuous with the mucous membrane lining the middle ear; and then between the two, a layer of radial and circular fibers that give the membrane its tension and stiffness. These radial and circular fibers are present antero-inferiorly. The thinner pars flaccida is a small portion superior posteriorly and is devoid of a fibrous layer. The tympanic membrane transmits sound in the form of air vibrations to the auditory ossicles in the middle ear.

The handle of the malleus (one of the auditory ossicles) is embedded in the TM and is normally visualized near the umbo. In a healthy ear, the anterior cone of light, observed when light from an otoscope illuminates the membrane, is visible antero-inferiorly from the umbo.

**Middle Ear**

The middle ear is an air-filled chamber contained within the petrous part of the temporal bone. It is divided into the space directly medial to the TM, known as the tympanic cavity, and the area superior to the TM, known as the epitympanic recess. The Eustachian tube connects the tympanic cavity to the nasopharynx. The auditory ossicles within the middle ear transmit sound vibrations from the tympanic membrane to the oval window, which is an opening to the cochlea of the internal ear.

**Internal Ear**

The internal (or inner) ear contains the vestibulocochlear organ. This is the sensory system for balance and hearing and is composed of the cochlear duct, semicircular canals, utricle, and saccule. The membranous labyrinth, containing endolymph, is located within the perilymph-filled bony labyrinth. The bony labyrinth has a series of cavities - the cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular canals. The cochlea contains the cochlear duct, which is involved in hearing. There are two permeable openings from the middle ear into the internal ear - the round window and the oval window. The round window is located in the round window niche inferoposterior to the oval window. The stapes bone transmits vibration to the oval window, which causes the round window to move in the opposite phase, which in turn allows the fluid in the cochlea to move, enabling hearing.

The blood-labyrinth barrier, or blood-perilymph barrier, is the barrier between the capillary vasculature and fluids of the internal ear, and it restricts entry of most blood-borne compounds into internal ear tissues, thereby regulating the composition of the fluid.

**Physiology**

The cochlea is one of the most difficult organs to access for drug delivery. Systemic administration can be limited by the blood-labyrinth barrier, which reduces the exchange of fluid between plasma and the inner ear.

Intratympanic administration is minimally invasive but does rely on diffusion through middle ear barriers, primarily the round window membrane and oval window for drug entry into the cochlea.

Steroids are delivered through the tympanic membrane via a needle into the middle ear space and then absorbed and diffused primarily through the semi-permeable round window membrane but also the oval window annular ligament and small lacunar mesh into the inner ear perilymph.

The mechanism behind SSNHL can be multifactorial and is not completely understood. However, there is an increasing suggestion that it involves immunomodulatory cells and proinflammatory cytokines in the inner ear along with tumor necrosis factor, causing a reduction in cochlear blood flow. Glucocorticoid treatment centers around their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.

Meniere's Disease diagnosis is based on episodic unilateral clinical symptoms of vertigo combined with fluctuating low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus, and aural fullness. Since it has been suggested that the condition is a disorder of an immune-mediated endolymphatic sac, glucocorticoids are used as treatment. Meniere's disease results from a failure of inner ear homeostatic mechanisms regulating endolymph and perilymph, nerve and intercellular signaling, metabolism, and blood flow.