The lymph node capsule is thin fibrous, which receives afferent lymphatics. The naïve lymph node has not received any antigenic stimulation and hence, has all primary lymphoid follicles lacking a germinal center. In response to antigens, it transforms into secondary lymphoid follicles with germinal centers and a peripheral mantle zone with small mature B cells. The germinal center is composed of centroblasts, centrocytes, tingible body macrophages, and follicular dendritic cells. In between the capsule and the cortex are the subcapsular sinuses that are the primary site of metastatic carcinomas.

The paracortex is the T-cell zone with intermixed immunoblasts and dendritic cells. The medulla is the innermost portion of the lymph node and is composed of medullary cords and sinuses and is rich in plasma cells.

Reactive follicular hyperplasia is seen in viral and bacterial infections and autoimmune diseases.

Granulomatous inflammation is a feature in mycobacterial tuberculosis, fungal infection, cat scratch disease, lymphogranuloma venerium, tularemia, and yersinia.

Necrotizing non-granulomatous lymphadenitis is present in Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease and systemic lupus erythematosus.

A pattern-based approach serves for the initial histological assessment of lymphomas.

Large nodules are usually seen in nodular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma, lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, progressive transformation of germinal centers, and follicular lymphoma.

Small to medium-sized nodules occur in follicular lymphoma, reacted follicular hyperplasia, mantle cell lymphoma, and marginal zone lymphoma.

Diffuse effacement by small lymphocytes is present in small cell lymphoma, diffuse follicular lymphoma, extranodal marginal B cell lymphoma.