Due to the multiple components of this syndrome, physicians often focus on the "dominant feature" instead of the entire syndrome when planning resuscitative efforts. It is important to note that this is a syndrome, therefore describing a constellation of symptoms, not an underlying cause. Both bradycardia and hyperkalemia can be life-threatening and require immediate intervention. While most improve with supportive therapy, the standard approach to hyperkalemia treatment should be used.

Hypocalcemia increases the cardiotoxic effects of hyperkalemia; therefore, prompt intravenous administration of either calcium chloride or calcium gluconate is warranted. Calcium chloride contains three times the amount of calcium when compared to calcium gluconate. However, calcium gluconate is universally used due to patient tolerance when administered peripherally. The standard dose of calcium gluconate is 10 mL of 10% solution or 1 gram IV, given over 5-10 minutes. The standard dose of calcium chloride is also 1 gram IV given over 1 to 2 minutes.

If calcium fails to improve the bradycardia within five minutes, it can be readministered. If bradycardia persists, epinephrine can be used, which will increase the heart rate and increase the systemic vascular resistance and shift potassium back into the cells. This can be accomplished with a push dose pressor of 10 to 20 mcg of a 1 to 100,000 dilution. It is important to note that the standard ACLS approach to bradyarrhythmias, which involves the use of atropine, may not work as this bradycardia is not vagally-mediated.

Combination therapies that promote the intracellular shift of potassium or increase total body clearance further improve response. Insulin acts to reduce serum potassium levels by shifting potassium back into the cell. Ten regular insulin units should be administered intravenously as a bolus followed by 25 to 50 grams of 50% dextrose to help prevent hypoglycemia. Some studies show that it is reasonable to hold dextrose when glucose is >250 mg/dl; however, insulin is renally cleared; therefore, withholding dextrose in the setting of an acute kidney injury may result in a prolonged hypoglycemic state. Nebulized albuterol can also be used for potassium shifting into cells. This treatment is dose-dependent, with the standard dose being 15-20 mg. Albuterol will not only shift potassium back into the cells, but the adverse effect of the beta-2 blockade resulting in tachycardia would be beneficial in this setting.

After addressing and managing the apparent life-threatening aspects, the underlying cause must be addressed. History alone will likely reveal the inciting event. Bedside limited ultrasound is also vital in determining volume status since hypovolemia is the most common causative event. IV hydration will be patient-specific. Large volume resuscitation should be done with a pH-guided approach depending on the initial acid-base disorder. Balanced crystalloids are appropriate in patients presenting with an initial pH between 7.35 and 7.45. Large volume resuscitation with 0.9% normal saline has been known to cause hyperchloremic acidosis; therefore, this agent should be reserved for those presenting with metabolic alkalosis.

A non-anion gap metabolic acidosis, specifically a uremic acidosis, is common in BRASH syndrome; therefore, it has been proposed that isotonic bicarbonate, 150 mEq/L sodium bicarbonate in D5W, should be the fluid of choice. The BICAR-ICU trial studied sodium bicarbonate as the resuscitative fluid of choice in 389 patients admitted to the ICU and its role in all-cause mortality. While the primary end-point suggested a decrease in mortality when using bicarbonate for resuscitation, it was not statistically significant. It did, however, show an improvement in morbidity, as it decreased the need for emergent dialysis from 52% to 35% (p=0.0009).

Kaliuresis describes the process of increasing potassium excretion through the urine. This process is a definitive treatment of hyperkalemia as it effectively removes the potassium from the body. Adequate fluid resuscitation as described above is imperative for diuretic use to be successful. This is generally achieved through the use of loop diuretics, thiazides, or acetazolamide. Successful therapy often requires higher doses of the diuretic due to the underlying renal failure. Mild/moderate hyperkalemia may be successfully treated with high-dose loop diuretics alone, such as furosemide 60 to 100 mg IV or bumetanide 2 mg IV. However, more severe hyperkalemia often requires the addition of a thiazide diuretic. Combination therapy has been shown to improve diuresis in those resistant to high-dose loop diuretics. Intravascular volume loss through diuresis should be replenished to maintain isovolemic kaliuresis. In the setting of anuria, emergent dialysis is warranted for the definitive removal of potassium.

In persistent hypotension not responsive to IV fluids, vasopressors should be initiated to improve organ perfusion. Few studies have suggested the initiation of an epinephrine infusion or isoproterenol would be appropriate.