Understanding the superficial anatomy of the neck is critical to not only selecting and planning the appropriate procedure but also documenting physical findings. The most commonly used system of categorizing aging neck changes is the Dedo classification, which follows:

- Normal

- Skin laxity only

- Neck adiposity

- Platysmal banding

- Retrognathia

- Low lying hyoid

Each successive category is more difficult to address than the last, with skin laxity easily reduced with a conservative neck lift. Underneath the skin, there is subdermal fat, which can be removed with liposuction, deoxycholic acid injection, and cryotherapy; liposuction is commonly combined with surgical neck lifting in the operating room. Beneath the subdermal fat lies the thin sheet of the platysma muscle. This muscle is contiguous with the mimetic muscles and superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) of the face; it produces the vertical bands seen in an aging neck when the medial borders dehisce away from each other and move laterally. Suturing the medial borders of the platysma back together during a platysmaplasty both helps to reduce the appearance of vertical bands and provides a strong sling that can be suspended laterally in order to restore a more youthful cervicomental angle during a neck lift. In the case of severe vertical banding, the platysma may be divided transversely at the level of the hyoid bone to further reduce the bands and redefine the cervicomental angle.

Subplatysmal fat occupies the space between the platysma superficially and the deeper strap muscles that cover the larynx; this fat may be excised directly, if necessary, but should not be addressed blindly with liposuction due to the danger of injuring nearby vessels, nerves, and viscera. Retrognathia or microgenia and unfavorable hyoid position are important to recognize preoperatively because they will both contribute to a poor surgical outcome, but addressing them is not a typical part of neck rejuvenation procedures.

In addition to the structures referred to in the Dedo classification system, it is important to be aware of several other factors when considering cervical procedures. The submandibular glands may be prominent or ptotic, the appearance of which may be unpleasantly exacerbated by tightening the neck surgically or reducing submental adiposity; in some cases, reduction or removal of the glands may be considered.

Evaluating the skin quality is important as well, given that the neck skin often shows similar signs of sun damage to those seen on the face, but the neck skin is thinner and has fewer dermal appendages, making it less resilient to resurfacing efforts. While most of the critical structures in the neck are located deeply, such as the carotid artery, larynx, internal jugular vein, and thyroid gland, there are some nerves and vessels at risk during cervical rhytidectomy. The marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve is often found 1 to 2 cm inferior to the inferior border of the mandible posteriorly but crosses the mandible anteriorly on its course back up into the face to innervate the depressors of the lower lip. The cervical branch of the facial nerve innevates the platysma and is not as commonly injured as the marginal mandibular branch, but because the two nerves occasional split from a common trunk, the cervical branch may also contribute innervation to the lower lip depressors; therefore, injury to this branch may also result in weakness of the lower lip.

In the face proper, this nerve branch typically runs along with or even wraps around the distal aspect of the facial vein; damage to the nerve results in the inability to depress the lower lip and causes an asymmetric smile. More commonly injured, however, is the great auricular nerve, which lies deep and lateral to the platysma and courses over the sternocleidomastoid between Erb's point and the inferior aspect of the auricle. Roughly 1 cm anterior to this nerve lies the external jugular vein, which is also at risk for injury during rhytidectomy.