A cardiac abscess is a suppurative infection of the myocardium, endocardium, native or prosthetic valve tissue. Similar to other abscesses, it develops either by dissemination from a distant source such as bacteremia or sepsis or by direct extension of a pre-existing cardiac infective focus. Infective endocarditis has long been identified as the main cause of the latter. Although the incidence of cardiac abscesses continues to be investigated, it is presumably higher than noted postmortem and is of great importance when deciding the prognosis and management of patients. A single organism causes cardiac abscesses, usually Staphylococcus aureus or Escherichia coli. Less typically, polymicrobial abscesses have been noted.

Important complications of a cardiac abscess, whether alone or with valve tissue, are conduction abnormalities on an electrocardiogram (ECG). The incidence of perivalvular abscess among patients with infective endocarditis is between 30% to 40%, with the aortic valve having a higher predisposition than the mitral valve and annulus. Native aortic valve endocarditis, usually located in a weak part of the annulus near the atrioventricular node (AV), clearly demonstrates the anatomic predisposition and exemplifies why abscesses and heart block presents as frequent sequelae.

Perivalvular abscesses are also more common with prosthetic valves. In this case, the annulus instead of the leaflet is usually the primary site of infection. The degree of conduction disruption, therefore, depends on the extent of the involvement of the conduction system and is more commonly seen in perivalvular aortic abscesses. Additionally, the severe extension of perivalvular infection can also result in extrinsic coronary compression, or disruption, leading to an acute coronary syndrome. Thus far, only aortic valve involvement and current IV drug use have been prospectively identified as independent risk factors for a perivalvular abscess. Any patient with a cardiac abscess, regardless of all other factors, has an increased risk of embolization, morbidity, and mortality.