Trauma teams’ use of CO and CLC was found to be useful in goal-oriented task completion, and utilization was more common in providers with significant professional experience. CO encouraged team members to verbalize completed tasks or substantial changes in a patient’s condition. Complications can arise when there are too many CO’s being verbalized with no direct recipient, as these commands can lead to confusion instead of action. Siassakos et al. found that direct commands were more likely to be executed and lead to overt action as opposed to indirectly articulated commands.[17] Indirect commands were also likely to lead to task overload for resuscitation team members, thus having a detrimental impact on the teams’ performance.

Although communication overload is alarming, appropriate, and timely vocalization of concerns on behalf of the patient is integral to a successful interprofessional team. Egalitarian team leaders were more likely to encourage active team members who vocalized their concerns. Authoritarian leaders lead to the less frequent use of CLC in trauma teams. CLC utilizing effective and clear communication does not always come naturally for team members, which is why its use in simulation activities requires emphasis. Factors including time pressure, excessive workload, and organizational hierarchies can negatively impact the use of CLC. Although the risk of miscommunication in surgical teams becomes reduced with the use of CLC, repetitive practice via simulation is imperative to successful implementation.