The structure of the veins in the upper extremity is similar to arteries. The chief difference between the arteries and veins is that veins contain valves in the lumen. The valves are designed to prevent the backflow of blood. Since the venous blood in the upper extremities is draining against gravity. Another characteristic of the veins is that they do not contain as much muscle in their walls as arteries. The valves and the lesser amount of muscle in the veins allow them to expand and act as a reservoir for blood. The veins have a large capacity to hold blood. The veins in the upper extremities rely on the external forces to assist in the propulsion of blood back toward the heart. The external forces exist as muscle contractions and the contractile force of the nearby arteries. The venous drainage of the upper limb divides into the superficial and deep venous systems. The venous drainage in the upper limb starts from the digits and drains toward the heart.

**Superficial**

In the hand, the superficial veins will arise from the dorsal venous arch on the dorsum of the hand. The dorsal venous arch drains into the cephalic and the basilic veins. The cephalic and the basilic veins are the principal superficial veins that drain the upper limb. The cephalic vein will drain predominately the radial side of the upper extremity while the basilic vein will drain the medial side. As the cephalic and basilic veins drain towards the cubital fossa, the two veins will become connected by a vein called the median cubital vein. The median cubital vein has a connection to the cephalic vein (median cephalic vein) and a connection to the basilic vein (median basilic vein). As the veins ascend the arm they will drain back into the brachial vein, axillary vein, or subclavian vein. The cephalic vein will penetrate the deep fascia around the axilla region to drain into the subclavian vein. The basilic vein drains either into the brachial or axillary vein.

**Deep**

The deep venous drainage of the upper extremity follows closely with the arterial system. In the hand, there is a venous deep and superficial palmar arch that will drain in the ulnar and radial veins. The main drainage of the hand and forearm will be directed towards the ulnar and radial veins. These veins will travel in pairs around their corresponding arteries. The pair of veins around the arteries in the forearm is called venae comitantes. Once the ulnar and radial veins reach the cubital fossa, they will merge together to form the brachial vein. At the axilla, the brachial vein is renamed the axillary vein. The blood in the axillary vein drains into the subclavian vein. The subclavian veins will merge with the internal jugular veins from the head to form the brachiocephalic veins. The brachiocephalic vein from each upper extremity will merge to form the superior vena cava. The superior vena cava drains into the right atrium of the heart.

**Common Pathway**

Even though the superficial veins drain mainly the superficial structures and the deep veins drain the deeper structures. The two venous drainage systems connect via perforating veins. The perforating veins ultimately drain into the deep veins all along the upper extremity.