Statins are competitive inhibitors of hydroxymethylglutaryl (HMG) CoA reductase, an enzyme that participates in a crucial rate-limiting step in cholesterol biosynthesis.

Ezetimibe impedes dietary and biliary cholesterol absorption at the brush border of the intestine without increasing bile acid excretion or inhibiting cholesterol synthesis in the liver. It inhibits Nieman-Pick C1 like 1(NPC1L1) protein, which is present in both the intestine and the liver.

Fibrates are agonists for the nuclear transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha). This receptor downregulates apoprotein C-III (an inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase) while upregulating the synthesis of apolipoprotein A-I, lipoprotein lipase, and fatty acid transport protein, resulting in an increase in VLDL catabolism and elimination of triglyceride-rich particles; this results in lowering of total plasma triglycerides by 30% to 60%; also a modest increase in HDL has been observed.

The mechanism by which nicotinic acid affects plasma lipoproteins is not fully known. It may involve several mechanisms, including partial inhibition of free fatty acid release from adipose tissue and increased lipoprotein lipase action, which may increase the rate of triglyceride removal from plasma.

Bile acid sequestrants bind with bile acids in the intestines, thus interrupting the reabsorption of bile acids. The ensuing reduction in the cholesterol pool lowers intrahepatic cholesterol, promoting the upregulation of LDL receptors, causing a further decrease in blood cholesterol. The bile acid sequestrants also induce a minimal elevation in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C).

PCSK9 binds to the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R) on the surface of hepatocytes leading to the targeted degradation of LDL-R  by lysosomes and, ultimately, an increase in plasma LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) levels. Antibodies to PCSK9 interfere with its binding of the LDL-R, leading to higher hepatic LDL-R expression and lower plasma LDL-C levels.