The differential diagnosis for back pain is extensive and includes degenerative disease, infection, inflammation, tumors, and trauma.

Pediatric dogma suggests that children presenting with back pain may have serious pathology, including malignancy and infection. However, most instances of back pain are non-specific and self-limiting. The onset of symptoms will help differentiate between acute trauma, chronic overuse injury, and postural and developmental abnormalities.

Abdominal and pelvic pathologies may refer pain to the back; laboratory tests are necessary for evaluating patients presenting with back pain and high suspicion of infection or systemic disease. White cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), or C reactive protein, blood, and joint cultures are necessary if an infection is suspected.

The following is a list of the most common differential diagnoses:

- 
**Pain Originating from the Posterior Elements of the Spine**

Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis

Posterior element overuse syndrome: It includes injuries to the ligaments, joint capsules, muscle-tendon units, and facet joints. It is also known as hyperlordotic back pain, spondylotic back pain, or lumbar facet syndrome. Patients will present with extension-related low back pain, weak core muscles, decreased lumbar range of motion, and tight hamstrings with no evidence of spondylolysis. Conservative management with cryotherapy and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is indicated, including physiotherapy focusing on core strength and hamstring flexibility.

- 
**Sacroiliac joint (SI) Pain**

This syndrome may be present in children with insidious onset of low back and buttock pain, worsened by extension, prolonged standing, or sitting. It can result from inflammation or stress fracture of the sacrum or SI joint. Rest, ice, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are indicated. A rheumatoid origin of the inflammation must be ruled out.

- 
**Pain Originating from the Anterior Elements of the Spine**

Scheuermann disease: This entity, with an incidence rate of 1 to 8%, is the most common cause of an adolescent kyphotic deformity. Both females and males are affected equally, and its etiology is unknown. The main difference between Scheuermann disease and postural kyphosis is that the first one is a fixed kyphosis during hyperextension and flexion of the spine.

Lumbar disk herniation is relatively uncommon in children and adolescents, with a rate of 3.5%. Children complain about low back or leg pain worsened by bending forward or Valsalva (coughing, sneezing).

- 
**Scoliosis**

Idiopathic scoliosis demonstrates a Cobb angle above 10 degrees on a standing coronal radiograph. It affects 1 to 3% of the school-age population. However, it is usually painless in this age group.

- 
**Infectious Disorders**

Discitis and vertebral osteomyelitis are uncommon entities. Discitis results from a bacterial infection (the most common germen isolated is Staphylococcus aureus) and usually affects the lumbar region, mainly in children under five years old. Children may present with unspecific symptoms, irritability, refusal to bear weight, and back or abdominal pain. Fever is not constant. Vertebral osteomyelitis is yet more uncommon in children, representing only 1 to 2% of all cases of pediatric osteomyelitis.

- 
**Inflammatory Disorders**

Spondyloarthropathy includes juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease. They are more common in boys, and the genetic marker HLA-B27 should be ruled out.

- 
**Pain Amplification Syndromes**

These syndromes do not have an identified cause. They provoke severe chronic musculoskeletal pain and sometimes are associated with minor trauma, underlying chronic illnesses, and psychological distress.

- 
**Tumors**

Benign and malignant tumors require exclusion in every child presenting with low back pain, even though they are very rare. The physician should look for severe pain and night pain, fever, weight loss, or neurologic symptoms. The most common benign lesions are osteoid osteoma, bone cysts, osteoblastoma, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Malignant bone tumors include osteosarcoma, leukemia, Ewing sarcoma, and metastases from rhabdomyosarcoma or neuroblastoma.