Laboratory data can be useful in the assessment of osteomyelitis but are usually nonspecific for osteomyelitis. There may or may not be leukocytosis, the elevation of ESR, and C-reactive protein (CRP). The CRP level correlates with clinical response to therapy and may be used to monitor treatment. Blood cultures may be positive, especially in hematogenous osteomyelitis involving the vertebrae, clavicle, or pubis.

Radiographic imaging is an essential component of the evaluation of a patient with suspected osteomyelitis. Clinically, the most useful studies are plain radiographs, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and technetium-99 bone scintigraphy.

Of all the imaging modalities currently in use, MRI has the highest combined sensitivity and specificity (78% to 90% and 60 % to 90% respectively) for detecting osteomyelitis. It can detect early bone infection within 3 to 5 days of disease onset

Other imaging modalities less commonly used are positron emission tomography (PET), which is expensive and not routinely available, leukocyte scintigraphy, gallium scan, and computed tomography (CT scan). A CT scan is more sensitive than a plain radiograph for assessing cortical and trabecular integrity, periosteal reaction, intraosseous and soft tissue gas, the extent of a sinus tract, and is superior to MRI in detecting necrotic bone fragments. However, though the CT scan is readily available compared to the MRI, it is more expensive than plain radiograph and has a limited role in the diagnosis of osteomyelitis. It should be used mainly to determine the extent of bony destruction (especially in the spine) to guide biopsies or in patients with contraindications to MRI.

Bone biopsy (either open or percutaneously) is essential to establish the histopathological diagnosis in osteomyelitis, identify the causative pathogen, and provide susceptibility data that helps direct antibiotic therapy. Superficial wound cultures or material from needle puncture or sinus tracts should not be used in diagnosis as these specimens do not correlate well with bone biopsy results.