A complete history and physical exam, including the chronologic appearance of presenting signs of conjunctivitis, are crucial but not specific for the diagnosis. It is known that the timing and characteristics of the clinical presentation may be typical depending on the etiologic agent; however, some of the clinical manifestations such as chemosis, erythema, and discharge can be present regardless of the cause.

Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae are transmitted at the time of the delivery. When these microorganisms are the suspected cause of neonatal conjunctivitis, the clinician should obtain information about maternal infections during the prenatal period should be obtained. It is also of the utmost importance to perform adequate screening for other sexually transmitted organisms, including the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

The timing of the onset of symptoms can also serve as an appropriate guide in managing these patients. Chemical conjunctivitis should be suspected in patients that present with erythema, chemosis, eyelid edema, and discharge within the first 24 hours after birth. Gonococcal conjunctivitis usually presents between 2 to 5 days; the hallmark is a thick and purulent eye discharge accompanied by remarkable chemosis and eyelids edema. On the other hand, ophthalmia neonatorum due to Chlamydia trachomatis is seen 5 to 14 days after birth, both eyes may be affected, but unilateral involvement can occur in some cases. The eye discharge is initially copious, then becomes purulent, and it is associated with eyelid swelling.

Herpes simplex conjunctivitis is uncommon, accounting for less than 1% of ophthalmia cases; however, it merits suspicion in patients presenting with unilateral chemosis, serosanguineous discharge that rarely becomes purulent, coupled to vesicular lesions surrounding the eyelids or oral ulcers and lymphadenopathy. Its identification is crucial to prevent complications, including disseminated disease and meningoencephalitis, that may be lethal if left untreated.