**Heart Failure**

The pathophysiology of the heart is complex, and as such, several examples will be illustrated to give a basic understanding of the mechanism of changes. To begin, we will discuss heart failure (HF) in the context of two categories: diastolic and systolic heart failure. Heart failure is defined by the inability of the heart to provide oxygenated blood to tissues adequately. The most important two distinctions to make between diastolic heart failure (DHF) and systolic heart failure (SHF) are the ejection fraction (EF) and pathophysiology. Ejection fraction is the fraction of blood moved through the left ventricle (LV) into the aorta over the total amount of blood available in the left heart; specifically, it can be calculated by EF = (SV/EDV)*100. A normal EF is considered greater than 40%; therefore, diastolic heart failure is considered to have an EF greater than 40%, and SHF is EF less than and equal to 40%. The second important factor to keep in mind is that of pathophysiology. For DHF, the key problem is with an inadequate filling of the heart with blood during diastole. For SHF, the key problem is with the inadequate ejection of blood during systole. For diagnostic purposes, the most common progression of testing begins with an Electrocardiogram (ECG), followed by Echocardiogram, with Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) used to monitor changes in the volume status of the heart. An echocardiogram is considered the gold standard of diagnosis of heart failure.

Diastolic heart failure is also known as heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Remember, DHF is considered to have an EF >40% and our focus is on lack of filling for the heart. The most common causes of DHF are chronic hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes, and obesity. Other rarer causes can include amyloidosis and sarcoidosis, causing restrictive cardiomyopathy. The pathophysiology behind DHF varies but the main cause, chronic hypertension, can be explained through hypertrophy of the walls of the heart resulting in decreased ability to fill the chambers. To explain, an important mechanism of cardiac myopathy is the heart undergoing reconstruction to adapt to chronic hypertension.

In the same way that a biceps muscle would increase in size in response to lifting heavier weights, the heart will hypertrophy in response to a larger pressure in the aorta. As discussed earlier, the left ventricle must overcome the pressure in the aorta to eject blood throughout the body; so, as a patient would present with higher blood pressure over the course of years, the heart must continue to pump harder to overcome this increased pressure and, over time, will increase in size to adapt. This increase in size can be visualized through a thickening of the chambers and, consequently, a decrease in the filling capacity of the heart. As discussed earlier, preload plays an important role in the ability for the heart to contract and with decreased filling capacity, thus decreased preload, the heart will be less effective in ejecting the appropriate amount of oxygenated blood and tissues begin to lack blood supply.

Systolic heart failure is heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Remember, SHF is considered to have an EF less than and equal to 40% and our focus is on the inability to pump blood during systole effectively. The most common causes of SHF are coronary artery disease (CAD), dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), hypertension, and valvular disease. The pathophysiology of SHF is more straightforward as, for example, a myocardial infarction would directly affect the ability of the heart to contract. There are other examples such as aortic stenosis which can cause a reduced ejection fraction as the heart is required to overcome the stenotic valve and ejection fraction is lowered. This logic can be applied to most other causes of SHF where any disease decreasing the contractibility of the heart will directly contribute to a decreased EF. Specifically for dilated cardiomyopathy, there is a myriad of causes that all result in a dilation of the chambers of the heart with a decreased ability to contract. Categories of causes with examples include infections (Coxsackie-B virus), medications (trastuzumab), toxins (ethanol), inflammatory/autoimmune disorders (sarcoidosis), and genetic conditions.

Heart failure clinical correlation will be discussed in a later section.

**Cardiac Defects**

Another significant topic of cardiac pathophysiology is cardiac defects. Many of these defects arise from birth and have significant pathology that alters the structure of the heart. The most common cardiac defect is a ventricular septal defect (VSD) that is essentially an opening in the septum between the ventricles. From birth, this defect causes a shunt from the left side of the heart (higher pressure) to the right side of the heart (lower pressure) and increases the volume load of the right side. This, in turn, increases the pressure load on the right side of the heart and causes eventual hypertrophy of the right ventricle to adapt to this new demand. An interesting illustration of cardiac physiology related to cardiac defects is Eisenmenger’s Syndrome. In this syndrome, we begin with the VSD mentioned above and increased volume load on the right side of the heart. Over time, the right side will hypertrophy, and the pulmonary vasculature will also become a higher pressure circuit in response to the increased volume. As this pressure increases, the right side of the heart will overcome the pressure gradient created by the left side, and the flow through the VSD will reverse, causing a right to left shunt instead. This phenomenon demonstrates the adaptability of the heart and systemic effects that arise from cardiac defects. Other examples of cardiac defects are the atrial septal defect (ASD) and patent foramen ovale (PFO), both of which resemble the VSD but are located in the atrial septum. Similar to the VSD, the pressure gradient will move blood volume from the left atrium to the right atrium and increase the workload of the right side of the heart.

**Cardiac Valve Defects**

Lastly, we will discuss the pathophysiology of several key cardiac valve defects. One of the most common valve anomalies is aortic stenosis (AS), which is mainly caused by congenital defects, calcification on the valve, or Rheumatic valve disease. With aortic stenosis, the valve does not open fully, and thus, the heart must work harder to eject blood through the ventricle. As the heart continues to increase its workload to overcome the stenotic valve, the left ventricle can hypertrophy and subsequently develop pathologies such as heart failure. The second valvular disorder we will discuss is aortic regurgitation (AR). The common causes of AR are endocarditis, aortic dissection, and aortic leaflet rupture. In AR, the valves fail to shut completely thus allowing backflow of blood at the end of systole. This backflow decreases the total ejection fraction and creates a volume-overload state that will lead to an increased workload by the left ventricle and eventual left ventricular hypertrophy. With acute AR, stroke volume can become decreased, and the heart will begin to adapt accordingly. Our final discussion on valve pathology is of mitral valve prolapse (MVP). The most common causes of MVP include idiopathic degeneration of the valve, connective tissue disorders such as Marfan syndrome, and genetic causes. The pathophysiology of MVP involves inadequate positioning of the valve leaflets which create an overlapping, unsupported valve that loses its tension. This pathology causes the valve to prolapse out into the left atrium during systole, creating an opening that can cause regurgitation of blood into the left atrium. Although MVP is often asymptomatic, it can create an increased volume load in the right atrium which the heart will adapt to accordingly.