Obesity in pediatrics is a complex problem that often requires an interprofessional team approach. Failure to adequately diagnose and treat obesity results in comorbid medical conditions and the likelihood that a child will become an obese adult. The primary care clinician usually makes the initial diagnosis, but the subsequent management involves consultation with specialists in a staged manner.

- Stage 1, Prevention Plus, involves recommendations made by primary care clinicians. Children whose BMI is between the 85th and 95th percentiles are considered overweight. Nutrition recommendations include consuming more fruits and vegetables, limiting sugary drinks and fast foods, and eating regular, balanced meals. Screen time, sleep, and exercise habits should be reviewed, and close follow-up within 3-6 months should be arranged.

- Failure of improvement in 3 to 6 months or a BMI in the obese range warrants consideration of Stage 2, structured weight management, which involves referral to a registered dietician or nutrition specialist. The recommendations from Stage 1 are continued, but there are structured guidelines for meals and snacks, and motivational interviewing may be helpful. Close follow-up is indicated. For families with food insecurity, referrals to community resources such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), food pantries, and soup kitchens should occur.

- In Stage 3, a comprehensive multidisciplinary team is involved, including dieticians, behavioral counselors, exercise specialists, and social workers who can coordinate care with the primary care clinician. Intensive behavior therapy and frequent follow-up visits take place.

- In stage 4, the patient is referred to a tertiary care center with a pediatric weight management program for possible pharmacological and surgical interventions.