**Structure**

All phospholipids, including PAF, have a glycerol backbone. Three carbons of glycerol are named sn-1, sn-2, and sn-3. PAF has an alkyl group at the sn-1 position, acetyl group at the sn-2 position (middle carbon), phosphocholine at the sn-3 position. Alkyl groups at the sn-1 position of PAF produced enzymatically by leukocytes have a mixture of hexadecyl or octadecyl groups (i.e., 1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl sn-glycero-3-phosphocholines). One of the most critical aspects of PAF is its strict structural requirement for receptor binding and recognition by degradative enzymes. The specificity by degradative enzymes is a highly practical requirement because if the degradative enzymes were not specific, they would also hydrolyze structural phospholipids.

**Biosynthesis**

There are two pathways to synthesize PAF: Remodeling and de-novo synthesis.

The remodeling pathway starts with a phospholipid called phosphatidylcholine. It involves substituting an acetyl residue for the long-chain fatty acyl residue a the sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine. A trace amount of phosphatidylcholine is present in all cells as a part of the normal plasma membrane. However, in PAF-producing cells such as endothelial cells and neutrophils, phosphatidylcholine content ranges from 10% to 40%.

Biosynthesis through the remodeling pathway has two steps, and it contributes to the bulk of the synthesis of PAF during inflammation. In the first step, phospholipase A2 (PLA2) acts on phosphatidylcholine producing eicosanoid (arachidonic acid) and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC). In the second and final step, acetyl residue is transferred to LPC by LPC acetyltransferase to produce PAF.

Synthesis of PAF with the remodeling pathway occurs inside the cell on the nuclear membrane or the endoplasmic reticulum. The mechanism of the translocation of PAF from the interior to the exterior is not known. The fate of synthesized PAF depends on the cell type. Endothelial cells and leukocytes display PAF on their cell surface for juxtracrine signaling, whereas monocytes release most of the PAF they produce. Leukocytes can also be triggered to release some of the PAF they produced.

The alternative pathway of PAF synthesis, de novo pathway, mainly contributes to the physiologic levels of PAF needed for normal cellular function and has three steps:

- The first step is to transfer acetyl residue onto a phospholipid, alkyl-lyso-glycerophosphate, by the acetyltransferase to form alkyl-acetyl-glycerophosphate. Acetyltransferase in this pathway is different from acetyltransferase in the remodeling pathway.

- The second step is the hydrolysis of alkyl-lyso-glycerophosphate to alkyl-acetyl-glycerol by phosphohydrolase.

- The final step involves transferring CDP-choline to alkyl-acetyl-glycerol by choline phosphotransferase to form PAF (alkyl-acetyl-glycerophosphocholine).

Under normal circumstances, the synthesis of PAF is maintained at a very low concentration by de novo synthesis, and its synthesis peaks during an inflammatory response through the remodeling pathway. Various agents can stimulate PAF syntheses, including antigen-antibody interactions, collagen, thrombin, and other inflammatory mediators involved in inflammation.

**Metabolism**

PAF acetylhydrolases degrades PAF by removal of acetyl group at the sn-2 position to generate lyso-PAF and acetate. There are various isoforms of PAF acetylhydrolase with variable specificity to PAF distributed widely in various tissues, including plasma and blood cells. PAF acetylhydrolases are unique enzymes because they hydrolyze phospholipids with short chains at the sn-2 position, and they can act in the absence of calcium.