Contemporary treatment of coronary artery disease is highly dependent on percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) along with medical management. PCI techniques have advanced significantly over time and are used to stent even difficult lesions. There are, however, some lesions that present challenges via the conventional PCI route. These lesions, termed complex coronary lesions, are categorized as such based upon various anatomic, physiological, or functional difficulties.

Some of these complex lesions in coronary vessels include bifurcation lesions, calcified lesions, chronic total occlusions, unprotected left main coronary artery lesions, ostial lesions, or stenosis of the saphenous vein graft.

Conventional PCI may not adequately resolve these lesions, and some may require advanced techniques. One such subset of advanced catheter-oriented interventions is termed: complex high-risk and indicated PCI (CHIP). Such techniques are reserved for individuals who are at very high risk for complications. Examples of these techniques include laser, rotational, laser atherectomy, various bifurcation stenting techniques, and specialized approaches to chronic total occlusions.

A brief explanation of some of the most common complex lesions follows.

- **Bifurcation lesions**- This type of lesion arises at or adjacent to the separation of a major coronary artery. These lesions subdivide into three anatomic portions. The three portions are the proximal main branch, distal main branch, and side branch. A bifurcation lesion is one with significant stenosis (over 50%) in a coronary artery involving the origin of a side branch or in a coronary artery adjacent to the origin of the side branch.

- **Calcified lesions**- Vascular calcification of the coronary arteries is a common process that is active, regulated, and involves atherosclerotic as well as inflammatory and hormonal disease processes. Coronary artery calcification (CAC) involved intimal and medial calcification.

- **Chronic total occlusions**- This is the complete obstruction of a coronary artery. These occlusions must show TIMI 0 or TIMI 1 flow and have a duration of 3 months.

- **Left main coronary artery (LMCA) disease**- Left main coronary artery disease can be problematic given that it is the origin of the majority of the left ventricular coronary supply. An unprotected left main coronary artery leaves the majority of the myocardium susceptible to death if significant stenosis is present.

- **Ostial lesion-**An ostial lesion is one that starts within 3 mm of the origin of a major coronary artery.

- **Stenosis of saphenous vein graft (SVG)**- This type of stenosis occurs commonly, with some reports up to 20% of patients within 1 year. PCI of SVG contains a significant risk for myocardial infarction or diminished anterograde flow.