The diagnosis and treatment of complicated disorders such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, acromegaly, hyperprolactinemia, and Parkinson disease require not only an astute patient-centered approach from physicians but an interprofessional team of healthcare workers who can guide patients from their first clinic visit until achieving symptomatic control. When clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, laboratory technologists, medical students, and all other involved members of the healthcare team collaborate effectively, there is greater access to care, increased coordination of services, better outcomes in chronic disease, and improvements in patient safety.

When a patient first enters a clinic, the initial diagnosis requires collaboration between the primary care provider and the appropriate specialist. The validity of the clinician’s diagnosis is dependent on the combination of clinical findings with laboratory tests. To prescribe the appropriate medication dosage and administration, the clinician must consult with the pharmacist, and the pharmacist must communicate with the patient so that the patient understands all instructions and side effects. If the patient incorrectly takes the medication, that patient should go to the emergency department, where nurses will be responsible for constant monitoring and consulting with toxicologists, radiologists, or even with pediatric specialists in the case of an accidental overdose in a child. If medical students are involved, they too, must effectively communicate with the attending physician, nurses, and technologists. Medical students trained in inter-professional education demonstrate more respect and positive attitudes when working with each other and other healthcare team members.

Even with patients regularly taking their medication as prescribed, health management continues. Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus will be assisted by Certified Diabetes Educators (CDEs) to provide diet and nutritional guidance, as well as mental health professionals, podiatrists, optometrists, and other community health workers to address the various sequelae associated with the disease. Patients with Parkinson disease, acromegaly, and hyperprolactinemia must continue to be cared for by their respective neurological and endocrine teams to treat the diseases holistically. Bromocriptine is a drug with a historically safe side-effect profile and very rare severe adverse effects, but it is a necessity that communication is present between each member of the team to ensure safe and effective treatment because even one unnecessary adverse event is one too many.