Cafe-au-lait spots and neurofibromas are benign and do not require treatment. Surgical excision can be performed on symptomatic lesions, but the recurrence can occur. Plexiform neurofibromas have malignant potential. There is an 8% to 13% risk for plexiform neurofibromas to develop into malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. This should be suspected if there is pain for more than one month, new neurologic deficits, change of the neurofibroma from soft to hard, or a rapid increase in size. These malignancies are treated with wide local excision. Imatinib has been shown to decrease plexiform neurofibroma size.

Monitoring for any neurologic changes and referral to a neurologist is paramount. These changes can be due to tumor development. Consistent ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended for observation of the development of optic gliomas. Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for optic gliomas.

Monitoring children for difficulty learning and behavioral issues is important. Counseling can be beneficial for patients to provide support regarding the disease's autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.

Neurofibromatosis type 2

Patients with neurofibromatosis type 2 require the assessment of their hearing. Ophthalmology evaluation, MRI, audiology, and brainstem evoked potentials are important in managing these patients. Surgery is still the first-line treatment for symptomatic tumors, but there is a 44% recurrence rate. Radiation can be used, but there is an increased risk of malignant transformation. Bevacizumab, a VEGF inhibitor, is a monoclonal antibody and can be used to treat neurofibromatosis type 2 patients medically. It decreased tumor size in 53% of cases and improved hearing in 57%. Patients with suspected neurofibromatosis type 2 should have an MRI of the head and spine done. Getting thin cuts through the internal auditory canals is important. Treatment is done if the tumor is compressing the brainstem or preventing hearing loss.