**Laboratory**

With active SLE, complement levels (C3 and C4) are usually low with the presence of anti-dsDNA autoantibody. Creatinine (Cr) may be elevated or normal with the presence of proteinuria. Urinalysis shows the presence of proteinuria, microscopic hematuria, red blood cells, or red blood cell casts. The presence of protein in urine indicates glomerular damage. Proteinuria that exceeds more than 3.5 g per day is in the nephrotic range. If significant proteinuria exists, a complete metabolic panel (CMP) will show a low albumin count.

Screening for proteinuria and hematuria is recommended every three months in active SLE.

**Radiographic**

Bilateral kidney ultrasound should be obtained to rule out hydronephrosis or obstructive cause.

**Biopsy**

A kidney biopsy is indicated when the patient develops nephrotic range proteinuria. It may also be useful in patients with repeated episodes of nephritis. With the help of renal biopsy, the histologic form and stage of disease (activity and chronicity) can be established which is, in turn, helpful in determining prognosis and treatment. A detailed clinical and laboratory evaluation can be used to predict the histologic pattern of lupus nephritis in around 70-80% of patients; however, it is not accurate enough.

A good rule is to carry out a kidney biopsy if the outcome will potentially change patient management. If a patient has other manifestations of SLE (such as severe central nervous system or hematologic involvement) and is going to be treated with cyclophosphamide, a biopsy may not be essential but should be considered as it may help predict the renal outcome. Sampling errors can occur during a renal biopsy. Therefore, the biopsy results should always be evaluated in relevance to the clinical presentation and laboratory results of the patient. The expertise of pathologists in interpreting lupus nephritis biopsy specimens differs a great deal. Studies have revealed that the most consistent reporters are in larger medical centers where a substantial number of patients with SLE are found.

**Class 1 - Minimal Mesangial Lupus Nephritis**

- Light microscopy findings - Normal

- Immunofluorescence electron microscopy findings - Mesangial immune deposit

**Class 2 - Mesangial Proliferative Lupus Nephritis**

- Light microscopy findings - Mesangial hypercellularity purely or expansion of mesangial matrix with mesangial immune deposits

- Immunofluorescence electron microscopy findings - Mesangial immune deposits with few immune deposits in subepithelial or subendothelial spaces possible

**Class 3 - Focal Lupus Nephritis**

- Light microscopy findings - Active or inactive with focal, segmental, or global involvement affecting fewer than 50% of all glomeruli

- Immunofluorescence electron microscopy findings - Mesangial and subendothelial immune deposits

**Class 4 - Diffuse Lupus Nephritis**

- Light microscopy findings - Active or inactive with diffuse, segmental, or global involvement affecting approximately 50% of all glomeruli. It is subdivided into diffuse segmental (class 4-S) when around 50% of involved glomeruli manifest segmental lesions (meaning less than half of glomerular tuft is affected) and diffuse global (class 4-G) when approximately 50% of affected glomeruli have global lesions. It shows wire-looping.

- Immunofluorescence electron microscopy findings - Subendothelial immune deposits

**Class 5 - Membranous Lupus Nephritis**

- Light microscopy findings - Diffusely thickened glomerular basement membrane with no inflammatory infiltrate. It can possibly show subepithelial deposits and basement membrane spikes on specific stains, such as silver and trichrome. It may occur in combination with class 2 or 4 and may reveal advanced sclerosis.

- Immunofluorescence electron microscopy findings - Subepithelial and intramembranous immune deposits.

**Class 6 - Advanced Sclerosis Lupus Nephritis**

- Light microscopy findings - Advanced glomerular sclerosis affecting almost 90% of glomeruli, tubular atrophy, and interstitial fibrosis, all manifestations of irreversible renal injury