**History**

The first step of approaching precocious puberty is to elicit a detailed history and conduct a comprehensive physical exam. History taking should begin by inquiring about the age of onset of signs of sexual development. Generally, the threshold for evaluating pubertal signs is eight years in girls and nine years in boys.

- Patients should be asked explicitly about the type of pubertal changes and progression rate as it can help guide evaluation. Signs of androgen excess such as pubic and axillary hair growth, acne, adult-type body odor,  and hirsutism indicate adrenal pathology. On the other hand, breast development and menstrual bleeding indicate estrogen excess.

- Rapid progression of pubertal signs may indicate an underlying testicular, ovarian, or adrenal tumor. Establishing the sequence of pubertal changes is essential as precocious pseudopuberty often presents with an abnormal sequence. For example, in McCune Albright syndrome, menstrual bleeding may precede the onset of breast development.

- Patients should also be inquired about a recent increase in height.  Usually, patients with precocious pseudopuberty have a rapid increase in height velocity, causing them to move up to higher centiles on the growth chart, at least initially.

- A history of neurological symptoms (headache, visual changes, seizures) should be elicited to exclude a central cause for precocious puberty. A history of chronic disease and insults to the central nervous system (head trauma, perinatal asphyxia, neoplasms, radiation) should also be noted.

- Patients should be inquired about the ingestion of sex hormones or exposure to topical agents with estrogenic/androgenic/endocrine disrupting activity.

- Family history should focus on the timing of pubertal onset in parents, history of ambiguous genitalia in siblings (possible congenital adrenal hyperplasia), and history of precocity in male relatives (familial male limited precocious puberty).

**Physical Exam**

- The initial step in the physical exam is to record the vital signs. The presence of hypertension may indicate congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11 beta-hydroxylase deficiency; and bradycardia may indicate hypothyroidism.

- Growth parameters, including height, weight, and head circumference, should be plotted for determining the growth velocity.

- The general exam should focus on looking for signs of specific conditions such as thyroid enlargement and café au lait spots. In McCune Albright syndrome, the café-au-lait spots have a "Coast of Maine" appearance and are described as large, hyperpigmented spots with irregular borders and a segmental distribution. These should be differentiated from the café au lait spots of neurofibromatosis, which tend to have regular borders. Other findings seen in McCune Albright syndrome include polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, which presents as bony deformities, pathological fractures, gait abnormalities, and bone pain.

- Neurological exam and visual field testing should be done to detect neurological deficits secondary to a possible intracranial mass. An abdominal exam should be done to identify any palpable masses which could arise due to adrenal or ovarian tumors.

- The most important part of the exam is to grade sexual maturity using the Tanner staging. Sexual maturity rating (SMR) is determined for pubic hair, breast and genitalia development, and graded on a scale of 1 to 5, with one representing prepuberty and 5 representing adult development. While assessing breast development in girls, care should be taken to distinguish between irregular ductal breast tissue from the subcutaneous tissue, which is smooth and soft. Similarly, palpation of the testes, measurement of stretched penile length, and testicular volume with an orchidometer should be done accurately. Penile dimensions disproportionately greater than testicular dimensions indicates peripheral precocious puberty due to adrenal pathology. Moderate symmetric enlargement of testes may indicate familial male limited precocious puberty or an HCG secreting tumor. On the other hand, asymmetric testicular enlargement and a palpable testicular mass may indicate a Leydig cell tumor.