Many cases are treated appropriately with hot water immersion. Hot water immersion therapy is considered the gold standard for treatment of marine envenomations due to the heat labile venoms (fish, starfish, and sea urchin). Patients should soak the affected limb in hot water (42 to 45 C or as close to 42 C as tolerated) for 30 to 90 minutes, or until removal from hot water no longer results in recurrence of pain. If hot water immersion is insufficient for pain control, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be used for mild pain with opioids reserved for ongoing moderate to severe pain.  Scorpaenidae species. Physicians must be proactive in identifying severe envenomations, characterized by systemic symptoms because multiple fatal cases have been reported; although, anaphylaxis rather than venom toxicity may have been the mechanism of death.

Patients should receive tetanus prophylaxis as indicated and antibiotic prophylaxis for most wounds other than those considered minor. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not standardized although general guidelines recommend broad-spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis (i.e., oral doxycycline with intravenous [IV] ceftazidime) for all puncture wounds with coverage for the following bacteria: Vibrio, Aeromonas, Mycobacterium marinum, and Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. Monotherapy may be used in immunocompetent patients with minor puncture wounds (i.e., ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally twice daily for 5 to 7 days). Physicians should guide ongoing antibiotic therapy for acutely infected wounds with cultures and sensitivities.