Protein S deficiency is managed in case of acute venous thromboembolism (VTE). In asymptomatic carriers without thrombotic events, prophylaxis may be used. Management of acute thrombosis is the same as for all acute VTE episodes, based on disease severity and hemodynamic stability. VTE management is by the administration of anticoagulation therapies such as heparin (low-molecular-weight heparin or unfractionated), vitamin K antagonist (VKA), or direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC). Initial heparin treatment may be with intravenous unfractionated heparin or subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). Heparin should be given for a minimum of five days, followed by vitamin K antagonist (VKA) or direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC). The choice between a DOAC and VKA depends on patient preference and convenience. In the past, VKA was the drug of choice for VTE, but it has changed with the advent of DOACs. DOACs are now increasingly used for VTE due to their efficacy and safety profile. In a cohort study of patients with inherited thrombophilias, DOACs had the same efficacy as heparin/VKAs, but there was an increased risk of non-major bleeding, while VKAs had a slightly increased risk of significant bleeding.

Patients with congenital protein S deficiency normally receive anticoagulation therapy for a longer duration until coagulation activity has stabilized for at least two consecutive days.

Prophylactic treatment should also be administered to patients with protein S deficiency exposed to thrombotic risk factors such as air travel, surgery, pregnancy, or long periods of immobilization. During pregnancy, patients in the first trimester or after 36 weeks should be treated with low-molecular-weight heparin rather than warfarin to reduce the risk of fetal and maternal bleeding.