The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the use of permethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid, to treat scabies and pediculosis capitis.

A patient with classic scabies often presents with generalized pruritus that is exacerbated overnight with inflammatory papules primarily localized to the area between the fingers, flexural sites, genitalia, breasts, and buttocks with or without burrows. The clinical diagnosis of pediculosis capitis relies upon the detection of living lice.

Several studies have assessed the effectiveness and safety of permethrin when compared with other treatments for scabies. A review of clinical trials resulted in low-certainty evidence demonstrating that after two weeks of administration, 5% permethrin cream and 200 micrograms/kilogram of oral ivermectin demonstrated similar efficacy for the treatment of scabies. However, clearance may be inferior after the first week when using oral ivermectin. There was moderate-certainty evidence to conclude that the proportion of patients with one or more drug-related adverse events was similar to those treated with permethrin cream or oral ivermectin.

A recent network meta-analysis evaluating randomized controlled trials found that treatment with combined permethrin and oral ivermectin for scabies was associated with the highest cure rate; however, combination treatment was not significantly better than permethrin alone; only one randomized controlled trial included this combination treatment. This analysis also found that permethrin was less often associated with persistent itching than other included treatments, like crotamiton and lindane, but was outperformed by topical ivermectin in this category. The risk of adverse events was lowest with synergized pyrethrins, but permethrin scored better than several treatments, such as lindane and topical ivermectin. The treatment of choice for a particular patient should be guided by several factors, including efficacy, safety profile, and the ability to administer the medication properly.

Classical scabies can have treatment with 5% permethrin cream, 200 micrograms/kilogram of oral ivermectin, or 10% to 25% benzyl benzoate lotion per European guidelines.

In endemic regions and during a scabies epidemic, the large patient population can more easily receive treatment with 200 micrograms/kilogram of oral ivermectin than with topical medications.

A common first-line treatment option for pediculosis capitis is 1% permethrin lotion, which is available over the counter in many countries.

Concerning pediculosis, pediculicide product labels only address their use to treat pediculosis capitis. Treatment of pediculosis corporis relies upon good personal hygiene and appropriate washing of clothes, but a topical pediculicide could aid in treatment, as well.