The toxicity of cardio-selective beta-blockers occurs after the ingestion of a high dose of the drug, either intentionally or unintentionally. It can be asymptomatic in some patients, but treatment is always required. Patients in such cases usually present with bradycardia and hypotension. In addition, selective beta-blockers in high doses lose their selectivity so that patients may demonstrate signs of respiratory distress, congestive heart failure, neurological manifestations, such as confusion and mental retardation, hypoglycemia, and hyperkalemia.

The beta-blocker overdose treatment protocol includes several medicines based on the signs and symptoms of clinical toxicity.

- Sympathomimetic agents ( IV atropine or isoproterenol ) are used in patients who experience bradycardia.

- To antagonize beta-blocker-induced hypotension, the clinician should administer intravenous glucagon and fluid. Glucagon stimulates heart contraction by glucagon receptors, which are not blocked by beta-blockers.

- To reverse the bronchospasm induced by beta-blockers, isoproterenol and/or aminophylline can be used.

- Hypoglycemia can be addressed by administering glucose orally or IV, depending on the patient's hemodynamic stability.

- The patient needs to be monitored carefully in case of a heart block and should be treated with isoproterenol infusion or transvenous cardiac pacemaker insertion.

- If a patient experiences CHF, then digitalis, diuretics, inotropic agents, vasodilating agents should be used.