# Introduction

Gait analysis is known as 'the systematic study of human locomotion.' Forensic gait analysis or forensic gait comparison is defined as 'the assessment and evaluation of the gait patterns and features of the person/suspect and comparing these features with the scene of crime evidence for criminal/personal identification.' In other words, forensic gait analysis may be defined as a contributor to the identification process rather than one of the methods of identification as individualization of the gait of a person has not yet been fully scientifically proved.'

Meanwhile, an investigating officer is always on the look-out for evidence that will link the suspect to the scene of the crime. In recent times, gait analysis has emerged as an important parameter that can help in personal identification during forensic examinations. The advent of CCTV cameras and other surveillance means has generated interest in the practice and research related to forensic gait analysis and its possible use in human individualization. In 1839, in London, gait analysis entered into the court in the case of Thomas Jackson; he was identified by the witness due to his bowed left leg and walking with a limp.

# Function

**Gait Analysis**

Human walking occurs in a specific pattern, including various stages, which is referred to as a 'gait cycle.' It mainly consists of two phases, i.e., the stance phase and the swing phase.

The dogma of forensic podiatry is to utilize the proper standardized methodology for scientific examination of every evidence. The gait pattern examination includes ACE-VR, which stands for analysis–comparison–evaluation–verification–report.

- **Gait analysis on the surface:**The analysis of gait pattern on the surface (consisting of a minimum of 3 to 4 consecutive footprints/footwear prints) is performed by considering various parameters including the dimensions, general shape of the prints, patterns in case if ridges are visible, margins of the prints, toe marks, etc. The measurements pertaining to step and stride length are taken into consideration, which may point out the nature of an individual's gait pattern, such as normal gait, running, etc., and associated abnormalities, if any. This analysis may also help approximate stature, sex, age, and the bodyweight of a suspect. A profile of the contributor of the prints may be established. A comparison between the perpetrator of the crime with that of the suspect is made by systematically analyzing and scoring the gait patterns.

- **Gait analysis from CCTV footage/video recording:**The emergence of CCTV cameras and video recording enabled devices (video cameras, mobile phones, dashboard cameras, surveillance cameras, traffic cameras, etc.) has given a fresh dimension to gait analysis. Currently, video recording and footages from CCTV are used to study the gait of the person.

**Forensic Gait Analysis Approaches**

Forensic gait analysis may be human-based/observer-based, as well as computer-based. Both the approaches are very briefly discussed below:

- **Human-based:**The human-based approach (also known as observer-based approach) falls under three categories: photo-anthropometry, morphometric analysis, and superimposition. Photo-anthropometry takes account of measurements of set landmarks. Morphological measurements are taken from photographs in the morphometric analysis. Then both the measurements are combined and superimposed to establish a match between suspect and standard photographs.

- **Computer-based human-assisted:**The computer-based analysis involves algorithms that can either be model-based or appearance based. The model-based approach work on fixed landmarks for extracting the features of gait. This is done by predefining the landmarks using a human model. Later the appearance-based model function by extracting silhouette sequences of walking individuals. In this, a predefined human model is absent. In both cases, the match score is obtained between questioned and suspected gait.

**Forensic Gait Analysis Features/Parameters**

For any traits or features to be useful for forensic purposes, it has to follow certain principles like universality, permanence, and uniqueness. While some may be grouped under class characteristics and some under individual characteristics. Even if one or two features may not be proof enough for a conclusion, it will result in a more reliable and scientifically sound result when these features are combined. Although it is beyond the purview of this article to detail the parameters/features used and factors affecting the forensic gait analysis, a brief account is given. Some of the features taken into consideration while performing forensic gait analysis (static as well as dynamic) that may contribute to the establishment of identity are as follows:

- **Static measurements**: These are the geometrical measurements of the body. For example, the whole leg length, length of knee-foot height, etc.

- **Dynamic****measurements:**These are the measurements related to gait. For example, the distance between both the knees, the length of stride, cadence, etc.

Another classification may include the **spatial parameters**, the**temporal parameters,**and the**angular displacement parameters**.

- **Spatial parameter (distance) -**These parameters can be measured using the measurement of footprints by drawing a progression line, which is an imaginary line corresponding to the direction of walking. The parameters that may be included are step length, stride length, stride length/leg length ratio, stride or step width, longitudinal dimension, horizontal dimension, dimensions of the foot, foot line, direction line, foot angle, gait line, etc.

- **Temporal parameter (time) -**In the videos/footage, these parameters are measured using a stopwatch (manually) or with the help of automated/semi-automated software. It includes step time, stride time, stance duration, swing duration, swing/stance ratio, speed, cadence, etc.

- **Angular displacement parameter (angle) -**Various angles like hip angle, knee angle, are also considered.

# Issues of Concern

**Factors Affecting Gait Pattern and Analysis**

Gait is a biological characteristic of a person, and the gait pattern is simply the manner or style in which a person usually walks. It is highly influenced by many factors (internal as well as external). Walking is often not a conscious behavior and can be used for differentiation if not for identification. Some of the factors that tend to affect the gait and hence the forensic gait analysis are as follows:

- **Footwear:**It causes gait pattern variability. Some footwears can cause increased hip movement, which results in long stride length, while some may reduce the stride length.

- **Fatigue:**Fatigue causes depletion of energy, which affects the gait cycle, thus influencing the gait pattern. The speed of walking also decreases when the person is low on energy.

- **Use of knee brace:**The use of a knee brace also affects the gait of a person.

- **Sex:**Studies have revealed that the sex of a person can be assessed from the gait pattern, which supports that sex affects the gait pattern.

- **Speed:**The gait pattern shows changes between the normal walking pattern and the person's running pattern.

- **Disease/disorders/medical conditions:**This is one of the common factors affecting a person's gait. A typical and at time-specific gait pattern in the person suffering from such condition is evident, e.g., Parkinsonian/Parkinson's gait in Parkinson's disease.

- **Directed gait:**Directional gait is walking under the instruction. For example, in marching, everyone shows a similar gait.

- **Age:**Age is one of the factors which influence the gait pattern. Walking depends on muscle strength, which gradually changes as the person grown up. The variations in muscle strength affect gait.

- **First trimester during pregnancy:**It is believed that during pregnancy, the gait pattern shows changes. A study has shown that foot angle exhibits changes during the first trimester of the pregnancy.

- **Location:**The location where the person is walking also affects the gait because when a person walks on a surface different than usual, he or she will focus on the walking, which makes him conscious and will affect the walking pattern.

- **Camera:**The type of camera used is also shown to affect gait analysis. The angle and positioning of the camera are also found to be crucial. The quality of recording received for comparison, if not clear, may result in misinterpretation or inconclusive results.

- **Lighting conditions:**The angle of light, the direction of light, the direction of movement of the person also affects gait pattern analysis.

Including the factors mentioned above, a few more can affect an individual's walking pattern, such as emotional mind state, music, talking, load carriage, attire, etc.

# Clinical Significance

**Forensic Significance**

According to Birch et al.

**Indirect Forensic Significance**

The forensic gait analysis may additionally help in the estimation of stature and sex of the person,

**Clinical Significance**

Clinical gait analysis helps assess and treat individuals with pathological and/or underlying neurological conditions that may affect their ability to walk. With the help of gait analysis, podiatrists, neurologists, and orthopedic surgeons usually diagnose the issues related to the cause of pain, such as muscles, nerves, and skeletal problems, consequently initiate the treatment for correction of the gait-related abnormalities and develop rehabilitation protocols.

# Other Issues

**Limitations of forensic gait analysis and criticism about its admissibility in the court of law**

In the present era, due to the paradigm shift in forensic science, there is an increased focus on the reliability, accuracy, quality of evidence, and its admissibility in the court of law. Forensic gait analysis has also witnessed criticism regarding its reproducibility, reliability, lack of proper standards, and rules of forensic practice.

Gait pattern or walking pattern is highly affected by various parameters mentioned above, so it brings the investigating officer into a situation that requires consideration of several factors, which is practically not possible to identify the single suspect. Another limitation of gait pattern analysis is that we do not have databases that can be used for gait comparison. Gait pattern shows high intra-individual variability. It means that a person's gait is highly variable on different occasions and scenarios, which makes it difficult to identify the person.

Presently, the research is being carried out in the area of automated gait recognition combined with larger & variable datasets, tested variables, and enhanced statistical evaluation of results. Despite these improvements, any form of forensic evidence without fully recommended codes of practice and standardization of procedures and having error rates in reproducibility and repeatability should be treated with caution in forensic scenarios.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Irrespective of the limitations and criticism about individuality and uniqueness and its admissibility in the court of law, forensic gait analysis may be considered supporting/corroborative evidence for identifying the criminals and perpetrators. Many forensic cases have been solved, and the criminals have been convicted based on forensic gait analysis throughout the world.