The surface of the eye is exposed to numerous external influences. It is susceptible to many disorders including dryness, allergic reactions, chemical irritation, trauma, and infections. Many systemic illnesses result in irritation to the conjunctiva. Sickle-cell anemia, type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, carotid artery occlusion, and leptospirosis are just a few diseases that result in changes to the blood supply or the structure of the conjunctiva.

The bulbar conjunctiva can generally be assessed at the slit lamp by having the patient look nasally to assess the temporal conjunctiva, and temporally to assess the nasal conjunctiva. The superior and inferior portions of the bulbar conjunctiva may be assessed by gently holding the patient’s eyelid open while the patient looks up or down. The palpebral conjunctiva and fornices may be more difficult to assess but may be assessed using a small cotton swab to invert the lid.

The conjunctiva can be assessed clinically using common stains at the slit-lamp by a trained ophthalmologist. A small amount of fluorescein dye is applied to the ocular surface, and light with a blue filter is used to detect areas of increased stain uptake, indicative of damaged epithelium. Lissamine green and Rose Bengal can also be used to stain the ocular surface with appropriate absorption filters. While both Lissamine green and Rose Bengal have similar staining characteristics, Lissamine green is better tolerated by patients and is thus more frequently used in the clinical setting. Various methods exist for grading abnormalities, including the Oxford grading scale and the National Eye Institute (NEI) scales. Both of these scales are developed for grading the conjunctiva and the cornea.