Technique

Clinicians can perform caudal blocks via blind technique, ultrasound guidance, or fluoroscopic guidance, as described below.

**Blind Caudal Epidural Block**

The sacral hiatus is identified by the landmarks of the sacral cornua found on each side superior to the gluteal cleft and at the apex of a triangle formed by the posterior superior iliac crests.  The beveled needle or angiocatheter is inserted at a 45-degree angle after skin preparation.  A "pop" or "give" may be felt, indicating progression through the sacrococcygeal ligament and entrance into the epidural space.  This loss of resistance technique correlates with a 26% miss rate.

**Ultrasound-Guided Caudal Epidural Block**

With the patient in prone or lateral decubitus position, a 7 to 13 MHz linear transducer (2 to 5 MHz curved transducer if the patient is obese) can be placed transversely placed in the middle of the sacrum. The transverse view shows the following hyperechoic structures: the superficial sacrococcygeal ligament in between two sacral cornua, and the deeper sacral bone. The hypoechoic structure between the sacrococcygeal ligament and the sacral bone is the target. The probe is then turned 90 degrees for the longitudinal view so that the needle can be inserted “in-plane” into the sacral hiatus. To avoid a dural puncture, the needle should not be advanced beyond 5mm after the tip of the apex since the needle is not visible after the tip of the apex. Unidirectional flow on color doppler can help identify the success of a caudal block.

**Fluoroscopy-Guided Caudal Epidural Block**

With the patient in the prone position, the sacral hiatus is visualized as an abrupt drop-off at the end of the S4 lamina. The needle can advance into the sacral canal, and by injecting a contrast medium, needle tip placement can be confirmed, and intravascular or intrathecal injection can be ruled out.

For children that are already under general anesthesia, the efficacy of the caudal block can undergo an assessment by analyzing the laxity of the anal sphincter. A 223-patient study conducted by Dave et al. demonstrated the anal sphincter tone test was the best predictor for a successful caudal block as compared to the swoosh test or the heart rate response to the injection.