# Definition/Introduction

The modified Ashworth scale is the most universally accepted clinical tool used to measure the increase of muscle tone.

In 1964, Bryan Ashworth published the Ashworth Scale as a method of grading spasticity while working with multiple sclerosis patients. The original Ashworth scale was a 5 point numerical scale that graded spasticity from 0 to 4, with 0 being no resistance and 4 being a limb rigid in flexion or extension.

- 0: No increase in muscle tone

- 1: Slight increase in muscle tone, with a catch and release or minimal resistance at the end of the range of motion when an affected part(s) is moved in flexion or extension

- 1+: Slight increase in muscle tone, manifested as a catch, followed by minimal resistance through the remainder (less than half) of the range of motion

- 2: A marked increase in muscle tone throughout most of the range of motion, but affected part(s) are still easily moved

- 3: Considerable increase in muscle tone, passive movement difficult

- 4: Affected part(s) rigid in flexion or extension

# Issues of Concern

Measurement of spasticity has traditionally been through the use of the modified Ashworth scale. Despite its popularity, the Modified Ashworth Scale is not without its critics, with most of that criticism focused around its poor inter and intra-rater reliability.

While being a popular method of assessing spasticity, it has been subject to criticism because of its inability to differentiate between the many factors that can contribute toward resistance to passive stretch.  Other methods have been proposed and used, including the Modified Tardieu Scale, Wartenberg Pendulum Test, Clinical Gait Analysis, Penn Spasm Frequency Scale, Visual Analog Scale, and Spinal Cord Assessment Tool for Spasticity, but all have had their limitations.

A study in 2012 by Numanoglu et al. looked at spasticity in 37 children with cerebral palsy and found "low-average" intraobserver reliability with the Modified Ashworth Scale, but "average-excellent" score in intraobserver interobserver reliability for the Modified Tardieu Scale.

While the modified Ashworth scale is not an inadequate tool for measuring spasticity, it may not be entirely psychometrically sound. The tests familiarity among spinal cord injury clinicians may not be good enough reason to continue using this assessment tool, given the advancements in rehabilitation science. Validity should not be sacrificed at the expense of familiarity.

# Clinical Significance

Spasticity affects a multitude of patients following some inciting event. Recent scientific research has shown that spasticity occurs in 20 to 30% of post-stroke patients.

The modified Ashworth scale is a muscle tone assessment scale used to assess the resistance experienced during passive range of motion, which does not require any instrumentation and is quick to perform.