Amebic encephalitis is an exceptionally rare and highly lethal central nervous system infection caused by free-living amoebae found in freshwater, lakes, and rivers. There are two types of amebic encephalitis: primary amebic meningoencephalitis and granulomatous amebic encephalitis. The initial symptoms of PAM are indistinguishable from bacterial meningitis, while the symptoms of GAM can mimic a brain abscess or meningitis.

These infections are almost always fatal. The high mortality rate is due to a lack of optimal treatment, the rarity of the disease, and delays in diagnosis.

Clinicians working in communities with potential exposure to large stagnant bodies of freshwater should play a role in educating patients about the risk and providing information about how to mitigate the risk. If the disease is being considered in the differential diagnosis of a patient, early laboratory evaluation and emergent consultations with infectious disease specialists, neurologists, and neurosurgeons are recommended to facilitate prompt diagnosis and treatment.

Patients with amebic meningoencephalitis may require monitoring in the intensive care unit. A hypothermia protocol may be considered as this has been shown to increase survival. An interprofessional healthcare team, including intensivists, infectious disease specialists, nurses, social workers, and pharmacists (specialized in infectious disease), may help facilitate family support and provide updates regarding the condition and prognosis of the patient. Intensive care nurses monitor patients and notify the team of status changes. The few reported survivors have been left with severe neurological disabilities and sequelae of encephalitis. Infectious disease pharmacists review treatment protocols, assess microbial susceptibility to the regimen chosen, and check for drug-drug interactions, reporting their findings to the prescribing/ordering clinician. This interprofessional model will increase the odds of improved patient outcomes, despite the bleak prognosis. [Level 5]