Although rifaximin has only been FDA-approved in the United States since 2004, new clinical trials and new off-label uses are continually under investigation. Therefore, it is essential to know FDA-approved and off-label uses. This medication is often a therapeutic choice for gastroenterologists, hospitalists, family medicine practitioners, and pharmacists. In addition, the fact that it has practically no contraindications, no need for monitoring, and no known toxicity makes it an ideal drug for patients with numerous gastrointestinal disorders.

Resistance to rifaximin is caused predominantly by mutations in the rpoB gene. The mutation in the rpoB gene changes the binding site on DNA-dependent RNA polymerase and reduces rifaximin binding affinity. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a danger to global public health. It increases morbidity and mortality and leads to the development of multidrug-resistant pathogens. An antimicrobial stewardship program is a system-wide healthcare strategy designed to encourage, improve, monitor, and evaluate the rational use of antimicrobials to maintain their future efficacy against microorganisms. Hence it is the responsibility of the entire healthcare team, including clinicians, infectious disease specialists, nurses, and pharmacists, to promote the rational use of antibiotics such as rifaximin.

It is important to consider that for prescribing rifaximin; insurance approval has to be obtained. Practitioners and nurses that are well versed and capable should be able to manage prior authorization of the medication.