Granulomatous hepatitis refers to the presence of granulomas in the liver. Liver granulomas are common and are the result of an inflammatory reaction to numerous noxious stimuli. They may be asymptomatic incidental findings or found to be associated with an underlying systemic process. Granulomas may regress with appropriate treatment or persist for years and may still be asymptomatic. Hepatic granulomas have a wide range of etiologies that may be infectious or non-infectious in nature. The most common causes of granulomatous hepatitis include sarcoidosis, primary biliary cholangitis (PBC), tuberculosis, and drug-induced liver injury. However, around 10% to 36% of hepatic granulomas may be found to be idiopathic even after an extensive evaluation.

In patients with symptomatic granulomatous hepatitis with uncertain etiology, a consultation with a hepatology specialist is indicated. In those with concerns of tuberculosis but not confirmed, infectious disease consultation is paramount for proper antituberculous therapy and antibiotic stewardship. Some patients may be diagnosed with idiopathic granulomatous hepatitis initially and may subsequently be diagnosed with an underlying systemic disorder or infection, resulting in delayed therapy or fatal infection. The earlier the signs and symptoms of a complication are identified, the better is the prognosis and outcome. Collaboration in shared decision making and communication are key elements for a good outcome. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of granulomatous hepatitis.