The HLA-B27 syndromes receive treatment with similar categories of drugs, but the first-line therapies and protocols are varied for each of them.

For adults with active ankylosing spondylitis, the 2019 American College of Rheumatology guidelines recommended treatment with continuous NSAIDs over as needed NSAIDs as first-line therapy.

Assessing the various domains of disease activity in patients with psoriatic arthritis, including the presence of dactylitis, enthesitis, cutaneous psoriasis, and axial involvement, influence therapy choice. A TNF inhibitor is the recommended first-line treatment in patients with active psoriatic arthritis and enthesitis.

Acute anterior uveitis initially gets treated with topical corticosteroids. Ophthalmologists may also choose to inject triamcinolone locally if the topical treatments fail. Oral corticosteroids are less frequently required, and use requires caution due to adverse effects.  In patients with refractory disease, mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, and azathioprine may be options as steroid-sparing agents. While TNF inhibitors are rarely useful when there is AAU without concomitant spondyloarthritis, infliximab and adalimumab have shown efficacy in the treatment of non-infectious anterior uveitis. Intra-ocular corticosteroid implants have been an option, as well.

Treatment of reactive arthritis depends upon the underlying trigger and severity of the disease. In patients with a genitourinary infection, treatment with antibiotics is indicated to address the underlying cause of the infection. However, antibiotics are not recommended to treat arthritis as a stand-alone symptom. Acute reactive arthritis treatment uses maximum dose NSAIDs such as naproxen, diclofenac, or indomethacin. Systemic or intra-articular glucocorticoids at a low to moderate dose can be adjuncts when there is a lack of control of symptoms with NSAIDs. In patients with active disease, despite the use of two different NSAIDS over four weeks or with prolonged steroid use, Sulfasalazine is recommended. Methotrexate and TNF inhibitors may be options for patients with progress to a more chronic disease state. Treatment generally continues until achieving remission, after which discontinuation follows three to six months later.