EMB can be performed in the right or left ventricle. However, the most common location for biopsy sampling is within the right ventricular septum. Right ventricular access is commonly performed via the right or left femoral vein, or through the right internal jugular vein (the most common approach used in the United States). Left ventricular access is granted via the right or left femoral artery or the right radial artery.

Knowing the cardiac anatomy and the particular locations of localized involvement are important for proper sampling and reducing complications. For example, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) causes changes in the right ventricular free wall (which is especially prone to perforation during a biopsy) rather than the septum (which is the usual location of EMB sampling). Cardiac masses, on a similar note, also have a distinct location within the heart, depending on its primary origin and character. For example, myxomas are most often found within the left atrium, whereas secondary neoplasms are often located in the right heart chambers. It has also been established that the expression of interstitial fibrosis and cardiac collagen type I is more reliably found when the EMB is performed in the left ventricle.

In order to decrease the sampling error in more diffuse processes, increasing the amount of EMBs taken has been established to decrease the sampling error. When deciding between which ventricle to biopsy, utilization of cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) and electrocardiogram concurrently during EMB has been shown to aid in guiding the physician to taking samples from areas of the heart that are shown to be actively affected by myocarditis or cardiac sarcoidosis.