Charles Bonnet syndrome (CBS) is a medical condition in which complex visual hallucinations occur concurrently with visual changes, specifically visual field loss or visual acuity loss.

Due to the nature of hallucinations and the most common etiologies, CBS often goes unrecognized and misdiagnosed with early dementia or psychosis. The patient is usually unaware of the unreality of visual experiences, which are typically normal to the brain but sometimes may result in distress. The patient has minimal or no control over the hallucinations, which are clear, well-defined, organized images.

The Swiss scientist Charles Bonnet initially described CBS in 1760, who first noticed this phenomenon of visual hallucination in his 90-year-old grandfather, who was suffering from cataracts.

Cognitive malfunction, social isolation, and sensory deprivation have been liked as the primary etiologies of CBS. CBS is often missed until the elderly age group due to fear of being labeled as mentally retarded and phobia of admitting hallucinations.

Patients who notice the unreal nature of their hallucinations may be depressed by the fear of imminent insanity. A detailed and systemic history is essential to rule out the existence of hallucinations. The hallucinations may improve spontaneously, or on improvement with vision, or dealing with social isolation.

Anticonvulsants have been shown to improve and abort hallucination, but there is no drug of choice for CBS. The awareness of the Ophthalmologist and the physician are the critical components of management.

**Pathogenetic Theories of Charles Bonnet Syndrome**

- Sensory deprivation—phantom vision

- Dreams and hallucinations

- Theory of perceptual release

- The neuromatrix theory

- Irritative and release hallucinations

- Social isolation

- Senescence

- Psychological factors

- Cerebral perfusion theory