Unfortunately, there is no specific treatment for Alport syndrome. Treatment is focused on limiting the progression of proteinuria and kidney disease. Options include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) for managing proteinuria, hypertension, and CKD. Depending upon the degree of proteinuria, diuretics can be used. Although the treatment may delay the onset of renal impairment, most people affected by Alport will ultimately require dialysis or a kidney transplant.

ARB delays the progression of CKD or ESRD by reducing intra-glomerular pressure and proteinuria. Despite normal renal functions, initiating therapy with ARBs has been shown to have a significant impact on the development of ESRD.

A small study found that combination therapy with an ARB, an ACE inhibitor, a statin, and a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker safely ameliorated hypertension, albuminuria, lipid abnormalities, and glomerular selectivity in patients with Alport syndrome and halted progression in those without renal insufficiency.

A multicenter, placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind trial of ramipril in children having Alport syndrome observed a decrease in the risk of disease progression by nearly half.

The use of cyclosporine has not shown any benefit and is not recommended. For patients with ocular involvement, specifically anterior lenticonus, clear lens phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation can be considered. For patients with concomitant hearing loss, hearing aids are usually very effective. Hearing loss is not impacted by kidney transplantation. As with any hereditary disease, psychosocial support for all affected family members is essential.

Patients with Alport syndrome have no contraindication for renal transplantation. There is no recurrence of the primary disease, as the transplanted kidney would have normal GBM. Antibodies against COL4A5 are found in males with XLAS, but very few patients also have antibodies against COL4A3.

Post renal transplantation, there is a 3% risk of de novo anti-GBM antibody disease or Alport posttransplant nephritis in XLAS with COL4A3. Generally, it relapses in the first year of transplantation.

The affected patients typically possess circulating anti-GBM antibodies leading to crescentic glomerulonephritis and graft loss.