The mandibular foramen is a bony canal formed within the mandible. This bony canal opens on the inner side of the mandibular ramus. The opening is directly inferior to the mandibular notch and ends at the mental foramen. The foramen follows the shape of the mandible. The canal starts inferior to the mandibular notch and descends until it's slightly superior to the angle of the mandible. At the point superior to the angle of the mandible, the canal will make a turn towards the anterior chin region. After the canal makes the turn, it will travel and end at the mental foramen, which is slightly lateral to the anterior chin region. The mandibular foramen contains a branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN V), a branch of the maxillary artery and the inferior alveolar vein. The nerve and blood vessels within the mandibular foramen are the inferior alveolar nerve, artery, and vein. The inferior alveolar nerve is responsible for innervation of the gums, dental sockets, and mandible. The inferior alveolar artery is the dominant blood supply to the mandible, gums, teeth, and nerves in the lower jaw. The inferior alveolar vein is responsible for the venous drainage of the mandible and tissues that are nearby.

Once the mandibular foramen ends at the mental foramen, the inferior alveolar nerve and artery will become the mental nerve and artery. On the outer medial surface of the mandibular foramen, there is a groove called the mylohyoid fossa. This fossa is designed for the mylohyoid nerve (branch of the inferior alveolar nerve) as it travels toward the mylohyoid muscle.