The indications for postoperative radiotherapy (PORT) in patients with thymomas vary. In stage I (Masaoka stage I-II) thymomas with no capsular invasion, no PORT is recommended since no survival benefit is shown. Annual thoracic imaging is all that is needed. In stage I (Masaoka stage I-II) thymomas with invasion into the mediastinal fat or pleura, PORT is recommended if there are high-risk features present (larger tumor size, microscopic, or grossly positive margins). PORT has been shown to reduce recurrence risk to that seen with an R0 resection and in tumors with lower-risk features. In stage II-III (Masaoka stage III) thymomas, PORT is indicated due to the higher recurrence risk. Finally, in stage IV (Masaoka stage IV) thymomas, individualized radiotherapy is recommended in addition to palliative therapy and curative therapy for oligometastases.

As was the case for thymomas, thymic carcinomas also have varied indications for PORT. In stage I to III (Masaoka stage I to III) thymic carcinomas, there is a higher risk of local recurrence and a survival advantage seen with PORT. If there is a positive margin or residual disease after resection, supplemental adjuvant chemotherapy is also recommended. In stage IV (Masaoka stage IV) thymic carcinoma, PORT is recommended for palliation of local symptoms.

Typically, the dosage recommended for PORT is 45 to 50 Gy divided into 1.8 to 2 Gy fractions over five weeks directed to the tumor bed and the adjacent mediastinum. This dosage is increased to 60 Gy divided into 2 Gy daily fractions for those with residual disease.

As with most oncologic therapies, there are associated toxicities. These include esophagitis, pneumonitis, pulmonary fibrosis, pericarditis, and rarely myelitis. All of which are treated symptomatically. Some late sequelae include the risk of lung fibrosis and a small chance of constrictive pericarditis. Patients also are at increased risk of accelerated coronary atherosclerosis and secondary malignancies.