Patients with a congenital deformity of the fifth toe are frequently brought to orthopedists as small children by their parents with cosmetic concerns or later when the child has difficulty obtaining comfortable footwear.

**Overlapping Fifth Toe**

The pathology of the overlapping fifth toe is observed at the metatarsophalangeal joint with adduction, dorsiflexion, and external rotation deformity of the fifth toe, resulting in an overlapping of the dorsum of the fourth toe. One may observe skin contractions or be able to palpate a tense extensor mechanism over the dorsum of the fifth toe. Sometimes, the deformity may extend to the interphalangeal joints of the toe, exacerbating the deformity. The condition is often passively correctable, and observing the foot during weight-bearing may show a reduction of the deformity.

**Curly Toe Deformity**

A curly toe will present as a flexion deformity of the interphalangeal joints of the fifth toe and result in a toe that scissors underneath the adjacent toe towards the center of the foot. This deformity is typically passively correctable but may develop into a rigid deformity when there is a contracture of the flexor skin and soft tissue of the foot. Hyperkeratotic areas of skin may be noted at the tip of the toe or other points due to increased contact pressures within a shoe.

**Bunionette Deformity**

The patients usually present with painful callosities over the head of the 5th metatarsal bone and increased forefoot width. This deformity has an association with flat foot and hallux valgus deformity.