The main noted adverse effects of aminoglycosides are ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and neuromuscular blockade.  Therefore, patients should be educated to look out for warning signs of these adverse effects before the initiation of aminoglycoside therapy.

Aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity has been reported to occur in 2 to 45% of adults.  The ototoxicity can be vestibular and/or cochlear and is typically dose-dependent. Gentamicin, streptomycin, and tobramycin more commonly cause vestibular damage, while amikacin and kanamycin (discontinued use in the USA) result in more cochlear damage.

Nephrotoxicity due to aminoglycosides may appear in up to 10 to 25% of patients.  In patients receiving aminoglycoside therapy, renal tubular toxicity decreased blood flow to the kidneys, and reduced GFR most commonly causes the nephrotoxicity seen. Renal effects with aminoglycosides generally are reversible. Furthermore, there are risk factors associated with the development of aminoglycoside-induced nephrotoxicity, including dehydration, pregnancy, and hepatic dysfunction. Taking other medications concurrently with aminoglycosides that can cause nephrotoxicity, such as NSAIDs, cyclosporine, and diuretics, also puts a patient at risk for renal problems.  It is important to monitor patient renal function when taking aminoglycosides.

Aminoglycosides have also demonstrated correlations with neuromuscular blockade. Although this is less common than ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity, patients with diseases affecting the neuromuscular junction and patients using medications prolonging neuromuscular blockade, most notably calcium channel blockers, should be cautious when using aminoglycosides.