Per the World Health Organization (WHO), 78 countries have reported transmission of schistosomiasis in all forms, and it is endemic in 52. The WHO Global Health Estimates from 2016 estimated that schistosomiasis had a death rate of 0.3 per 100,000. There were also estimated to be 24,000 deaths in 2016, which decreased from 55,000 in 2000.

Schistosoma haematobium is the species responsible for urogenital schistosomiasis. It is endemic to many countries in sub-Saharan Africa, as well as some parts of the Middle East. It is especially prevalent in tropical and subtropical areas, particularly affecting communities that lack access to sanitation and safe drinking water.

The most prevalent form of urogenital schistosomiasis is chronic. While acute schistosomiasis (or Katayama fever) can be caused by S. haematobium, it is more recognized in other schistosome species.  In endemic areas, the average age of initial infection is age 2, with an increasing worm burden for the next 10 years. Infection intensity and prevalence in a region of Kenya were highest in children aged 5 to 14 years old. Infection prevalence and intensity are possibly due to the frequency of contact with water during daily activities, as adult individuals with high water contact during their daily activities (fishing, laundry, etc.) have also been shown to have persistence of prevalence and infection.

Serology has shown that endemic areas have almost a 100% infection rate, with 60% to 80% of school-age children and 20% to 40% of adults remaining actively infected.

In endemic regions, up to 65% of patients with bladder cancer (typically squamous cell carcinoma) had concomitant urogenital schistosomiasis.