Three types of stents are commonly utilized in the treatment of coarctation, including closed-cell, open-cell, and hybrid designs. The closed-cell design is more rigid with the creation of fixed points formed by the connection of the internal inflection points of the stent material. Open-cell type offers more flexibility of the stent with the lack of connection of all of the structural components of the stent. The ability to offer more flexibility makes the open-cell design desirable in the placement of a stent in the transverse aortic arch position. Hybrid designs utilize a combination of open and closed-cell stents. Another structural difference is the utilization of welding together of single wires or the use of a uniform tube lacking junctions between the components. The welding points, however, mark weak points in stent architecture. The more modern CP stents have undergone soldering with gold to strengthen these welded points. The stents are further differentiated based upon the metal from which they are composed. The common types include platinum-iridium alloy, chromium-cobalt alloy, and stainless steel. Stents are then classified as covered and bare stents.

Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is the most common inorganic compound used for cover. Covered stents are preferred in the treatment of coarctation of the aorta in patients with genetic aortopathies, tortuous aortas, narrow coarcted segments, or with aneurysms that all carry an increased risk of aortic wall complications with the intervention.