**Non-Operative****Treatment**

Closed-reduction and nonoperative treatment in a long leg cast is acceptable for fractures in less than 5 degrees of varus-valgus angulation, less than 10 degrees in anterior-posterior angulation, greater than 50% cortical apposition, less than 1-cm shortening and less than 10 to 20 degrees of flexion and less than 10 degrees of rotational malalignment after reduction.

**Operative Treatment**

**External Fixation**

Treatment of choice when significant soft tissue compromise is present or in polytrauma cases where damage-control orthopedics is needed.

**Intramedullary Nailing (IMN)**

This is the treatment of choice for operative fixation.

When comparing outcomes of IMN with external fixation, IMN is associated with decreased malalignment and compared to closed treatment, IMN is associated with decreased union time and time to weight bearing.

**Percutaneous Plating-Shaft
**

This method is often used in the distal tibia or proximal-third fractures that are too proximal or distal for intramedullary nailing.

**Amputation
**

This is another treatment method but can be difficult to get the patient to buy into this treatment. The mangled extremity severity score (MESS) can help predict when an amputation is necessary. A score of 7 or greater is highly predictive of amputation. MESS has a high specificity but low sensitivity in predicting amputations. Relative indications include significant soft tissue trauma, warm ischemia greater than 6 hours, and severe ipsilateral foot trauma. It is important to note that loss of plantar sensation is not an absolute indication for amputation.