The treatment of HIT should start as soon as a 4T score of 4 or more is calculated. The first step in the treatment is the discontinuation of all forms of heparin, including heparin flushes, heparin-coated catheters, and heparin in the dialysate.

According to the 2018 American Society of Hematology (ASH) Guideline, an alternative anticoagulant must be initiated at the therapeutic intensity in the vast majority of patients, including the following: Any patient with a high-probability 4T score (6-8), any patient with intermediate-probability 4T score (4-5) and another indication for therapeutic anticoagulation, or any patient with intermediate-probability 4T score (4-5) and no indication for therapeutic anticoagulation, but who is not at high bleeding risk. Alternatively, a prophylactic dose of an alternative anticoagulant may be initiated in a small subset of patients who are considered to be at high risk of bleeding, provided that they do not require therapeutic anticoagulation for a different indication and they have an intermediate probability 4T score. If prophylactic anticoagulation is initiated in a patient meeting those criteria, and the immunoassay comes back positive, the patient should be switched to therapeutic anticoagulation while awaiting functional assay results.

As per the current practice guidelines, one of the following anticoagulants may be selected: argatroban, bivalirudin, danaparoid, fondaparinux, or a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC).

Argatroban and bivalirudin have a short duration of action and are a good option for critically ill patients, patients who are at increased risk of bleeding, or patients who might require an urgent procedure.

Bivalirudin is another direct thrombin inhibitor that may safely be used in this patient population; however, this agent is usually reserved for use during cardiac catheterization procedures or cardiac surgery as an alternative to heparin. It is FDA approved for patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention with or without a HIT. It is more expensive than the argatroban.

Another anticoagulant that may be used in a HIT is fondaparinux. Although not FDA-approved for this indication, fondaparinux is considered safe and effective and is one of the recommended agents according to the ASH guideline. Fondaparinux is given as a once-daily subcutaneous injection. An important consideration is that this drug is renally cleared and contraindicated in CrCL <30 mL/min.

Before the 2018 ASH guideline, treatment options during acute HIT had focused on parenteral anticoagulants, either on-label with argatroban or off-label with fondaparinux. But, recently, the evidence supporting the efficacy and safety of DOACs is increasing, with most of the published experience being with rivaroxaban. The current guideline lists DOACs as an acceptable treatment option. Dosing for these agents is extrapolated from dosing recommendations for VTE, and the same contraindications to their use in VTE apply to their use in HIT.