Muscle energy uses the patient's muscle energy to control a pathological barrier via reciprocal and autogenic inhibition. Administered by various manual therapists, including physical therapists, physiotherapists, non-physician osteopaths, this method has undergone randomized control trials to prove its efficacy. Phadke et al. analyzed the effect of muscle energy procedures and static stretching on pain management and functional disability on patients with mechanical neck pain, similar to symptoms seen in TMJ dysfunctions. The team concluded that MET was better than the static stretching techniques used by professionals, judging outcomes using VAS and Neck Disability Index (NDI).

Direct MFR is mainly used to stretch and minimize muscle tightness; yet, its analgesic effect is noteworthy. In a cytochemical investigation, scientists discovered intercellular fibroblasts responding by secreting inflammatory cytokines, surpassing hyperplasia, and modifying cell shape and alignment. An in vitro study showed that MFR-led release of strain for 60 seconds reversed inflammatory effects in previously strained cells. Current trials have shown that MFR may promote wound healing by affecting the extracellular matrix.

BLT procedure deunionize and exaggerate the area of dysfunction. As one of the least demanding techniques, BLT works the best in hospital settings. Especially if the TMJ dysfunction is too severe to the point where the patient may be unable to cooperate with the physician, BLT will help the physician treat the patient. The Multicenter Osteopathic Pneumonia Study in the Elderly (MOPSE) RCT demonstrated briefed hospitalization and reduced in-hospital mortality rates within experimental subgroups, supporting OMT's contribution as a supplementary treatment for hospitalized pneumonia patients.