Pancreatic cysts are usually found incidentally via CT or MRI. The further evaluation depends on findings on these imaging modalities and symptomatology. Moreover, guidelines for the evaluation of pancreatic cysts continue to be modified as advanced diagnostic tests such as endoscopic ultrasound are developed.

The American Gastroenterology Association has guidelines for patients with asymptomatic, incidental pancreatic cysts.

For symptomatic pancreatic cysts, surgical resection is the preferred treatment (ACCF/AHA class 1, level B recommendation) as it will provide relief of symptoms but also because pain is associated with a greater likelihood of premalignant or malignant pathology.

High-risk pancreatic cysts that have the high-risk features above or a main pancreatic duct dilation, suspected mucinous cystic neoplasm, presumed branch duct IPMN greater than 3 cm are recommended as an ACCF/AHA class 1, level B for resection.

For low-risk pancreatic cysts such as microcystic serous cystadenoma, they likely can be observed regardless of size as they have very low levels of malignant potential. However, macrocystic serous cystadenomas can be hard to distinguish from mucinous lesions on imaging and require evaluation by EUS-FNA, in which the fluid would be tested for carcinoembryonic antigen level (CEA).

EUS-FNA is a procedure that is gaining ground for further characterizing lesions and prevent misdiagnosis. Cyst fluid can be analyzed for mucin, CEA, and cytology. High CEA levels are correlated with mucinous lesions. Moreover, fluid cytology can help distinguish malignant versus nonmalignant lesions.