**Isolation of the Tooth**

Moisture control is the most crucial aspect of the pit and fissure sealant placement, and therefore absolute isolation using a rubber dam is preferred. As a result of inadequate isolation, the enamel porosities formed during etching can be filled by any fluid blocking the resin tags, decreasing the retention of the material. There are cases where absolute isolation is not possible, or it is not practical, like in the case of newly erupted teeth due to the need for local anesthesia to place the clamp. In such cases, a dry field can be achieved by cotton rolls and isolation shields, and clever use of the evacuation tip. The application of glass ionomer may be considered as a temporary measure.

**Acid Etching**

- Most frequently used: 37% orthophosphoric acid (gel)

- Gel applied either directly with special application tips or with a small disposable brush

- Should be applied to all the susceptible pits and fissures and extend up to cuspal inclines

- Etch for 15 seconds for permanent molars, 15 to 30 seconds for primary teeth. Teeth with dental fluorosis require additional etching time

- If glass ionomer cement is being used, etching is not required, and a surface conditioner may be used

- Rinse well with air-water spray

- Dry the tooth with uncontaminated compressed air until a frosty white opaque appearance is seen

- If cotton roll isolation has been used, replace cotton rolls

- If this appearance is not seen, repeat acid etching

- If the surface becomes contaminated, re-etching must be done

**Sealant Placement and Curing**

Many sealant kits have their own dispensers and instructions that must be followed.

- Apply sealant, allow to flow into pits and fissures

- In mandibular teeth, apply the sealant from the distal aspect, allow flowing mesially

- In maxillary teeth, apply the sealant from the mesial aspect, allowing to flow distally

- Use a fine brush, mini sponge, and carry sealant material up to the cuspal inclines

- Air bubbles should not be incorporated

**Visible Light Cured Sealant**

- 10 to 20 seconds: exposure to visible light

- The tip of curing light should be held 3 mm to 5 mm from the surface of the sealant

- After the sealant has set, wipe the surface with a wet cotton pellet so that air inhibited layer of non-polymerized resin is removed and failure of this step leaves an objectionable taste in the patient's mouth

**Evaluate the Sealant**

- Visually and tactically

**Evaluate the Occlusion of Scaled Tooth Surfaces**

- Check the occlusion with articulating paper – round finishing bur

- Annual recall: 5% to 10% of sealants require repair or replacement annually

The retention of sealants can be evaluated through visual and tactile examinations. When the sealant has been lost or partially retained needs to be reapplied

**Follow-up**

Sealed surfaces should be clinically and radiographically regularly monitored. Bitewing radiographs are recommended for radiographical assessment, which should be performed as often as the risk status indicates it. However, the risk status may change over time; for that reason, other susceptible sites, like proximal surfaces, should be monitored.

In the case of defected sealants, dentists must reapply them to maintain marginal integrity