There are six stages in the transtheoretical model of change that are worth review:

- Pre-contemplation (I can’t/wont)

- Contemplation (I might)

- Preparation/determination (I will)

- Action (I am doing)

- Maintenance (I am still doing)

- Relapse to the undesired behavior or, very rarely, termination with no desire to resume the behavior after a long maintenance period.

MI is a counseling approach that has relational components (principles) and technical components (processes). The principles of motivational interviewing can be strategically applied to the patient’s stage of change. They include expressing empathy, avoiding arguments or rolling with resistance, developing discrepancy, creating and resolving ambivalence, and supporting self-efficacy. MI processes include engaging, focusing, evoking, and planning.

**Express Empathy**

Obesity and other maladaptive behaviors respond poorly to the traditional paternal model of medicine. In the MI model, the clinician creates a platform of empathy and has a collaborative relationship with the patient. The clinician does less advising, and the patient does more of the talking. When patients feel understood and respected, they are more likely to consider change – one of the first MI processes. Evocation, another MI process, involves drawing out the patient’s thoughts regarding solutions. OARS is a MI acronym and tool that can be used for this purpose. It includes Open-ended questions, Affirmation, Reflections, and Summaries. Open-ended questions allow the patient to elaborate their thoughts. It encourages answers that are not binary, such as ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ They can be used at the beginning of a patient encounter to help explore the patient’s reasoning for change and at the end of the summary to evoke change talk. Reflection is a crucial tool that demonstrates that the clinician has accurately heard the patient.

**Supporting Self-efficacy**

This is a principle of MI where the clinician focuses on successes, strengths, and skills and provides affirmation. Patients are more likely to change behavior if they and the clinician believe that they can accomplish it. Clinicians foster autonomy and empower the patient to own the solutions. It can be used over many stages of change, especially in the preparation, action, and maintenance stages.

**Rolling With Resistance**

When we provide education, it may be met with resistance and reluctance. Patients may have internalized weight bias and feel that the clinician is judgmental and authoritative, which manifests as interrupting, arguing, denying, and ignoring during the encounter. Rolling with resistance is encouraged, where the clinician avoids arguments by reflection, reframing, shifting focus, and siding with the negative. If resistance is encountered, this is a cue for the clinician to pull back and adjust the counseling approach. Examples of rolling resistance include:

- Therapeutic paradox (“reverse psychology”): “you seem to be saying that now is not the best time to make changes, so what do you think is the best way for us to move forward?”

- Siding with the negative: making a reflective statement hoping that the patient would eventually counter with a positive argument. For example, if a pessimistic statement is made, such as “I’ll never lose weight,” the clinician agrees with the statement using a non-judgemental stance such as - “For you, it would seem to be quite a challenge.”

- Shifting focus: as part of the guiding motivational interviewing approach, a clinician seeks to redirect a discussion to the intended topic. For example – “Your feelings about taking time off from work during your flare-ups of back pain are obviously stressful to you, but remind me, what led you to make this appointment to discuss your weight?”

- Reframing: reconstructing a statement made by the patient to one that favors change talk. It is a directive measure, guiding the patient away from sustain talk (talk from the patient that supports keeping the current behaviors) and argument.

**Ambivalence and Discrepancy**

Ambivalence is defined as the uncertainty in the desire for change. It is a challenge in evoking change talk. Developing discrepancy involves drawing out from the patient the perception of how current behaviors match (or not match) with core values or desired behaviors. This clarity guides the patient to target the maladaptive behavior and build motivation to change it. If a clinician can develop and amplify discrepancy by contrasting where the patient is from where they want to be, this helps with resolving ambivalence. For example, a clinician can have the patient explore their current behavior’s positive and negative aspects. The patient can consider the benefits of change, the risks of change, and the benefits and risks of no change. Another approach to evoking change talk would be to ask the patient to rate on a scale of 1 to 10 how important, ready or confident they are that they can change. Depending on the response, the clinician can further ask, “why are you not at a lower/higher number?” or “what would take you from a 6 to an 8?” to elicit change talk.

Evidence supports the efficacy of 3 constructs of motivational interviewing. Patient experience of discrepancy and patient change talk lead to better outcomes, and therapist MI-inconsistent behavior is linked to worse outcomes.

Additional micro-counseling approaches that help provide a framework for a short visit include:

1. The five A’s of obesity management:

- Ask permission to discuss weight. This non-judgemental approach gives autonomy in a population with a high prevalence of weight bias internalization. The clinician can also explore the patient's readiness for change.

- Assess basic parameters related to weight, including BMI, waist circumference, waist to hip ratio, and obesity stage. Complications and drivers of increased weight need to be explored.

- Advise the patient on health risks of obesity, health benefits of 5 to 10% weight loss, long term strategies, and treatment options.

- Agree to realistic weight loss expectations. The clinician engages in respectful negotiation on goals, behavior change, and specifics of a weight loss plan.

- Arrange/assist by identifying barriers to weight loss goals, referrals to other providers, e.g., a dietitian, resources, and follow-up. Without training, most clinicians are proficient at Ask and Advise but used Assess and Assist/Arrange less frequently. There is evidence that improving the frequency of the latter has the most impact.

2. FRAMES is a technique that constitutes:

- Feedback about personal risk

- Responsibility of the Patient

- Advice to change

- Menu of strategies

- Empathetic style

- Self-Efficacy