Methocarbamol is administered commonly via the oral route. Oral methocarbamol is available in 500 mg and 750 mg tablets. Recommended daily dosing ranges from four to six grams daily in divided doses every six hours. The maximum recommended dose is six grams daily, and up to eight grams daily have been used. However, lower doses are often used in practice. For example, in a recent retrospective study of a reasonably sized cohort, the typical dose for a hospitalized patient was 500 mg orally every eight hours.

Intravenous (IV) and intramuscular (IM) formulations may also be used commonly in the postoperative setting.

**Pharmacokinetics**

The onset of action of oral methocarbamol is 30 minutes. The drug is completely absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract and reaches peak plasma concentrations at two hours.

**Specific Population**

**Renal Impairment:**All major metabolites of methocarbamol are excreted in the urine. Similarly, some small amounts of unchanged methocarbamol are also excreted in the urine. IV dose is contraindicated in patients with renal impairment due to the presence of polyethylene glycol excipient. The oral dose should be used with caution for patients with mild to moderate kidney conditions. Patients who are on dialysis should also be using methocarbamol with caution.

**Hepatic Impairment:**Methocarbamol is mainly metabolized via dealkylation, hydroxylation, and conjugation in the liver. However, there are no dose recommendations available in manufacturer labels.

**Pregnant Women:**It is considered pregnancy category C medicine. Some reports exist of fetal and congenital abnormalities following exposure to methocarbamol in pregnant women. Therefore, it should not be used in women who may become pregnant or are pregnant, particularly in early pregnancy, until potential benefits outweigh the risk.

**Breastfeeding Women:**There are no studies conducted to evaluate methocarbamol use in breastfeeding women. The manufacturer recommends exercising caution when methocarbamol is administered to a nursing woman.

**Pediatric:**Effectiveness and safety of methocarbamol in pediatric patients below the age of 16 have not been studied.