Within the human body, there are 33 vertebrae and 31 spinal nerves.

**Vertebrae**

- Cervical: 7

- Thoracic: 12

- Lumbar: 5

- Sacrum: 5 (fused)

- Coccyx: 4 (fused)

**Spinal Nerves**

- Cervical: 8

- Thoracic: 12

- 5 Lumbar: 5

- Sacral: 5

- Coccygeal: 1

Cervical nerves C1-C7 exit above their corresponding vertebrae (e.g., C2 exits above C2 and below C1 vertebrae). C8 exits between C7 and T1. The remainder of the spinal nerves exits below their corresponding vertebrae (e.g., the T1 spinal nerve exits below T1 and above T2.)

Three connective tissue layers, termed meninges, conceal the spinal cord. Directly lining the spinal cord is the pia mater, which also thickens to form the denticulate ligament, anchoring the spinal cord in the middle of the vertebral canal. The next layer of meninges is the arachnoid mater. Between the pia mater and the arachnoid mater is the subarachnoid space, which contains CSF. On top of the arachnoid mater is the last layer of meninges, the dura mater. The epidural space separates the meninges from the vertebral column.

The spinal cord extends caudad from the medulla oblongata of the brain stem at the level of the foramen magnum. In an adult human, the spinal cord gives rise to 31 pairs of spinal nerves, each of which originates from the adjacent spinal cord segment:

- Cervical nerves (C1-C8): the cervical spinal cord is enlarged because spinal nerves from this area go to the upper extremities, which have more neural input and output.

- Thoracic nerves (T1-T12)

- Lumbar nerves (L1-L5): the lumbar spinal cord is enlarged because the lower extremities have more neural input and output.

- Sacral nerves (S1-S5)

- Coccygeal nerve (Co1)

Spinal nerves emerge from the spinal cord as rootlets, which join to form two nerve roots. The anterior nerve roots contain motor fibers extending from the anterior horn to peripheral target organs. The motor neurons are multipolar, with at least two dendrites, a single axon, and one or more collateral branches. They control skeletal muscles and the autonomic nervous system. The posterior nerve roots contain sensory fibers and dorsal root ganglia, transmitting sensory information from the periphery toward the CNS. The sensory neurons located at the dorsal root ganglia are pseudounipolar. The anterior and posterior nerve roots converge into spinal nerves, which split into dorsal and ventral rami.

There are five spinal plexuses, which include sensory and motor nerves from the anterior rami:

- Cervical plexus (C1-C5): the deep branches innervate neck muscles, and the superficial branches innervate the skin on the neck, head, and chest. The cervical plexus also has an autonomic function, including controlling the diaphragm and interactions with the vagus nerve.

- Brachial (C5-T1): controls movement and sensation of the upper extremity.

- Lumbar (L1-L4): controls movement and sensation of the abdominal wall, thigh, and external genitals.

- Sacral (L4, L5, S1-S4): controls movement and sensation of the foot, leg, and thigh.

- Coccygeal (S4, S5, Co): innervates the skin around the tailbone.

In adults, the spinal cord tapers to an end, termed the conus medullaris, at the first or second lumbar vertebra level. Past the conus medullaris, a bundle of spinal roots termed the cauda equina extends until the level of S2.

**Myotomes:**a muscle or group of muscles supplied by one spinal nerve root.

Clinically, myotomes are helpful in evaluating a patient with a complex nerve injury and determining the pattern of neurological deficit. In testing of myotomes, an injury or lesion may be localized to the correct spinal nerve or trunk level.

- C5: shoulder abduction

- C6: elbow flexion, wrist extension

- C7: elbow extension

- C8: wrist flexion, thumb extension

- T1: finger abduction

- T2-L1: chest wall and abdominal muscles

- L2: hip flexion

- L3: knee extension

- L4: ankle dorsiflexion

- L5: great toe extension

- S1: ankle plantar flexion

- S2: knee flexion

**Dermatomes:**areas of skin supplied by one spinal nerve root (except cranial nerves V1-V3).

Dermatomes exist for each of the spinal nerves, except for C1. Therefore, testing sensory perception or touch in these areas may be helpful to localize spinal cord lesions to a specific cord level or spinal nerve. Major anatomic landmarks associated with dermatome levels are listed below. Note: Depending on the source, there may be minor variations in dermatome level.

**Cervical Dermatomes**

- C2: crown of the head, posterior scalp, earlobes, lower jaw

- C3: base of the skull, upper neck

- C4: lower neck, upper shoulders

- C5: clavicle

- C6: thumb

- C7: index finger, middle finger

- C8: little finger, ring finger

**Thoracic Dermatomes**

- T1: upper chest and back, axilla, upper medial arm

- T2, T3: upper chest and back

- T4: level of nipples

- T6: xiphoid process

- T10: umbilicus

**Lumbar Dermatomes**

- L1: groin, greater trochanter, lower back

- L2, L3: lower back, hips, anterior and inner thighs

- L3: medial knee

- L4: lower back, anterior thigh, anterior knee, medial calf, medial ankle, medial aspect of the great toe

- L5: lower back, anterior and lateral shin, lateral aspect of the great toe and second-fourth toes, top and bottom of the foot along 2-4 toes

**Sacral Dermatomes**

- S1: buttock, posterolateral leg, little toe

- S2: buttock, genitals, posteromedial leg

- S3: buttock, genitals

- S2-S4: perineum

- S5: anus