# Continuing Education Activity

H. pylori is a gram-negative, microaerophilic bacterium that can infect humans. It is often found in the stomach of affected individuals and causes inflammation and ulceration. Patients harboring the bacteria are asymptomatic with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and dyspepsia developing only after gastritis and peptic ulcer disease have set in. This activity describes the evaluation and treatment of H. pylori and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the pathophysiology of Helicobacter pylori infection.
- Summarize the use of a urea breath test in the evaluation of Helicobacter pylori infection.
- Describe the triple therapy used in the eradication of Helicobacter pylori infection.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team members to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by Helicobacter pylori infections.

# Introduction

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a gram-negative spiral-shaped bacterium that affects up to 50% of the population worldwide, with a higher prevalence in developing countries.

# Etiology

Transmission of H. pylori can occur via the fecal-oral, gastric-oral, oral-oral, or sexual routes.

# Epidemiology

Prevalence of H. pylori varies across the world, with the United States having 5% prevalence in children less than 10 years.

# Pathophysiology

There are four important components that lead to the formation of clinical diseases such as gastritis and ulcer in H. pylori infection. First, the urease activity of H. pylori plays an important role in countering the acidic environment of the stomach. Second, the flagella-mediated motility helps H. pylori bacterium move towards the host gastric epithelial cells. This is followed by the bacterial adhesins interacting with the host cell receptors, leading to successful colonization and persistent infection. Finally, there are many effector proteins/toxins that include cytotoxin-associated gene A (Cag A) and vacuolating cytotoxin A (VacA) released by H. pylori that lead to host tissue damage. Both acute and chronic inflammation is seen in H. pylori gastritis as eosinophils, neutrophils, mast cells, and dendritic cells are stimulated.

# Histopathology

Microscopic gastric inflammation is always seen in H. pylori infection.

# History and Physical

The majority of children with H. pylori infection are asymptomatic.

# Evaluation

H. pylori infection is diagnosed by both invasive and non-invasive methods. Noninvasive tests include the detection of H. pylori antigens in the stool, detection of antibodies against H. pylori in serum, urine and oral samples, and a urea breath test (UBT). The stool antigen test and UBT have high sensitivity and specificity similar to the invasive methods.

# Treatment / Management

To achieve a higher eradication rate following H. pylori infection, the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) and North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) have updated the treatment guidelines for children and adolescents. Triple therapy including PPI (1-2 mg/kg/day), amoxicillin (AMO) (50 mg/kg/day), and clarithromycin (CLA) (20 mg/kg/day) for 14 days is the treatment of choice if the strain is susceptible to CLA and metronidazole (MET). If this regimen fails, CLA can be replaced with MET (20 mg/kg/day) without further antibiotic susceptibility testing. Another treatment option is sequential therapy for 10 days (PPI with AMO for 5 days followed by PPI with MET and CLA for 5 days) in pediatric patients infected with fully susceptible strains. Sequential therapy should not be given if the strain is resistant to MET or CLA; however, this treatment regimen exposes the child to three different antibiotics. Medication doses should be calculated based on the weight of the child, and a higher dose of PPI per kg body weight is recommended to suppress acid in younger children sufficiently compared to adolescents and adults. PPIs are preferred to be given at least 15 minutes before meals. In the case of resistance to both CLA and MET or when antimicrobial susceptibility is not known, bismuth quadruple therapy consisting of bismuth salts (8 mg/kg/day), PPI, AMO (in children younger than 8 years) or tetracycline (in children older than 8 years) and MET is effective. Although there is limited evidence, the other regimen recommended, in this case, is the combination of high dose AMO triple therapy with MET.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Celiac disease

- Upper gastrointestinal Crohn disease

- Peptic ulcer disease

- NSAID-induced gastritis

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease

- Eosinophilic esophagitis

- Lactose intolerance

- Constipation

# Medical Oncology

H. pylori, a group 1 carcinogen can lead to gastric adenocarcinoma through a sequence of pathology starting from gastritis => atrophy => intestinal metaplasia => dysplasia => carcinoma. In patients with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, H. pylori has been seen in more than 75% of cases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A phase 3 clinical trial in children in China documented the efficacy and safety of an oral recombinant H. pylori vaccine. This could be considered as a future option to reduce the incidence of H. pylori infection, especially in the developing countries. The vaccine offered protection against H. pylori infection up to 3 years; however, longer follow-up is needed in the vaccinated cohort along with a study to identify the timing for booster doses for long-term protection against H. pylori infection.