Regarding hemorrhage control, the location of the bleeding is critically important. There are two major categories to consider: compressible and non-compressible. Any obvious bleeding in a compressible area should first be treated with direct digital pressure.

Once a scene has been secured, the CoTCCC recommends a new tourniquet be placed directly on the skin, two to three inches proximal to the wound, and the more proximal tourniquet loosened. If bleeding in any extremity continues after placing one tourniquet, a second should be placed side-by-side with the first.

Non-compressible hemorrhage often takes the form of truncal (thoraco-abdominopelvic) or junctional wounds. These wounds account for 21% of recent combat deaths.

One recent study demonstrates their ease of deployment but shows the need for improvement when transporting patients who have a junctional tourniquet applied. Further research shows that a knee with significant force applied just superior to the umbilicus or just inferior and lateral to it may stop or slow hemorrhage from the aorta, iliac, or femoral arteries while these devices are applied.

In the early 2000s, hemostatic agents were being pressed into development. A chitosan-based dressing and a zeolite mineral powder were the first approved by the US military.

One product, made of smectite minerals, was developed to both concentrate clotting elements by desiccation and activate the intrinsic coagulation pathway. While the products made of smectite minerals proved to be highly effective at hemostasis, studies showed that it caused thrombi to form that could migrate throughout the circulatory system, resulting in devastating complications. A surgical gauze impregnated with kaolin and aluminum silicate also proved to be effective at activating the intrinsic pathway and facilitating hemostasis without known side effects. Following these studies, the CoTCCC decided in 2015 to recommend surgical gauze impregnated with kaolin and aluminum silicate as the "hemostatic agent of choice."

All three gauze-type hemostatic agents recommended by CoTCCC should be placed on or packed into wounds and followed by at least three minutes of direct pressure. During this time, junctional tourniquets should be applied to sites amenable to their use. The CoTCCC also recommends that limb and junctional tourniquets be converted to a hemostatic or pressure dressing if all three of the following criteria are met: "the casualty is not in shock; it is possible to monitor the wound closely for bleeding, and the tourniquet is not being used to control bleeding from an amputated extremity." This should be completed within two hours of tourniquet placement whenever possible. Furthermore, the CoTCCC recommends that tourniquets in place for more than six hours not be removed unless the patient is under close monitoring with lab capabilities.

Several other physical actions can be performed to save a patient's life from hemorrhaging from a non-compressible area. Bleeding control of the abdomen can be accomplished by packing, including hemostatic agents, but it requires surgical capabilities.

Patients can be given several medications to promote and enhance their ability to form clots. Tranexamic acid (TXA) is a lysine derivative that blocks the activation of plasmin.

While it has shown decreased mortality in the short term, the 30-day mortality was not significantly different, and more studies have been encouraged. Recombinant factor VIIa is another possible treatment for severe bleeding; however, it is not considered a first-line treatment.