# Continuing Education Activity

Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a systemic condition characterized by characteristic ossification patterns that can occur in the spine and peripheral entheses. DISH most commonly affects the spine and often presents as back pain and stiffness. Resnick et al. originally coined the term DISH in 1975 and is now the most commonly used term to describe this condition in the literature. The term is both inclusive and descriptive of the disorder. The ossifications are classically described in the spine as flowing ossifications along the anterolateral aspect in at least three successive vertebral levels or four contiguous vertebrae. Although less common, peripheral enthesopathy can occur at the shoulder, elbow, knee, or calcaneus. DISH in the spine most commonly occurs on the right side of the thoracic spinal segment. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the criteria for DISH on plain film radiographs.
- Describe the examination and evaluation criteria for a diagnosis of DISH, including radiographic and laboratory analysis.
- Review the management options available for a patient with diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis.
- Explain the importance of interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to aid in the diagnosis of DISH and improving outcomes in patients diagnosed with the condition.

# Introduction

Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is a systemic condition characterized by characteristic ossification patterns that can occur in the spine and peripheral entheses.

The ossifications are classically described in the spine as flowing ossifications along the anterolateral aspect in at least three successive vertebral levels or four contiguous vertebrae.  Although less common, peripheral enthesopathy can occur at the shoulder, elbow, knee, or calcaneus.

While the etiology remains poorly defined, various risk factors have been identified in the literature, including gout, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes.  HLA-B8 is common in both DISH and diabetes mellitus.

# Etiology

Several recent studies have revealed a significant association between DISH and metabolic disorders, such as diabetes mellitus, hyperinsulinemia, obesity, dyslipidemia, and hyperuricemia.

# Epidemiology

There have been relatively few publications regarding epidemiologic data for DISH.

In an autopsy study, evidence of DISH was present in approximately one-fourth of the specimens, with a mean age of 65 years (minimum 50 years).

A 2016 study out of Japan reported discord between DISH prevalence rates diagnosed via computed tomography (CT) scans compared to radiographic imaging alone.  The prevalence in the general population in Japan was 17.6% and 27.2% as reported from radiographs and CT imaging, respectively.

# Pathophysiology

DISH in the spine most commonly occurs on the right side of the thoracic region.  The literature supports the original theory of the protective effect and mechanical barrier preventing DISH formation on the contralateral (i.e., left) side of the thoracic spine secondary to the pulsatile descending aorta.

For example, a 2017 study reported that newly formed bone in the cervical spine occurred mainly anterior to the vertebral bodies, which is in contrast to the anterolateral bone deposition pattern seen in DISH of the thoracic spine.

DISH can result in pain from nerve impingement or boney growths. this can lead to acute monoarticular synovitis, limited spinal range of motion, dysphagia, polyarticular pain, spinal or extremity pain, and an increased risk of unstable spine fractures.

# History and Physical

Patients with DISH can be asymptomatic, so the disease is discovered incidentally. Neuropathy or bony overgrowth causing physical impingement can cause pain.

The traditional diagnostic criteria for DISH had previously included three major elements

- Presence vertebral flowing ossifications present at a minimum of four contiguous vertebrae

- Preservation of disc height and lack of significant degenerative changes at the involved vertebral segments

- Differentiates DISH from degenerative spondylosis

- The absence of ankylosis at the facet-joint interface and absence of sacroiliac joint erosion, sclerosis, or fusion

- Differentiates DISH from ankylosing spondylitis (AS)

The current widespread definition of DISH by Resnick and Niwayama has recently been challenged as these inclusion criteria may be best applied to the more advanced stages of the condition.  Moreover, even dating back to 1985, Utsinger had challenged the contemporary definition and advocated to lower the threshold for spinal involvement to two contiguous while incorporating the presence of peripheral enthesopathies.

There have been recent challenges to the validity and consensus agreement regarding the current and evolving level of support behind these specific criteria.  A 2013 Delphi exercise found that consensus agreement and definitive literature support may only be available for the following elements:

- Presence of exuberant new bone formation (in the locations as mentioned above)

- Enlarged bony bridges present in either the C-spine, T-spine, or L-spine

**Differentiating DISH from AS**

Healthcare providers often are inevitably confused regarding the clinical differentiation in discerning a diagnosis of DISH as opposed to AS.  In short, the main distinguishing features of DISH compared with AS can be summarized into the following elements

- Higher age of presentation favoring DISH over AS

- The absence of sacroiliac (SI) joint erosions favoring DISH over AS

- Important to recognize the clinical overlap for milder conditions of SI joint pathology.  For example, there are reports of SI osteophytes in patients with DISH

- The absence of apophyseal joint obliteration favoring DISH over AS

- Frequent ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL)

- Absent enthesopathies with erosions favoring DISH over AS

- No association with HLA-B27 favoring DISH over AS

- DISH, compared to AS, tends to be a relatively mild or even painless disease

- The clinical symptoms are mild in comparison to the extensive radiographic or advanced imaging modalities
- DISH is often discovered incidentally in asymptomatic patients

Aside from the current controversial and debated diagnostic criteria, the classic clinical presentation remains that of an older patient with increasing back pain and stiffness. Soft tissue involvement secondary to osteophytes at the cervical segments may result in dysphagia, hoarseness, sleep apnea, and difficult intubation.

Peripheral joint involvement in DISH has some distinctive features

- involvement of joints usually unaffected by primary osteoarthritis (OA - e.g., hip and knee)

- Foot and ankle involvement has been reported in up to 70% of patients

- Clinical and radiographic findings are often consistent with heel spurs, Achilles tendinitis, and plantar fasciitis

- Increased hypertrophic changes compared with primary OA

- Prominent enthesopathies adjacent to peripheral joints

- Calcification and ossification of entheses in sites other than the joints

Peripheral findings often include hyperostosis and tendonitis.

# Evaluation

Laboratory values (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibody) are often normal in DISH. Radiographic evaluation with AP and lateral spine imaging in patients with DISH demonstrate “flowing candle wax,” which describes the non-marginal syndesmophytes that project horizontally from the vertebrae and form extra-articular ankylosis, this is distinguishable from the vertical “bamboo spine” that forms intra-articular disc space ossification in ankylosing spondylitis (AS).

Increased radiodensity, preservation of facet joints and disc spaces on spine imaging help further distinguish DISH from AS, which may present with osteopenia and degenerative changes.

Given that the thoracic spine is most commonly involved, the clinician should have a low threshold for obtaining thoracic spine or chest radiographs even in patients with primary neck or low back pain, stiffness, and diffuse extremity complaints.

Minor trauma in patients with DISH may result in fracture and instability. These may commonly result in missed injuries that lead to neurologic compromises and delayed treatment. Occult fractures in these patients must be aggressively evaluated using advanced imaging (CT, MRI, or CT myelogram).

# Treatment / Management

In most patients with isolated back discomfort, the mainstays of treatment include activity modification, physical therapy, bracing, NSAIDs, and bisphosphonates.

Surgical decompression and stabilization may be indicated for specific sequelae of the condition, including fracture, cervical myelopathy, lumbar stenosis, neurologic deficits, infection, or painful deformity.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for patients with back pain, stiffness, and spondylophytosis also includes, but is not limited to

- Ankylosing spondylitis (AS)

- Spondylosis deformans (SD)

- Differentiated from DISH as SD has no association with thoracic ALL ossification

- Seronegative spondyloarthropathies

- Charcot spine

- Acromegaly

- Psoriasis

- Reactive arthritis

- Pseudogout

- Hypoparathyroidism

# Complications

Patients with DISH who sustain spine fractures are at increased risk of instability due to ligamentous calcification and increased deforming forces secondary to vertebral ankylosis. Increased length of instrumentation is often necessary to accommodate the lever arms acting on the fracture site. Meyer demonstrated that surgical treatment of cervical fractures in elderly patients with DISH correlates with a 15% rate of mortality compared to 67% after conservative treatment, highlighting the importance of prompt diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment after trauma in patients with DISH.

Heterotopic ossification (HO) is a frequent complication following total hip arthroplasty (THA) in patients with DISH (30 to 56%).****

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and family members should receive education regarding the increased susceptibility to significantly morbid (and even fatal) complications even in the setting of low energy traumatic mechanisms and elective procedures.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While semantics exist regarding the absolute and consensus agreement of DISH diagnostic criteria, there remain several critical components to the workup and management of these patients when presenting even in the setting of minor traumas.  Emergency medical services (EMS) providers, nurses, advanced practitioners, clinicians, and surgeons require efficient and coordinated care to obtain comprehensive histories, examinations (including mandatory neurovascular examinations), and to have a low threshold to obtain appropriate imaging to ensure underlying fractures do not go undetected.  Clinical deterioration warrants urgent evaluation and management modalities. [Level 1]