# Introduction

The superior mesenteric vein (SMV) is a major venous tributary of the abdominal cavity. Embryologically derived in association with the vitelline vein, the superior mesenteric vein lies lateral to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and serves to drain the vast majority of the organs of the abdominal cavity. At the most superior aspect, the superior mesenteric vein joins with the splenic vein, ultimately forming the portal vein. At the mesenteric root, it is of utmost importance that the vascular anatomy is correctly identified to perform complex abdominal surgical procedures. There are several clinical complications involving the superior mesenteric vein that clinicians must readily identify due to their life-threatening nature. This article will serve as a comprehensive review of the anatomy, embryology, function, and clinical significance of the superior mesenteric vein.

# Structure and Function

The superior mesenteric vein collects the majority of the venous blood from the jejunum and ileum. According to literature reviewing computed tomography scans of the mesenteric vascular relationships, within the first three 3 cm of their respective origins, the superior mesenteric vein lies lateral to the superior mesenteric artery on the right side. As it ascends, the superior mesenteric vein normally remains on the right side of the superior mesenteric artery. When located to the left of the artery, this can represent either midgut malrotation, a resultant adjacent tumor compression, or a transient phenomenon of a normally rotated midgut.

The superior mesenteric vein receives many tributaries to drain the various organs of the gastrointestinal system. The superior mesenteric vein drains a portion of the large intestine up to the splenic flexure via the right colic and middle colic veins. It also carries blood from the pancreas via the inferior pancreaticoduodenal veins, the transverse colon by means of the middle colic vein, the stomach via the right gastroepiploic vein, the appendix by the ileocolic vein, as well as the small intestine through various venous plexuses. The superior mesenteric vein continues to ascend superiorly, until it passes posteriorly to the neck of the pancreas and ultimately anastomoses with the splenic vein to form the portal vein. Via the portal vein, the blood from all of the gastrointestinal organs continues into the liver.

# Embryology

When the human embryo is 21 days old, there are three pairs of essential veins supplying and draining the embryo: the vitelline veins, the umbilical veins, and the cardinal veins. Historically, literature has suggested that the superior mesenteric vein remains in the adult human as a remnant of the regressed left vitelline vein. Recent literature has suggested that, although the vitelline vein contributes to the superior mesenteric vein, it is not the sole embryological basis of the vein. This recent 2017 study, which studied serial sections of 5- to 6-week old embryos, suggests that the superior mesenteric vein secondarily develops within the mesentery during or after regression of peripheral courses of the left vitelline vein.

# Physiologic Variants

Often, surgeons request preoperative CT angiography to assess for any existing anatomical variations as well as accurate imagery of the disease process relative to the mesenteric vasculature in patients undergoing intra-abdominal procedures. Imaging studies have shown that there can be a single main trunk of the superior mesenteric vein, which possesses a variable-length (5 to 50 mm) before dividing into the right and left intestinal branches.

# Clinical Significance

There are several clinical implications involving the superior mesenteric vein that clinicians must be vigilant about due to a possibly drastic progression. The most serious of these is pylephlebitis. Pylephlebitis is the presence of portal mesenteric venous thrombosis, with or without bacteremia, within 30 days of an intra-abdominal inflammatory process. The most common precursors to pylephlebitis are diverticulitis, acute appendicitis, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and gastroenteritis.

In contrast, isolated superior mesenteric venous thrombosis (SMVT) is reported to have milder disease progression compared to portomesenteric venous thrombosis, due to the extensive venous collateral circulation preventing bowel infarction.

Traumatic injuries to the superior mesenteric vein are rare, accounting for 0.1% of trauma admissions, but they are associated with a steep mortality rate of 45 to 52.7%. The mechanism of these injuries is often a penetrating abdominal injury but is increasingly caused by high-speed motor vehicle collisions. Studies indicate that hemodynamic stability upon presentation, the severity of the vascular injury, and the degree of comorbid injuries are the most important factors that influence mortality rates.