Myofibroblastoma is a rare benign breast tumor with a male predisposition. It was first described in 1987, and since then, there have been various pathological, surgical, and radiographical publications in the literature. Given its rarity, myofibroblastoma poses a challenge to pathologists when it comes to differentiating between benign and malignant lesions on core biopsy, thereby necessitating an excision. On palpation, myofibroblastoma appears as a solid, mobile mass. Histologically, the lesion is well-circumscribed, composed of randomly arranged fascicles of spindle-shaped cells admixed with interrupted adipocytes in a collagenous and myxoid background. Ultrasonography and mammography imaging can be used for the diagnosis. Although, the tumor can be confused with various lesions on imaging. This tumor is often confused with spindle cell lipoma, as both are spindle cell neoplasms, both are positive for CD34, and both show similar deletion of the 13q14 region. Management involves surgical excision. Malignant behavior or recurrence has not been documented in the literature. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of myofibroblastoma of the breast and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of myofibroblastoma of the breast.
- Review the epidemiology of myofibroblastoma.
- Identify the important histochemical and morphological markers that aid in the diagnosis of myofibroblastoma and differentiate it from other spindle cell lesions.
- Explain the treatment options and prognosis of myofibroblastoma.