There are various types of cardioplegia solutions that not only vary from adults to pediatric patients, but also from institution to institution.  A global survey sent to Europe, Australia/New Zealand, North and South America regarding cardioplegia use and practices during cardiac surgery and found a wide variety in responses confirming there is no clear consensus on best practices regarding cardioplegia use.

Single-dose cardioplegia is becoming increasingly popular due to its use in minimally invasive cardiac surgery and basic CABG procedures. Benefits of single-dose cardioplegia include reduced aortic cross-clamp time, reduced interruptions during the procedure, and a decreased incidence in postoperative myocardial dysfunction. Two cardioplegia solutions are used for single-dose administration: Bretschneider solution and del Nido extracellular cardioplegia solution, and their characteristics are identified below.

Bretschneider solution:

- Type of long-acting crystalloid cardioplegia

- Low sodium and calcium concentrations resulting in reduced action potential leading to diastolic cardiac arrest

- Potassium chloride

- Magnesium sulfate

- Sodium chloride

- Tryptophan for membrane stabilization

- Ketoglutarate for increased energy production during reperfusion - a precursor to ATP

- Mannitol osmotic agent for cell membrane regulation

- Histidine buffer that supports anaerobic glycolysis and is better at maintaining pH and postoperative electrolytes and metabolic levels

Del Nido solution:

- Multiple electrolytes based which its contents make it similar to the components of extracellular fluid

- Mannitol for cell membrane regulation

- Magnesium sulfate which functions as a calcium antagonist

- Sodium bicarbonate buffer

- Potassium chloride

- Lidocaine, a class IB antiarrhythmic that functions as a Na+ channel blocker

- 1:4 blood: crystalloid composition

- Initially developed for neonates and pediatric cardiac patients for the immature myocardium

Studies published comparing solutions noted no clinically significant difference between the Bretschneider solution and blood or crystalloid cardioplegia. When comparing del Nido solution, a reduction in troponin T and CK-MB levels were noted postoperatively, and spontaneous conversion to normal sinus rhythm was more frequent than in other cardioplegia solutions likely secondary to the addition of lidocaine. Additionally, there was a reduction in the insulin requirement when compared to the crystalloid solution likely due to the exclusion of glucose in del Nido cardioplegia. Del Nido provides approximately 60 minutes of myocardial protection; however, care must be taken, and redosing may be required in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy or cases of severe obstructive coronary artery disease due to the risk of maldistribution and subsequent inadequate myocardial protection.

Crystalloid cardioplegia:

- Reduces ischemia injury by using potassium chloride concentrations <26 mEq/L

- Additives including glucose and sodium bicarbonate

- St. Thomas cardioplegia solution is a type of extracellular crystalloid based cardioplegia that requires short-interval (~20 minutes) repeat dosing due to its incidence of myocardial acidosis in between doses.

Blood cardioplegia (Buckerberg's):

- 4:1 blood: a crystalloid composition that was created and seen as the ideal delivery solution due to blood having:

- Natural buffering system
- Normal oncotic pressure
- Improved oxygen delivery
- Innate free radical scavenging mechanism

- A variant known as microplegia is a concentrated version using whole blood cardioplegia

- Microplegia aims to reduce the volume used and thus prevent hemodilution and edema.

Calafiore cardioplegia

- Another type of blood-based cardioplegic solution

- May be administered in a low or continuous flow

- Believed to provide better physiologic conditions and improved oxygen-carrying capacity

While many studies have tried to compare one to the other, some find no clinically significant difference, and others determine blood to be superior to crystalloid cardioplegia. Likewise, there is variation in the temperature at which to administer cardioplegia, and studies have failed to prove one temperature to be superior to the other. To date, there is no clear consensus. The dose of cardioplegia is also widely variable and often dosed empirically. It takes about 300 to 500 mL to arrest the heart; however, larger doses are infused during the initial dose to ensure adequate perfusion to the myocardium in cases of severe coronary artery stenosis or left ventricular hypertrophy.