**Responsibilities of the Bedside Staff to the Patient**

When a patient is on ECMO, the typical case scenario would be akin to having 1:1 nursing care for the patient and 1:1 care of the circuit. In other words, the ECMO circuit is viewed as a "patient" that requires hourly monitoring and intervention.

**Patient Monitoring and Intervention**

1. Moving the patient is a dangerous procedure and requires multiple "hands on deck" to achieve the needed movement for the needed procedure, such as daily Xrays to assess lung fields, ECMO cannula positions to ensure that they are unchanged as well as ET tube position as well as the position of other "plastics"- e.g., chest tubes and central venous catheters.

2. It is important to assess the ECMO cannulation sites for bleeding, infection, or kinking.

3. Neurologic assessment every 1-2 hours is imperative as patients are at high risk of intracranial hemorrhage, thrombosis, and stroke, as well as clinical and subclinical seizures. Neurologic assessment includes pupillary reflexes, spontaneous breathing, awareness, withdrawal to painful stimuli, fontanelle size in pediatrics, abnormal movements or unexplained episodic tachycardia, and hypertension autonomic signs of subclinical seizures or a sign of large intracranial hemorrhage, especially in the neonatal and pediatric population.

4. Typically, the ventilator would be able to be weaned drastically while on ECMO given that the oxygenator is excellent at gas exchange unless it is "aging and starting to fail" due to clot formation. Daily chest x-ray is needed. Blood gas frequency is initially every 30-6- minutes, then can be reduced to q2h -q4hourly if the patient has been on "stable ECMO and vent settings." Suctioning while on ECMO can be done as needed. If bright red blood is noted in the ET tube, then increasing the PEEP would help control the bleeding.

5. Monitor urine output as well as urine color. Gross hematuria may be secondary to anticoagulation. Microscopic hematuria and plasma-free Hb are assessed daily. These findings, especially if plasma-free Hb is >500 with an associated drop in platelet level, are concerning for pump head thrombosis and the need for pump exchange.

Also, plasma-free Hb > 53 is associated with the prolonged need for renal replacement therapy and increased mortality.

**Responsibilities of the Bedside Staff to the ECMO Circuit**

1. Conduct a full check of the circuit to look for clots.

2. Conduct a full assessment of the health of the circuit. In other words, take note of the transmembrane pressures, bladder pressures, amount of FIO2, and sweep needs and trends. The circuit's chatter is a sign that the patient and circuit may potentially be intravascularly depleted and monitor the venous return monitor. Other issues that can cause venous return difficulties include all the causes of reduced preload in the patient himself. E.g., tension pneumothorax, tension pericardial effusion.

3. Other reasons for VRM alarms include patient agitation and kinking of the cannula, especially if cannulation was peripheral and not central.