**Anatomy of Angle of the Anterior Chamber**

Clinically the structures are visualized by gonioscopic examination. The structures forming the angle of the anterior chamber are as follows (posterior to anterior):

- **Ciliary Body Band**
- It is formed by the anterior-most part of the ciliary body between its attachment to scleral spur and iris insertion.
- It appears a grey or dark brown band
- the gonioscopy. It is the most posterior landmark.

- **Scleral Spur**
- This posterior part of the scleral sulcus is related to the ciliary body posteriorly and corneoscleral meshwork anteriorly.
- It appears as a white band on gonioscopy.

- **Trabecular Meshwork**
- It appears as a band anterior to the scleral spur. It has two parts clinically, anterior non pigmented and posterior pigmented. The posterior is the draining part hence, pigmented.
- It is responsible for 90% of the aqueous humor outflow.
- It has three components-

- The uveal meshwork- the innermost portion which consists of cord-like endothelial cells, the intertrabecular spaces are relatively large, around 70 microns in diameter, offering little resistance to the passage of aqueous.
- The corneoscleral meshwork- lies anterior to the uveal meshwork forms the thickest portion of the trabecular meshwork. The intertrabecular spaces are lesser, around 35 microns, offering greater resistance.
- The juxtacanalicular meshwork- the outer part of the trabecular meshwork, lines the endothelium of the Schelmm's canal. The intertrabecular spaces are around 7 microns, offering maximum resistance to aqueous outflow.

- **Schwalbe's Line**
- It appears as a fine ridge just in front of the trabecular meshwork, formed by the prominent end of the Descemet membrane of the cornea.
- It marks the anterior limit of the structures forming the angle of the anterior chamber.

**Physiological Aspects of Outflow**

The aqueous humor flows from the posterior chamber via the pupil in the anterior chamber. It exits the anterior chamber via the following routes:

- Trabecular meshwork - about 90% aqueous flows through this route.

- Uveoscleral pathway - about 10% aqueous flows via the uveoscleral pathway

- Iris - some aqueous also drains via the iris.