Budesonide is a potent anti-inflammatory agent with a broad spectrum of clinically significant activity, and its FDA-approved indications are as below.

The nasal spray is available for allergic rhinitis and other upper respiratory allergies; one spray contains 32 mcg of budesonide: for adults and children 12 years of age and older, two sprays are administered into each nostril while sniffing gently once per day, and once allergy symptoms improve, the dose is decreased to one spray into each nostril once per day. Use in patients from 6 years to under 12 years of age is recommended only under the supervision of adults; instill one spray into each nostril daily. If symptoms do not improve, the dose can be increased to two sprays into each nostril daily. If symptoms do not improve after two weeks, consultation with a physician is required. If budesonide spray is necessary for more than two months in a year, then monitoring the growth of the children is needed.

Budesonide inhalation suspension solution is used for asthma treatment in pediatric patients of 1 to 8 years old.

As budesonide acts synergistically with the long-acting sympathetic beta-2 agonist, a combination of budesonide and formoterol in aerosol form in the metered-dose inhaler is indicated for the maintenance treatment of asthma. Pediatric patients under 12 years of age are prescribed two inhalations of budesonide 80/formoterol 4.5 mcg two times daily. Patients 12 years old and older should use 2 inhalations of budesonide 80/formoterol 4.5 mcg twice daily; starting dosage depends on the severity of the condition. Two inhalations of budesonide 160/formoterol 4.5 mcg from a metered-dose inhaler are used in the maintenance treatment of airway obstruction and reducing exacerbations in patients with chronic bronchitis and/or emphysema (COPD-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). Nebulized budesonide treatment facilitates the weaning from mechanical ventilation in patients with very severe COPD.

Budesonide inhalation powder is useful to treat both pediatric and adult patients with asthma, and it is for oral inhalation only. For pediatric patients aged 6 to 17 years, the recommended starting dosage is 180 mcg two times per day. A starting dose of 360 mcg (maximum dose) two times a day may be appropriate for some pediatric patients. For adults (>18 years of age), the recommended starting dose is 360 mcg two times per day. For some adult patients, a starting dose of 180 mcg two times a day may be adequate. The maximum dose of 720 mcg two times per day should not be exceeded.

Treatment of mild to moderate Crohn disease: Budesonide is used to induce remission in the active phase of mild to moderate Crohn disease and maintenance of remission following the treatment of active Crohn disease.

Budesonide is used for ulcerative colitis as a second-line therapeutic agent and promotes the mucosal healing of the distal lesions.

**Non-FDA Approved Uses**

**Acute Sinusitis**

Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) with or without polyposis: Off-label high-volume sinonasal budesonide irrigations are commonly used to manage chronic rhinosinusitis and will not cause hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis suppression despite extended use for more than two years.

Oral viscous budesonide is useful in treating eosinophilic esophagitis, and it improves not only symptomatic parameters but also reverses endoscopic and histological changes.

- Lymphocytic esophagitis

- Refractory celiac disease(RCD)

- Microscopic colitis (collagenous colitis, eosinophilic colitis)

- Autoimmune hepatitis without cirrhosis

- Primary biliary cholangitis

**Croup**

2 mg of nebulized budesonide is effective for mild to moderate croup.

In the early stages of sarcoidosis, inhaled budesonide may be an effective and safe alternative to oral corticosteroids for maintenance treatment.

In very low birth weight infants, intratracheal administration of budesonide-surfactant combination results in reduced incidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) or composite outcome of BPD or death.