The approach will vary according to the patient’s age and the distribution and severity of the condition. It is essential to discuss good general skincare practices, including the use of a soap-substitute and appropriate moisturizing.

A typical formulary should include antifungals, keratolytics, antipruritics, and anti-inflammatories (topical corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors). Moreover, treatment rotation may be more effective and associated with fewer adverse reactions than persisting with monotherapy. For scalp and non-scalp SD treatment, evidence supports the use of topical 1% to 2% ketoconazole, 1% ciclopirox, 1% zinc pyrithione, and 1% hydrocortisone.

Side effects associated with topical corticosteroids should be mitigated by intermittent use of site-appropriate potencies or steroid-sparing preparations such as topical 1% pimecrolimus. Another strategy is to employ the inherent anti-inflammatory effect of the topical antifungals, estimated to be equivalent to 1% hydrocortisone.

Itraconazole is safe and effective for controlling flares of SD and in preventing relapses.

**Typical Formulary May Include:**

**i. Topical Creams, Ointments, and Lotions**

- 2% salicylic acid + 2% sulfur in sorbolene cream or emulsifying ointment

- 2% ketoconazole cream

- 1% clotrimazole + 1% hydrocortisone cream

- 10% sulfacetamide + 5% sulfur lotion

- Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% lotion

- 0.03% and 0.1% tacrolimus ointment

**ii. Shampoos**

- 1% zinc pyrithione

- 1% to .5% selenium sulfide

- 2% ketoconazole

- 1% ciclopirox

- 5% coal tar + 2% salicylic acid

- 0.1% and 0.03% tacrolimus

**iii. Oral Medication**

- Itraconazole

- Fluconazole

- Terbinafine