Several of the most common diseases of the eye are manifestations of pathology within specific histological layers. Below are examples of common eye conditions, and the layers of the eye implicated.

- **"Chalazion"**:A sterile lump often in the upper eyelid caused by obstruction of the meibomian oil glands.

- **"Conjunctivitis":** Inflammation of the transparent conjunctiva that may be caused by bacterial or viral infections, allergies, or exposure to certain chemicals.

- **"Cataracts":******A sclerotic nuclear cataract is the most common and is due to opacification in the central nucleus of the lens. Cortical cataracts are due to opacifications in the cortex and have a distinct wedge-shaped appearance. Posterior subcapsular cataracts arise from behind the sac-like structure of the lens.

- **"Glaucoma":** Refers to optic nerve damage related to increased intraocular pressure. Drainage of aqueous humor through the trabecular meshwork is often implicated.

- **"Age-related macular degeneration":******A progressive eye disease causing damage to the macula or central portion of the retina. Accumulation of drusen, or lipid-laden deposits in Bruch’s membrane of the retina, is associated with disease severity.

- **"Fuchs Dystrophy"**: A disease of the corneal endothelium, that causes accumulation of excess edema in the corneal stroma. Progression of the disease often causes blisters in the eye, also referred to as bullous keratopathy.

- **"Floaters":** The sensation of floaters is due to changes that occur in the jelly-like vitreous layer of the eye.

- **"Retinal detachment":** It occurs when the outer pigment epithelial layer separates from the inner neurosensory layer consisting of rods and cones; this is a vision-threatening condition as the neurosensory layer is unable to receive nutrients from the underlying choriocapillaris and retinal pigment epithelium.