# Continuing Education Activity

Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet agent used in secondary prophylaxis against stroke and as an adjunctive agent with warfarin post mechanical valve replacement. It is also used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease during a pharmacologic stress test. This activity illustrates the indications, action, and contraindications for dipyridamole as a valuable agent in preventing thromboembolic events in those with mechanical valves and the importance of use for pharmacologic stress testing. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent to members of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action for the administration of dipyridamole.
- Describe the possible adverse effects of dipyridamole.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients using dipyridamole.
- Summarize some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication, especially in the administration of pharmacologic stress testing to improve outcomes and reduce adverse events.

# Indications

Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet agent. It is also a vasodilator that is FDA-approved for use as an adjunctive agent in thromboembolism prophylaxis in those undergoing cardiac valve replacement and thallium-nuclear stress testing. It is also used off-label to prevent stroke; however, it is not FDA approved for this indication. In addition to its use as a sole agent, the combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole also has clinical use. This formulation obtained FDA approval for stroke prevention and as an alternative therapy for those with intolerable headaches. Off-labels for the combination medication include those with symptomatic carotid artery stenosis and maintaining hemodialysis graft patency.

**Stroke Prevention**

The indication for stroke prevention came from the data obtained from the European Stroke Prevention Study 2 Trial (ESPS-2).

Further, a 2009 study in the New England Journal of Medicine compared the combination of extended-release dipyridamole with aspirin (ASA-ERDP) against clopidogrel for the risk of recurrent stroke.

**Thromboembolism Prophylaxis in Cardiac Valve Replacement, Adjunct with Warfarin**

A 1994 metanalysis by Pouleur et al. demonstrated the value of dipyridamole in mechanical cardiac valve replacement by reducing the frequency and risk of embolization.

**Role in Thallium Myocardial Perfusion Imaging (off label-use)**

Myocardial perfusion imaging is a form of assessing blood flow to the heart and evaluating coronary artery disease. Dipyridamole was the first agent employed for pharmacologic stress testing but now also includes dobutamine and adenosine-induced testing.

# Mechanism of Action

Dipyridamole functions predominantly by inhibiting the function of phosphodiesterase and adenosine deaminase.

# Administration

Dipyridamole is available in tablet forms of 25 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg strengths. The generic version is also available. In addition to its tablet formulation, there is also an intravenous solution of the strength of 5 mg/mL. The intravenous solution is applicable for its adjunctive use during pharmacologic stress testing, typically administered over four minutes.

**Indication Specific Dosing**

Thromboembolism prophylaxis in post-cardiac valve replacement: 75 to 100 mg PO 4 times daily as an adjunct to warfarin.

Myocardial perfusion scan: injectable solution of 5mg/mL is administered at a dose of 0.142 mg/kg/min IV infusion over 4 minutes. The maximal allowed dose for this use is 70 mg.

**Dosing Adjustments**

The dosing recommendations for patients with significant obesity have not undergone thorough evaluation, although a general guideline of a maximum dose of 70 mg has been recommended. There is no need to dose adjust this medication for those patients with renal or hepatic impairment. Caution is advised in geriatric patients using this medication as its oral formulation is a Beers List medication, although the extended-release form combined with aspirin is not on the Beers List.

**Pediatric Dosing**

Pediatric use of this medication has limited data, but guidelines suggest 2.0 to 6.0mg/kg/daily for its antiplatelet effect. Given the limited data, dipyridamole is not a first-line agent for the use of antiplatelet therapy for pediatric and adolescent patients.

# Adverse Effects

**Most Commonly Reported Adverse Effects**

- Chest pain (20%)

- Angina exacerbation, IV (19.7%)

- Abnormal ECG (15.9%)

- Headache, IV (12.2%)

- Dizziness (12%)

**Other Reported Adverse Effects**

**Generalized System Effects**

- Diaphoresis, fatigue, increased appetite, increased thirst, malaise, and weakness

**Cardiopulmonary Effects**

- Arrhythmia, bronchospasm, cough, chest pain, cardiomyopathy, flushing, heart attack, ischemic electrocardiogram changes, lowered blood pressure, orthostatic hypotension, palpitations, and shortness of breath.

**Central Nervous System Effects**

- Ataxia, changes in vision, dizziness, general weakness, headache, hypertonia, numbness/tingling, tinnitus, tremor, and vertigo

**Dermatologic System Effects**

- Hypersensitivity reaction, injection site reaction, pruritis, skin rash, and urticaria

**Gastrointestinal System Effects**

- Abdominal pain, dyspepsia, dysphagia, nausea, eructation, flatulence, tenesmus, and vomiting

**Psychiatric System Effects**

- Depersonalization

**Lymphatic System Effects**

- Edema

**Musculoskeletal System Effects**

- Arthralgia, back pain, claudication, generalized weakness, myalgia, and rigidity

# Contraindications

The main contraindications for the application of dipyridamole are previous hypersensitivity reactions and thrombocytopenia.

**Disease-related Concerns**

- Cardiovascular disease: Use requires caution in patients with hypotension, unstable angina, and/or recent MI; may enhance exercise-induced myocardial ischemia in patients with chronic stable angina.

- Hepatic impairment: Use requires caution in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Concurrent Drug Therapy Issues**

- Antiplatelet agents/anticoagulants: Use requires caution in patients on other antiplatelet agents or anticoagulation.

**Dosage Form Specific Issues**

- Injection: Severe adverse reactions have infrequently occurred with IV administration. Use the IV dosage form with caution in patients with bronchospastic disease or unstable angina. Testers should have aminophylline ready in case of urgency or emergency with IV use.

# Monitoring

Current guidelines do not suggest routine laboratory testing for therapeutic monitoring of dipyridamole. There are no required scheduled laboratory evaluations for associated toxicities. The American Society of Nuclear Cardiology does suggest monitoring the patients for toxicity while undergoing perfusion testing with particular attention for signs of hypoperfusion, including extremity cyanosis, pallor, or decreased temperature.

**Pharmacokinetic Parameters**

- Half-life elimination: 10 to 12 hours

- Peak time: 2 to 2.5 hours

- Onset: 24 minutes

- Duration: 3 hours

- Protein-bound: 91 to 99%

- Vd: 2 to 3 L/kg

- Clearance: 2.3 to 3.5 mL/min/kg

- Excretion: Fecal excretion

- Metabolism: Liver

- Dialyzable: not-dialyzable

# Toxicity

To reverse any complications and side effects of dipyridamole, aminophylline (50 to 250 mg IV push over 30 to 60 seconds given no sooner than 1 minute after the radiotracer injection) should be on hand for urgent/emergent use.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

When using dipyridamole in the setting of pharmacologic stress testing, it is essential to actively look out for the clinical findings associated with an adverse pharmacologic stress test. As outlined above, monitoring for hypoperfusion while undergoing diagnostic testing is imperative to assist in preventing adverse events. It is essential that the entire interprofessional stress-testing team is aware of and actively evaluate the signs of hypoperfusion. The entire team, including the ultrasound technician, nursing team, cardiologist, and any other assistants involved in administering the stress test, understand the signs and symptoms of toxicity. A pharmacist should also review the patient's medication profile to ensure no drug-drug interactions and alert the team of any findings that may raise concerns. In addition to the importance of active monitoring, having the appropriate resources to reverse induced hypoperfusion is also essential to deter sequela. Maintaining an adequate stock solution of aminophylline with suitable syringes is important to allow for time-sensitive reversal when appropriate and necessary.