Localized prostate cancer is commonly an indolent disease. Patients exhibit few to no symptoms, and if symptoms are present are often caused by co-existing BPH. It is important to be aware of the criteria for offering a PSA test and also to be prepared to discuss the pros and cons of such testing with patients. The steps involved in assessing a patient with localized prostate cancer are key to selecting the best treatment strategy for that patient, be it active or passive.

The initial evaluation of lower urinary tract symptoms and any request for PSA testing usually rests with the family physician or general practitioner. It is at this point that a careful evaluation of the symptoms, a search for other conditions that might mimic BPH (e.g. bladder cancer), and patient counseling around the pros and cons of PSA testing is carried out.

The urologist is usually the primary specialist involved in making the diagnosis and therefore the first line of providing care for men with localized prostate cancer. Given the many treatment options involved and the difficulties associated with the interpretation of needle biopsy and MRI scans of the prostate, the involvement of other multidisciplinary team members is essential prior to a definitive treatment discussion. Initial referral is commonly from the general practitioner. Diagnosis involves histology and radiology, whilst treatment may involve a radiation oncologist or a full surgical team, including recovery and ward teams.

Clinical nurse specialists are invaluable in supporting patients diagnosed with cancer, and input from psychologists or support groups might prove valuable. Trained clinical exercise specialists can be helpful in achieving lifestyle changes including exercise training and dietary modification.

When considering treatment, large randomized controlled trials have demonstrated equivalent overall and disease-specific mortality of active surveillance, radical radiotherapy, and radical surgery at 10 years of follow-up. Thus, it is important to assess each patient individually to establish his co-morbidities and priorities whereby to optimize treatment and minimize side effects (for example, not offering radiotherapy to a patient with pre-existing colitis).

With prompt and effective diagnosis and treatment, localized prostate cancer has a favorable prognosis for patients. It is vital that members of the multidisciplinary team come together to support patients and optimize both oncological and non-oncological outcomes.