Ultimately, the condition is self-limiting but may persist for up to 2 years until the apophysis fuses. Treatment includes relative rest and activity modification from the offending activity as guided by the level of pain. There is no evidence to suggest that rest speeds up recovery, but activity restriction is effective in reducing pain. Patients may participate in sports as long as the pain resolves with rest and does not limit sports-associated activities. Local application of ice and NSAIDs can be used for pain relief. A protective knee pad may be worn over tibial tubercle to protect from direct trauma. Hamstring stretching and both quadriceps stretching and strengthening exercises can be a useful adjunct. If the pain does not respond to conservative measures, formal physical therapy may be warranted. In severe, prolonged cases a short period of knee immobilization may be considered. There is no evidence to recommend injection therapy or surgical intervention for Osgood-Schlatter disease. Symptoms typically are self-limiting with a resolution of pain upon closure of the apophysis. Long-term sequelae may include a thickened or prominent tibial tubercle, but this is asymptomatic in the vast majority of cases.

**Refractory Cases**

In up to 10% of cases, symptoms may persist >1-2 years beyond skeletal maturity.  In skeletally mature patients with persistent symptoms, ossicle excision may be performed.

Surgery is rarely indicated for the disorder but may be undertaken to excise the overlying bursa. Overall, surgery does not offer any more benefit than medical treatment and is more likely to cause complications.