Treatment with immunosuppressant therapy post-transplant has significantly reduced rates of rejection. Immunosuppressive therapy usually consists of steroids, antiproliferative therapy such as cyclosporine, sirolimus/tacrolimus and antimetabolites like azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, and rapamycin. The thirty-fourth heart transplant consensus from the ISHLT registry reported a lower rejection rate when treated with tacrolimus-based immunosuppression compared to recipients receiving cyclosporine. Treatment strategy depends on the type of rejection

PGD is treated with high dose inotropes to improve ventricular function. Patients failing medical therapy benefit from mechanical circulatory support such as an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), extracorporeal membrane oxygenator (ECMO) or temporary ventricular assist device.

Hyperacute rejection is treatable with plasmapheresis, along with corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulin.

**ACR**

Treatment strategy usually involves oral or intravenous steroids, anti-thymocyte globulin, and murine monoclonal antibody OKT3. Steroids act by inhibiting the production of interleukin-1,2 and 6, TNF-alpha, and IFN-gamma. Anti-thymocyte globulin prepared from immunized rabbits or horse cause cell death by complement-mediated lysis. OKT3 is a murine monoclonal antibody that inhibits T-cell function by binding to CD-3 antigen. Selection amongst these options is dictated based on the hemodynamic status of the recipient and the histologic severity of rejection.

Hemodynamic compromise is defined by the presence of one or more of following

- Reduction in cardiac output (<4.0L/min) or cardiac index (<2.0L/min per m2)

- A decrease in pulmonary artery saturation (<50%)

- Elevation in the pulmonary artery to capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)

Histology-based treatment for ACR

1.) Recipients with Grade IR rejection (grade 1A,1B and 2 in 1990 system) do not require treatment unless hemodynamically compromised.

2.) Grade 2R rejection (grade 3A in 1990 system) is treated the same way as grade IR rejection with hemodynamic compromise. Oral pulse steroid (3-5mg/kg for 3-5 days) or 500-1000mg/day of IV methylprednisolone can be used.

3.) Grade 2R rejection with hemodynamic compromise, grade 3R rejection, and steroid-resistant rejection episodes are treated with either anti-thymocyte globulin or OKT3 antibodies. The usual dose of OKT3 is 5mg/day intravenously for 10 to 14 days. Cyclosporine and mycophenolate are continued at pretreatment doses if therapeutic levels have been achieved. Other options include switching immunosuppressive therapy from cyclosporine to tacrolimus. Recipients treated with OKT3 antibodies should have levels of CD3 positive cells checked before, and three to five days after initiation of therapy.

Antibiotic, antifungal, and antiviral prophylaxis are conventional adjunct therapies for patients treated with high-dose steroids or anti-lymphocyte therapy.

**AMR**

AMR is hemodynamically more severe compared to ACR and has an association with a worse prognosis. Improved outcomes with Plasmapheresis in combination with corticosteroids and anti-thymocyte globulin or OKT3 antibody have undergone study. Treatment with CD20 monoclonal antibody Rituximab has shown some promise.

Recurrent or resistant rejection despite two to three courses of OKT3 or anti-thymocyte globulin requires alternative approaches. These include photopheresis, total lymphoid irradiation, and immunosuppressive regimen changes.