The majority of patients with JME start having seizures between the age of 12 to 18 with a mean age of onset around 15 years. But, the onset can be early or later with an age range between 5-34 years.

Myoclonic seizures are the hallmark of this condition and are necessary for the diagnosis of JME. Only occasionally they will manifest as the only seizure type. They are described as brief, usually bilateral, jerking movements of the arms and sometimes legs with preservation of consciousness. The misdiagnosis of myoclonic seizures is possible as twitches or anxiety/nervousness. Many a time, increasing intensity and frequency of myoclonic jerks in clusters evolve into GTC seizures. GTC seizures usually occur a few months after the onset of myoclonic seizures. Absence seizures are generally the first seizures to manifest in JME. They tend to occur 3 to 5 years before the onset of myoclonic or GTC seizures, sometimes as early as 5 to 6 years of age. The early and isolated occurrence of absence seizures frequently leads to a diagnosis of childhood or juvenile absence epilepsy. Seizures with JME occur 30 minutes to an hour after morning awakening, especially the myoclonic seizures. Usual triggers for JME are sleep deprivation, alcohol intake, emotional stress, anxiety, fatigue. A large proportion (30%-40%) of JME patients exhibit photosensitivity and flashing lights, sunlight, TV, and computer can trigger seizures. Photosensitive patients tend to have an earlier onset of seizures.

Physical examination remains normal, and cognition well preserved. Studies suggest an increased prevalence of psychiatric disorders, including anxiety, mood disorder, and personality disorders in patients with JME.