The diagnosis of hemophilia combines an index of suspicion due to familial history and clinical manifestation, as well as laboratory testing. Screening tests are necessary for families with an active carrier status or for those who have a family history of excessive bleeding after trauma or after surgery or known bleeding disorders in the family. Genetic testing by chorionic villous sampling or amniocentesis is available during pregnancy and is usually reserved for families with a history of hemophilia. Genetic counseling is also an option for those families who want prenatal testing for hemophilia. Pregnant females are advised to talk to their obstetricians and genetic counselors if they have one child with hemophilia and are planning to have another child. Testing for hemophilia is sometimes by obtaining a blood sample from the umbilical cord or a vein of a newborn immediately after birth, and levels of clotting factors can be checked for patients with high suspicion for hemophilia or in those patients who have a significant family history of bleeding disorders. It is important to note here that factor IX levels can be low at birth as it takes about six months for babies to reach their normal levels. Therefore umbilical cord blood samples are more accurate in finding lower levels of factor VIII, while low levels of factor IX at birth in umbilical cord blood samples do not indicate the presence of hemophilia B.

After the prenatal period, the initial laboratory work includes but is not limited to complete blood count, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and bleeding time (BT). Especially those patients who have no family history of hemophilia, findings like prolonged bleeding after circumcision or delivery or after blood draw can prompt workup of hemophilia. In both hemophilia A and B, PTT will be prolonged (intrinsic pathway disruption), whereas PT and BT will be normal. The PTT could be as prolonged as 2 to 3 times the high normal range. Once PTT is found to be prolonged, it should be followed by a mixing study. In a mixing study, the PTT should normalize if factor deficiency is suspected. After the mixing study, the next step should be factor VIII and IX assay. Hemophilia is usually the diagnosis if the factor activity is less than 40% of normal factor activity. Molecular genotyping should then be offered to confirm the diagnosis and also to help predict disease severity.

Also, it is now routine in most hospitals to measure factor VIII inhibitors in patients with hemophilia as some patients develop antibodies against factor VIII, which are called "inhibitors," especially following treatment with infusions of factor VIII. This fact is important as infusions of plasma-derived or recombinant factor VIII would be ineffective in patients who have antibodies against factor VIII. Inhibitors are measurable through quantitative inhibitor assays - Bethesda assay and Nijmegen assay. Original Bethesda assay was developed to standardize the measurement of inhibitors in a factor VIII neutralization assay, while in the Nijmegen assay, which is a modification of the original Bethesda method, the pH, and the protein concentration of the test mixture are further standardized. This variation makes the test mixture less prone to artifactual deterioration and improves specificity. The International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis recommends these assays.

One important bleeding disorder that often gets mixed with hemophilia is von Willebrand disease (VWD). Both hemophilia and Von Willebrand disease are bleeding disorders, but the former is caused by deficient or defective clotting factors VIII (hemophilia A) and factor IX (hemophilia B), while the latter results from deficient or defective von Willebrand factor. They are similar but have several important differences. Hemophilia is seen more in males being an X-linked disease, while von Willebrand disease is equally common in males and females due to a genetic change in chromosome 12. While bleeding in hemophilia is usually musculoskeletal, bleeding in von Willebrand disease is more mucocutaneous; this is because the von Willebrand factor targets skin and mucous membranes like linings of the nose, mouth, vagina, uterus, intestines, etc., and that is why its deficiency primarily causes nosebleeds, gum bleeds, easy bruising, heavy menstruation or heavy peri and postpartum hemorrhage. Internal bleeding is rare in von Willebrand disease, unlike hemophilia, Von Willebrand disease is usually diagnosed by quantitative tests like checking von Willebrand factor antigen levels and factor VIII clotting activity and by qualitative tests like checking ristocetin cofactor and von Willebrand factor multimers to measure how well the von Willebrand factor works.

Healthcare providers are also often challenged when patients with hemophilia present with signs and symptoms of suspected internal bleeding. It becomes crucial for the healthcare team to evaluate them and order tests in a timely fashion to rule out life-threatening bleeds like intracranial bleeds or abdominal bleeds. When patients present with altered mental status, confusion, cognitive dysfunctions, or multiple falls, the CT scan of the head or MRI of the brain is ordered to rule out intracranial bleed, this factor is crucial, especially in neonates, infants, and during early childhood, as these patients may not be able to provide a detailed history. Sometimes adults with hemophilia may present with unusual symptoms like cognitive dysfunction due to frequent but silent cerebral microbleeds and require MRI of the brain to evaluate these microbleeds.