ECT is commonly performed in a dedicated suite, a post-anesthesia care unit, or an ambulatory surgery site, most frequently on an outpatient basis. Patients with severe debilitation including substantial medical or psychiatric illness may start on an inpatient basis and transition to an outpatient basis as needed. Patients should be appropriately nil per os (NPO) for the procedure, which includes no light meal for six hours, no full-fat meal for eight hours, and no clear liquids for two hours before anesthesia.

Vital signs, including blood oxygen saturation, ECG and EEG activity are recorded continuously. EMG is recorded on the right foot to measure the motor component of seizure activity. A nerve stimulator is utilized to monitor succinylcholine, a depolarizing muscle relaxant used to reduce tonic-clonic contractions during the procedure. As an alternative to EMG, a blood pressure cuff is inflated on the patient’s ankle to prevent succinylcholine from entering the foot, allowing a visual monitor of seizure activity with measurement of tonic-clonic contractions. Following intravenous induction, a bite block is placed to protect the patient’s tongue and teeth. The beginning and termination of a cerebral seizure is monitored via EEG, recorded from right and left frontal and mastoid positions. Seizure induction is via two electrodes placed bitemporally or a right unilateral electrode; both of which allow electrical current to pass into the scalp.

The ECT stimulus is either a brief pulse (0.5 to 2.0 milliseconds) or ultra-brief pulse (less than 0.5 milliseconds) waveform. While the brief pulse is considered standard, the ultra-brief is considered more tolerable.

As with any other procedure, the goal of the anesthesiologist during ECT is to facilitate a safe and pain-free experience for the patient.

Once the patient is rendered unconscious, administration of a muscle relaxant follows, along with bag valve mask ventilation with 100 percent oxygen. A nerve stimulator is utilized to determine the adequacy of muscle relaxation along with the clinical assessment of plantar reflexes and fasciculations in the calves and left foot. An inflated blood pressure cuff prevents muscle relaxant from entering the right foot. Muscle relaxants do not prevent masseter muscle contraction from the electrical pulse, requiring placement of a bite block for lingual and tooth protection.

Although most therapeutic ECT seizures last from 15 to 70 seconds, EEG recording lasts about 25 percent longer than the motor seizure.

In pregnant patients receiving ECT,