Patients with acute renal infarctions typically present with the sudden onset of abdominal or flank pain along with associated symptoms like nausea, vomiting, hematuria, and occasionally fever.

Acute loss of renal arterial supply can lead to new-onset, acute renin-mediated hypertension noted at the time of initial presentation of patients, which usually improves with treatment.

Some patients may not experience any symptoms, further contributing to the underdiagnosis of renal infarction. Asymptomatic renal infarction can often be detected as an incidental finding in some patients undergoing imaging for unrelated reasons.

Unfortunately, the clinical presentation is often either too non-specific or suggestive of alternative, more common disorders such as ureteral colic, a "passed" stone, pyelonephritis, or gastroenteritis. This confusion often leads to a delay, with less than 50% of patients receiving the correct diagnosis within two days of their initial presentation.

Atherosclerotic renal emboli are suggested by the triad of:

- Recent (within six months) precipitating event (angiography)

- Acute or subacute kidney injury (which may appear several weeks after the actual injurious event)

- Skin color changes such as "blue toe" syndrome or livedo reticularis will be present in about one-third of cases

Cholesterol crystals may be found in the retina (Hollenhorst plaques), so a fundoscopic examination is suggested in suspected cases of atherosclerotic emboli.

Since these cases do not typically present with acute symptoms, a high index of suspicion is necessary for higher-risk patients. The risk factors for general atherosclerotic disease include male gender, significant smoking history, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, and older age.