Personal protective equipment implementation has become the standard of care for medical providers. The COVID-19 pandemic reshaped healthcare in many ways, including the increased emphasis on health practitioner safety in the presence of communicable diseases. PPE has been shown to prevent the spread of disease and preserve the health of individual practitioners. Following guidelines regarding the use of PPE sets a standard for all healthcare organizations to follow. Proper training is needed for PPE to be effective, including the appropriate application and removal of PPE.

Specific steps for putting on (donning) and taking off (doffing) pieces of PPE will be reviewed here. Not all components of PPE are required for each patient, and specific isolation precautions should be followed as appropriate.

**Suggested Sequence for Application of PPE**

Donning of PPE should take place outside patient rooms.

- Gown

- 
              
- Cover body from neck to knees, arms to wrists, and ensure gown wraps around the back
              
              
- Tie neck and waist straps if available

- Mask or Respirator

- 
              
- Place straps or ties around the head/neck
              
              
- Adjust the flexible band to the nose bridge for proper fit
              
              
- Fit-check respirator

- Eye protection

- 
              
- Place eye protection on the face to ensure adequate protection of the face/eyes
              
              
- 
                  
- May include goggles and/or a face shield

- Gloves

- 
              
- Ensure application of gloves extends to cover the wrist of the gown

**Suggested Sequence for Removal of PPE**

Doffing of PPE should take place outside patient rooms. If a respirator is in use, do not remove the respirator until after exiting the patient room.

- Gloves

- 
              
- Remove the first glove by grasping the palmar surface with the other gloved hand, and discard the first glove in the appropriate disposal container
              
              
- Remove the second glove by sliding the fingers of the ungloved hand under the remaining glove at the wrist, and discard the second glove in the appropriate disposal container

- Eye protection

- 
              
- Remove without touching the contaminated outside surface on the front of eye protection, and handle equipment by the strap or earpieces
              
              
- Dispose of in the appropriate reprocessing or waste container

- Gown

- 
              
- Release gown straps or ties
              
              
- Touching inside of gown only, remove by pulling away from neck and shoulders
              
              
- Turn the gown inside out
              
              
- Place in an appropriate disposal container

- Mask or Respirator

- 
              
- Do not touch the front or mouth area of the mask/respirator
              
              
- Remove by releasing ties or straps around the back of the head
              
              
- Discard in the appropriate disposal container