Dimercaprol is administered by a deep intramuscular injection (IM) in the top lateral quadrant of the buttocks. Multiple doses must be given for several days to weeks, and the injection sites alternate between the right and left buttocks, approximately two inches below the previous ones. Maintaining an alkaline urine pH is also recommended to protect renal function. Blood and urine concentrations, alleviation of symptoms, and dimercaprol toxicity are the major factors when determining management with dimercaprol.

**Adult Dosing**

**Arsenic or gold poisoning (mild):**Deep IM: 2.5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 6 doses, then every 6 hours for 4 doses, then every 8 hours for 3 doses, then every 12 hours for 2 doses, followed by once daily for 10 days.

**Arsenic or gold poisoning (moderate):**Deep IM: 2.5 to 3.5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 6 doses, then every 6 hours for 4 doses, then every 8 hours for 3 doses, then every 12 hours for 2 doses, followed by once daily for 10 days.

**Arsenic or gold poisoning (severe):**Deep IM: 3.5 to 5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 6 doses, then every 6 hours for 4 doses, then every 8 hours for 3 doses, then every 12 hours for 2 doses, followed by once daily for 10 days

**Elemental and inorganic mercury poisoning (moderate to severe):**Deep IM: 5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 1 to 2 days, then 2.5 mg/kg 1 to 2 times/day for 10 days

**Lead poisoning:**Deep IM: 4 mg/kg every 4 hours for 3 days and 2.5 mg/kg for 1 to 4 days; dimercaprol is given in combination with calcium disodium edetate; dimercaprol should be administered first, and calcium disodium edetate should be administered at a different site than dimercaprol

**Pediatric Dosing**

**Arsenic or gold poisoning (mild):**Deep IM: 2.5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 6 doses, then every 6 hours for 4 doses, then every 8 hours for 3 doses, then every 12 hours for 2 doses, followed by once daily for 10 days.

**Arsenic or gold poisoning (moderate):******Deep IM: 2.5 to 3.5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 6 doses, then every 6 hours for 4 doses, then every 8 hours for 3 doses, then every 12 hours for 2 doses, followed by once daily for 10 days.

**Arsenic or gold poisoning (severe):**Deep IM: 3.5 to 5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 6 doses, then every 6 hours for 4 doses, then every 8 hours for 3 doses, then every 12 hours for 2 doses, followed by once daily for 10 days.

**Elemental and inorganic mercury poisoning (moderate to severe):**Deep IM: 5 mg/kg every 4 hours for 1 to 2 days, then 2.5 mg/kg 1 to 2 times/day for 10 days

**Lead poisoning:**4 mg/kg every 4 hours for 3 days and 2.5 mg/kg for 1 to 4 days; dimercaprol is given in combination with calcium disodium edetate; dimercaprol should be administered first, and calcium disodium edetate should be administered at a different site than dimercaprol.

**Renal Impairment**

No adjustments are needed in the presence of renal disease, but if acute kidney injury develops during treatment, discontinuation of dimercaprol is recommended.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Except due to arsenic toxicity, dimercaprol is contraindicated in hepatic insufficiency.

**Drug Interactions**

Iron supplements and preparations should be avoided with dimercaprol therapy. Dimercaprol potentially increases the nephrotoxic effects of iron salts.