**Corticosteroids**

Corticosteroids stay the main modality of treatment to date and have been shown to prevent blindness and suppress disease activity. The main goal of treatment is to prevent visual loss, which is irreversible. Initiation of corticosteroids shall be considered as soon as possible in suspected cases.

**Dosing**

Early treatment with a daily divided dose of prednisone 1mg/kg/day or 40 to 60 mg/day (or equivalent) in divided doses is adequate in most cases. This dose shall continue until all the symptoms resolve and acute phase reactants normalize, usually taking 2 to 4 weeks.

**Duration**

Almost all patients with GCA need corticosteroids for more than 1 year, and some may need long-term low doses of corticosteroids.

**Role of Intravenous (IV) Corticosteroids**

The role of initial IV pulse steroids (1000 mg methylprednisolone for 3 days) is debatable. One study did show the use of pulse steroids to be associated with more rapid tapering of steroids and more patients being steroid-free eventually.

**Tocilizumab**

IL-6 levels are significantly elevated in patients with GCA, and IL-6 is thought to play a pathogenic role in GCA by activating the T-cells and promote IFN-gamma release from the T-cells. Tocilizumab, an IL-6 inhibitor, was evaluated in a phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial and was associated with relapse-free survival in 85% of patients in the tocilizumab+corticosteoid arm compared to 20% in placebo+corticosteroid arm by week 52.

Tocilizumab has gained significant importance in the treatment of GCA, especially in patients who are intolerant to corticosteroids. However, unanswered questions about the timing of initiation, duration of therapy, and planning of treatment tapering exist and need further investigation.

**Methotrexate**

While one study showed the potential steroid-sparing efficacy of methotrexate in GCA, another study failed to reciprocate these results.

**Aspirin**

Low dose aspirin was associated with a reduction in rates of vision loss and strokes in GCA and can be considered as adjuvant therapy if no contraindications exist.

**Other Agents**

Several other agents have been studied, and unfortunately, not shown to be efficacious in GCA. The use of statins was not associated with steroid dose reduction or change in the disease course.

**Other Treatment Considerations**

Patients with GCA require moderate to high doses of corticosteroids for several months, which is associated with bone loss. Baseline bone density scan and treatment with bisphosphonates shall be strongly considered to prevent steroid-induced osteoporosis and fractures. Vitamin D deficiency, if present, shall be corrected. Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis with sulphamethoxazole, atovaquone, or pentamidine in patients on prednisone doses of more than 5 mg/day shall be considered. Patients shall be counseled to quit smoking. Appropriate management of diabetes mellitus and hypertension, which can be accelerated by high-dose corticosteroid treatment, is important.