Design of prosthetic heart valves focuses on four components:  improved optimal hemodynamics, mechanical/biological durability, minimizing biological response to the prosthetic heart valve, and optimal delivery system.

Although prosthetic heart valves functionally provide adequate hemodynamics, the hemodynamics are still suboptimal, and the introduction of a foreign body into the body increases the risk of thrombogenicity.  The latter statement is of particular importance and is the rationale behind anticoagulant therapy in post-heart valve replacement patients. The most severe complications associated with prosthetic heart valves include thrombosis, anticoagulant-related hemorrhage, infection, valvular failure, tissue hyperplasia, and overgrowth.

As mentioned previously, exposure of human blood to a prosthetic implant leads to an increased risk of thrombogenicity, thus warranting appropriate anticoagulant therapy.  However, anticoagulant therapy has its own share of risks which clinicians must address with a patient.  Anticoagulation will be covered further under the "Clinical Significance" topic.

The Hufnagel prosthesis is the first historical heart valve prosthesis and served as a precursor for future developments in mechanical prostheses.  The original Hufnagel prosthesis consisted of a ball within a non-collapsible tube. The ball would move respective to the cardiac cycle but was restrained by the decreasing radius of its plastic tubing.  As one would expect, the Hufnagel prosthesis led to more turbulent flow due to inadequate flow dynamics. Mechanical valves exhibit poor hemodynamics when compared to biological prostheses. The Starr-Edwards valve, the first orthotropic prosthesis, consists of a ball occluder within a cage.  The ball occluder would form a seal with an appropriately sized sewing ring during a particular period of the cardiac cycle (systole for the mitral valve and diastole for the aortic valve). In the native valve, central flow through the valvular orifice is essentially undisturbed and can be, for all practical purposes, considered laminar flow.  The mechanical ball occluder in the Starr-Edwards valve induced turbulent flow, leading to suboptimal hemodynamics. Efforts directed at improving the fluid dynamics of mechanical valve prosthesis led to bi-leaflet designs. The main difference between the Starr-Edwards and the subsequent bi-leaflet designs was the improved central flow, leading to decreased turbulent flow.  The issue of prosthetic durability clearly delineates along the lines of mechanical versus biological prosthesis.  Mechanical heart valve prostheses have a considerably longer life duration relative to biological prosthesis. The typical lifespan of a mechanical prosthesis is on the order of decades while the biological prostheses have a lifespan on the order of 10-12 years.