As with any other medical or psychiatric condition, the interview is of the utmost importance for guiding your treatment plan. As usual, we start by obtaining a thorough history. This should include but is not limited to the following: Timeline and severity of symptoms, prior psychiatric history/conditions, hospitalizations, previous medical history/conditions, medications taken (psychiatric or non-psychiatric), history of substance use, detailed social history, history of trauma (emotional, physical, sexual), suicidal ideation with prior attempts, auditory/visual hallucinations. The clinician should also be able to recognize the psychiatric patient may not always be able to give the most concise history due to their underlying condition.

Of equal importance to the history, and an indispensable component of the psychiatric interview is the mental status exam (MSE). One must carefully note the patient’s appearance, behavior, speech, mood, affect, thought process, and thought content.

Aside from a urinary toxicology screen, a standard medical workup can help to rule out non-psychiatric causes of psychosis, as well as some additional tests if clinical suspicion permits. These may include:

- Complete blood count and metabolic panel

- Urinalysis, urine cultures

- Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), T3, T3

- Liver function tests

- Vitamin B12

- HIV

- CT, MRI

- EEG

- Lumbar puncture

- Rheumatologic or immunologic workup

It is important to note that some substances which correlate to psychotic episodes (bath salts, certain synthetic strains of cannabis, psychedelics) may not show up on basic drug screen panels.

It is only when clinicians have officially ruled out a substance, medication-induced, or other underlying medical causes that one can consider a primary psychotic disorder.