Opiates are also associated with a few other complications besides the usual respiratory and CNS adverse effects.

**Acute Lung Injury**

Acute lung injury is well known to occur after a heroin overdose. However, acute lung injury can also occur following methadone and propoxyphene overdose and is universally present in patients who expire from a high dose of opiate. As to how these opiates cause lung injury is not fully understood, but the eventual result is hypoventilation and hypoxia. Clinically, heroin-induced lung injury will present with sudden onset of dyspnea, frothy sputum, cyanosis, tachypnea, and rales- features consistent with pulmonary edema. Acute lung injury is also known to occur in children who have ingested high doses of opiates. Acute lung injury is very similar to ARDS in presentation, and most cases clear up with aggressive airway management and oxygen. The usual drugs used to manage pulmonary edema are not used, and in fact, the use of diuretics may exacerbate the hypotension.

**Infection**

In individuals who use intravenous opioids, complications include abscess, cellulitis, and endocarditis. The most common organisms involved are the gram-positive bacteria like Staphylococcus and Streptococci. If the bacteria enter the systemic circulation, the risk of epidural abscess and vertebral osteomyelitis are other potential complications. These patients may present with fever and continuous back pain. Some IV drug abusers are known to inject the opiates directly into the neck, and this can lead to jugular vein thrombophlebitis, Horner syndrome and even pseudoaneurysms of the carotid artery. Both peripheral and pulmonary emboli have been reported in IV drug users. Accidental injection into the nerves has also been reported to cause permanent neuropathy.

Endocarditis is a serious complication of intravenous drug abuse. Often these individuals use a mixture of illicit drugs and dirty needles. The diagnosis of infectious endocarditis is often difficult as the symptoms are vague initially. Although in most cases, the right-sided heart valves are affected, sometimes the left-sided valves may also be involved. The most common valves involved in intravenous drug users is the tricuspid valve. It often presents with fever, malaise and a new murmur. In some patients, recurrent septic pulmonary embolism may be the only presenting feature. The most common organism involved in right-sided endocarditis is Staphylococcus aureus, but left-sided endocarditis may be polymicrobial and include Streptococcus, E. coli, Pseudomonas or Klebsiella. In most patients, when the left-sided valves are involved, the symptoms and signs are usually more obvious compared to right-sided involvement.

Other manifestations of opioid abuse may be recurrent pneumonia, and in some cases, aspiration pneumonia may also occur with the individual is unconscious.

Rhabdomyolysis is not an uncommon complication of opiate overdose. It may occur even in the absence of a compartment syndrome.

Another life-threatening complication is necrotizing fasciitis that often presents with severe pain, fever, dark, dusky skin with crepitus. The individual will show signs of septic shock. Aggressive resuscitation and immediate surgical debridement can be life-saving.

Seizures: Opiates are known to increase the risk of seizures, especially drugs like propoxyphene, meperidine, pentazocine, intravenous fentanyl, and heroin. The individual may present with a prolonged seizure which may result as a result of CNS hypoperfusion and hypoxia or a result intracranial injury due to a fall.

**Narcotic Bowel Syndrome**

Narcotic bowel syndrome is a type of opiate bowel pathology that is characterized by frequent episodes of moderate to the severe abdominal pain that worsens with escalating or continued doses of opiates. Narcotic bowel syndrome appears to occur in people with no prior bowel pathology and is a maladaptive response. The syndrome can also be associated with intermittent vomiting, abdominal distension, and constipation. Eating always aggravates the symptoms, and the condition can last for days or weeks. Anorexia can lead to body weight loss. There is delayed gastric emptying and intestinal transit. The syndrome is often confused with bowel obstruction. The key to the diagnosis is the recognition of continued and escalating doses of opiates that worsen the abdominal pain, instead of providing relief. The treatment of narcotic bowel syndrome is some psychotherapy combined with tapering or discontinuing the opioid. The key to successful treatment is to develop a strong patient-physician relationship and trust with the patient; the narcotic should be gradually withdrawn, and other non-pharmacological treatments used to manage pain.

**Withdrawal Reaction**

Withdrawal symptoms following cessation of opiates are common, but the symptoms are often vague and not as severe as those observed with alcohol or benzodiazepines discontinuation. The onset of symptoms depends on the drug ingested and usually occur within 2 to 4 days with methadone and 8 to 10 hours after meperidine. The autonomic symptoms may include excessive lacrimation, sweating, piloerection, rhinorrhea, repeated yawning, myalgia, nasal congestion, diarrhea and abdominal cramps.  The symptoms usually peak between 36 to 48 hours and gradually subside in 72 hours. In chronic drug addicts, the symptoms may last for 7 to 14 days. The treatment of withdrawal symptoms is supportive. The use of additional opiates to counter the symptoms of withdrawal is not recommended. For severe withdrawal cases, one may use clonidine, especially when methadone may be inappropriate or unavailable. After the acute treatment, the patient should be recommended to join a long-term drug rehabilitation program to prevent relapse.