Nimodipine is available as oral tablets, oral solutions, and intravenous infusion solutions. However, the FDA has not approved the intravenous infusion solution, and this formulation is not available in the US market.

Neurocritical Care Society guidelines suggest that all patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage should receive oral nimodipine 60 mg every four hours for 21 days from SAH onset.

**USFDA Boxed Warning:**Do not administer nimodipine by parenteral routes. Serious, life-threatening adverse events, including death, cardiac arrest, hypotension, cardiovascular collapse, and bradycardia, have been reported when the drug has been injected parenterally. However, an IV formulation of nimodipine is available in Europe but is not FDA-approved.

**Oral Administration**

- Nimodipine is available as liquid-filled oral capsules of 30 mg and oral solution of 6 mg/mL and 30 mg/10 mL strength (unit-dose prefilled syringe and 8 oz container.). It has to be given at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals.

- Nimodipine should start as early as possible or within 96 hours of the diagnosis of subarachnoid hemorrhage. The recommended dose for adults is 60 mg (two 30-mg capsules) every 4 hours for 21 consecutive days.

- If the patient is not conscious enough to swallow the nimodipine capsule, a hole can be made in both ends using an 18-gauge needle, and the contents get extracted into a syringe. Then it can be fed through a nasogastric tube and washed down with 30 ml of normal saline (0.9%).

**Intravenous Administration**

- Nimodipine can be given intravenously via a central venous catheter at a starting dose of 1 mg/hr (15 mcg/kg per hour, equivalent to 5 ml per hour) for the first 2 hours. If the patient tolerates the drug well and has no hypotension, the dose can increase to 2 mg per hour (30 mcg/kg per hour, equivalent to 10 ml per hour) after the first 2 hours.

- If the patient's body weight is less than 70 kg or has hypotension, nimodipine should be started at a dose of 0.5 mg per hour (2.5 ml of solution per hour) or less, if necessary.

**Intraventricular Administration**

- The outcome, dosage, and duration of intraventricular administration of nimodipine were assessed in The NEWTON trial. Results of the trial indicated no significant increase in a favorable outcome for intraventricular nimodipine compared with the standard of care.

**Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Treatment Duration**

- Treatment via intravenous route should be started as soon as possible after the onset of clinical vasospasm and should continue for a minimum of 5 days and a maximum of 14 days. If the condition has surgical treatment, nimodipine should continue at the same dose for a minimum of 5 days.

- The administration of intravenous nimodipine can be with or without pre-treatment with nimodipine tablets. However, if nimodipine is administered intravenously following oral administration, the total duration of treatment should not exceed a maximum of 21 days.

- Intravenous nimodipine should not be given for a period longer than 14 days. In addition, patients should not take the intravenous and oral forms of nimodipine concomitantly.

- During surgery, a freshly prepared 20 mL diluted solution of nimodipine (1 ml of nimodipine concentrated intravenous infusion solution and 19 ml of Ringer solution) warmed up to blood temperature may be instilled intracisternal. This diluted solution must be used immediately after preparation.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Bioavailability increases in patients with cirrhosis, making it necessary to reduce the dose in such patients. Use 30 mg every 4 hours in patients with cirrhosis.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**There is no information available from the manufacturer's prescribing label.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Nimodipine is a former US FDA pregnancy category C medicine, and alternative agents are preferred.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Nimodipine is present in human milk; based on the available data, relative infant exposure is less and is not expected to cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants. However, the decision to breastfeed during an episode of SAH merits a risk-benefit evaluation.