Imatinib mesylate (Imatinib) is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor that initially received FDA approval for chronic myelogenous leukemia in 2001. Subsequently, it has received approval to treat several other oncologic conditions. Currently, FDA-approved indications include:

- First-line adult and pediatric Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase (Ph+ CML CP)

- IRIS Trial: treatment with imatinib in adults with newly diagnosed CML resulted in a 10-year overall survival rate of 83.3%.

- Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in blast crisis (Ph+ CML BC)

- In a single-arm phase 2 study of Ph+ CML BC patients, imatinib induced a major cytogenetic response in 16% of patients and a complete hematologic response in 52% of patients.

- Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in accelerated phase (Ph+ CML AP):

- In a single-arm phase 2 study of Ph+ CML AP patients, imatinib induced a significant cytogenetic response in 24% of patients and a complete hematologic response in 82% of patients.

- Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase after failure of interferon-alpha therapy

- In a single-arm phase 2 study of Ph+ CML CP treatment failures with interferon-alpha, imatinib induced a significant cytogenetic response in 60% of patients and a complete hematologic response in 95% of patients.

- Adult relapsed/refractory Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL)

- In a single-arm phase 2 study of relapsed/refractory Ph+ ALL patients, imatinib induced a complete cytogenetic response in 17% of patients and a complete hematologic response in 19% of patients.

- First-line pediatric Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL) in combination with chemotherapy

- AALL0031 Trial: treatment with imatinib plus chemotherapy resulted in 5-year disease-free survival of 70% compared to a 65% rate in the sibling donor bone-marrow transplant cohort.

- Adult myelodysplastic (MDS)/myeloproliferative (MPD) diseases associated with platelet-derived growth factor receptor gene re-arrangements

- In an open-label phase 2 study, an additional study, and 12 published case report in adult myelodysplastic(MDS)/myeloproliferative(MPD) disease associated with platelet-derived growth factor receptor gene re-arrangements, imatinib induced a major cytogenetic response in 39% of patients and a complete hematologic response in 45% of patients.

- Adult aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM) without D816V c-Kit mutations (or unknown c-Kit mutational status)

- In a phase 2 study and ten published case reports, imatinib induced a complete hematologic response in 29% of patients.

- Adult hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) or chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL) with FIP1L1-PDGFR-alpha fusion kinase and for patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome and/or chronic eosinophilic leukemia who are FIP1L1-PDGFR-alpha fusion kinase negative or unknown

- In a phase 2 study and 35 published case reports, treatment with imatinib induced a complete hematologic response in 61% of patients.

- Adult unresectable, recurrent, and/or metastatic dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP)

- In a phase 2 study and five published case reports, treatment with imatinib induced an 83% response rate, including a 39% complete response rate.

- Kit positive unresectable and/or metastatic malignant gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST)

- In two large randomized phase 3 clinical trials of patients with Kit positive unresectable and/or metastatic malignant GIST, treatment with imatinib 400mg/day resulted in a 1.58 year(18.9 months) progression-free survival and a 4.08 year(49.0 months) overall survival.

- Adult adjuvant treatment following resection of Kit positive GIST

- In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial of adult adjuvant treatment following the resection of Kit positive GIST, imatinib therapy resulted in a recurrence-free survival of 98% at one year compared to placebo at 83%, p<0.0001, hazard ratio = 0.35.