Vaginitis - Inflammation of the vagina can result from the overgrowth of local bacteria, yeast, or sexually transmitted infection. Bacterial Vaginosis (BV) characteristically presents with an alkaline pH and predominance of Gardnerella and Mycoplasma spp. BV is often associated with a ‘fish-like’ odor. Vaginal candidiasis is an overgrowth of a commensal organism and is another cause of vaginitis characterized by pruritus, thick ‘cottage cheese-like’ discharge and changes in vaginal flora. Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted disease caused by a parasite that is commonly associated with a clinical picture of yellow-green frothy discharge and vaginal irritation. Non-infectious vaginitis can be due to allergic reactions or irritation secondary to applying products to the vagina such as douches, scented perfumes, and soaps.

Vaginal neoplasia - Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) precursor lesions are associated with HPV and may progress to malignant vaginal squamous cell carcinoma; this is the most common form of vaginal malignancy. Vaginal clear cell carcinoma is associated with DES exposure in utero due, in part, by the persistence of columnar cells. Several more rare neoplasms, both malignant and benign can occur in the vagina.

- Benign vaginal lesions:  angiomyofibroblastoma, fibroepithelial polyp, hymenal polyp, leiomyoma, Mullerian papilloma, polyposis, vaginalis postoperative spindle cell nodule, pseudosarcomatous fibroepithelial stromal polyp, rhabdomyoma,  spindle cell epithelioma, squamous papilloma, superficial cervicovaginal myofibroblastoma, tubulovillous adenoma

- Malignant vaginal lesions: adenocarcinoma, aggressive angiomyxoma, clear cell adenocarcinoma, endometrioid adenocarcinoma, granulocytic sarcoma leiomyosarcoma, lymphoma, malignant mixed tumor melanoma, mesonephric adenocarcinoma, metastases, mucinous adenocarcinoma, myeloid sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, small cell carcinoma, spindle cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, urothelial carcinoma, VAIN, verrucous carcinoma, yolk sac tumor

Vaginal trauma - Causes range from vaginal intercourse to parturition and iatrogenically from instrumentation.  Tears can range in severity from mucosal involvement to underlying muscle involvement.

Vaginal atrophy - Declining levels of estrogen during peri-menopausal and menopausal years are associated with thinning of the vaginal walls and loss of rugae.

Vaginal prolapse - Vaginal vault prolapse occurs with weakened vaginal walls, fascia, and ligaments that are supporting the surrounding structures such as uterus, rectum, bowel, and bladder. These may prolapse out of the vaginal canal and present as a bulge, sensation of increased pressure and a spectrum of changes in bowel and urinary continence.