In juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM), the clinical features are usually insidious. Muscle weakness is the main reason for consultation, usually accompanied by systemic signs like asthenia, anorexia, irritability, pain, fever, and deterioration of one's general condition. The dermatological manifestations are like those of adults and are highly characteristic. Their recognition is essential because they can precede muscular signs. The periorbital violaceous patches like frames of glasses are almost pathognomonic as well as Gottron papules.

Violaceous papules are usually seen over the metacarpophalangeal area, the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints of hands, and less commonly, in the extensor surfaces of elbows and knees. One can also observe painful periungual erythema with telangiectasia, cuticular hypertrophy, facial edema, erythematous patches involving the "V-neck," shoulders anterior chest wall, and Raynaud phenomenon. More rarely, there are skin lesions of cutaneous vasculitis and photosensitivity. The muscular deficit is usually progressive, symmetric, bilateral, proximal, and non-selective, involving striated muscles of the pelvis and shoulders. The muscle weakness intensity varies from one patient to another, ranging from simple myalgia to a severe muscle deficit.

Children may report difficulties in dressing, combing hair, and climbing stairs. During evolution, calcinosis may occur more commonly in children than in adults. These calcifications arise from subcutaneous tissues or deeper locations such as musculoaponeurotic structures. The commonest sites of calcinosis include elbows, knees, buttocks, and trauma areas. Its evolution is unpredictable. It can regress spontaneously, ulcerate with a risk of secondary infections causing major aesthetic and functional sequelae. It can mimic cold abscesses.

Myocardial involvement may cause ventricular arrhythmias. Lipodystrophy usually occurs after a long evolution. The fat loss is slow and progressive, typically affecting the upper part of the trunk. It can be associated with hirsutism, hepatomegaly, and acanthosis nigricans lesions. JDM is associated with a high risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular comorbidities.