Leukocytosis is a common presentation for both benign and more concerning disease processes. Physical examination, evaluation, review of all body systems, and careful history taking are crucial to identify possible causes of this common laboratory finding. A prior CBC should be used to confirm acute or chronic leukocytosis, as well as to identify trends. The outcomes of a laboratory finding of leukocytosis depend on the underlying cause.

Consultation should be obtained based on the identification of the driving force for the leukocytosis, and an interprofessional team is often needed. Primary care clinicians should be able to obtain the necessary workup for acute or chronic leukocytosis and involve the appropriate specialty consultants. Initial workup, depending on history and physical examination findings, should include cultures of blood, urine, sputum, and body fluid if indicated, rheumatologic laboratory studies, radiological imaging if needed, and the necessary confirmatory testing. Specialty consultants and their interdisciplinary teams, including infectious disease, oncology and hematology, radiation oncology, and an array of other professionals, should be involved to assist with the treatment course for the underlying condition.

Based on clinical recommendations, leukocytosis over 100x10^9 is almost always caused by an underlying malignancy, leukemia, or myeloproliferative disorder (Evidence Rating C), and patients with leukocytosis and no evidence of systemic inflammatory process do not need blood cultures (evidence rating C).