A comprehensive evaluation of the chin should be performed in three dimensions with the vertical (superior-inferior), horizontal (anterior-posterior), and transverse dimensions recognized. In addition, the chin position relative to the lips, teeth, maxilla, nose, and soft tissues of the neck should be taken into account. Often, photographic analysis is sufficient for minor deformities that will require an alloplastic implant; however, if the deformity is more significant (e.g., vertical height excess or transverse asymmetry), a radiograph is often warranted.

Several techniques exist to help evaluate those patients who may benefit from a chin augmentation:

- Goode described a line perpendicular to the Frankfort horizontal line that passes through the alar groove. In this method, he determined that the pogonion (most prominent or anterior point of chin projection) must be in the same plane as this line or immediately posterior to it.

- Gonzalez-Ulloa proposed a line that also runs perpendicular to the Frankfort horizontal line and passes through the nasion (the deepest portion of radix). In this case, the pogonion should reach that line or be immediately posterior. He further classified the degree of insufficiency as grade I being within 1 cm posterior to this line, grade II between 1 to 2 cm posterior, and grade III as greater than 2 cm posterior.

- Silver suggested a line that passed perpendicular to the Frankfort horizontal line passing through the mucocutaneous junction of the lower lip. He determined the pogonion should project to this line or, more ideally, for women be within 2 mm posterior.

- Merrifield took a similar but somewhat different approach for chin analysis in describing the Z-angle, which is formed by the Frankfort horizontal line and a line passing through the pogonion and the most anterior projection point of the lips. Ideally, this angle should be between 75 and 85 degrees.

- Legan also proposed an angle-based chin analysis formed from a line traversing the glabella and subnasal point and a line traversing the subnasal point to the pogonion with an ideal value of 12 degrees (range of 8 to 16 degrees).

Lastly, two well-described facial angles required for complete chin analyses are: the cervicomental angle (CMA) and the mentocervical angle (MCA).

- The CMA is formed by a tangential line from the submental point and a line tangential to the neck at the subcervical intersection or the lowest point between the submental area and the neck. Ideally, the CMA will be 121 degrees for men and 126 degrees for women.

- The MCA is most commonly described as an angle formed between a line passing through the nasal tip and pogonion and a tangential line that passes through the submental point with an ideal angle ranging from 110 to 120 degrees.

While all of these methods offer insight as to an ideal chin position relative to the lips, face, and even neck, only a limited number take into account the relationship between the nose and chin. This is an important relationship not to overlook as they directly correlate to each other’s relative appearance in space, with the general rule being that the more projected the nose, the less projected the chin appears to be and vice versa. There is an essential, and ideal, harmonious balance between projection of the chin and nose. Furthermore, it is important to recognize that all of the analysis methods mentioned are based on standardized photography methods, four of which rely on the Frankfort horizontal line, which is a well-known anatomic horizon extending from the superior border of the external auditory canal to the inferior orbital rim.