Carisoprodol is an FDA-approved drug indicated for the relief of discomfort associated with acute, painful musculoskeletal conditions. Although marketed as a muscle relaxant, the parent compound is actually in the tranquilizer class of medications, with its primary metabolite meprobamate considered actually to be a benzodiazepine. This activity discusses the indications, mechanism of action, and contraindications for carisoprodol as a valuable agent to relax muscles after strains, sprains, and muscle injuries. This medication is intended to be used together with rest, physical therapy, and other measures. This activity highlights the mechanism of action, the potential benefits, the side effect profile, and other key factors (e.g., dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for healthcare professionals in managing patients with myofascial pain symptoms and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of carisoprodol and its primary metabolite, meprobamate.
- Describe the common potential adverse events or side effects associated with carisoprodol therapy.
- Review the potential toxicity of carisoprodol and its appropriate management. 
- Explain why it is essential for the healthcare team to be aware of and up to date on the indications, interactions, adverse effects, and other pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic factors that can affect successful carisoprodol use in clinical care and lead to improved patient outcomes.