Pre-treatment evaluation includes complete blood counts, liver and kidney chemistries, lactate dehydrogenase, hepatitis B, and HIV. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing should be performed on stem cell transplant candidates. Peripheral blood flow cytometry is essential, along with peripheral smear evaluation by pathology. Unilateral bone marrow biopsy and aspirate are recommended for all patients. Computed tomography (CT) with contrast to evaluate for lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Patients with neurologic signs or symptoms should have imaging studies and cerebrospinal fluid evaluation.

Remission induction with Tagraxofusp (CD123-directed cytotoxin consisting of recombinant human interleukin-3 fused to a truncated diphtheria toxin) is recommended for adults with blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm over regimens used for acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoblastic lymphoma (ALL/LBL). The U.S. FDA approved Tagraxofusp in 2018 for use in adults and children over two years of age as the initial treatment of blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm and relapsed disease.

In the prospective, open-label, multicenter cohort of 29 patients with untreated blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm, tagraxofusp resulted in a combined rate of complete remission (CR) and complete clinical remission in 21 (72%) patients. Survival rates at 18 and 24 months were 59% and 52%, respectively. Elevated liver enzymes, capillary leak syndrome, and hypoalbuminemia were among the most common adverse effects. Tagraxofusp is given intravenously once a day at a dose of 12 mcg/kg on days 1-5 of a 21-day cycle. Treatment is continued until the disease progresses or significant toxicity occurs.

In contrast, ALL/LBL, non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) regimens are associated with poorer response rates, considerable toxicity, and poor long-term outcomes.

Alternate remission induction regimens for blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm could vary by institution. Most individuals treated with ALL/LBL-like induction therapy relapsed after two years; nevertheless, ALL/LBL-like regimens were reported to produce favorable outcomes.

Regarding the role of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm therapy, multiple studies have found that allogeneic stem cell transplantation (Allo-SCT) produces better results in durable remissions and relapse rates than autologous stem cell transplantation. Allo-SCT has been shown to result in long-lasting remissions with overall survival rates ranging from 58% at three years to 40% at ten years, depending on the length of follow-up.

Allo-SCT consolidation produces the best results when performed in the first complete remission, with rates reaching 74 to 82% in 3-4 years.

Management in children: It is recommended that children (age 2 to 18 years) diagnosed with blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm undergo remission induction therapy with either tagraxofusp or an ALL/LBL-like regimen followed by observation rather than allogeneic HCT in the first remission stage. Allogeneic HCT is associated with significant toxicity and outweighs any potential longer-term favorable outcomes. However, because tagraxofusp is not FDA-authorized for children under two, treatment with an ALL/LBL-like regimen is recommended.

Relapsed or refractory cases: The optimal treatment for relapsed or refractory blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm is not well defined. Treatment should occur within a randomized controlled trial framework as much as possible. Tagraxofusp salvage therapy followed by allogeneic HCT for patients who had previously received an ALL/LBL-like regimen and an ALL/LBL-like regimen or repeat treatment with tagraxofusp for individuals previously treated with tagraxofusp is the recommended option. Venetoclax, bendamustine, and biweekly CHOP chemotherapy are other therapeutic options.