Intestinal parasite infections often cause morbidity and mortality, especially in children. The major risk factors of helminthiasis are rural areas, low socioeconomic status, poor sanitation, poor availability of clean water, poor personal hygiene, lack of nail trimming, crowded living conditions, lack of education, lack of access to health care, and inadequate dwelling conditions.

- A. lumbricoides and T. trichiura are transmitted through the fecal-oral route. Adult Ascaris is a long cylindrical worm, and its larvae can migrate into the pulmonary circulation, but T. trichiuria can not.

- A. duodenale and N. americanus are transmitted by penetration of the skin from where it goes into the lungs and crosses pulmonary capillaries to penetrate into alveolus and then to the intestine through the passing of larynx. N americanus is globally predominant compared to A. duodenale. S. stercoralis can infect percutaneously and orally.

- Poor hygiene of mother or caregiver is also one of the most important risk factors for soil-transmitted helminths infection in preschool children.

- Schistosomiasis infection is usually transmitted from contact with freshwater snails during swimming or washing. Schistosomiasis causes chronic inflammation that produces oxygen-free radicals. These free radicals are responsible for different mutations and the formation of carcinogenic N-nitrosamines that cause bladder carcinoma and portal tract fibrosis.

- Diphyllobothriasis is most commonly occurs by species being D. latum from the ingestion of larva of the fish tapeworm.