The care plan and evaluation for twin gestations depend on the definition of the chorionicity of the pregnancy.

Regarding fetal aneuploidy risk assessment, dizygotic twin gestations entail doubling the aneuploidy risk; however, the risk for both affected fetuses is theoretical. For monozygotic twin gestations, the aneuploidy risk is congruent, i.e., either both are affected, or both are healthy; thus, the aneuploidy risks for significant gestation based on maternal age can be utilized. When dichorionic diamniotic twin gestation manifests with gender congruence, a distinction between a monozygotic twin gestation with embryonic splitting in the first three days cannot be excluded; however, the vast majority can be assumed to be dizygotic. Noninvasive prenatal testing for twin gestations is available. Serum screening of NT-sequential and QUAD screening are available. If genetic amniocentesis is pursued, the risk of procedure-related loss is in the range of 3%. Additional technical expertise is required to map the twin gestation before the procedure, especially if they are believed to be dizygotic with the same gender. Discordant results with one affected fetus may indicate a selective fetal reduction, and mapping of the twin gestation at the time with genetic amniocentesis assumes additional relevance.

Obstetric ultrasound evaluations for twin gestations depend on determining the chorionicity of the gestation. An ultrasound at 16 weeks for a fetal anatomy survey is appropriate in dizygotic twin gestations. Subsequently, it should be done every 3 to 4 weeks for fetal growth and confirmation of fetal anatomy.

If fetal growth is appropriate, fetal testing is unnecessary unless there are any alternative concerns. In monochorionic twin gestations, imaging every two weeks is recommended and should commence at 16 weeks. The imaging study provides an opportunity for surveillance of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Balanced amniotic fluid and the presence of fetal bladders are reassuring signs. Interval fetal anatomy survey and growth assessment occur with every other study. As long as fetal growth remains reassuring and findings of twin-twin transfusion syndrome are absent, then fetal middle cerebral artery Doppler peak systolic velocity surveillance for twin anemia-polycythemia sequence is deferred to the third trimester when MCA Doppler can be assessed every 3 to 4 weeks for twin anemia-polycythemia sequence risk. Twice-weekly fetal testing is recommended for monochorionic twin gestations beginning at 28 to 32 weeks.