**Reduction of Blood Pressure**

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) plays a critical role in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. This pathway is a process that eventually results in vasoconstriction, increased sympathetic activity, and Na+ retention, which in turn increases water retention and blood pressure. One step in this pathway is the cleavage of angiotensin I to angiotensin II, performed by the ACE enzyme. Therefore, ACE inhibitors block the renin-angiotensin pathway by halting this step, leading to decreased systemic arterial blood pressure and increased Na+ excretion in the urine.

**Attenuation of Adverse Cardiac Remodeling in Heart Failure**

In patients with heart failure, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) becomes active due to the low cardiac output leading to reduced renal artery perfusion. It activates the RAAS pathway to increase intravascular volume to augment blood pressure, which increases the cardiac output via the Frank-Starling mechanism. However, this attempt at maintaining homeostasis ultimately results in increased preload of the heart, contributing to adverse cardiac remodeling. This cascade can quickly become detrimental and leads to eccentric hypertrophy. ACE inhibitors reduce adverse cardiac remodeling in patients with heart failure.

Patients who adhere to a low-potassium diet, monitor blood pressure and renal function regularly, and adhere to a strict regimen of consistent dosage times with benazepril should expect a lower blood pressure and reduced adverse cardiac remodeling.