# Continuing Education Activity

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a relatively common disorder that can cause significant renal and skeletal complications. Surgery remains the definitive treatment. However, alternative therapies may be appropriate for select patients. Basic knowledge of normal calcium homeostasis is essential in diagnosing and managing patients with hyperparathyroidism. A basic understanding of normal calcium homeostasis as well as the natural history of primary hyperparathyroidism is essential in diagnosing and properly managing patients with this disorder. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of primary hyperparathyroidism and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with this disorder.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of primary hyperparathyroidism.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism.
- Review the management options available for primary hyperparathyroidism.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies to improve care coordination and communication to advance the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a relatively common endocrine disorder that can cause hypercalcemia with significant renal and skeletal complications over time, although most patients identified in recent decades have relatively mild degrees of serum calcium elevations. Once known for the aphorism as a disease of "stones, bones, groans, and moans," as suggested by Fuller Albright, it is now usually asymptomatic when initially diagnosed.

Historically, the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism was made by the radiological findings of osteitis fibrosa cystica (brown tumors on long bones, evidence of subperiosteal bone resorption, "salt and pepper" radiographic erosions of the skull bones, and tapering of the distal portions of the finger bones and clavicles). While radiological evidence of hyperparathyroid bone disease is now rare at <2% of cases, bone densitometry can detect skeletal abnormalities well before they become clinically apparent.

Primary hyperparathyroidism involves the excess production of parathyroid hormone (PTH) by one or more of the four pea-sized parathyroid glands normally located peripherally along the margins on the posterior aspect of the thyroid gland. Surgery remains the definitive, curative treatment but observation alone or medical therapy is appropriate for selected patients.

# Etiology

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a disorder resulting in excessive, uncontrolled production of parathyroid hormone. It is the third most common endocrine disorder (after diabetes and thyroid disorders). Eighty percent of patients will present with a single adenoma, about fifteen percent will have hyperplasia of all four glands, 2%-4% will have multiple adenomas, and less than 1 percent will have a malignancy.

Rarely primary hyperparathyroidism will be associated with a heritable familial germline mutation syndrome such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. In such cases, primary hyperparathyroidism is often the initial clinically identified abnormality and will be found in over 90% of these patients, usually between 20 and 25 years.

Parathyroid carcinoma is relatively rare, constituting <1% of all cases of hyperparathyroidism.

**Summary:**

**PTH-dependent Causes of Hypercalcemia**

- Primary Hyperparathyroidism
            
              
- Single adenoma
              
              
- Multigland disease
                
                  
- Familial causes of hyperparathyroidism
                    
                      
- Multiple endocrine neoplasia Type 1
                      
                      
- Multiple endocrine neoplasia Type 2a
                      
                      
- Familial hyperparathyroidism (chief cell parathyroid hyperplasia)
                      
                      
- Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome
                      
                    

                  
                

              
              
- Parathyroid carcinoma
              
              
- Parathyromatosis

- Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, autosomal dominant inactivating mutations of the calcium-sensing receptor

- Treatment with lithium (may also increase calcium reabsorption in the loop of Henle as well as disrupt calcium feedback mechanisms within parathyroid cells that would typically suppress PTH production

**PTH Independent Causes of Hypercalcemia**

- Malignancy

- Granulomatous diseases

- Hyperthyroidism

- Thiazide therapy

- Vitamin D intoxication

- Milk-alkali syndrome

- Adrenal insufficiency

- Vitamin A intoxication

# Epidemiology

Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most common identifiable cause of hypercalcemia and is typically found most frequently in postmenopausal women.

Risk factors associated with hyperparathyroidism include specific germline and somatic mutations, chronically low dietary calcium, obesity, prolonged use of furosemide, history of neck radiation therapy, lithium therapy, hypertension, and physical inactivity.

Once considered a relatively rare disease associated with significant morbidity, primary hyperparathyroidism is now considered a relatively common endocrine disorder, often asymptomatic. Prior to 1970, the diagnosis went unsuspected until patients presented with specific symptoms, typically nephrolithiasis or bone pain. Since then, most patients are diagnosed with hyperparathyroidism when serum calcium is incidentally discovered to be elevated on a chemistry profile ordered as screening tests or for an unrelated problem. The current incidence in the United States has been estimated at a mean of 66 per 100,000 person-years in women and from 13 to 36 per 100,000 person-years in men.

Primary hyperparathyroidism is typically asymptomatic in most Western countries, where biochemical blood screening is commonly performed. In those global regions where vitamin D deficiency is widespread and biochemical screening is not a common or routine part of the healthcare system, symptomatic disease with skeletal abnormalities and nephrolithiasis are the more likely presentations.

Parathyroid cancer is quite rare as it constitutes less than 0.5% of all cases of primary hyperparathyroidism. Higher serum calcium levels and parathyroid hormone are commonly seen compared to benign primary hyperparathyroidism.

# Pathophysiology

**Parathyroid Hormone**

The function of parathyroid hormone is to increase serum calcium levels as part of the calcium homeostasis mechanism. To accomplish this, it performs three principal activities. First, it increases the rate of bone resorption, which releases calcium and phosphate into the serum. Secondly, it decreases urinary calcium excretion by increasing its reabsorption in the distal convoluted renal tubule and thick, ascending loop of Henle. Finally, it activates 1-α-hydroxylase in the renal proximal tubule, which converts relatively inactive 25-hydroxyvitamin D to active 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. This active vitamin D then increases gastrointestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate.

Parathyroid hormone also increases urinary phosphate excretion, which explains why patients with hyperparathyroidism are hypophosphatemic despite increased gastrointestinal phosphate absorption and higher bone resorption rates.

Parathyroid glands are made up of two cell types:

- Chief cells are the most common and produce parathyroid hormone. They have a very prominent Golgi apparatus and a very developed endoplasmic reticulum.

- Oxyphil cells are larger, but their exact function is unclear. It is thought they may have additional endocrine functions or may be supportive of chief cell activity.

Secretion of parathyroid hormone is inversely related to the ionized calcium concentration in the extracellular fluid. The calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is a G-protein coupled receptor whose activity varies with changes in serum calcium. As the calcium concentration in the extracellular fluid increases, this receptor is activated, and parathyroid chief cells decrease their production and secretion of parathyroid hormone. Conversely, the activity of the CaSR decreases, and parathyroid hormone secretion increases as serum calcium levels decline.

Parathyroid hormone activates PTH receptors increasing the resorption of calcium and phosphate from bone, enhancing the distal tubular reabsorption of calcium, and decreasing the renal tubular reabsorption of phosphorus which increases urinary phosphate excretion. Furthermore, parathyroid hormone plays an essential role in vitamin D metabolism, activating the vitamin D 1-alpha hydroxylase, which increases the renal synthesis of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.

**Renal failure**elevates serum parathyroid hormone levels. This becomes clinically significant as the glomerular filtration rate falls below 30 ml/min.

Hyperphosphatemia develops due to the inability of the kidneys to excrete phosphate (while hypophosphatemia is seen in classic primary hyperparathyroidism). Band keratopathy, from corneal calcium phosphate crystal deposition, has been reported in dialysis patients but is rarely visible without a slit lamp examination; even then, it is quite uncommon.

Treatment includes a low phosphorus diet, oral phosphate binders, vitamin D supplements, calcimimetic agents, parathyroid surgery (total parathyroidectomy with or without auto-transplantation, and subtotal parathyroidectomy).

**Normal Calcium Homeostasis**

Under physiologic circumstances, calcium concentration in the extracellular fluid is maintained within a very narrow range. Normal calcium homeostasis is dependent upon a complex set of hormonal regulatory mechanisms that include the effects of parathyroid hormone, vitamin D metabolites, and calcitonin on calcium transport in the bones, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract.

Only about ten to twenty percent of ingested calcium is ultimately absorbed in the small intestine; the rest is excreted untouched.

Approximately 50% of total serum calcium is protein-bound, principally to albumin. Forty-five percent is ionized, while a small proportion forms complexes with anions such as phosphate and citrate. Only the ionized calcium is biologically active, yet most laboratories routinely report total serum calcium levels. Measurements of ionized calcium are available when requested. An approximate correction of serum calcium can be made by adjusting for differences in the serum albumin level.

Corrected calcium = Measured calcium + 0.8 x (4.0 - albumin).

Caution is necessary when evaluating normal total serum calcium levels in patients with hypoalbuminemia. Such patients may have elevated ionized calcium levels and are truly hypercalcemic. Conversely, the ionized calcium is often normal when there is a low total calcium concentration in the presence of hypoalbuminemia.

# Histopathology

Parathyroid adenomas tend to be encapsulated and are typically composed mostly of chief cells. Adenomas of oxyphilic cells are rare but have been reported in a few cases of primary hyperparathyroidism.

Newer non-invasive imaging technologies suggest that the effects of hyperparathyroid hormone excess on skeletal bone may be more significant than previously thought. Trabecular bone score (TBS) is an indirect analysis of trabecular microstructure taken from the DEXA scan. TBS demonstrates the deterioration of the trabecular spinal microstructure in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism, although this appears normal on the DXA scan.

High-resolution peripheral quantitative CT scans of the distal radius and tibia show fewer, thinner, and more widely spaced trabeculae in primary hyperparathyroidism patients.

# History and Physical

In past decades most patients were diagnosed when they had complaints of nephrolithiasis, bone pain, fractures, muscle weakness, or bone deformities. Of these, the most common clinical symptoms are nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and muscle weakness. Most patients with primary hyperparathyroidism are asymptomatic, diagnosed when hypercalcemia is incidentally discovered on a chemistry profile.

A familial syndrome should be considered when primary hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed at an early age or there is a family history of hypercalcemia, pituitary adenomas, pancreatic islet cell tumors, pheochromocytomas, or medullary thyroid cancer.

When the serum calcium level exceeds 12 mg/dL, patients are likely to start noticing symptoms associated with hypercalcemia such as anorexia, cardiac arrhythmias, altered mental states, constipation, dehydration, polyuria, and polydipsia.

While most primary hyperparathyroidism patients are asymptomatic, up to 55% will actually have previously undiagnosed nephrocalcinosis or non-obstructing renal calculi, and up to 75% of the symptomatic patients will present with acute renal colic and/or nephrolithiasis.

Patients with hypercalcemia should be tested for hyperparathyroidism. For those hyperparathyroid patients who undergo surgery, their increased risk of nephrolithiasis persists for ten years after their parathyroidectomy.

Besides kidney stones, other potential symptoms of hypercalcemia and hyperparathyroidism include:

- Weak bones that break easily (osteoporosis)

- Bone pain

- Nephrocalcinosis

- Excessive urination

- Stomach (abdominal) pain

- Tiring easily, chronic fatigue

- Muscle weakness

- Depression, memory loss, or forgetfulness

- Trouble concentrating

- Difficulty sleeping

- Joint pain

- Loss of appetite

- Body aches

- Headaches

- Hypertension

- Cardiac arrhythmias

- Left ventricular hypertrophy

- Decreased coronary artery flow reserve

- Aortic valve calcification

- Increased overall cardiovascular disease

- Renal Failure

- Frequent complaints of illness with no apparent cause

The physical examination of a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism is usually normal. However, the physical examination can help find abnormalities that could suggest other etiologies of hypercalcemia.

Parathyroid adenomas are rarely palpable on physical examination, but the presence of a large, firm mass in the neck of a patient with hypercalcemia should raise suspicion of a possible parathyroid carcinoma.

# Evaluation

The finding of hypercalcemia together with hypophosphatemia is highly suggestive of hyperparathyroidism.

Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism and other causes of PTH-dependent hypercalcemia often have frankly elevated levels of PTH, while some will have values that fall within the reference range for the general population. A normal PTH in the presence of significant hypercalcemia is considered inappropriate and still consistent with PTH-dependent hypercalcemia.

Patients on known hypercalcemic drugs, such as lithium and thiazide, should have these medications stopped for 3 to 6 months, if possible, and their serum calcium & parathyroid hormone levels retested. Patients with low vitamin D levels should receive supplements to maintain at least 30 mg/mL. If parathyroid hormone levels are still elevated, this suggests hyperparathyroidism. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia can be excluded by a 24-hour urine calcium determination (<100 mg calcium/24  hours) or by a low calcium/creatinine excretion ratio [(urinary calcium x serum creatinine) / (serum calcium x urinary creatinine)] typically <0.02.

Biotin (also known as vitamin B-7) is a nutritional supplement that helps produce energy from food. It is significant here because biotin supplementation can interfere with parathyroid hormone assays.

Recommended serum intact parathyroid tests include immunochemiluminometric or immunoradiometric assays, which readily discriminate between primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy-related hypercalcemia. (Parathyroid hormone-related protein, which causes malignancy-related hypercalcemia, does not react with parathyroid hormone assays.)

A comprehensive clinical evaluation complemented by routine laboratory and radiologic studies should be sufficient to establish a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism in a patient with persistent hypercalcemia and a concomitant elevated serum level of parathyroid hormone. It is uncommon for clinically occult malignancies to cause hypercalcemia. Most patients with malignancy-associated hypercalcemia are known to have cancer, or their cancer is readily detectable on initial evaluation, and PTH levels will be suppressed.

A review of previous medical records can often be of significant value in establishing the cause of hypercalcemia. Most patients with hyperparathyroidism have persistent or intermittent hypercalcemia for many years before a definitive diagnosis is established. Very few diseases, other than hyperparathyroidism, will allow a healthy-appearing individual to be hypercalcemic for more than a few years without any clinical signs or symptoms.

List of tests for primary hyperparathyroidism:

- Total serum calcium

- Calculation of the "corrected" serum calcium; approximately 50% of total serum calcium is protein-bound, principally to albumin, and only the free or ionized fraction is biologically active. Corrected calcium = Measured calcium + 0.8 x (4.0 - albumin) (calcium measured in mg/dL; albumin measured in g/dL)

- Ionized calcium in selected cases when there are questions about the accuracy of the corrected calcium

- Parathyroid hormone

- Phosphate (hypercalcemia with hypophosphatemia is highly suggestive of hyperparathyroidism)

- BUN and creatinine

- Alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin (usually elevated)

- Sclerostin (a bone formation regulator) is usually suppressed in primary hyperparathyroidism

- 25-hydroxyvitamin D

- Serum albumin

- Urine calcium and creatinine

- Imaging to screen for renal calcifications or urolithiasis (KUB, renal ultrasound, or non-contrast CT scan)

- Bone densitometry (DEXA) scans, including measurement at the distal 1/3 radius (which is preferentially affected in hyperparathyroid patients)

- Localization studies for potential surgical patients (see below)

- EKG

- Genetic testing in selected individuals if there is suspicion of a genetic syndrome

- The need for other studies such as PTHrP levels, serum or urine protein electrophoresis, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels, thyroid tests, or mammography can be individualized and are usually only needed in those with PTH-independent hypercalcemia.

**Parathyroid Localization (Imaging) Studies**

Neck ultrasonography and parathyroid nuclear medicine (Tc-Sestamibi) scans are standard imaging tests for the localization of hyperfunctioning parathyroid glands. Neck ultrasonography is highly operator-dependent but can be very successful in centers with experience and expertise.

Parathyroid four-dimensional multiphase (4D) CT should be considered when surgery is planned, particularly when the abnormal parathyroid glands cannot be localized with Sestamibi scans or neck ultrasound imaging.

F-18-Fluorocholine positron emission tomography/CT (F-18-choline PET/CT) has shown promising results in parathyroid adenoma localization in difficult or equivocal cases, suggesting superiority over Sestamibi scanning, ultrasound, or CT scans alone.

When non-invasive preoperative localization studies (ultrasound, Tc-Sestamibi single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and 4D CT imaging) are negative, selective parathyroid venous sampling can help identify the anatomical location of abnormal hyper-functioning parathyroid glands.

The need for other studies such as PTHrP levels, serum or urine protein electrophoresis, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels, thyroid tests, bone scans, fine needle parathyroid aspiration, or mammography can be individualized and are usually only needed in those with PTH-independent hypercalcemia. DEXA scans will typically show a loss of bone density, particularly in the distal third of the radius, although any pattern may be present.

**Specific Hyperparathyroid and Hypercalcemic Disorders**

**Acute primary hyperparathyroidism**(parathyroid crisis, parathyroid storm) is a rare condition in which there is a sudden episode of potentially life-threatening hypercalcemia in a patient with known primary hyperparathyroidism. Laboratory studies indicate very high serum calcium levels, >14 mg/dL,  with parathyroid hormone readings up to twenty times normal.

**Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia**(FHH) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder that is sometimes easily confused with primary hyperparathyroidism. It is characterized by hypercalcemia, hypocalciuria, and high-normal to mildly increased parathyroid hormone secretion.

**Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism**can be primary or secondary and is defined as the presence of persistently elevated parathyroid hormone levels over at least six months despite normal readings of corrected serum calcium or ionized calcium with 25 (OH) levels of 30 ng/ml or more and a GFR of at least 60 mL/min. An increased serum calcium/phosphate ratio is also suggestive of this diagnosis.

**Malignancy-related hypercalcemia**can be found in as many as 30% of all cancer patients.

In the absence of known cancer, physicians should be suspicious of a hidden malignancy, especially in patients with paraneoplastic-like symptoms such as unexplained fatigue, weight loss, skin rashes, or muscle weakness. Bone scans are useful for osteolytic metastases as they are quite sensitive but relatively non-specific. Bone marrow biopsy examinations can be useful in patients with unexplained anemia or abnormal blood smears. Treatment would be directed to the specific malignancy. When this is not possible, the hypercalcemia can be severe and relatively resistant to standard hypercalcemia therapy (hydration with normal saline or increased salt intake, diuresis with furosemide, bisphosphonates, denosumab (rank ligand inhibitors), oral phosphates, calcitonin, glucocorticoids, cinacalcet, and dialysis).

**Parathyromatosis**has also been reported as an exceedingly rare cause of primary hyperparathyroidism. In this condition, scattered non-malignant but hyperfunctioning islands of parathyroid tissue are found in the superior mediastinum and/or the neck.

**Evaluation Summary**

- Hyperparathyroidism should be suspected when there are unexplained elevated serum calcium levels.

- Hypercalcemia with hypophosphatemia is also suggestive of primary hyperparathyroidism.

- Patients at risk are more likely to be female and older.

- All potential causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism must be ruled out.

- Familial hypocalcemic hypercalcemia can be differentiated from primary hyperparathyroidism by calcium/creatinine excretion ratio and 24-hour urine testing for calcium excretion.

- Patients with low vitamin D levels may need supplementation and a retest of calcium and PTH levels after three months.

- Primary hyperparathyroidism can be confirmed with an ionized calcium (or a corrected serum calcium) determination together with a parathyroid hormone test.

- Imaging for possible nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis is recommended.

- A baseline DEXA bone scan is recommended in all patients with confirmed primary hyperparathyroidism, including the lumbar spine, hip, and distal third of the radius.

- Localization studies are not diagnostic; they are unnecessary except for patients considering possible parathyroid surgery.

- A diagnosis of normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism requires persistent parathyroid levels with normal serum calcium determinations at least six months apart.

- The treatment of normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism is similar to classic primary hyperparathyroidism.

# Treatment / Management

**Medical Treatment**

Surgery remains the definitive treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism, but non-operative surveillance may be the appropriate option for some, particularly for patients who are elderly with mild hypercalcemia and no significant complications. Medical treatment with bisphosphonates and/or cinacalcet can be extremely useful in selected patients. The decision of whether to recommend surgery is based on age, the degree of hypercalcemia, and the presence or absence of complications due to hyperparathyroidism, as well as patient comorbidities and surgical/anesthesia risk.

Patients who are not surgical candidates may benefit from medical management of primary hyperparathyroidism. Calcium intake should not be restricted as this could further stimulate PTH production.

Long-term outcomes in hyperparathyroid patients who do not undergo surgery are available out to 15 years.

Current guidelines for monitoring hyperparathyroid patients being treated medically now recommend annual serum calcium and creatinine levels.

Medical therapy in non-surgical hyperparathyroid patients is designed to treat osteoporosis or hypercalcemia (defined as >1 mg/dL above the normal range) but usually not both. If both entities require treatment, combination therapy is recommended.

- Oral phosphates can reduce serum calcium levels up to 1 mg/dL. They reduce intestinal calcium absorption by direct phosphate binding, lower vitamin D levels, and reduce bone resorption.

- Estrogen therapy for postmenopausal women with primary hyperparathyroidism has shown a benefit in increasing bone mineral density, particularly in the lumbar spine, but with no change in serum PTH or calcium.

- Oral bisphosphonates and denosumab (a rank ligand inhibitor) are anti-resorptive agents and can increase bone mineral density in hyperparathyroid patients with osteoporosis or osteopenia and help control hypercalcemia.

- Agonists to the calcium-sensing receptor, such as cinacalcet, will significantly lower serum PTH and calcium in hyperparathyroid patients but not increase their bone density.

- The use of combination therapy with a calcium-sensing receptor medication along with either a bisphosphonate or rank ligand inhibitor is reasonable to control serum calcium and increase bone mineral density, but there are only limited studies on this approach.

**Surgical Therapy**

Surgery is the treatment of choice for those with recurrent kidney stones or decreased bone mineral density.

Since 1990, several workshops have developed guidelines to assist physicians in managing asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism. Surgical and medical experts, internationally recognized for their experience in managing patients with hyperparathyroidism, reviewed the evidence-based medical literature, and a consensus of their opinions was disseminated to the medical community. The most recent guidelines were published in 2014.

The current guidelines recommend surgery for all symptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism patients.

- Age younger than 50 years

- Serum calcium is more than 1 mg/dL above the upper limit of normal

- Osteoporosis on DEXA scan (T-score <-2.5 at any site)

- History of fractures

- Vertebral compression fracture on imaging

- GFR less than 60 mL/min

- Hypercalciuria with urine calcium greater than 400 mg/24 hours

- Evidence of renal calcifications, nephrocalcinosis, or urinary stones

- Electively for all hyperparathyroid patients, even if they do not meet any of the above criteria and have no medical contraindications.

Surgery should optimally be done by experienced parathyroid surgeons who perform these surgeries frequently and are knowledgeable about preoperative localization. Success rates exceed 95% in such hands.

Preoperative localization studies are recommended in patients undergoing surgery, especially if a minimally invasive technique is being used. Imaging studies are not recommended for diagnosis due to poor sensitivity and specificity, with a false-positive rate as high as 25%.

The use of intraoperative parathyroid hormone measurements is recommended to verify the efficacy of the surgery. The half-life of parathyroid hormone is only about 4 minutes, so the PTH level should drop by at least 50% from the preoperative level in 10 to 20 minutes after successful excision and should normalize within 30 minutes.

Left untreated, many patients with primary hyperparathyroidism have progressive loss of cortical bone while successful surgery leads to a substantial increase in bone mineral density, an effect that can persist for up to 15 years.

Radiofrequency ablation of isolated parathyroid adenomas has been successfully reported with minimal complications in small series.

Nephrolithiasis patients who undergo surgery tend to have fewer stones, but other chemical promoters of kidney stones are possible, so 24-hour urine testing is recommended in such patients after recovery from parathyroid surgery.

For patients where observation is the selected course of action, periodic monitoring of serum and urine calcium levels, renal function, and bone densitometry is required. Blood testing of calcium and parathyroid hormone every six months, as well as annual 24-hour urine measurements and DEXA scans, are suggested.

**Hungry Bone Syndrome (Bone Hunger)**

Immediately following the surgical correction of primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism, a period of profound, severe, and prolonged hypocalcemia may ensue, which is called hungry bone syndrome or bone hunger. While there is no definitive consensus, most sources will define hungry bone syndrome as persistent low serum calcium of <8.4 mg/dL present for more than four days after definitive parathyroid surgery.

The likelihood of hungry bone syndrome increases as the duration and severity of hyperparathyroidism rise. It is also more commonly seen in older patients with radiographic bony changes, osteitis fibrosa cystica, obesity, a larger volume of parathyroid tissue removed at surgery, preoperative vitamin D deficiency, presurgical elevated alkaline phosphatase levels, and high numbers of osteoclasts on bone biopsy.

Hungry bone syndrome may also occur after correction of secondary hyperparathyroidism, thyrotoxicosis, vitamin D supplementation in calcitriol deficient patients, or treatment of malignant tumors, including prostate cancer, that affect calcium metabolism.

Symptoms of severe hypocalcemia would include seizures, paresthesias, numbness, arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and laryngospasms. Physical signs would include evidence of recent parathyroid or thyroid surgery or hyperexcitability of nerves as in a prominent Chvostek or Trousseau sign.

Treatment generally includes high oral doses of supplemental calcium and vitamin D. However, if the serum calcium is below 7.6 mg/dL, if there are symptoms from hypocalcemia, or if there are related EKG changes such as QTc prolongation, intravenous calcium supplementation is indicated (Calcium gluconate is usually preferred over calcium chloride due to easier administration as no central line is needed).

**Treatment Summary**

Criteria for surgery include any parathyroid or hypercalcemic-related symptoms.

- Medical therapy for hypercalcemia is primarily with a calcium-sensing receptor (calcimimetic) drug such as cinacalcet, which typically has little effect on bone density.

- Medical treatment for low bone density is mainly bisphosphonates and rank ligand inhibitors with minimal effect on hypercalcemia.

- Combined therapy is necessary to manage both hypercalcemia and low bone density.

- Medical therapy is intended only for patients unable or unwilling to undergo surgery.

- Surgical treatment is always preferred over medical therapy whenever possible.

- Many patients will do quite well for years without symptoms, but they will require routine monitoring and may develop symptoms over time.

- Surgery cures the underlying condition and allows for better reductions in nephrolithiasis and improved bone densities.

- Localization studies are intended only for possible surgical patients. Such studies include neck ultrasound and Sestamibi scans. If these are negative or equivocal, 4D CT scanning or selective parathyroid venous sampling can be done.

- Referral to an experienced parathyroid surgeon is recommended when surgery is selected.

- Be aware of the possibility of hungry bone syndrome (severe, prolonged hypocalcemia) immediately after parathyroidectomy surgery.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism

- Secondary hyperparathyroidism

- Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia

- Treatment with lithium

- Malignancy related hypercalcemia

- Granulomatous diseases

- Hyperthyroidism

- Thiazide therapy

- Vitamin D intoxication

- Milk-alkali syndrome

- Adrenal insufficiency

- Vitamin A intoxication

# Prognosis

Most patients with primary hyperparathyroidism in the United States are diagnosed while asymptomatic from an incidental elevated serum calcium level. Available studies have followed such patients for 15 years and determined that laboratory values remain relatively stable over time, but bone mineral density starts to decline eventually. An increased risk of renal calculi remains.

# Complications

Complications of primary hyperparathyroidism include loss of bone mineral density, fractures, bone pain, gastrointestinal disturbances, psychological issues, a higher risk of urinary stones, and an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be made fully aware of all possible treatments for hyperparathyroidism. Even for patients at higher risk and reluctant to undergo surgery, the long-term benefits of parathyroidectomy should be carefully explained and reviewed, as surgery remains the only definitive cure for this condition. Patients undergoing surgery should also be aware of possible hungry bone syndrome and postoperative hypocalcemia.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Hyperparathyroidism should be suspected if hypercalcemia is found with hypophosphatemia.

All calcium nephrolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis patients should be checked for elevated serum calcium. If hypercalcemia is found, a parathyroid hormone level should be performed.

Primary hyperparathyroidism preferentially reduces cortical bone density and increases fracture risk at sites where cortical bone predominates, such as the distal forearm, with relative sparing of trabecular bone. For this reason, those with hyperparathyroidism should have a dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry that includes the distal third of the radius, a site composed almost exclusively of cortical bone, in addition to the more common measurements at the spine and hip.

Primary hyperparathyroidism is associated with some psychological complaints, including depression, anxiety, fatigue, irritability, lassitude, and sleep disturbances. Surgical correction of hyperparathyroidism seems to help, but the relief of psychological symptoms and improvement in quality of life scores is somewhat inconsistent.

When there is a family history of hyperparathyroidism, consider the possibility of multiple endocrine neoplasia types 1, 2a, 4, or familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH). 24-hour urinary calcium excretion with calculating the calcium/creatinine excretion ratio is the best initial test to differentiate familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia from primary hyperparathyroidism.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a relatively common endocrine disorder. Because hypercalcemia can affect many organs, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a radiologist, endocrinologist, urologist, surgeon, and internist. To ensure a successful surgery and minimize complications, parathyroid surgery should only be performed by surgeons who are highly skilled and experienced in parathyroid procedures.

Asymptomatic patients with mild hypercalcemia and no complications related to high parathyroid hormone levels can be observed. However, they need period re-evaluation, usually with annual blood tests and bi-annual DEXA scans, to see if they develop criteria that warrant surgery.

All symptomatic patients and those with complications related to high parathyroid hormone levels need surgery. If hypercalcemia is left untreated, it can severely affect many organs. After surgery, most patients have a favorable long-term outcome.

Following a surgical cure of primary hyperparathyroidism, follow-up can be done by the primary care provider, including nurse practitioners and physician assistants, and monitoring renal function, bone density, calcium levels, and mood changes.