The education of health professionals can increase the appropriate use of pain medicine and palliative care. Health professionals can help patients and families dispel fears about opioid medications by explaining the proper use of opioid pain medicine. Patients need to be taught that pain relief will decrease psychological and physical stress, possibly prolong life, and allow a more comfortable dying process. Patient education improves satisfaction with pain and palliative care management. Patient adherence to pain treatment regimens is improved with knowledge.

Disparities in culturally diverse populations occur, particularly in the management of a patient’s pain at the end-of-life. Palliative care, in particular, is underutilized by culturally diverse communities. Studies show that non-white patients are substantially less likely to receive end-of-life care and appropriate pain management.

Health practitioners should be aware that many different cultural beliefs can be relevant to the care of patients at the end-of-life. It is crucial for the health practitioner to feel comfortable in asking the patient about their personal preferences regarding pain management and end-of-life care. The discussion should take place with the patient and, if desired, with the immediate family. If there is a language barrier, a trained medical interpreter should be used.

By educating health practitioners about pain management and the cultural issues concerning pain and death, better care can be provided.

**Questions for the Patient**

- How important is staying mentally alert to you in the final days before death?

- What pain level are you willing to endure?

- What type of pain medicine or alternatives should be considered?

The patient should be educated on nonpharmacological and pharmacological pain options. The patient should understand that while opioids will ease suffering and pain, they may also cause a certain amount of clouding of the mind, which some cultures feel it is essential to avoid.

The patient should also be instructed on pain assessment tools. Make sure while the patient is entirely coherent, they understand how to use them. The health practitioner must also learn to interpret pain scores considering the patient’s cultural beliefs.

Members of the healthcare team should work with the patient’s spiritual advisor to help the patient make peace with their impending death. The medical staff should make every effort to accommodate requests for space and time for praying.

Healthcare clinicians and support staff should always be aware of the cultural backgrounds of their patients. Providers require an understanding of how to communicate with patients about end-of-life decisions. Many clinicians have a difficult time talking to terminally ill patients when death is imminent. This is a skill that can be learned. In time and with training, healthcare providers can manage pain appropriately while simultaneously providing culturally sensitive end-of-life care.

Healthcare providers have to care for patients with compassion, especially during their final moments. Improving cultural competence ensures that health professionals can provide pain relief and optimal palliative care to patients from all walks of life and cultural backgrounds. As Rachel Naomi Remen, M.D. once said: “Our power to heal is far less limited than our power to cure. Healing is not a relationship between an expert and a problem. It is a relationship between human beings.”