The wall of a vein is traditionally divided into three anatomic layers: the intima, the media, and the adventitia. Veins are highly compliant over the range of venous pressures and are relatively non-compliant at arterial pressures. There are differences in the vasomotor function of the saphenous veins compared to the internal mammary arteries. Nitric oxide and prostacyclin-mediated relaxation responses of saphenous veins are much less and the maximal contractile forces generated are much greater than the internal mammary artery.

Saphenous veins demonstrate a spectrum of pre-existing pathological conditions ranging from significantly thickened walls to post-phlebitic changes and varicosities at harvest time. Between 2% and 5% of these veins are unusable, and up to 12% can be considered "diseased." These diseased veins have a patency rate of approximately 50% compared to their "non-diseased" controls.

Perioperative manipulations of veins before their bypass anastomosis results in significant tissue damage. Such implantation injury leads to endothelial dysfunction, endothelial cell injury, endothelial denudation, and smooth muscle cell injury. Each is an essential factor in initiating neo-intimal hyperplasia and venous graft stenosis (VGS). Following exposure to the arterial environment, postoperative venous grafts experience severe stretching and increased tangential stress. These forces significantly contribute to endothelial cell damage. Histological surveys of saphenous vein grafts have been derived from specimens obtained at autopsy or reoperation. Vein grafts obtained in the early postoperative period show focal loss of endothelial cells, particularly at the perianastomotic regions, with fibrin deposition on the intima.

Intimal hyperplasia is the universal response of a vein graft to insertion into the arterial circulation. It is considered to result from the migration of smooth muscle cells out of the media into the intima and the proliferation of these smooth muscle cells. Macroscopically, intimal hyperplastic lesions appear pale, smooth, firm, and homogenous; they are uniformly located between the endothelium and the medial smooth muscle cell layer of the vein graft. During the initial perioperative period after saphenous vein grafting, early stenosis and occlusions occur in 5% to 8% of grafts due to intimal hyperplasia. Vein grafts with lower flows and higher rates of stasis are associated with greater intimal thickening. Similarly, low shear stress is also associated with the increased development of intimal hyperplasia in vein grafts.