Glossectomy is most commonly performed for the treatment of malignant and pre-malignant tongue lesions. Malignant lesions of the tongue, like other parts of the head and neck, usually require multimodality treatment that utilizes the expertise of a range of professionals, including otolaryngologists, medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, radiologists, surgical pathologists, oral surgeons, speech-language pathologists, dieticians, nurses, and pharmacists.

Preoperatively, a comprehensive clinical evaluation of the patient proposed for glossectomy must be performed by the otolaryngologist, as previously described, facilitated with imaging and fiberoptic examinations as necessary. Appropriate consultation referrals in anticipation of adjuvant therapy that may be required after the procedure should be made preoperatively to prevent subsequent delays in treatment. Ideally, the patient is evaluated as part of a multi-specialty tumor board. Preoperative evaluation by internal medicine, cardiology, pulmonology, and/or anesthesia must be performed to allow identification and optimization of comorbidities that may significantly impact surgical safety and outcome.

During the glossectomy procedure, adequate and efficient communication between the surgeon, anesthesiologist, pathologist, and nursing is critical for ensuring a successful surgical outcome, including a margin-negative resection with adequate reconstruction as indicated so as to improve survival prognosis and transition to the next phase of care.

Postoperatively, the management of the glossectomy patient will also require a variety of expertise. Pain control will be optimized with the help of pharmacists. Monitoring of the wound and reconstructive flaps will be performed by the surgical team, including specialist nurses conversant with monitoring for wound infections, reconstructive tissue viability, and other common postoperative complications. As most patients will require dietary modifications after glossectomy, dietitians will be necessary to provide appropriate oral or enteral feeding recommendations based on evaluations from the speech-language pathologists. Speech and swallowing rehabilitation through the help of speech-language pathologists will also be required to optimize patients' quality of life and early re-integration into their pre-existing lifestyle.

Thus, the need for an interprofessional approach to the preoperative, operative, and postoperative management of glossectomy patients cannot be over-emphasized. It is important that professionals involved in the care of glossectomy patients be aware of the collective roles they play in the management of these patients and the need to strategically be on par with each other to improve patient outcomes.