**Breast Cancer Postoperative Care**

**Drain and Wound Care**

Patients should receive appropriate instruction in the management of several types of wound coverage. Since surgeons often close wounds with absorbable stitches, stitch removal is not needed. We recommend that patients should shower two days after surgical intervention, including simple mastectomies and breast-conserving surgery. At the time of surgery, flexible tube drains are placed under the skin. Their role is to remove all sorts of fluids that accumulate at the site of surgery. The drain will be taken off after one to two weeks in the clinic when the drainage is minimal.

Patients should consult a doctor if there is:

- Fever (greater than or equal to 38 degrees C)

- Swelling or redness around the operation site

- Discharge around the drain site or from the wound

- Wound breakdown at the wound site

- Pain increased at the operation site

**Medication and Diet**The medications prescribed by doctors usually continue after surgery, and there are some diet restrictions.

**Rehabilitation and Activity**

Patients are encouraged to carry on normal mobility and function as early as it is possible after surgical intervention. The majority of patients with simple mastectomies and breast-conserving surgery will be able to carry on usual daily activities just after surgery, with some precautions for those with breast reconstruction.

**Arm Exercise Program**

The exercises promote the lymphatic system and circulation, hence preventing swelling of the concerned arm. In the first few weeks after discharge, patients should avoid over-strenuous activities.

**Arm and Hand Care**

Following axillary surgery, lymphedema, and increased risk of infection of the arm may occur. Hence, extra care to protect the arm and the hand on the operated side from injury is recommended. Patients usually receive a referral to a physical or occupational therapist specially-trained in treating lymphedema.

**Physical Appearance**

With a mastectomy, physical appearance can be maintained by undergoing breast reconstruction or wearing a prosthesis.