Bone tissue is susceptible to a myriad of pathologies that may range from etiologies of embryological, metabolic, autoimmune, neoplastic, or idiopathic origins. These include, but are not limited to, the conditions discussed below.

Achondroplasia is a genetic disorder commonly associated as a cause of dwarfism. Individuals affected may present with short extremities due to decreased development of endochondral bone; this is the type of bone that is responsible for the growth of long bones in the body. This formation begins with the construction of cartilage matrices which are eventually supplanted by new forming bone. However, clinically, these patients present with normal-sized head and chests. This presentation is because the development of intramembranous bone is unaffected. These bone processes are responsible for forming flat bones – skull, sternum, and rib cage. They do not require a preexisting cartilage matrix to lay down new bone tissue in its place. Research has identified the cause as an activating mutation in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3, or FGFR3, gene. This gene is, under normal circumstances, inhibited to allow for standard bone growth. However, with a lack of inhibition of this gene, bone growth is arrested leading to the phenotype.

Paget disease of the bone is characterized to be an imbalance amongst the activities of osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Of unknown etiology, the condition only affects localized portions of the skeletal tissue, generally involving one or more neighboring bones rather than the diffuse skeletal system. The disease process has three different stages. Osteoclast activity first increases, leading to a higher breakdown of bone tissue than normal. From this, the negative feedback mechanism is activated leading to osteoblasts responding to the breakdown and beginning to lay down bone. Eventually, osteoblastic activity is uncontrolled and continues to lay down bone tissue far past the metabolic requirement yielding a thick, sclerotic bone that is susceptible to fractures. Clinical symptoms are a result of the end process of this overgrowth of bone such as bone pain from microfractures, hearing loss due to impingement on the vestibulocochlear nerve from excess bone, and lion-like facies following the involvement of the craniofacial bones. Alkaline phosphatase becomes elevated more than twice the normal level juxtaposed with the clinical features, in a patient should lead a physician to consider Paget as a diagnosis because an isolated elevation of alkaline phosphatase in adults above 40 years most commonly points to the disease. Bone specimens of these patients illustrate a mosaic pattern of lamellar bone representing the low threshold required to fracture.

If untreated, Paget disease of the bone can act as a risk factor for osteosarcoma, a malignant proliferation of osteoblasts. Much more common in teenagers than in the elderly, this skeletal neoplasm begins in the metaphysis of long bones with patients complaining of bone pain with swelling or as a pathologic fracture (a break in the bone caused by weakness of the bone through disease rather than trauma). According to the literature, the most common bones affected are the distal femur and the proximal tibia composing of bones of the knee joint. Radiological investigations of osteosarcomas depict a “sunburst” appearance of a destructive mass in affected areas. Due to the over-proliferation of osteoblasts, the periosteum is shown to be lifted, forming a Codman triangle. Levels of serum alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase are also elevated in these patients as they are indicative of increased osteoblast activity. The degree of the elevation in these markers also determines the prognosis for patients, as higher levels signal more advanced disease. A biopsy is necessary for these patients. This biopsy can be either a closed biopsy through fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), a core needle biopsy, or an open/incisional biopsy which would allow an appropriate amount of tissue extraction for subsequent ancillary studies. Histological imaging demonstrates pleomorphic cells with the ability to produce osteoid, confirming the diagnosis.