The initial step in the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder is to obtain a detailed history. It is challenging for the patient at times to describe the nature and severity of the traumatic event, and they may choose to avoid mentioning it. However, the presentation and the duration of the symptoms are useful in making an accurate diagnosis. The health care workers must inquire about any depressive or anxiety symptoms, suicidal ideation or previous attempts, substance abuse, access to firearms.

The diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of PTSD as per DSM-5 include:

**Criterion A:****Stressor**

Exposure to real or threatened death, injury, or sexual violence in one or more of the following ways:

- They are directly exposed to the traumatic event.

- Witnessing in person as it occurred to someone else.

- They learned about a close family relative or close friend been exposed to actual or threatened trauma, accidental or violent death.

- Indirect exposure to distressing details of the traumatic event (professionals repeatedly exposed to the details of child abuse, collecting human remains, or pieces of evidence). This does not include exposure through television, movies, electronic devices, or pictures.

**Criterion B: Intrusion Symptoms**

Presence of one or more of the following symptoms related to the traumatic event and began after the trauma occurred:

- Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive thoughts associated with the traumatic event. In children older than 6 years, this may be expressed using repetitive play in which the aspects of the trauma are expressed.

- Distressing nightmares that may be repetitive with the content of the dream is related to the traumatic event. Children may have frightening dreams where they may or may not recognize the content.

- Dissociative reactions, as flashbacks, in which the individual may feel or act that the traumatic event is happening again. These reactions may occur as a continuum ranging from brief reactions to complete loss of awareness of oneself or the surrounding. Children may re-enact such events in the play.

- Intense or prolonged psychological distress on exposure to traumatic reminders

- Marked physiological reactivity such as increased heart rate, blood pressure on exposure to traumatic reminders

**Criterion C: Avoidance**

Persistent avoidance of the stimuli related to the traumatic event, as evidenced by one or both of the following:

- Avoidance or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts associated with the traumatic event.

- Avoidance or efforts to avoid external reminders such as people, places, activities, conversations, or situations that arouse distressing memories or thoughts related to the traumatic event

**Criterion D: Negative Alterations in Mood**

Negative alterations in mood and cognition that began or worsened after the traumatic event, as evidenced by two or more of the following:

- Inability to recall important aspects of the traumatic event. This can be due to dissociative amnesia, not due to head injury, drugs, or alcohol.

- Persistent and distorted negative beliefs or expectations about oneself or the world, such as "I am bad," or "The world is completely dangerous."

- Persistent distorted cognition that leads the individual to blame self or others for causing the traumatic event.

- Persistent negative emotional state, including fear, guilt, anger, or shame

- Markedly diminished interest in significant activities that used to be enjoyable.

- Feelings alienated, estranged, or detached from others.

- Persistent inability to experience a positive emotion such as happiness, satisfaction, or love

**Criterion E: Alterations in Arousal and****Reactivity**

Trauma-related alterations in reactivity and arousal that began or worsened after the traumatic event, as evidenced by two or more of the following:

- Irritable or aggressive outbursts with little or no provocation.

- Reckless or self-destructive behavior.

- Hypervigilance

- Exaggerated startle response

- Problems in concentration

- Sleep disturbances (difficulty falling or staying asleep, restless sleep)

**Criterion F: Duration**

Persistence of symptoms in Criterion B, C, D, and E for more than one month

**Criterion G:**The disturbance causes significant functional impairment or distress in various areas of life, such as social or occupational.

**Criterion H:**The disturbance is not attributable due to substance use, medication, or another medical illness.