The following extrinsic and intrinsic muscles provide support and help in the maintenance of the arches of the foot. In the standing position, plantar ligaments and aponeurosis provide support, while during locomotion, especially in the stance phase, for shock absorption and weight transmission, muscles play a key role.

**Intrinsic Muscles of the Foot**

Abductor hallucis: It is the muscle of the first layer of the sole, causing abduction of the great toe. Support the medial longitudinal arch of the foot as a tie beam.

Flexor digitorum brevis: It also lies in the first layer of the sole, causing flexion at the proximal interphalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints. It acts as a tie beam and supports both longitudinal arches of the foot.

Abductor digiti minimi: The first layer of muscle of the sole lies on the lateral side, causing abduction of the little toe. Support the lateral longitudinal arch of the foot as a tie beam.

Lumbricals: It arises from tendons of flexor digitorum longus, so they do not have a bony origin. It prevents buckling of the toes and supports the arches of the foot.

Flexor hallucis brevis: It causes flexion of the great toe and supports the medial longitudinal arch.

Adductor hallucis: Muscle of the third layer of the sole, having two heads of origin, act as intersegmental ties as well as tie-beam for the transverse arch of the foot. Its unopposed action may predispose to hallux valgus.

Flexor digiti minimi brevis: It causes flexion of the little toe and supports the lateral longitudinal arch of the foot as a tie beam.

Dorsal Interossei: They lie in the fourth layer of the sole, causing abduction of the toes and assisting extensor tendons in the dorsiflexion of the toes. Four dorsal interossei originate from the adjacent side of the metatarsals, so they act as intersegmental ties or staples for the transverse arch of the foot.

**Extrinsic Muscles Act on the Foot**

Tibialis posterior: Its slips of insertion on the plantar surface of the foot supports the longitudinal and transverse arches of the foot from below as sustentacular action and also act as intersegmental ties or staples. Also, help the foot to adjust to the uneven surface by causing inversion.

Flexor digitorum longus: It enters into the sole by passing through the tarsal tunnel and runs in the second layer of the sole, causing flexion at the distal interphalangeal joint and assisting for flexion of the proximal joint, including plantar flexion at the ankle joint. It also supports the longitudinal arch as a tie beam.

Flexor hallucis longus: A muscle of the back of the leg enters into the sole and causes flexion of the interphalangeal joint of the great toe. It also assists in supporting the medial longitudinal arch of the foot as a tie beam.

Tibialis anterior: It helps the foot to adjust on uneven surfaces by causing inversion. It acts as slings to pull the medial longitudinal arch of the foot upwards. Also, along with peroneus longus, it supports the longitudinal arch of the foot by elevation.

Peroneus longus: Muscle of the lateral compartment of the leg, also enter into the sole by passing through a cuboidal groove and inserts into the medial cuneiform and base of the first metatarsal. It supports the longitudinal arch as sustentacular action and slings along with the tibialis anterior to pull the longitudinal arch upwards and also acts as a tie beam for the transverse arch.

Peroneus brevis: It is also the muscle of the lateral compartment of the leg and maintains the lateral longitudinal arch as sling action.

Peroneus tertius: It also assists the peroneus brevis in maintaining the lateral longitudinal arch of the foot. Peroneus longus, brevis, and tertius muscles cause eversion of the foot, so they help adjust the foot on an uneven surface.