The conjunctiva is a thin semitransparent membrane that covers the white part of the eye called the sclera. The conjunctiva starts at the limbus of the cornea and covers both the sclera and posterior surface of the eyelids. The portion covering the scleral is referred to as the bulbar conjunctiva, and the portion on the posterior surface of the lids is the palpebral conjunctiva.

The most common cause of viral conjunctivitis is adenoviruses. The adenovirus is part of the Adenoviridae family that consists of a nonenveloped, double-stranded DNA virus. Frequently associated infections caused by the adenovirus include upper respiratory tract infections, eye infections, and diarrhea in children. Children are most susceptible to viral infections, and adults tend to get more bacterial infections. Viral conjunctivitis can be obtained by direct contact with the virus, airborne transmission, and reservoir such as swimming pools.

Most cases of viral conjunctivitis are highly contagious for 10-14 days. Washing hands and avoidance of eye contact are key to preventing transmission to others.

**Adenoviral Conjunctivitis**

Up to 90% of viral conjunctivitis cases are caused by adenoviruses.

**Herpetic Conjunctivitis**

Herpes conjunctivitis is common in adults and children and associated with follicular conjunctivitis. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is estimated to be responsible for 1.3 - 4.8% of acute conjunctivitis cases.

**Acute Hemorrhagic Conjunctivitis (AHC)**

This is a very contagious form of viral conjunctivitis and symptoms include foreign body sensation, epiphora, eyelid edema, conjunctival chemosis, and subconjunctival hemorrhage. A small proportion of patients experience systemic symptoms of fever, fatigue, limb pain. Transmission is primarily via hand to eye contact and fomites.

**COVID-19 Conjunctivitis**

The most recent isolated strain of coronavirus, COVID-19 has been reported to cause conjunctivitis along with fever, cough, respiratory distress, and death.