Cryoglobulins can be detectable in the serum of patients with several inflammatory conditions; however, they do not always lead to the disease. The real mechanism of cryoprecipitation is complicated and still not completely understood. It is sometimes attributed to the intrinsic properties of the Immunoglobulin components.

- **Type 1 cryoglobulins**comprise monoclonal immunoglobulins, usually IgM, less frequently IgG, IgA, or light chains. Although rare, they are also found in plasma cell dyscrasias like multiple myeloma and monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance, B cell diseases like Waldenstorms macroglobulinemia, lymphoproliferative diseases like Non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

- **Type 2 cryoglobulins**consist of monoclonal IgM with rheumatoid factor (RF) activity and polyclonal IgG.

- **Type 3 cryoglobulins**involve polyclonal IgM with RF activity and polyclonal IgG.

- Newer techniques like immunoblotting have helped identify a novel mixed cryoglobulin, which is called type II to III (it is type II cryoglobulin with microheterogeneity) as it has a simultaneous presence of oligoclonal IgM and polyclonal IgG.

RF activity denotes the binding capacity of IgM to the Fc fragment of IgG. Type 2 and Type 3 are referred to as mixed cryoglobulins. They are commonly associated with infections, autoimmune diseases, and lymphoproliferative disorders:

- Among infections, Hepatitis C is the most common.Coxiella burnetii.

- Autoimmune conditions include systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjogren syndrome.

- Lymphoproliferative disorders like diffuse large B cell lymphoma and Non-Hodgkin lymphoma.