The Pediatric Regional Anesthesia Network (PRAN) is a collaborative group of several pediatric hospitals that acts as a registry for regional procedures in children.

The overall incidence of neurological complications was 2.4 per 10,000 blocks. These were mainly sensory issues that were resolved in less than 3 months. None of the patients had permanent motor deficits. There was no difference in neurological complications between neuraxial vs. peripheral nerve blocks. There was no difference in the incidence of complications between caudal vs. lumbar vs. thoracic epidural blocks. The risk of neurological complications was similar between single injection vs. continuous catheter techniques.

The incidence of severe LA systemic toxicity (cardiac arrest/seizures) was 7 per 10,000 blocks. Most of them were in infants, less than six months, after a bolus dose of LA. One epidural abscess was reported (incidence of 0.76 per 10,000), which required intervention but resolved without any residual nerve damage. 53 per 10,000 blocks were complicated by cutaneous infections, which was more common with neuraxial catheters compared with peripheral catheters. There were no hematomas reported with neuraxial blocks. Inadvertent dural puncture incidences were 66, 86, and 10 per 10,000 for thoracic, lumbar, and caudal approaches, respectively. 14 out of 10,000 patients who received opioids through a neuraxial catheter experienced respiratory depression. The prospective study of around 30,000 pediatric regional blocks by the French-language Society of Paediatric Anesthesiologists similarly found a very low incidence of complications, none of which resulted in any sequelae.