Initial evaluation requires good history taking and physical exam, particularly food and medical history, an assessment of duration, frequency, current volume status, and any other alarming signs and symptoms of the patient. Many cases of acute bacterial gastroenteritis may not require any testing to determine a specific etiology, but in a case of severe volume depletion, a serum electrolyte panel should be indicated to check for any electrolyte derangements. A complete blood count cannot distinguish between bacterial etiologies but helps in suggesting severe disease or potential complications, for example, a high white blood count indicates invasive bacteria or pseudomembranous colitis and low platelets counts indicate the development of the hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Blood culture should be obtained in a patient with high fever or other severe constitutional symptoms.

Stool testing for bacterial pathogens is indicated in the presence of severe illness (e.g., signs of dehydration/hypovolemia, severe abdominal pain, or need for hospitalization) high-risk host features (e.g., pregnant women, age greater than 70 years, immunocompromised state, or other co-morbidities), and other signs and symptoms of inflammatory diarrhea (e.g., mucus or blood in diarrhea, high-grade fever). A routine stool culture can identify three common bacteria: Salmonella, Campylobacter, and Shigella. Suspicion of other bacterial pathogens (e.g., Vibrio, Yersinia, Aeromonas, and Listeria) should warrant specific microbiology and culture analysis. In case of bloody diarrhea, additional testing for Shiga toxin and leukocytes in stool for EHEC should be ordered in addition to stool culture. In case of persistent diarrhea, the practitioner should send stool samples for ova and parasite testing.