Salter-Harris fractures include a classification system that allows providers to risk-stratify injuries. Ranging from I to V, lower numbers are less severe and have less of a propensity for growth abnormalities.

**Salter I (Slipped)**

This is when the fracture line extends through the physis or within the growth plate. Type I fractures are due to the longitudinal force applied through the physis, which splits the epiphysis from the metaphysis. Beware that a normal radiograph cannot exclude a physis injury in a symptomatic pediatric patient. A radiograph may be normal due to lack of bony involvement, and mild to moderate soft tissue swelling may be noted. Look for the widening of the physis or displacement of the epiphysis, which may suggest a fracture. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings, such as the presence of focal tenderness or swelling surrounding the growth plate. An example is Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis (SCFE).

**Salter II (Above)**

These are when the fracture extends through both the physis and metaphysis. These are most common and occur away from the joint space.

When the small corner of the metaphysis is visible, this is known as a corner sign or Thurston-Holland fragment.

Be careful in using the terms proximal and distal to describe the extension because the position of the physis is relative to the metaphysis and is not fixed. If the proximal end of the bone is involved, the physis is proximal to the metaphysis, so this extends distally from the physis into the metaphysis. If it involves the distal end of the bone, the physis is distal to the metaphysis, which extends proximally from the physis into the metaphysis.

**Salter III (Lower)**

This is an intra-articular fracture extending from the physis into the epiphysis. If the fracture extends the complete length of the physis, this type of fracture may form two epiphyseal segments. Since the epiphysis is involved, damage to the articular cartilage may occur. One example is a Tillaux fracture of the ankle, which is a fracture of the anterolateral aspect of the growth plate and epiphysis.

**Salter IV (Through/Transverse)**

This is also an intra-articular fracture, in which the fracture passes through the epiphysis, physis, and metaphysis. As this fracture involves the epiphysis, the articular cartilage may be damaged. An example of this is a Triplane fracture at the ankle, which has the following three components:

- Vertical component through the epiphysis

- Horizontal component through the growth plate

- Oblique component through the metaphysis.

Types III and IV fractures each carry a risk for growth retardation, altered joint mechanics, and functional impairment. Therefore, both require urgent orthopedic evaluation.

**Salter V (Rammed/Ruined)**

This fracture type is due to a crush or compression injury of the growth plate. In type V, the force is transmitted through the epiphysis and physis, potentially disrupting the germinal matrix, hypertrophic region, and vascular supply. Though Harris-Salter V fractures are very rare, they may be seen in electric shock, frostbite, and irradiation cases. As this fracture pattern tends to result from severe injury, these typically have a poor prognosis leading to bone growth arrest.

Be aware that it can be radiographically occult, and thus the radiograph may appear normal. This may be diagnosed retrospectively once growth arrest has occurred. One should consider the possibility of type V in a symptomatic child with a normal radiograph in an appropriate setting. Nevertheless, there may be evidence of physeal widening, which may be a potential clue to displacement. Anteroposterior and lateral views may be necessary to delineate the fracture type properly and imaging of the opposite, unaffected extremity for comparison.

**Additional Radiological Evaluations**

When radiography is doubtful about the presence or extent of fractures, CT or MRI may be used to confirm or further delineate fractures. This is especially true in ensuring the involvement of an articular surface exists or measuring the degree of fracture diastasis.

- Widening and increased T2-weighted signal within the physis

- Adjacent bone marrow edema

- Associated metaphyseal(Salter-Harris II or IV) or epiphyseal (Salter-Harris III or IV) fracture lines

- Periosteal disruption

The most important complication of physeal injuries is growth arrest, which can lead to deformity and longitudinal growth arrest, potentially with limb length discrepancies.