# Definition/Introduction

Confabulation is a neuropsychiatric disorder wherein a patient generates a false memory without the intention of deceit.****Confabulations can include small details such as birthdays, or they may be fantastical and more broadly based.

# Issues of Concern

**Associated Conditions**

The most common reports of confabulation are in patients with Korsakoff syndrome from Wernicke encephalopathy, wherein patients have anterograde amnesia in addition to confabulations.

**Mechanism**

Multiple reported lesions have correlations with the phenomenon. While most disorders associated with confabulation are related to lesions in the orbitofrontal or ventromedial prefrontal cortex of the frontal lobe, errors in processing may also occur within the hypothalamus, mammillary bodies, and the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus.

**Spontaneous vs. Provoked Confabulation**

Two types of confabulation can be distinguished. Provoked confabulations can be discovered by directly questioning and prompting a false memory.

**Delusions vs. Confabulation**

While confabulations appear to be false memories, delusions are more akin to false beliefs.

# Clinical Significance

Treatment most commonly revolves around treating the underlying disorder, such as using thiamine to treat Korsakoff syndrome or antipsychotic medications to treat schizophrenia. Interprofessional cognitive rehabilitation, however, may also be helpful. Specific interventions, such as maintaining a diary, and specific therapies such as self-monitoring training may also be efficacious.