Carbon monoxide gas diffuses rapidly across the pulmonary capillary membrane, binding to hemoglobin with an affinity 200 times that of oxygen to form carboxyhemoglobin. By displacing oxygen, CO decreases the oxygen-carrying capacity and oxygen delivery to tissues, causing marked cellular hypoxia and acidosis. Also, CO directly disrupts multiple metabolic processes. It binds to mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase, directly inhibiting aerobic metabolism. CO binds to cytochrome c oxidase in the brain, resulting in impaired mitochondrial function and ATP synthesis, platelet to neutrophil aggregation, and neutrophil degranulation. Myeloperoxidase, proteases, and reactive oxygen species are subsequently released, causing cellular damage. In endothelial cells, proteases (via xanthine dehydrogenase) form xanthine oxidase, which blocks inherent protective mechanisms against oxidative stress.

Organs with the highest oxygen demand, the brain, and heart, are the most susceptible to the ischemic injuries described above. The deleterious effects on the heart, in particular, can vary widely as the cardiovascular health of the exposed person heavily influences compensatory mechanisms. In hypoxemia, cardiac output increases to maintain oxygen delivery to the brain, as with anemia or at altitude. With sustained and progressive hypoxemia, cardiac output will maximize and cannot compensate for the reduced oxygen-carrying capacity in carboxyhemoglobinemia. Demand ischemia and subsequent reduction of cardiac output ensue, exacerbating cardiac ischemia. This is a vicious cycle, propagating cerebral and peripheral ischemia as well. Hence, loss of consciousness, presumably due to decreased cardiac output and/or cerebral ischemia, has been identified as a strong predictor of severe toxicity.

Carbon monoxide exposure has a particularly deleterious effect in utero. The fetus is much more sensitive to hypoxia and direct toxic effects on a cellular level. Fetal hemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen, to begin with, demonstrated by the left-shift of the hemoglobin dissociation curve. Carboxyhemoglobin further exaggerates the left shift, decreasing the release of oxygen into tissues causing profound hypoxia. Additionally, data in animal studies suggests a delay in fetal steady-state levels of carboxyhemoglobin up to 40 hours after maternal steady-state is reached, and levels in the fetus may exceed that of the mother.