Deviation from proper plasma cell proliferation can lead to a number of clinical pathologies. These classify as plasma cell neoplasms and plasma cell immunodeficiency.

Plasma cell neoplasms are characteristically an aberrant proliferation of clonal plasma cells producing monoclonal, heavy-chain, class-switched immunoglobulin, referred to as M-protein.

**Plasma Cell Neoplasms**

**MGUS**

Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, also known as MGUS, is the least severe manifestation of plasma cell neoplasm. MGUS classifies as a clonal population of plasma cells secreting immunoglobulin, though serum M-protein concentration does not exceed 3 g/dL.

Immunofixation studies of monoclonal proteins indicate that approximately 70% of MGUS cases are IgG, 15% are IgM, 12% are IgA, and 3% are biclonal.

**Smoldering Myeloma**

As plasma cells continue to proliferate aberrantly, an individual may progress beyond the criteria of MGUS, a stage defined clinically as smoldering myeloma. In contrast to MGUS, serum M-protein levels are equal to or greater than 3 g/dL, and clonal plasma cells comprise 10% to 59% of the bone marrow.

Similar to MGUS, the presence of criteria for smoldering myeloma manifests asymptomatically.

**Multiple Myeloma**

The most severe presentation of plasma cell neoplasm is that of multiple myeloma. Though similar to smoldering myeloma in having serum M-protein concentrations of at least 3 g/dL, multiple myeloma criteria require the presence of at least one additional characteristic. Such include the presence of one or more CRAB lesions, bone marrow clonal plasma cells exceeding 60%, a serum-free light chain ratio equal to or greater than 100, and at least one focal lesion detected in MRI.

Multiple myeloma represents approximately 10% of all hematopoietic neoplasms.

**Other Plasma Cell Neoplasms**

Amyloidosis is classified as the deposition of immunoglobulin light chain fibrils from clonal plasma cells, often of lambda composition. Such can occur independently or as sequelae of MGUS, smoldering myeloma, or multiple myeloma.

**Plasma Cell Deficiencies**

Counter to the preceding disorders, characterized by excessive plasma cells or their byproducts, common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) results from a lack of adequate plasma cell numbers. The diagnosis of the disorder is established by reduced levels of IgG, IgA, and/or IgM.Haemophilus influenzae, MMR, varicella, and pneumococcus) should have consistent testing.

In addition to CVID, over 100 primary immunodeficiencies are attributable to improper B-lymphocyte development and/or function, including improper immunoglobulin production. X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is characterized by a mutant BTK gene (Bruton’s tyrosine kinase), inhibiting pre-B cell formation.