Surgery is the preferred treatment in primary hyperaldosteronism caused by unilateral disease. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is preferred as it is associated with fewer complications and a shorter hospital stay than compared to open adrenalectomy. Complete adrenalectomy is preferred to partial adrenalectomy due to greater efficacy and resolution of symptoms. For nonsurgical candidates, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) were preferred as a medical therapy.

For bilateral hyperplasia in primary hyperaldosteronism, MRAs are the treatments of choice. Spironolactone or eplerenone is the most commonly used. Selection among these agents depends on the adverse effect profile. According to the 2016 Endocrine Society Guidelines, the spironolactone starting dose is 12.5 to 25 mg daily and titrated every two weeks upward. Eplerenone is usually started at 50 mg daily and titrated upward. The clinical course ultimately dictates the increase and frequency in dosage. Combination therapy consisting of medications, restriction of sodium (less than 100 mEq/day), avoidance of alcohol, smoking cessation, aerobic exercise, and maintenance of ideal body weight is shown to produce the best results.

For secondary hyperaldosteronism, treatment of the underlying disease will lead to the resolution of the symptoms. Renal artery stenosis might need intervention/ revascularization to control the blood pressure.

ACE inhibitors (ACE I) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) are the agents of choice for controlling blood pressure due to their renal protective benefits. Salt restriction also is recommended for better efficacy.