# Continuing Education Activity

The double-chambered right ventricle was first described in the 19th century. It is now considered a distinctive anatomic entity; wherein there is a muscular obstruction below the infundibulum dividing the right ventricle into a low-pressure infundibulum and a high-pressure apical portion. This activity describes the clinical presentation of the double-chambered right ventricle and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the epidemiology of double-chambered right ventricle.
- Identify the clinical features of a patient with a double-chambered right ventricle.
- Describe the diagnosis and management options available for a double-chambered right ventricle.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the delivery of care for patients with double-chambered right ventricle and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) was first described in 1858 by TB Peacock, but it is now understood to be a form of congenital heart disease wherein there is a mid-cavitary obstruction that divides the right ventricle into a high-pressure proximal portion and a low-pressure distal portion.

# Etiology

Proposals posit various mechanisms to explain the development of abnormal muscle bundles in a double-chambered right ventricle. They include the following:

- Increased blood flow among patients with VSD causes hypertrophy of the supraventricular crest resulting in an acquired obstruction.

- Superior displacement of the septomarginal trabecula or moderator band causes it to undergo progressive hypertrophy over time.

- Extension of a muscular shelf from the septoparietal trabeculations to the trabecular component of the right ventricular apex in conjunction with other acquired factors results in the formation of obstructive muscle bundles.

# Epidemiology

Double-chambered right ventricle presents in 0.5% to 2% of all patients with congenital heart disease.

# History and Physical

Patients with isolated double-chambered right ventricle and mild-to-moderate right ventricular outflow tract obstruction (RVOTO) are asymptomatic.

# Evaluation

**Electrocardiogram**

It usually shows right ventricular hypertrophy and right axis deviation, but may have atypical features like dominant R in lead V4R, with only an rS complex in V1. These electrocardiographic abnormalities are attributable to the absence of hypertrophy of the distal right ventricular chamber.

**Echocardiography**

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) often serves as an initial diagnostic modality, but it has been reported to be often less effective than transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), cardiac catheterization, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The diagnostic effectiveness of TTE has limitations because of the right ventricle’s irregular shape, retrosternal position, and proximity to the precordium; the mid-cavitary turbulent jet on TTE can also be confused for an intracardiac shunt or high right ventricular pressure may be incorrectly assumed to represent pulmonary hypertension.

**Cardiac Catheterization**

The pressure data characteristically shows a low pressure tracing in the pulmonary artery, and the infundibular chamber, while the pressure is high (often supra systemic) in the right ventricular apex. Angiography should merit consideration if the pressure gradients cannot be evaluated by echocardiography or if the patient needs evaluation for suspected co-morbid coronary artery disease.

**Cardiac MRI**

This modality can be helpful as an adjunct to TTE and/or TEE. It is a non-invasive option that can help to confirm the presence of any associated cardiac anomalies, quantify the pressure gradient in the right ventricle, and evaluate the wall thickness of the right ventricle.

# Treatment / Management

Patients with significant right ventricular cavity gradient require surgical resection of the obstruction.

# Differential Diagnosis

Double-chambered right ventricle can be mistaken for tetralogy of Fallot, isolated pulmonic valve stenosis, isolated VSD, pulmonary valve stenosis with a VSD causing a left to right shunt, and idiopathic hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy affecting the right side of the heart.

# Prognosis

One study mentions that children who undergo surgery for DCRV had positive long-term outcomes, did not require re-operation for any recurrent anomalous tissue acting as an intracavitary obstruction, and did not die in adulthood from complications from the management of DCRV.

# Complications

Complications after surgery are not very likely. However, patients may be at risk for death from low cardiac output states after surgery despite successful resection of the anomalous muscle bundle or heart failure, and they may experience arrhythmias and occurrence of right ventricular dysfunction that would require close follow-up and additional interventions.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is important to discuss with patients and parents about early correction after diagnosis in childhood if possible, to avoid the progressive developments of the anomalous muscle bundles. They should be aware of the positive outcomes reported when patients undergo surgery. If they do still refuse, they should be encouraged to follow up appropriately in the outpatient setting.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

For the diagnosis of the double-chambered right ventricle, a high index of suspicion is necessary from the primary clinician, cardiologist, and cardiothoracic surgeon. It should always receive a thorough preoperative evaluation. Encouraging surgery when appropriate is important, but patients may refuse. If and when they refuse, alternative options that are not curative but can provide symptomatic relief and reduce future hospitalizations are available and should be offered as well. These should have outpatient follow up with their primary care clinician and a cardiologist to monitor them.

Nursing will play a critical role in the management of this condition, primarily by preparing the patient for surgery, monitoring vitals, and assisting during surgery, and administering postoperative care, reporting to the surgeon, or managing clinician any concerns that may arise. Only with this type of strong interprofessional team dynamic can patients with a double-chambered right ventricle achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]