Wernicke encephalopathy should be suspected in any patient with chronic alcohol abuse or any form of malnutrition and any of the following: acute altered mental status, ophthalmoplegia, ataxic gait, delirium, and hypotension. The classic triad of Wernicke encephalopathy is altered mental status, ataxic gait, and ophthalmoplegia. The diagnosis is made based on clinical presentation, and a definitive diagnosis is complicated as the clinical triad may not be present in up to 90% of patients.

The hallmark sign of Wernicke encephalopathy is ocular abnormalities especially nystagmus. Other oculomotor symptoms include cranial nerve involvement of oculomotor, abducens, and vestibular nuclei causing conjugate gaze palsies. Pupillary sluggishness, ptosis, and anisocoria are also common.

Gait ataxia is also a significant finding in Wernicke encephalopathy where patients will present with a broad-based gait. Also, gait can worsen, and in many cases, patients are unable to walk. Physical examination may include a complete neurological exam with cerebellar testing. Disorientation and altered sensorium characterize encephalopathy. Some patient can present with hyperactive delirium secondary to possible alcohol withdrawal symptoms alongside Wernicke encephalopathy. Less than 5% of patients with Wernicke encephalopathy can present with the severely depressed level of consciousness that will eventually lead to coma and death. Some other warning signs could include hyperthermia and hypotension. The patient could also present with peripheral neuropathy and commonly includes the lower extremity, and an examination would reveal distal sensory loss.

WE should be a consideration in a patient with long term malnutrition and episodes of confusion and altered mental status. Over the past few decades, bariatric surgery has been associated with WE and malnutrition; the key reason is that after surgery, there is limited intake of food and the stores of thiamine are rapidly depleted.