Neuropathies of the ankle and foot are uncommon and often underdiagnosed. Neuropathies may arise from metabolic processes, such as diabetes or alcohol abuse, or as a result of nerve compression syndromes.

- Morton's neuroma (digital nerve entrapment):

- Morton's neuroma is a non-neoplastic lesion comprising degenerative changes and perineural fibrosis that impinges the digital nerve at the third web space on the plantar aspect of the foot because of entrapment from the intermetatarsal ligament or compression from the metatarsal heads and/or tissues surrounding the metatarsophalangeal joints. Women are more affected by this nerve entrapment than men most likely because of the availability of narrow-toe box shoes that externally compress the forefoot. Symptoms include burning or electric pain and paresthesias in the affected web space. Physical examination reveals a positive Mulder sign (i.e., reproducible pain and presence of a clicking sensation when squeezing two metatarsal heads together).

- Baxter's neuropathy (lateral calcaneal nerve entrapment):

- Entrapment of the lateral calcaneal nerve typically occurs between the fascia of the abductor hallucis and the quadratus plantae muscles, but may also occur between the flexor digitorum brevis muscle and the calcaneus. Some primary causes for this entrapment include stretching of the nerve in athletes, muscle hypertrophy, bone spurs, and bursitis and inflammation of the plantar fascia. Baxter’s neuropathy presents as chronic medial plantar heel pain that worsens with activity and foot eversion and abduction. It is not usually associated with any paresthesias or weakness. Physical examination shows tenderness upon deep palpation of the abductor hallucis muscle.

- Jogger’s Foot (medial plantar nerve compression):

- The medial plantar nerve may experience compression between the abductor hallucis fascia and its origin at the navicular and calcaneus, between the abductor hallucis muscle belly and the knot of Henry, or as it passes through the medial intermuscular septum. Long-distance runners with valgus hindfeet deformity may be more susceptible to jogger’s foot. Symptoms include exercise-induced pain over the medial plantar surface of the foot that radiates distally to first through third toes (on the plantar surface) and proximally into the medial heel and ankle. Physical examination findings reveal a positive Tinel sign at the plantar border of the navicular tuberosity and dysesthesia along the heel, medial arch, and first through third toes.

- Tarsal tunnel syndrome (tibial nerve compression):

- Tarsal tunnel syndrome involves entrapment of the tibial nerve as it passes posterior to the medial malleolus and medial to the talus and calcaneus. This compression may divide into two syndromes: proximal compression of the tibial nerve or distal compression of its terminal branches (i.e., medial plantar nerve, lateral plantar nerve, and medial calcaneal nerve). Because the tibial nerve more commonly branches within the tarsal tunnel, distal compression syndromes present more often from either tarsal tunnel proper compression or distal entrapments outside the tarsal tunnel. Conversely. space-occupying lesions within the tarsal tunnel may cause proximal compression of the tibial nerve, such as tenosynovitis, ganglion, lipoma, venous engorgement, neurilemmoma, exostosis, or accessory muscles. Other causes of proximal compression include osseous or cartilaginous deformities, trauma, flexor retinaculum thickening, or even significant hindfoot pronation causing excessive tension on the tibial nerve. Symptoms of proximal compression include diffuse pain along the medial ankle and plantar foot (typically at night) that may worsen with activity, burning, shooting, and tingling sensations in the distribution of the tibial nerve proximally into the calf or distally into the foot, and even intermittent numbness of the plantar foot. Physical exam findings reveal a positive Tinel sign and reproducible pain with deep palpation of the tarsal tunnel or with foot dorsiflexion and eversion.

- Anterior tarsal syndrome (deep fibular nerve compression):

- Compression of the deep fibular nerve and its branches may occur as it passes through the anterior tarsal tunnel, defined by the inferior extensor retinaculum superficially and the talonavicular joint capsule deeply. Compression of the lateral branch of the deep fibular nerve causes dorsal foot pain radiating to the region of the lateral tarsometatarsal joints whereas compression of the medial branch causes pain and/or numbness of the first web space on the dorsum of the foot.

- Superficial fibular nerve entrapment:

- This nerve entrapment is a rare cause of chronic leg pain. As the superficial fibular nerve pierces the deep fascia of the leg to enter the foot, it may become entrapped by a thickened fascial tunnel, a fascial defect and muscle herniation, or a soft-tissue mass (e.g., lipoma). Athletes with lateral ligament deficiency or functional ankle instability may also experience this nerve entrapment as both conditions may cause traction injury to the superficial fibular nerve. Symptoms of this form of nerve entrapment include activity-related pain to the lower lateral leg and dysesthesia in the dorsum and lateral aspect of the foot. These symptoms may worsen with ankle inversion and plantar flexion and nerve percussion where it emerges from the deep fascia.

- Sural nerve entrapment:

- This is a rare form of entrapment that may be caused by trauma, surgery, bony overgrowth, soft-tissue scarring, or instability. Although rare, sural nerve entrapment may occur in different locations along the leg, ankle, or foot. The most common sites of entrapment include the lateral border of the ankle, the calcaneus, and the fifth metatarsal. Patients with sural nerve entrapment report pain, numbness, or burning sensation at the posterolateral leg, lateral ankle, or lateral foot. Physical examination often reveals a positive Tinel sign and exacerbation of symptoms with plantar flexion and foot inversion.

- Saphenous nerve entrapment:

- This is a rare form of entrapment that is diagnosed clinically and presents with pain and paresthesias to the medial foot and ankle. Proximal entrapment of the saphenous nerve is a more common presentation, whereas distal entrapment is less common and frequently associated with trauma or surgery. Nerve conduction velocity studies may be used to rule out more proximal impingement at the femoral nerve or the lumbar nerve roots.

In most cases, these entrapment neuropathies resolve with rest, NSAIDs, and occasional steroid injections. Removal of any external compressive factors, inflammation and edema reduction, and correction of any deformities or osseous abnormalities are also effective. Recalcitrant cases may require surgical decompression and release of any tissues compressing the affected nerve, which have frequently provided satisfactory results.