Telemedicine started in the 1950s with several hospital systems shared images along with information by telephone. It slowly developed in time, from sending radiographic images into connecting a physician with a patient with a specialist elsewhere. US military and aerospace sectors advanced telemedicine in the 1960 an 1970s by using the information and communication technologies to provide medical services in remote areas.

As one could imagine, in the earlier days of medicine, they viewed this concept of geographic reach with great potential, especially for citizens in rural regions without access to specialist care. As with most facets of life throughout the 20th century, technology advanced, and capabilities correspondently increased. With new equipment and devices, remote physician visits became possible, albeit remained highly resource-intensive and expensive.

Telemedicine broke out of its limited utility with the development of the internet. Further advances were spearheaded by the rise of portable computers and, subsequently, smartphones. By being able to transmit high-quality video and audio in real-time at relatively low costs, the potential for telemedicine expanded into private homes, offices, and living facilities. Providing an alternative to in-person visits provided those same patients with access to care often they might not have had across both primary and specialty care.

While often confused with the term and concept of "telehealth," telemedicine differs in scope. While the latter focuses on electronic devices to permit communications regarding clinical services (follow-ups, medication management, specialist consultation), the former is much broader in practice. Telehealth uses technology to empower and improve healthcare as a whole. Telehealth includes non-clinical services, such as administrative communication, meetings, and training.