Treatment of strokes requires an interprofessional specialized team found at centers that specialize in stroke care. Team members include neurology, neurosurgery, neuro-intensivists, specialized nursing, rehabilitation medicine with physical, occupational, and speech therapists.

**Ischemic Strokes**

Treatment of ischemic strokes is time-dependent. If the onset of symptoms occurs before 4.5 hours without evidence of hemorrhage on a non-contrast CT scan, the patient is tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) eligible, the preferable agent being IV alteplase. The dose of alteplase is calculated as 0.9 mg/kg with a maximum dose of 90 mg. 10% of the total dose is given as a bolus over one minute, and the remainder is given over the next hour.  There is a set of inclusion criteria and contraindications that should be discussed with the patient to obtain informed consent before administering the medication. This is generally performed by a neurologist specializing in stroke; however, another physician can perform it with guidance. Most notable contraindications include recent intracranial surgery or trauma, active internal bleeding, intracranial hemorrhage, blood pressure greater than 180/90 mmHg. Inclusion criteria are stroke with a measurable neurological deficit occurring less than 4.5 hours. There are relative exclusion criteria for patients greater than 80 years old, NIHSS score greater than 25, and current anticoagulant use.

While posterior circulation strokes were not included in the DAWN or DEFUSE-3 trials, recent studies have shown thrombectomy can be performed on posterior circulation ischemic strokes. These studies have also noted to have a lower rate of hemorrhage when compared to anterior circulation strokes. In this procedure, a puncture through the femoral artery at the groin is made to insert a clot retriever device to remove a thrombus obstructing a large intracranial vessel manually. Using fluoroscopic guidance, the degree of vessel recanalization is categorized as Thrombolysis In Cerebral Infarction (TICI) score is assigned 0 to 3, with TICI 3 representing complete perfusion.

After treatment with TPA and/or thrombectomy, the patient is later observed in a neuro focused ICU setting for close monitoring of vitals. Blood pressure is permissively elevated to 180/90 mmHg to allow tissue reperfusion in the first 24 hours after the intervention. If no therapy is given, blood pressure is more permissive to 220/110 mmHg. Strict blood pressure can be controlled using IV antihypertensives such as nicardipine, clevidipine, hydralazine, or labetalol. Hourly neuro checks are also performed to assess for a change in their neurological exam to indicate an acute complication such as intracranial hemorrhage, edema with midline shift or herniation, or a repeat ischemic stroke. If a change is documented, a stat CT of the head without contrast should be obtained.

**Hemorrhagic Strokes**

This life-threatening condition requires an immediate neurosurgical assessment, depending on the extent of bleeding, and acute surgical intervention may be necessary depending on the site of hemorrhage. A head CTA should be performed to localize the hemorrhaged vessel to evaluate for surgical intervention. These cases should also be observed in a Neuro ICU setting. Hemorrhage into the ventricular space can obstruct CSF flow and may require placement of an extra ventricular drain through the scalp to manually drain CSF and reduce ventricular pressure. Hemorrhage into the parenchyma is generally monitored closely in the ICU for evaluation of midline shift. Blood pressure should be controlled using IV antihypertensives listed above to maintain pressure below 160/90 mmHg. Anticoagulant and pharmacological deep venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis are recommended to be held in the acute management of this disease to prevent worsening intracranial bleeding.