The delirium pathophysiology is not fully elucidated and may not be due to a single pathway given the wide variety of causes. It is generally thought to be an interplay between unique patient characteristics such as advanced age, and cognition, and physiological insults. Many theoretical mechanisms have been proposed that range from neurotransmitter dysregulation, neuroinflammation with microglial activation, oxidative stress, neuronal aging, and sleep-wake cycle dysfunction, among other theories.

Derangements of different neurotransmitter pathways have been seen in the pathophysiology of delirium, most importantly, dopamine and acetylcholine. Dopamine excess and acetylcholine depletion have been found linked to delirium.

Inflammatory markers produced during a critical illness like cytokines, chemokines, tumor necrosis factor-alpha initiate a sequence of events leading to microvascular compromise, thrombin formation, and endothelial damage.

Another hypothesis is the reduction of cerebral oxidative metabolism leading to alteration of neurotransmission. Failure of cerebral oxidative metabolism is found to be important in the pathogenesis of multiple organ dysfunction in critical illness.

Neurotransmitters level and function are directly influenced by plasma concentration of many amino acids, and decreased availability of neutral amino acids can lead to delirium in patients admitted to ICU.

There may be some cross-talk between proposed pathways that explain the different phenotypic presentations of delirium (hyperactive, hypoactive, and mixed), but not enough evidence exists at this time to definitively describe the pathophysiology behind this condition.