Individuals who have sustained a hand amputation typically present to the emergency department. It is essential first to obtain a history and evaluate the injured limb in a timely fashion. The injured hand is generally apparent, receiving the first and most attention. It is critical, however, to evaluate the patient for other injuries before focusing on the hand.  The patient may have other life-threatening injuries that deserve immediate attention. After stabilizing the patient, providers can then evaluate the hand injury. The mechanism of amputation, including whether it was sharp, crushing, mangling, avulsion, high velocity, or explosive, will likely be the primary determining factor in treatment strategy. Additional required information to obtain includes the time of amputation, hand dominance, occupation, and recreational activities. The time course of the injury is also critical to know ischemia time, which affects treatment options. A full medical history is essential, noting tobacco use and vascular disorders in particular, as they can affect treatment options. As in the evaluation of any patient preparing for surgical intervention, it is critical to note the time of last oral intake and the use of any anticoagulating medications.

The physical examination must include a complete evaluation of the entire affected extremity. On inspection, the examiner must note the level of amputation and the digits involved. The quality of involved soft tissue requires examination also, an adjacent burn receive different treatment differently than a clean, sharp injury margin. Additional abrasions or lacerations may also be present. Noting exposed structures, including bone, joint space, tendon, nerve, and vasculature, is essential.  If the amputated part is available, then its condition should be reported. Palpation of the extremity proximal to the amputation may elicit pain indicative of additional injury and requires further investigation. The neurologic examination includes the sensory condition of the median, radial, and ulnar nerves as well as motor capacity of the remaining muscles innervated by the anterior interosseous, posterior interosseous, median, radial, and ulnar nerves. The condition of individual tendons at or near the amputation site requires evaluation. Vascularity evaluation is by assessing the nature of bleeding (pulsatile or continuous), the capacity of a part to bleed, and distal capillary refill time. Providers must remember to determine the overall status of the patient and to address associated acute medical conditions.

Following the history and physical exam, radiographs are the next appropriate step in the evaluation of the patient with a hand amputation. Radiographs of the hand, wrist, and forearm are necessary for any hand amputation. Radiographs of the distal amputated part, if available, should be obtained as well.  If the amputation is not traumatic, then a vascular workup is appropriate. Assessment of perfusion can include vascular pressures, transcutaneous oxygen levels, and arteriography.