Microtia is a congenital hypoplastic malformation of the pinna that ranges in severity from a fully-formed auricle with slightly smaller subunits to complete absence of the auricle and lobule in its most severe form, known as anotia. The condition is often unilateral and creates an obvious asymmetry. It can be associated with many syndromes and is thought to be caused by vascular insults or different medications taken during embryologic development. Malformation or absence of the external ear can cause a conductive hearing loss on its own, but microtia is also often associated with aural atresia, a condition in which the middle ear and external auditory canal fail to form, substantially exacerbating the conductive hearing loss. There is often a correlation between the degree of auricular deformity and middle ear deformity. Careful collaboration between plastic surgeons and otologists is required when considering the timing of repair if these two conditions coexist.

Children born with craniofacial anomalies are at increased risk of low self-esteem and bullying.

As operative techniques have evolved, particularly that of reconstruction with autologous costal cartilage, many surgeons have elected to postpone interventions until the patient reaches at least 10 years of age to ensure adequate costal cartilage stock for reconstruction as well as meaningful patient assent and participation in post-operative care. Children who undergo high-density porous polyethylene implantation are candidates at a younger age, typically three to five years old, but have a higher rate of infection and extrusion than those that undergo autologous costal cartilage implantation later.