# Continuing Education Activity

Wounds of all shapes and sizes have plagued patients and created a significant burden on their caretakers. It has long been noticed that some patient factors are more likely to be associated with better wound healing. Likewise, certain wound types have been noted to be associated with a better prognosis than others. Until recently, there has been little scientific evidence regarding the risk factors and characteristics, both positive and negative, responsible for wound healing behaviors. This activity will review factors that lead to poor wound healing and the latest advances in their care. It will also address how an interprofessional team can provide coordinated care to provide better outcomes in the care of patients with wounds.

**Objectives:**
- Describe factors that are associated with better wound healing.
- Identify the wounds that are likely to experience impaired healing.
- Summarize the recent advances in wound care and treatments available.
- Explain how use of an interprofessional team leads to better outcomes in the care of wounds.

# Introduction

In a way, history of wound care is the history of humankind. Well before any written historical record, chronic wounds of all shapes and sizes have plagued patients and created a significant burden on their caretakers. It has long been noticed that some patient factors are more likely to be associated with better wound healing

# Function

**Normal Wound Healing**

At times difficult to appreciate, the wound healing process (WHP) is a highly structured and well-organized biological process

- Hemostasis

- Inflammation

- Proliferation

- Tissue remodeling

When a wound forms, whether due to trauma or surgery, immediate vasoconstriction occurs via the action of thromboxane A2 and prostaglandin

The next major step in wound healing involves the accumulation of macrophages, usually around 48 to 72 hours

# Issues of Concern

**Factors Affecting Wound Healing**

The WHP is very complex and involves high levels of coordination between multiple tissues and cell types

**Diabetes**

There is no doubt that diabetes plays a detrimental role in wound healing. It does so by affecting the WHP at multiple steps. Wound hypoxia, through a combination of impaired angiogenesis, inadequate tissue perfusion, and pressure-related ischemia, is a major driver of chronic diabetic wounds

**Tobacco Abuse**

Cigarette smoking leads to numerous adverse health consequences, including various types of cancer, primary lung disease, and cardiovascular disease, among others

**Malnutrition**

The nutritional needs of the healing wound are very complex. Wounds require a myriad of different micro and macronutrients to heal properly

Several micronutrients are worth mentioning because they play a particularly important role in wound healing

**Obesity**

Obesity is a significant factor in surgical wound healing. Abdominal obesity is correlated with oxidative stress, a phenomenon associated with deficiency of adiponectin (e.g., adipose-derived cytokine with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties). Adiponectin-deficient state leads to impaired perfusion and reepithelialization of the wound. Moreover, hypovolemia combined with relative hypoperfusion and reduction in oxygen delivery lead to further tissue injury. Consequently, wound complications, including surgical site infections and fat necrosis are more prevalent in obese patients. Various combinations of the same factors may be associated with impaired secondary healing following primary wound-related morbidity

Pressure ulcers are more likely to develop in obese patients through pressure-related ischemia and hypovascularity, as well as decreased mobility. Contact between the skin and various hospital surfaces (e.g., stretchers, operating room tables) may result in friction, leading to ulceration and wound formation. Systemic effects of obesity, such as hypertension, hyperglycemia, and upregulation of the stress hormones in response to the physiologic burden of surgery and acute illness, all work to impair further wound healing. Additional factors involved in this complex process include blunting of the immune and inflammatory responses. Interestingly, these ill-effects of obesity are largely reversible through weight loss

**Stress**

Stress has been demonstrated to be a major contributor to a broad range of health conditions and illnesses, including cardiovascular disease, cancer, and obesity. Stress states lead to upregulation of stress hormones via the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and the release of adrenocortical hormones. Resultant changes include elevated levels of cortisol, glucocorticoids, and catecholamines. Cortisol works to blunt the immune response by blocking the production of important cytokines such as IL-1beta, IL-6, and TNF-alpha. The impairment of immune response ultimately leads to deficient wound healing

# Clinical Significance

Wound healing is a vast topic area, with many aspects remaining poorly understood despite the tremendous amount of progress over the past few decades. Successful wound healing requires attention to multiple factors, incorporating nutritional, microbiologic, mechanical/coverage/dressing, and circulatory considerations. Various co-morbid conditions (e.g., diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, chronic steroid administration) and environmental factors (e.g., tobacco abuse) play important roles as modulators of the WHP. More recently, a better understanding of the role micronutrients play in wound healing, along with the introduction of novel wound care therapeutics (e.g., NPWT, MDT, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, growth factors), created a foundation for further progress in this critically important area of patient care.

# Other Issues

**Methods and Techniques Known to Improve Wound Healing**

**Negative Pressure Therapy**

Numerous wound management devices have been introduced over the years to improve wound healing. However, none have been as influential and successful as negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) therapy. NPWT involves the application of subatmospheric pressure on wound via a sponge-based system with an airtight seal directly over the wound, connected under sealed conditions to a suction device. Benefits of NPWT are realized via several different mechanisms. First, the subatmospheric pressure applied to the wound helps to remove wound exudate and other materials that are known to impair the WHP. Secondly, the presence of subatmospheric pressure promotes angiogenesis and tissue perfusion by increasing cellular proliferation and migration into the wound. The suction also assists in bringing wound edges together. When combined, all of the above elements and mechanisms work synergistically to help speed up wound healing. NPWT devices can be used on a wide variety of wounds, such as pressure ulcers, large abdominal wounds, traumatic wounds, as well as complex, difficult-to-cover tissue defects following debridement operations (e.g., in the setting of necrotizing soft tissue infections)

**Vitamins, Trace Elements, and Growth Factors
**

Although a detailed discussion of the role of vitamins and trace elements in the WHP is well beyond the scope of the current review/synopsis of this topic, the authors feel strongly that a brief overview of this topic is fully warranted. It has long been known that Vitamin A may have beneficial effects on wound healing in the setting of previous systemic exposure to corticosteroids. More specifically, Vitamin A has been shown to overcome the inhibitory effects of cortisone (and related corticosteroids) on the rate of gain in tensile strength of the wound

Vitamin C and zinc have both been found to improve wound healing characteristics, although clinical adoption and implementation of this therapeutic combination is less than universal. Mechanistically, vitamin C has several favorable effects on the WHP. First, it is a powerful antioxidant and free radical scavenger. Second, it is important to systemic immunity, and along with Zinc helps boost the immune system when taken in the postoperative period. Together with Arginine and Zinc, Vitamin C is important for collagen synthesis. The evidence is strongest for supplementing vitamin C and zinc during the immediate postoperative period

Among other interesting (and important) developments in wound care, there is evidence that vitamin-D supplementation may help positively modulate impaired wound healing, although further research toward mechanistic understanding is required in this area. More specifically, the role of vitamin D in the WHP may be indirect, through beneficial effects on closely related physiological processes, such as glucose homeostasis

Finally, another vast topic area that is worth mentioning (but too extensive to fully discuss in this review) is the use of growth factors in the modulation of the WHP.  It has been demonstrated that delivery of various specific growth factors (e.g., basic fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, keratinocyte growth factor) may produce beneficial effects on chronic wounds, with many experimental and clinical applications highlighting promise in the area of diabetic wound care

**Maggot Debridement**

While considered by many as archaic, maggot debridement therapy (MDT) has been shown unequivocally to be of benefit in wound healing

**Hyperbaric Oxygen**

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) is another treatment modality that has been around for quite some time, but only recently saw a resurgence in interest due to promising effects on the WHP, especially in the setting of chronic and complicated wounds

It has been demonstrated that HBOT is effective in improving the course of chronic diabetes-related extremity wounds, potentially reducing the need for major (but not necessarily minor) amputations. Available evidence suggests beneficial effects of HBOT on wounds are usually apparent within approximately 6 weeks of therapy, but long-term beneficial effects continue to be questionable. Another area where HBOT can be beneficial is the management of necrotizing soft tissue infections (e.g., necrotizing fasciitis), with evidence showing potential mortality benefit, lower amputation rates, and an overall reduction in surgical debridements

Despite its potential benefits, there are significant potential dangers of HBOT, including the risk of oxygen fire/explosion, the risk of pneumothorax, as well as the possibility of damage to eardrums during repeated "dives." Consequently, appropriate provider is credentialing and patient/staff safety procedures must be strictly followed to reduce any undue risks of harm

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The best management of wounds is taken care of by an interprofessional team of a nurse specializing in wound care and a clinician with significant wound experience. Caring for wounds not only involves regular follow-ups but patient education. A coordinated team approach has been shown to be most effective in wound management.