Hypertonicity denotes a relative excess of the solute with extracellular distribution over body water regardless of whether body water is normal, reduced, or excessive. The gain of extracellular solutes leads to the osmotic exit of water from the intracellular compartment to dilute the extracellular solutes. Sodium salts, including sodium chloride and sodium bicarbonate, are the major extracellular solutes and routinely indicate hypertonicity when elevated.

Under hypertonic conditions, ions such as Na, Cl, and K accumulate in the cytosol and get exchanged for compatible organic osmolytes that do not perturb intracellular protein structure or function.

On the other hand, TonEBP (tonicity-responsive enhancer-binding protein), also known as NFAT5 or OREBP, is a transcription factor that can promote the cellular accumulation of organic osmolytes in the hypertonic renal medulla. This is done by stimulating the expression of its target genes in the kidneys, but it is also abundantly expressed in the brain, heart, liver, and activated T-cells.

Additionally, there is evidence that osmotic stress elicits a morphological disruption of the transverse tubular system in skeletal muscle fibers. The transverse tubular system is a continuation of the surface membrane that forms a junction with the sarcoplasmic reticulum and is known for its calcium storage. It is the primary interface between the myoplasm and the extracellular environment, and these arrangements are essential for muscle contraction.