In the prehospital setting, the mainstay of treatment involves airway, breathing, and circulatory support, aiming to get the patient to the closest emergency department (with capabilities of managing stroke). A detailed history from any witnesses or family/carers at the site of the incident is always useful as it may provide pertinent information regarding trauma, medical, and drug history.

Aggressive early medical management once in an acute hospital setting has been shown to have a direct impact on morbidity and mortality following an ICH. The immediate aim following diagnosis is to minimize the risk of rebleeding and hematoma expansion within the first 24 to 72 hours.****Studies are still ongoing regarding the definitive indication for platelet transfusion in those affected by antiplatelet medication. However, analysis of a smaller case series revealed a smaller final ICH size in those who underwent a platelet transfusion within 12 hours of ictus.

Most ICH presentations include raised blood pressure for various physiological reasons, including pain, stress, a history of increased blood pressure, and raised ICP. The potential consequence of a persistently raised systolic blood pressure is hematoma expansion, and therefore initial medical management must include treatment of elevated blood pressure. However, blood pressure reduction should take into account the patients' regular blood pressure, as a hypertensive patient may not be able to maintain cerebral perfusion at a significantly lower SBP. American stroke guidelines recommend reducing blood pressure to an SBP <140 mmHg in those with SBP ranging between 150 to 220 mmHg. In the population of patients with ICH presenting with SBP > 220 mmHg, it remains pertinent to lower their blood pressure, but in a more controlled way using an infusion with continuous monitoring.

Randomized trials initially proved strict blood glucose measurement to be beneficial to the prognosis of ICH; however, further studies have revealed increased mortality in those with cerebral hypoglycemia. Guidelines, therefore, suggest aiming for normoglycemia with strict avoidance of hypoglycemia.

To prevent secondary brain injury, the aim is to keep CPP>70mmHg. Conservative measures to reduce ICP include keeping the patient's head up at 30 degrees, appropriate analgesia, laxatives to avoid straining, hyperventilation, and sedation. In patients who have CT scans that reveal significant mass effect with indications of imminent parafalcine or uncal herniation, osmotic diuretics such as mannitol or hypertonic saline may be rapidly administered, although the benefit from this is not proven.

Urgent complications of ICH include intraventricular extension and hydrocephalus; the latter developed more quickly in posterior fossa hemorrhages due to the anatomical proximity of the fourth ventricle and, therefore, its ability to become obstructed. CSF diversion is the mainstay of treatment in these cases, and an external ventricular drain (EVD) can be inserted, most commonly into the right lateral ventricle. This allows for a reduction in ICP and herniation.

Studies have shown that in ICH within the posterior fossa, surgical evacuation of the clot improves outcomes in good surgical candidates if the clot is > 3 cm and is causing brainstem compression, decreased level of consciousness, and/or hydrocephalus.****Patients with a higher GCS and decreased volume of blood at the time of surgery are more likely to have a favorable prognosis following the surgical intervention.

The ‘Surgical intervention for supratentorial ICH’ or STITCH trial is the largest randomized trial looking into the surgical benefit. In this trial, over 1000 patients with clinical equipoise were randomized to having surgery within 72 hours or undergoing medical management. The trial concluded that there was no significant benefit from surgical intervention. However, the need for clinical equipoise meant that the patients randomized were already clinically worse off**.**Further examination of the results revealed that a small group of patients with lobar hemorrhages <1cm from the cortical surface had more encouraging outcomes from surgery with a relative benefit of 29% compared to medical management, while those patients who presented with a CGS <8 had poorer results.****This led to another trial, STICH II, aiming to understand the potential outcomes of patients with lobar clots <1 cm from the cortical surface without IVH, with and without surgery. Patients either underwent medical management or medical management with early surgery (<12 hours from the time of randomization). The results of the trial revealed no statistical significance in the two arms, although early surgery benefited the clinically unwell patients more than those who would have likely done well even without surgery.****As a result of these two large trials, the role of surgical intervention in supratentorial ICH remains controversial. It is largely considered a life-saving intervention in those who are clinically declining.

Some surgeons would consider a decompressive craniectomy (with or without evacuation of the clot) for selected patients who show little improvement with medical therapy to relieve the mass effect caused by a supratentorial, large ICH. The results of a systematic review of decompressive craniectomy in the setting of supratentorial ICH has shown improved survival rates, though morbidity remains high.

More recently, ICH treatment using minimally invasive techniques is being developed and undertaken worldwide, providing the benefit of less parenchymal brain trauma and reduced surgical time. The current techniques involve stereotactic guidance and insertion of a catheter, which can deliver thrombolysis into the clot and also allow for aspiration if appropriate. The MISTIE trial (Minimally invasive surgery plus rtPA (recombinant tissue plasminogen activator) for intracerebral hemorrhage evacuation) has proposed that the use of rtPA into the clot provides improved hematoma clearance when compared to conservative management.