Severe F.G.R. is one of the most important set-ups for high-risk delivery, in which resuscitation at the time of delivery may be required. An interprofessional team, comprised of obstetricians, anesthesiologists, neonatologists, neonatal nurse practitioners (NNP), pharmacists, etc. should be present at the delivery. Effective communication and interaction among the team members help in decreasing the risk of sentinel events. The team members should be able to perform optimally with anticipation, proper information about the pregnancy, and appropriate task delegation. Communication approaches like P.U.R.E. and TeamSTEPPS have been developed and implemented, in order to prevent communication breakdown among the essential team members in clinical practice and have proven to be effective.

Nutritional management of the fetal growth-restricted infants is important and poses a great challenge for the clinical caretaking team. The main goals include maintenance of optimal growth, avoidance of the side effects of feeding, and achieving full enteral feeding in due time. A nutrition support team (NST), composed of clinicians, dietitians, nurses, pharmacists, medical technologists, and social workers, serves to provide optimal nutritional management. A meta-analysis has shown that the availability of an NST in the hospital effectively improves patient outcomes.

Post-discharge, the infants are followed by primary clinicians and/or by specialists in a neonatal follow-up clinic, where the growth and development are serially monitored, and appropriate referrals are made for early intervention, among others, as needed in a timely manner.