Medical supplies aboard each aircraft vary, however, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), has established a mandatory requirement of “adequate medical supplies,” that must be aboard aircraft including first aid equipment and medicines that should be available to anyone offering to assist a passenger with a medical issue. Medications mandated by the FAA in onboard kits include analgesic - non-narcotic, aspirin, atropine, dextrose 50%, epinephrine 1:10,000 and 1:1,000, albuterol, hydrocortisone, diphenhydramine (oral and injectable), lidocaine intravenous, and nitroglycerin. Equipment available in each kit includes gloves, stethoscope, sphygmomanometer, CPR masks, Bag valve masks, oropharyngeal airways, Intravenous starting kit, 500 ml of normal saline, needles and syringes.

**Psychological Stress**- Flight can be stressful for anyone, but those who have an underlying psychiatric diagnosis or a fear of flying are prone to acute agitation and anxiety during the flight.

**Barotrauma**- Complications of changing cabin pressure during ascent and descent, or variations unexpectedly in level flight, can include pain due to trapped gas in the intestinal tract, teeth, sinus, or middle ear. Tympanic distention during descent is typically well-tolerated by most healthy people. Adults may conduct a Valsalva maneuver. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) travel yellow book recommends children chew gum or swallow, and infants to be offered nursing or bottles to help alleviate pressure. This intervention may not be sufficient to relieve pressure, however, in the setting of coexisting nasal and sinus congestion, which increases the risk of tympanic perforation and sinus barotrauma. If intense pain is suddenly relieved, this may be indicative of perforation, and patients should have routine follow up with their primary care physician and possibly otolaryngology. Similar acute localized pain may occur in the sinuses, teeth, or intestines and should be evaluated by a physician upon flight completion.

**Altered Mental Status**- Insidious hypoxia can result in decreased CNS functioning and hypoxic vasoconstriction severely impacting other organ systems resulting in pulmonary edema and increased cardiac output leading to congestive heart failure (CHF) or myocardial infarction(MI). Other conditions that may result in altered mental status may include a broad differential such as stroke, intoxication, infection, circadian rhythm dysregulation, hypoglycemia, or another metabolic pathology.

**Myocardial Infarction (MI)**may result if the patient has a predisposition due to increased sympathetic tone and gradual hypoxia leading to vasoconstriction.

**Shortness of Breath**- Asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or pulmonary hypertension can be exacerbated by decreased oxygen concentrations, resulting in increased sympathetic response, clinically hyperventilation, tachycardia, and chest pain. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or emphysema live with lower blood oxygen levels and so should be advised to travel with oxygen to prevent in-flight hypoxia.

**Exposures**- Those who are prone to an allergic response, especially those with may have an increased response to irritants and allergens, can have those reactions in flight and present as respiratory reactions, dermatitis, abdominal pain, and warrant consideration of anaphylaxis.

**Motion Sickness**- Nausea and vomiting due to sensory conflict or vestibular disturbance, while uncomfortable, is rarely life-threatening during the in-flight period. Motion sickness can become exacerbated by in-flight conditions, heat, vibration or turbulence, task saturation, unusual attitude relative to the direction of flight. Reduction of these factors can improve symptoms in some cases - offer cool vented air or cool compress, relocate if possible to the forward area of the aircraft to minimize vibration, sit in a forward-facing position, with a view of the direction of travel, and if conducting in-flight responsibilities, suggest a break from these for the responsibilities.

**Fatigue**- Vibration, dehydration from low air humidity and circadian dysregulation (jet lag associated with crossing several time zones in one flight) can result in daytime fatigue, poor sleep, and headache lasting for 3 to 4 days.

**High Gravitational Exposures**along the z-axis (head to foot), felt typically only in high-performance military aircraft during abrupt maneuvering, have the potential to cause acute loss of consciousness if appropriate “anti-G straining maneuver” (AGSM) is not initiated promptly, regardless of the physical condition of the aviators.