In most cases, the approach to the dive site and the return route following the dive are at lower altitudes, but in mountain areas, divers often traverse mountain passes that add significant pressure changes that may induce off-gassing of residual nitrogen in the bloodstream. This risk can be mitigated by applying the same warning given to divers at sea level: “do not fly for 18 hours following a single dive, or 24 hours after the last dive of a multi-dive profile.” When arriving at an altitude from a dive, the diver is saturated with nitrogen, and time for off-gassing should be allowed. Acclimatization to new altitude levels is important to reduce the overall risk before the event. Minimum acclimatization of 12 hours before diving is recommended; however, 3-day acclimatization may be required at elevations greater than 10,000 ft (3000 m). When diving before the recommended wait time ends, a diver should take into account the residual nitrogen and appropriate time added to bottom times when calculating the decompression obligation.

High-altitude weather may also significantly affect risk. Temperature extremes and reduction in oxygen concentrations exist with a greater rise in elevation. Colder, dry, humidified air is common at higher altitudes. This may affect respiratory function, usually in the form of bronchial irritation with effects ranging from a minor cough to asthmatic wheeze. When combined with reduced oxygen availability, increasing hypoxia may develop. Respiratory rate increases initially to blow off more carbon monoxide (CO) induced by the lower PaO2 levels. This also increases insensible fluid losses leading to dehydration. It may also result in greater, unplanned depletion of air in the diver’s tank.

The higher altitudes (greater than 8000 to 10,000 ft) may also expose the individual to cold injuries, acute mountain sickness (AMS), high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), or high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE).

Dive profiles are for freshwater in most mountain waterways. The increased density of seawater exerts a pressure greater than that of freshwater (64 pounds per cubic foot or [1025 kg per cubic meter] versus 62.4 pounds per cubic foot [1000 kg per cubic meter]). Therefore, a diver must either convert from depth calculations in feet of seawater (fsw) to feet in freshwater (ffw) or utilize freshwater charts or a dive computer that allows for this conversion.