A presenting patient is usually a male, older than 70, and a current or former smoker. Patients often have multiple cardiovascular or pulmonary comorbidities.

SCLC typically occurs in the central airways and is often aggressive with a short doubling time and high mitotic rate. Symptoms are usually rapid-onset and begin 8 to 12 weeks before presentation. Signs and symptoms depend on the location and bulk of the primary tumor. They may include a cough, wheezing, and hemoptysis. Local intrathoracic tumor growth can affect the superior vena cava (resulting in superior vena cava syndrome), chest wall, or esophagus. Extrapulmonary distant spread can present with neurological problems, recurrent nerve pain, fatigue, and anorexia. Nearly 60% of patients present with metastatic disease. Most common sites of metastases include the brain, liver, adrenal glands, bone, and bone marrow. If left untreated, SCLC is characterized by rapid tumor progression with a median survival of 2 to 4 months.

SCLC is the most common solid tumor to cause paraneoplastic syndromes. Paraneoplastic syndromes are caused by ectopic hormone production or immune-mediated tissue destruction.

The most common paraneoplastic syndromes include:

- SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis) in 15% to 40% of patients. This may present as weakness, dysgeusia, and clinical euvolemia.

- Ectopic Cushing syndrome in 2% to 5% of patients. Production of ectopic corticotropin (ACTH) resulting in elevated free cortisol levels. Can present with edema, proximal myopathy, and hypokalemic alkalosis.

- Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic syndrome in 3% of patients. This presents as a weakness of proximal arms and legs, relieved temporarily after exercise. Can involve autonomic nervous system.