New technologies have been introduced and evolved into dentistry in recent years. The need for 3-dimensional (3D) images has made cone beam computerized tomographies (CBCT) a valuable and popular diagnostic tool in dentistry.

Dental radiography is widely used as a diagnostic tool in daily dental practice. It is estimated that dentists are responsible for more than one-quarter of all medical radiographs in Europe. Since the discovery of X-rays 120 years ago, dental radiographs have been the primary source of diagnostic information for the oral and maxillofacial complex. However, their use is limited because 2D imaging techniques cannot display complex 3D anatomical structures and related pathologies.

In 1972 computed tomography (CT) was developed by Hounsfield; in 1973, it was reported to be used to diagnose with 3-dimensional (3D) images. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Robb et al. performed fundamental research on cone-beam CT (CBCT). In the 1980s, CT imaging became widely used in dental teaching hospitals. This allowed 3D imaging of extensive inflammation and tumors for precise diagnosis and treatment planning. These images were not optimal for observing dental and periodontal structures. CT devices are large and expensive and expose patients to high doses of radiation. But they have become more compact and popular for dental implant surgeries.

In 1997 Arai and colleagues designed a more compact CT machine specially created for dentistry. It was a cone beam CT (CBCT) device for dental use called "Ortho-CT."