The diagnosis of venous gas embolism is largely clinical and requires high suspicion. Sudden symptoms after or during an invasive procedure such as loss of consciousness or hemodynamic instability are highly suggestive of gas embolism. The temporal relationship between symptoms and invasive procedures is the biggest clue in making the diagnosis. Various monitors used during surgery that may already be in place can be helpful in making the diagnosis of venous gas embolism or arterial gas embolism.

The blood gas may reveal hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and metabolic acidosis.

Transesophageal echocardiography may visualize a gas bubble in the heart and is the most sensitive diagnostic test for venous gas emboli. Precordial Doppler monitoring is the most sensitive noninvasive test routinely used. As noted previously, end-tidal carbon dioxide and nitrogen monitoring are useful in detecting venous gas emboli that have lodged into the pulmonary vasculature. Additionally, a drop in tidal volume is more specific for venous gas embolism than many other tests.

CT scans can detect small amounts of air in the central venous system. The technique may also reveal intracerebral air or cerebral edema.

End-tidal nitrogen is a very sensitive method of detecting venous air embolism. The response is much faster than with ETC02 measurements. However, the technique does not always identify minute amounts of air and may falsely indicate resolution.

If the patient has a central venous catheter, aspiration may reveal the presence of air bubbles.

Anytime venous air embolism is suspected, the surgical procedure must be quickly terminated. If one is inserting a central venous catheter, one may attempt aspiration. The catheter should ideally be placed just 2 cm below the junction of the right atrium and SVC.