# Introduction

The skull is a compact structure that covers and protects the brain and facial organs.

While radiography has been the principal imaging modality of skull lesions until recent years, today it is largely replaced by computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Thanks to its high spatial resolution, CT is excellent at precisely localizing the skull lesion and defining its extensions. And owing to its high contrast resolution, MRI is the preferred method for the assessment of diploic involvement and lesion texture.

# Anatomy

The skull, also referred to as the cranium, is one of the hardest and most durable structures of the human body. It consists of two parts, one of which is neurocranium encasing the brain, and the other is viscerocranium forming the facial skeleton. The neurocranium is a large neural cavity formed by the tight engagement of the calvarium (cranial vault) and the skull base with each other. The calvarium is made up of flat bones, including frontal bones, parietal bones, the squamous portions of the temporal bones, and the interparietal portion of the occipital bone. Although the calvarium is a monolayer structure at birth, the diploic space emerges in around the fourth year giving the calvarium its characteristic double-layer form. The skull base forms the floor of the neurocranium on which the brain sits smoothly.

# Plain Films

In today's clinical practice, cross-sectional imaging methods such as computed tomogram (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have largely replaced skull radiography, and the use of plain films has been significantly limited. However, it is still regarded as the first-line imaging method in cases of suspected skull lesions and is sometimes used to obtain a diagnostic clue.

# Computed Tomography

The skull imaging study has a long list of indications that can practically be classified as trauma, benign or malignant focal skull lesions, and systemic pathologies affecting the skull. CT is the principal modality in imaging of the traumatic skull lesions since it not only provides perfect visualization of cortical bone but also offers a very short imaging time allowing immediate intervention before brain damage or death. Besides, it is regarded as the most accurate method in the detection of a cerebrospinal fluid leak. Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) allows rapid volumetric image data acquisition, and with the use of sub-millimetric slice thickness, it permits multiplanar reformations (MPR) and 3-dimensional (3D) reconstructions.

# Magnetic Resonance

In imaging of the skull, CT and MRI usually complement each other in terms of their strengths and disadvantages and are often used in combination. MRI is superior in imaging the diploic area and demonstrating bone marrow involvement. It can detect a lesion in the diploic area even before it changes bone architecture, and can shed light on the content of the lesion. Another strength of MRI is that it provides the opportunity to evaluate the associated soft tissue component accurately and precisely define scalp involvement and intracranial/extracranial extension.

The skull MRI sequence profile shows some differences as compared with that of the head MRI. First, a skull MRI study should include more fat-saturated imaging sequences compared to brain imaging because of the considerably high adipose tissue content of the structures surrounding the skull, especially the skull base. Second, the study should always include non-contrast T1-weighted images without fat saturation since it is the best sequence in evaluating possible marrow replacement by a tumor or edema. While most physicians are usually persistent in requesting contrast-enhanced MRI for skull imaging, it should be taken into consideration that gadolinium may obscure lesions in case the appropriate technique is not performed. Therefore, the administration of contrast material should be justified according to the suspected pathology.

On MRI, intact inner and outer tables appear as signal-free areas, and the diploic space displays variable signal intensity depending on patient age. While most of the skull lesions are hypointense on T1-weighted and hyperintense on T2-weighted images, the signal characteristics of the lesions show a wide range of variations according to their cellular content.

# Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography (US) is not a useful imaging modality for evaluating bone pathologies. The use of the US in the skull region is not intended for bone lesions, but the evaluation of brain parenchyma and cerebral vascular structures through the acoustic windows obtained between sutures or through the relatively low mineralized skull in newborns.

# Nuclear Medicine

Bone scintigraphy is a diagnostic nuclear medicine imaging method that evaluates active bone formation related to malignant and benign diseases, as well as physiological processes.

Almost all bone scintigraphy examinations are performed in patients with a diagnosis of malignancy, especially breast, prostate, and lung cancer. And the method plays an indispensable role in the staging and treatment of malignant tumors. Bone metastases usually appear as scattered foci of increased uptake, which are different from each other in terms of size and shape on radionuclide bone imaging.

# Angiography

The use of angiography in imaging studies of skull lesions is extremely limited. The most common application area of angiography in skull lesions is for preoperative embolization of the brain tumors affecting the skull, especially meningiomas. Preoperative embolization is applied to reduce intraoperative blood loss, facilitate tumor resection, and shorten the operation time. It is especially useful in skull base tumors and tumors with very high vascularity.

# Clinical Significance

The skull is at the target of many pathological processes, including congenital, inflammatory, neoplastic, and traumatic pathologies. Most skull lesions are asymptomatic and are incidentally discovered during CT or MRI performed for other reasons. Benign tumors such as hemangioma and osteoma are the most commonly encountered lesions in this region.

**Calvarial Lesions**

Osteoma, hemangioma, fibrous dysplasia, eosinophilic granuloma, epidermoid and dermoid cysts, and Paget disease are the most commonly encountered benign lesions in the calvarium. Among these, hemangiomas, eosinophilic granulomas, and epidermoid and dermoid cysts are seen as lucent lesions while the remaining are sclerotic on radiography and CT. The most common two malign calvarial lesions are metastases and multiple myeloma. While the lung, breast, prostate, kidney, and thyroid are the most common origins of skull metastases in adults, a metastatic lesion in the skull of a child primarily suggest neuroblastoma or sarcoma as the origin. Skull metastases may be either lytic, sclerotic, or mixed; however, they mostly present as multiple lytic foci with accompanying soft-tissue components. Single and expansive lytic lesions are highly suggestive of thyroid or renal neoplasm metastasis. Metastases of prostate carcinoma are typically osteosclerotic. Multiple myelomas, the most common primary bone tumor of adulthood, characteristically show punched-out lytic lesions with sharp non-sclerotic margins that may coalesce to form larger lytic areas in the skull.

**Skull Base Lesions**

The skull base has an extremely complex anatomy and is not favorable for clinical examination. Therefore, radiologic imaging is an indispensable part of skull base evaluation. Inflammatory and neoplastic lesions of this region are the two main groups of pathology that must be primarily addressed. The main inflammatory lesions of the skull base are mucoceles and cranial complications of sinusitis and mastoiditis. Mucocele refers to the expansion of an air cell by mucus accumulation caused by the obstruction of the sinus ostium. In cases of mucocele, it is necessary to determine the cause of obstruction and to evaluate intraorbital/intracranial expansion, on CT and/or MRI. Sinusitis and mastoiditis may cause several intracranial infectious complications such as meningitis, cerebritis, ventriculitis, epidural abscess, subdural empyema, or skull base osteomyelitis. An initial non-contrast CT of the skull base and paranasal sinuses/temporal bone, followed by MRI with and without contrast administration, should be performed in case any of the mentioned complications are suspected. The neoplastic involvement profile of the skull base is no different from that of the calvarium, except for chordoma and chondrosarcoma, both of which have a well-known tendency for the skull base.