# Introduction

Blood flow through the body delivers oxygen, nutrients, hormones, cells, products of defense mechanisms for wound healing, and platelets. The heart pumps these products to the organs, while the vessels transport them to and from the organs. Arteries perfuse the organs and veins drain the organs of waste products. The lymphatic system helps in draining excess tissue fluid to the bloodstream. Two circulatory loops are most important to survival: the pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation. The pulmonary circulation pumps blood from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery. Blood exchanges carbon dioxide for oxygen while passing through the lung and the newly oxygenated blood drains into the left atrium from the pulmonary veins. The other circulatory loop is the systemic circulation, which pumps blood from the left ventricle to the aorta to the rest of the body. It transports nutrients to the intestines and hormones to endocrine glands. Waste excretion then occurs via the kidneys, intestines, lungs, and skin. Blood returns to the right atrium from the superior and inferior vena cava.

# Structure and Function

There are four main types of vessels in the body and have a specific role in blood flow. Arteries are thick-walled vessels that perfuse organs. Capillaries connect arteries to veins and are the main sites of nutrient/waste exchange. Capillaries have the largest total cross-sectional and surface area. Veins are thin-walled blood vessels that return deoxygenated blood to the heart. Sinusoids are substitutes for capillaries in some organs such as the spleen, liver, red bone marrow, etc. and their primary function is to elicit an immune response to foreign antigens. Each vessel plays a specific role in blood flow and is regulated by several different factors that alter flow physiology.

Arterioles are branches of arteries that are innervated by autonomic nerve fibers. There are alpha-1-adrenergic receptors on arterioles of the skin, splanchnic and renal circulations, and beta-2-adrenergic receptors on skeletal muscle. Alpha1-adrenergic receptor activation results in vasoconstriction, and beta2-adrenergic receptor activation results in vasodilation.

# Embryology

When the embryo is no longer able to meet its respiratory, nutritional, and excretory needs, by simply spreading the nutrient fluids, it develops a system of vessels capable of distributing oxygen and nutrients to its tissues and transporting waste products.

Blood vessel formation begins with the development of blood islands or Wolff islets in the mesenchyme of the splanchnic mesoderm, before the yolk sac and later on the allantoid.

The blood vessels that develop in the wall of the yolk sac and the allantoid-chorion flow into an extra-embryonic network, which belongs to a pair of arteries and vitelline veins and a pair of allantoid arteries and veins which, through the umbilical cord, they penetrate the embryonic area.

Blood fluids are vital in the formation of the future child, as they generate valuable mechanotransductive information.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Blood flow can either be laminar or turbulent. Laminar flow is linear flow, mainly found in the middle of the vessel. Turbulent flow is any disruption in the laminar flow. Reynold’s number predicts the chances of flow being turbulent. The higher the number, the increased likelihood of being turbulent and vice versa. Reynold’s number is proportional to density, velocity, and diameter and inversely proportional to viscosity.

Many organs, such as the heart, brain, and kidney, rely on autoregulatory mechanisms, or local control of blood flow, that affect perfusion. Other organs rely mostly on sympathetic stimulation or extrinsic control of blood flow. The coronary arteries are locally regulated by hypoxia and adenosine, which vasodilates the vessels to maintain oxygenation to the heart. When the heart increases in contractility, the oxygen demand of the coronary arteries increases. Therefore, vasodilation occurs to increase blood flow and oxygen to the arteries. The afferent arteries in the kidney are the main pressure-induced auto-regulators of renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate via stretch and tubuloglomerular feedback. Carbon dioxide is the main autoregulator in the brain that stimulates cerebral vasodilation to maintain blood flow during ischemia.

# Nerves

Baroreceptors located on the carotid sinus response to the decreased pressure (low blood pressure), which signals to activate the sympathetic nerves and vasoconstricts arteries and veins.

# Clinical Significance

A multitude of factors regulates blood flow throughout the human body. Each organ has its way of altering the flow, depending on certain conditions. Understanding the mechanisms behind perfusion is essential for the treatment of diseases associated with blood flow pathophysiologies such as myocardial infarction, hypertension treatment, and stroke.

# Other Issues

The blood flow can vary its intensity, direction, type of flow (laminar, turbulent, etc.), entity. These processes involve different mechanical signals to the tissues, with mechanotransductive responses specific to the type of flow.