Temporary transcutaneous pacing requires a pulse generator and monitoring unit with standard defibrillation pads. These are ubiquitous in most medical settings. The pulse generator must have a pacing function. ECG electrodes, non-invasive or invasive blood pressure monitoring and pulse oximetry are strong recommendations.

Temporary transvenous pacing requires central venous access, typically with a 6 French (Fr) venous percutaneous introducer sheath, a transvenous pacing catheter, and an external pulse generator. Ultrasound guidance for central venous access is also a strong recommendation. A 12 lead-capable ECG machine, cardiac monitor, non-invasive or invasive blood pressure monitoring, and pulse oximetry should be available. This procedure is sterile, and standard sterile technique is necessary.

The transvenous pacing catheter is mostly bipolar, 3 Fr to 5 Fr in diameter and 100 cm long. Lines are typically present at 10 cm intervals to estimate catheter depth. Catheters may be flexible, semi-floating, or rigid. For most emergent indications, when temporary pacing would be in order, a semi-floating catheter with a balloon is used. The balloon holds 1.5 ccs of air and requires testing before insertion. The leading end of the catheter has two electrodes, of which the negative is most distal. Adapters allow the electrodes to be attached to the pulse generator.

The external pulse generator delivers an electrical current through the pacing catheter, measured in milliamperes (mA). Generators share the same basic features, including electrical output and cardiac sensing components. These are present as dials on the generator’s face. Output control regulates the current delivered, functionally controlling the ability to obtain electrical capture. Rate control selects the pacing rate. Sensitivity control establishes the threshold at which a sensed intrinsically generated current inhibits the pacemaker from firing. This setting is the choice for demand (synchronous) pacing. For most emergent indications, the sensitivity control is turned to the lowest setting, providing asynchronous (fixed rate) pacing.

Epicardial pacing typically requires an external pulse generator and surgically placed epicardial pacing electrodes. The electrode location requires confirmation with the surgical team.