When the presence of the dawn phenomenon is detected, especially when associated with the extended dawn phenomenon, an individual patient should be considered for earlier and more aggressive control of glucose.  The prevention of long-term sequelae by minimizing exposure to hyperglycemia is key early in the disease process. Optimal insulin therapy is important in type 1 diabetes, but also in type 2 diabetes. Oral hypoglycemic agents have failed to show adequate control of the dawn phenomenon, while insulin therapy has been shown to be much more effective.

Choosing an insulin regimen must, of course, be individualized for each patient, but research has indicated that the presence of the dawn phenomenon must be considered in selecting the type of insulin and the mechanism of delivery.  In studies that have demonstrated superior glycemic control with continuous insulin infusion as opposed to long-acting insulin formulations, the dawn phenomenon is likely the reason. The ability for a continuous infusion to provide a bolus in the early morning hours to counteract the dawn phenomenon is a possible explanation, as long-acting insulin preparations have no ability to achieve this. For type 1 diabetes, tight control with insulin must take into account the dawn phenomenon to avoid nocturnal hypoglycemia before the onset of early morning glucose elevations. If insulin adjustments are made based on early morning fasting glucose levels, a larger dose of insulin might be administered than would be appropriate if the dawn phenomenon magnitude was considered.

Management of morning hyperglycemia should be a part of the overall diabetes control strategy.  Lifestyle modification is an important component to be considered.  Better control of morning glucose levels has been demonstrated by increasing the amount of exercise in the evening and by increasing the protein to carbohydrate ratio of the evening meal. Consuming breakfast is also very important. While it seems counterintuitive, an early morning meal serves to decrease the secretion of insulin-antagonistic hormones.