# Continuing Education Activity

Tubal sterilization is performed at the request of women who have completed childbearing and desire an effective and irreversible form of birth control. It can be performed at any time during a woman's menstrual cycle or in the immediate postpartum or postabortal period. It may be performed via laparoscopy, mini-laparotomy, or hysteroscopy. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, and complications associated with tubal sterilization and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients undergoing this procedure.

**Objectives:**
- List the indications for tubal sterilization.
- Describe the technique for performing tubal sterilization.
- List the complications of tubal sterilization.
- Employ interprofessional team strategies for optimizing care coordination and communication to advance the safe performance of tubal sterilization.

# Introduction

Tubal Sterilization is performed at the request of women who have completed childbearing and desire an effective and irreversible form of birth control.

Informed consent is very important.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The fallopian tubes lie on either side of the uterus and are divided into four segments which include:

- Infundibulum or fimbriated end overlying the ovary

- The thin-walled and wide ampulla, which varies in length and shape

- The narrow, straight and thin isthmus

- The intramural portion of the tube pierces the uterine wall and usually located on the superolateral segment of the uterine cavity.

# Indications

- For women wanting a permanent method of contraception.

- For women in whom a future pregnancy could pose a significant risk of medical harm.

# Contraindications

Contraindications include ambivalent patients, lack of finances,very young age, incapable of making a medical decision, the presence of gynecological malignancy, and morbidly obese patients.

# Preparation

Follow the following steps:

- Perform pregnancy test

- Pap smear

- Urinalysis

- Screening for STD

- Ultrasound of the pelvis if there is suspicion of any pelvic mass on physical exam

# Technique or Treatment

**Approaches**

Hysteroscopy offers the advantage of the ability to perform in the office setting with minimal to no sedation with a paracervical block and avoidance of incisions and intra-abdominal entry with its attendant risks.

Laparoscopy offers the advantage of immediate efficacy and ability to evaluate the pelvis.

Minilaparotomy is used for postpartum sterilizations, in patients who have significant risks with laparoscopy, or as an interval procedure in low-resource settings.

# Complications

Some complications include:

- Mortality is low and about 0.01% to 0.02% and mostly related to general anesthesia.

- Conversion to open laparotomy

- Bowel injury from trocar, electrocautery

- Vascular injury from trocar

- Ectopic pregnancy

- Failure to sterile

- Vascular injury

- Failure to sterile because of lack of anatomical knowledge, failure to identify  oviduct, poor technique

- Ectopic pregnancy

- Pain

- Infection

- Patient regret

# Clinical Significance

Patients should be warned about the possibility of post-tubal ligation syndrome. There is some controversy whether post tubal ligation syndrome is a real entity. For many decades patients undergoing tubal ligation have presented with menorrhagia, pelvic discomfort, and ovarian cystic changes. It is not known whether these symptoms are due to damage to the blood supply or a result of oral contraceptives that the women were taking prior to the procedure. Fortunately, the number of cases are few, and the pattern of symptoms is not always consistent.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Tubal ligation is usually done by the obstetrician but initially most women come for advice on the topic to their primary care provider or nurse practitioner.  The key about tubal ligation is that the patient must be informed that it is a permanent procedure and should never be done as an emergency. While the mortality of the procedure is low, a number of serious complication may ocur. The patient should be counseled with the spouse before a decision is made to undertake the procedure. The outcomes for most patients who undergo tubal ligation are good.