# Continuing Education Activity

Young children with sickle cell anemia are at risk for acute splenic sequestration crises. These occur when an excessive amount of blood becomes trapped in the spleen, causing a dangerous drop in the circulating blood volume. This activity outlines the etiology, evaluation, and management of acute splenic sequestration crises and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and epidemiology of splenic sequestration crises. 
- Describe the appropriate history and physical examination of a patient with a splenic sequestration crisis. 
- Summarize the appropriate treatment options available for a patient with a splenic sequestration crisis. 
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes for patients with splenic sequestration crises.

# Introduction

Splenic sequestration is a feared complication of sickle cell anemia that primarily affects young children. It is an acute drop in hemoglobin of 2 g/dL accompanied by splenomegaly. The spleen is at particular risk for complications from sickle cell anemia due to its role as a filter of the blood. The spleen is composed of three areas; white pulp, red pulp, and a transitional zone, and each plays a role in the immune system. A minority of blood flow entering the spleen (approximately 10%) is directed outside of the vessels into the parenchyma of the red pulp, where the red blood cells (RBCs) become exposed to reticuloendothelial cells such as macrophages which clear away abnormal cells or other pathogens.

# Etiology

Adult type hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule contained within RBCs, consists of two alpha and two beta-globin chains. Mutations in the structure of the beta-globin can result in abnormal polymerization and aggregation of the beta-globin chains when they are in a deoxygenated state, rendering the RBC stiff and deformed into a sickled shape.

# Epidemiology

Splenic sequestration crises are one of the first serious manifestations of sickle cell anemia and typically occur from age six months to 5 years, after which the spleen has typically undergone autoinfarction. However, a case series of acute sequestration events in adults demonstrated continued risk for those with variant hemoglobinopathies such as HbSC disease and sickle cell beta-thalassemia.

The median age of children with sequestration crises is 1.4 years, with 75% of episodes occurring before age 2.

# Pathophysiology

Splenic sequestration crises are thought to occur when an area of sickled cells within the red pulp of the spleen obstructs a larger draining vein.

# Histopathology

Children with sickle cell disease have a disordered architecture of the white pulp of the spleen characterized by reduced and indistinct follicles and varying levels of fibrosis and RBC congestion within the red pulp.

# History and Physical

Splenic sequestration crises characteristically demonstrate the abrupt onset of pallor, weakness, and tachycardia.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of an acute splenic sequestration crisis is primarily clinical and can usually be accomplished by a careful history and focused physical exam.

# Treatment / Management

Immediate management of acute splenic sequestration episodes consists of restoring the circulating blood volume, typically accomplished by the transfusion of RBCs, which improves the hemoglobin level directly and promote the release of trapped RBCs by the spleen. The usual recommended dose for transfusion is 5-10 ml/kg. Initial transfusions should target a post-transfusional hematocrit of less than 35%. This is to avoid complications from excessive RBC release and subsequent hyperviscosity syndrome.

# Differential Diagnosis

An acute aplastic crisis may present with sudden onset pallor, fatigue, and anemia but is typically associated with a low reticulocyte count and lack of splenomegaly.

# Prognosis

Although historically splenic sequestration was the second leading cause of death among young children with sickle cell anemia, mortality rates have dropped dramatically over the past forty years.

# Complications

Acutely, children with a sequestration crisis are at risk for severe anemia and cardiovascular collapse. Many of the long-term complications of acute splenic sequestration crises arise from efforts to prevent its recurrence. The spleen plays an important role in optimizing antibody production against encapsulated organisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, and children who undergo splenectomy have lower circulating IgM levels and are at increased risk of sepsis from encapsulated bacteria.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Daily penicillin prophylaxis is the recommended intervention for all children with sickle cell anemia starting at two months of age, and children who undergo splenectomy to prevent future sequestration crises must be maintained on this antibiotic to lessen their risk of sepsis from encapsulated organisms. Asplenic children must also receive the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine series as well as the Hemophilus influenzae type b series and a yearly influenza vaccine.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The use of hydroxyurea, a medication that stimulates the production of non-sickling fetal hemoglobin, has resulted in a marked reduction in the number of vaso-occlusive events among young children with sickle cell anemia. However, it has not demonstrated a reduction in the risk of splenic sequestration crises, and primary prevention remains an unresolved goal.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Splenic sequestration crises are medical emergencies that must be diagnosed and managed promptly to prevent hemodynamic collapse. Children with sickle cell anemia are most at risk before age 5, after which the spleen is rendered minimally functional through the process of autoinfarction. Sequestration events are primarily a clinical diagnosis when an acute enlargement of the spleen accompanies signs of anemia such as pallor, fatigue, and tachycardia. The evaluation consists of a careful physical exam and a CBC to assess the degree of anemia. Emergent management should focus on the restoration of circulating blood volume and is typically accomplished through the use of RBC transfusions. Long-term prevention of recurrent sequestration events is controversial and may involve watchful waiting, chronic transfusion therapy, or splenectomy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Sickle cell disease affects nearly every organ system, and the management of patients with this condition depends on effective interprofessional communication. Splenic sequestration crises are managed primarily in the emergency department setting. However, many children may first present to their primary care provider who must be able to recognize this potentially fatal condition quickly. The emergency department must have nursing protocols in place to promptly triage and evaluate children with sickle cell disease. After triage and initial evaluation are complete, emergency physicians should communicate closely with the patient's primary hematologist, who can provide consultation and assist with the coordination of care. In the case of sequestration crises, the blood bank staff must be available to type and crossmatch blood for transfusion if necessary quickly. Long-term management of children with splenic sequestration crises may include splenectomy, which would require consultation from a surgeon as well as the child's primary hematologist. Overall care coordination for children with sickle cell disease is complex and should be led by the child's primary hematologist in conjunction with their primary care provider. Nursing will assist the team by providing ongoing monitoring, and assist in the event of surgical intervention, counseling parents, and assessing compliance. With interprofessional collaboration, children with splenic sequestration can achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]