To understand anti-reflux surgery, clinicians must have a firm grasp of the foregut anatomy, particularly the lower esophageal sphincter and stomach.

The lower esophageal sphincter consists of four anatomic structures:

- The intrinsic musculature of the distal esophagus, which is usually in a state of tonic contraction.

- The sling fibers of the gastric cardia, which contribute to the high-pressure zone of the lower esophageal sphincter.

- The crura of the diaphragm, which surrounds the esophagus at the esophageal diaphragmatic hiatus.

- The gastroesophageal junction, which should be located intra-abdominally so that the intra-abdominal pressure on the distal esophagus prevents reflux.

The stomach begins at the diaphragmatic hiatus, or lower esophageal sphincter, and ends as it continues as the first portion of the duodenum. It is divided into the cardia, fundus, body, antrum, and pylorus. The cardia is just distal to the gastroesophageal junction, the fundus abuts the left diaphragm, and the pylorus is the most distal portion entering the duodenum. The lesser curvature lies beneath the medial segments of the liver and contains the incisura angularis. The incisura angularis can be identified as the junction of the vertical and horizontal parts of the lesser curvature, which marks the transition of the body to the antrum. The greater curvature is the long left lateral border of the stomach. It runs from the fundus to the pylorus, which is connected to the greater omentum. The left border of the intraabdominal esophagus and the fundus meet at an acute angle called the angle of His.

**Ligaments**

- Gastrohepatic ligament: lesser curvature to the medial liver edge, contains the left and right gastric arteries. This may contain a replaced left hepatic artery.

- Gastrophrenic ligament: fundus to left hemidiaphragm, avascular.

- Gastrosplenic ligament: greater curvature to the spleen, which lies in the left upper quadrant. It contains the short gastric vessels.

- Gastrocolic ligament: inferior stomach to the transverse colon, considered part of the greater omentum. It contains the gastroepiploic vessels.