Compressed gas diving results in increased uptake of inert gas, mainly nitrogen, in tissue during descent. On ascent or decompression, the excess inert gas is eliminated from the tissues. Once at the surface, there is a residual inert gas that continues to be released from the tissues. The amount of residual inert gas depends on the type of diving done. If a diver ascends to the surface too fast, the inert gas comes out of solution and forms bubbles in the tissues and the bloodstream causing decompression sickness. These bubbles can cause an injury that ranges from mild joint pain and rash to severe neurological injury and death. Similarly, if a diver flies shortly after diving, the reduction in pressure can cause the residual inert gas to come out of solution and form bubbles. To reduce the risk of decompression sickness when flying after diving, a diver should remain at sea level long enough to allow the elimination of excess inert gas from tissues. Preflight surface intervals vary and depend on the type of diving done before the flight.

Recommended preflight surface intervals for recreational divers:

- For a single no-decompression dive, a minimum preflight surface interval of 12 hours is suggested.

- For multiple dives per day or multiple days of diving, a minimum preflight surface interval of 18 hours is suggested. Of note, one study found no DCS occurrences with flying after 18 hours in trials of flying after diving using profiles near the no-decompression exposure limits for recreational diving.

- For dives requiring decompression stops, there is little evidence on which to base a recommendation and a preflight surface interval substantially longer than 18 hours appears prudent.

These recommendations were the consensus of attendees at the 2002 Flying After Diving Workshop held by Divers Alert Network (DAN) and Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS). They apply only to recreational divers doing air dives followed by flights at cabin altitudes of 610 to 2438 meters (2000 to 8000 feet) for divers who do not have symptoms of decompression sickness (DCS). The recommended preflight surface intervals do not guarantee avoidance of DCS. Longer surface intervals will reduce DCS risk further. At altitudes lower than 610 meters (2000 feet), the effect of a flight is considered mild enough not to warrant special consideration.