Pre-op preparation and optimization are essential to decrease peri-operative morbidity and mortality in pheochromocytoma. Roizen criteria proposed by Roizen et al. in 1982 are commonly used to assess the efficacy of adequate preoperative alpha blockade

- No in-hospital blood pressure >160/90 mmHg for 24 h before surgery.

- No orthostatic hypotension with blood pressure <80/45 mmHg.

- No ST or T wave changes for 1-week before surgery.

- No more than five premature ventricular contractions per minute.

Catecholamines (noradrenaline is the most common) released from the tumor cause vasoconstriction, and hence patients with PCC usually have contracted intravascular volume despite being hypertensive. It is vital to optimize intravascular volume to decrease peri-operative hemodynamic fluctuation. An alpha-adrenergic blocker is administered starting 10 to 14 days preoperatively to optimize blood pressure and ensure euvolemia for volume expansion. Phenoxybenzamine is the most commonly used drug. It is an irreversible, nonspecific alpha-adrenergic blocker. It is long-acting and has a half-life of approximately 24 hours

Selective alpha-1-adrenergic blocking agents, prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin may all be used to facilitate preoperative α-blockade. Blockade of alpha-1 and alpha-2 leads to smooth muscle relaxation in arterioles and venous capacitance vessels. Orthostatic hypotension and reflex tachycardia, especially in the setting of hypovolemia, are potential side effects of the alpha blockade, particularly with long-acting phenoxybenzamine. Selective alpha-1-adrenergic blocking agents cause less reflex tachycardia than non-selective alpha-blockers because the alpha-2 inhibitory activity is left intact.

The successful alpha blockade is reflected by normalizing blood pressure with mild orthostasis. The beta blockade should never be initiated before the alpha blockade. They should be started only after an adequate length of the alpha blockade is established; if not, a hypertensive crisis can occur due to unopposed alpha-receptor stimulation

Alpha-methyl-para-tyrosine (metyrosine) inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis