Transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement is a safe and effective alternative to surgical valve replacement in patients with native RVOT/surgical RVOT conduit dysfunction with excellent procedural success and low incidence of post-procedural pulmonary valvular regurgitation. Fracture of stent frame is the most common etiology for valve degeneration requiring re-intervention. Current recommendations from professional societies recommend TPVI in symptomatic patients with severe PR/PS (Class 1, CEBM level of evidence 3) and asymptomatic patients with severe PS/PR and evidence of RV dysfunction/RV dilation/recurrent arrhythmias (Class 2a, CEBM level of evidence 3). Future development of valve systems improving valve durability, lowering catheter/valve profile, reducing thrombogenicity, and inflammatory response to valves may further improve outcomes, reduce complications, and expand the patients eligible for TPVI.

The interprofessional team approach in the management of patients with RVOT dysfunction plays a critical role in ensuring optimal outcomes for patients. The interprofessional team should include interventional cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, cardiac imaging experts, cardiac anesthesiologists, nurses, and catheterization laboratory technologists who work together to provide an integrated & holistic approach to pre-procedural planning, intra-procedural support, and post-procedural care to ensure optimal outcomes for patients. Communication shared decision making, and collaboration between health care providers is key for excellent outcomes. Interprofessional care also helps identify early and late complications of TPVI, therefore improve the prognosis of the patients. Advancements in imaging techniques and protocols will provide further insight into the pathophysiology of the RVOT dysfunction to help identify appropriate timing for TPVI for the best clinical outcome and long term prognosis.