Clinicians should teach the patient adequate hygiene measures.

First-line therapy continues to be circumcision, which is the only therapy that provides long-term, full remission. Some patients often reject procedures in this sensitive area. Other options include topical steroids, calcineurin inhibitors, mupirocin, photodynamic and laser therapy, but the disease tends to relapse with the use of any of these treatments.

The use of topical steroids in the treatment of plasma cell balanitis has been used, although there is little evidence to support its use. Tang et al. reported a good response to a combination cream of oxytetracycline 3%, nystatin 100,000 units/g, and clobetasone butyrate 0.05% (Trimovate) until a complete clinical resolution was observed. Three of ten patients had recurrences within 3 months after cessation of therapy and responded to the second course of Trimovate cream. A fourth patient had three recurrences within 12 months, and each responded within a few days, and he continued on follow-up.

Calcineurin inhibitors, such as tacrolimus 0.1 and 0.3% and pimecrolimus 0.1% have been used, with complete remission after 3 to 8 weeks of therapy. However, there has been concern regarding a relationship between topical calcineurin inhibitors and carcinogenesis.

Photodynamic therapy has not yet been well established since it’s mostly based on case reports. Nevertheless, it has been considered a moderately effective and safe option for Zoon balanitis and has been used in refractory lesions.

Carbon dioxide and erbium:YAG lasers are alternatives that have shown variable outcomes. Erbium:YAG was used with a focus on mostly 3 mm. The frequency employed was 8 Hz, the impulse energy was mostly 800 mJ. In most patients, a complete re-epithelization was achieved within ten days. There was a complete clearing of lesions during follow-up (3 to 30 months). There were no major complications, including phimosis. The erbium:YAG laser offers a precise superficial ablation with low thermal injury, low risk of scarring, low pain and rapid healing.

Mupirocin 2% ointment 3 times daily for 6 weeks to 3 months, has shown temporary complete resolution in two cases. This could be explained by the possibility that Zoon balanitis might be associated with bacterial colonization or super-antigen.