Moderate alcohol consumption is defined as 1 drink/day for women and up to 2 drinks/day for men. Studies have revealed that this low to moderate alcohol use has been demonstrated to lower the risk of coronary heart disease.

The average rate of alcohol metabolism is approximately 7 g/hour which is equal to 1 drink/hour.

Cage criteria for alcoholism screening:

- Have you ever felt the need to CUT down your drinking?

- Have people Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking?

- Have you ever felt guilty drinking?

- Have you ever felt you needed a drink first thing in the morning (Eye-opener) to steady your nerves or to get rid of a hangover?

Each yes gets a +1, and each no gets a 0 for a total of 4 and a low of 0. However, CAGE falls short in lower severity situations. For these (if provided with ample time for interviewing) refer to AUDIT:

- How often have you had a drink containing alcohol this past year?

- How many drinks with alcohol did you have on a typical day you were drinking this past year?

- How often did you have six or more drinks on one occasion in this past year?

Each question has four potential categories for responses allowing each category a max of 4 and a low of 0. Scores less than 3 are consistent with normal alcohol consumption.

CIWA Criteria:

- Nausea/Vomiting 0-7

- Tremor 0-7

- Paroxysmal sweats 0-7

- Anxiety 0-7

- Agitation 0-7

- Tactile disturbances 0-7

- Auditory Disturbances 0-7

- Visual Disturbances 0-7

- Headache/Fullness in head 0-7

- Orientation/clouding of sensorium 0-4

Patients less than or equal to a score of 8 do not require medical treatment whereas those above do.

While patients addicted to opioids may develop a tolerance for all other side effects, constipation and miosis remain constant despite the dosage — screen patients with these side effects before signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and other vital sign depressions.

Although variable amongst the states, typical BAC levels that define alcohol intoxication 80 to 100 mg/dL (.08 to 0.1% BAC). For the chronic user, these levels may take increasing times to reach.

Sober time calculator – (BAC (mg/dL) – legal limit) / 20mg/dL/hr = time to sobriety

Avoid bupropion in patients with a current or past history of eating disorders as this lowers the threshold for seizure side effects.