Chronic kidney disease is diagnosed when there is evidence of kidney damage for at least three months or in any patient with a GFR of less than 60 mL/min for that same amount of time.

To calculate GFR, three equations are commonly used (the MDRD [Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study], CKD-EPI, and Cockcroft-Gault formula). However, the best estimate of GFR is the CKD-EPI (Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration) equation, which adjusts for age, race, and gender. However, it is important to note that the formula underestimates the actual GFR at a GFR more significant than 60 mL/min.

Further evaluation of kidney disease can include a renal ultrasound, complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP), urinalysis, and/or kidney biopsy.

**Complete Blood Count**

CBC shows normochromic normocytic anemia.

**Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP)**

The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine levels are elevated. Hyperkalemia or low bicarbonate levels are usually present. Serum albumin levels are low due to urinary protein loss or malnutrition. Serum phosphate, 25-hydroxyvitamin D, alkaline phosphatase, and intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels are obtained to look for evidence of renal bone disease.

**Urinalysis**

A spot urine protein/creatinine ratio can be used to quantitate albuminuria. A value higher than 30 mg of albumin per gram of creatinine is considered abnormal, while values greater than 300 mg/g are considered severely impaired renal function. Additionally, a 24-hour urine protein can also be performed. A value greater than 3.5 g is concerning for nephrotic range proteinuria.

**Renal Ultrasonography**

Renal ultrasonography should be done to look for hydronephrosis or involvement of the retroperitoneum with fibrosis, tumor, or diffuse adenopathy. Small, echogenic kidneys are observed in advanced renal failure. While in diabetic nephropathy, kidneys are normal in size. Structural abnormalities like polycystic kidneys also may be observed on ultrasonograms. An ultrasound can provide data estimating size, obstructions, stones, echogenicity, and cortical thinning.

**Radiology**

Plain abdominal radiography can detect radio-opaque stones or nephrocalcinosis, while a voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) is diagnostic for vesicoureteral reflux.

Computed tomography (CT) scanning can help better describe renal masses and cysts and is also sensitive for identifying renal stones.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) can accurately diagnose renal artery stenosis.

A renal radionuclide scan with captopril administration can diagnose renal artery stenosis, and it also quantitates differential renal contribution to the total glomerular filtration rate (GFR).

**Renal Biopsy**

Percutaneous ultrasound-guided renal biopsy is indicated when the diagnosis is unclear after an appropriate workup.

**Specific Tests**

- Serum and urine protein electrophoresis for multiple myeloma

- Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), double-stranded DNA antibody levels for systemic lupus erythematosus

- Serum complement levels

- Cytoplasmic and perinuclear pattern antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (C-ANCA and P-ANCA) levels for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis) and microscopic polyangiitis

- Anti–glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies for Goodpasture syndrome

- Hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) serology