Diagnosis and management of solid pseudopapillary pancreatic neoplasms require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) will typically be the ones to diagnose the condition and order the lab tests; given the absence of symptoms earlier in the disease, this step is crucial to prompt treatment initiation.

An interprofessional team, including histopathologists, oncologists, and surgeons, can provide a holistic and integrated approach to achieve the best possible clinical outcomes on the management of the solid pseudopapillary epithelial neoplasms. These clinicians will also determine when and the type of surgical intervention, which nursing will assist. Specialty nursing including operating room, perianesthesia, and medical-surgical nurses will also be responsible for the care and monitoring and communicate their observations to the rest of the team.

While chemotherapy is not presently a part of the treatment picture for solid pseudopapillary epithelial neoplasms, post-operative care will include medication therapy for pain and possible infection prophylaxis. Pharmacists can make medication recommendations based on the patient's current drug profile, comorbid conditions, and also verify dosing, and report recommendations to the nurses or prescribers. In this manner, the entire interprofessional team collaborates to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level V]