There are many case series, observational trials, and few randomized controlled trials investigating outcomes in neurolysis, but due to heterogeneity of nerve targets and a large variety of tools for neurolysis, large data pools have not been studied.

In terms of chemical neurolysis, phenol neurolysis may provide therapeutic relief for 8 to 12 weeks, while alcohol neurolysis generally lasts longer from 12 to 24 weeks. RFA of peripheral nerves may last 3 to 12 months until axonal regeneration occurs.

Of studies looking at chemical neurolysis, those targeting the celiac plexus for pancreatic malignancy have been extensively described. A meta-analysis demonstrated that neurolytic celiac plexus block in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer was associated with improved pain scores, reduced opioid use, and decreased constipation.

Of all studies looking at non-chemical interventional approaches to neurolysis of peripheral nerve targets, RFA of the medial branch of the dorsal primary rami that innervate facet joints has been most studied. A prospective 10-year clinical trial investigating radiofrequency neurotomy of the lumbar facet joints for relief of chronic low back pain showed that over 68% of patients reported good (greater than 50%) to excellent (greater than 80%) pain relief lasting from 6 to 24 months.

Despite these meta-analyzed data, controversy still exists on the long-term efficacy of RFA for low back pain. For example, a recent study that included three separate randomized controlled trials performed by Juch and colleagues included patients with chronic low back pain from facet joints, sacroiliac joints, or intervertebral disks. They reported that RFA combined with exercise compared with exercise alone resulted in no difference in pain intensity after 3 months.

A systematic review on the efficacy of cryoablation in the cancer pain population demonstrated that cryoablation decreased pain scores by over 60% at 24 hours post-procedure, by 70% at 3 months, and by over 80% at 6 months.

Data on surgical neurectomy are even more limited, and typically involve peripheral nerves at the trunk. A study investigating neurectomies of the ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric, genotifemoral, lateral-femoral cutaneous, and intercostal nerves demonstrated this as a reasonable modality for treatment of chronic postoperative neurogenic pain, leading to significant improvement in pain scores and quality of life.

Outcomes data on neurolysis for pain relief remains inconsistent due to variable patient selection, diagnostic criteria, type of intervention, and outcome measures. Due to the absence of compelling evidence and the paucity of data suggesting low-risk long-term benefits, neurolysis should be cautiously considered only after a failure of other modalities including pharmacologic, physical, psychiatric, and non-destructive interventional therapy.