Iron overload suspected after a history and physical can generally be diagnosed with low costs, non-invasive blood tests. Serum iron levels are not indicated. Serum ferritin greater than 300 ng/ml in males and greater than 150 to 200 ng/ml in menstruating females can be indicative of iron overload. However, serum ferritin levels can also be elevated for a variety of reasons, including inflammation, infection, and liver disease; it is known as an acute phase reactant. Total binding iron capacity (TIBC) may be normal as well. Fasting, elevated serum transferrin saturation percentage greater than 45% can assist in further diagnosis. In classic hemochromatosis, both serum ferritin and transferrin iron saturation percentage will most often be elevated.

Genetic testing is now available for the HFE gene associated with hemochromatosis. Mutations in this gene can occur in many different patterns. Patients with the C282Y/C282Y, H63D/H63D, or C282Y/H63D pattern are most at risk for the disease. It is estimated that one million white Americans have the C282Y/C282Y inheritance pattern.

Hepatic iron index on percutaneous liver biopsy can be utilized in difficult to diagnose cases but carries greater procedural risk than blood testing. Liver biopsy has been the standard of diagnosis, but with the introduction of genetic testing is reserved for more complicated cases.

Once the diagnosis of iron overload is established, more specific testing is directed depending on suspected organ involvement.