The deltoid is a triangular muscle. Its base (or origin) attaches to the spine of the scapula and lateral third of the clavicle. This U-shaped origin point mirrors the insertion point for the trapezius muscle. Its apex (or insertion) attaches to the lateral side of the body of the humerus, on a point known as the deltoid tuberosity.

The deltoid divides into three distinct parts (anterior, lateral, and posterior). When all three parts contract simultaneously, the deltoid will assist in abducting the arm past 15 degrees. It cannot initiate abduction because the direction of pull of the deltoid muscle is parallel to the axis of the humerus. Throughout abduction, the anterior and posterior parts of the deltoid play a significant role in stabilizing the arm, while the lateral head assists in raising the arm from 15 to 100 degrees. Additional functions include ambulation. The anterior head of the deltoid works with the pectoralis major to flex the arm when walking. This is in contrast to the posterior part of the deltoid, which works with the latissimus dorsi to extend the arm during ambulation.

It is also noteworthy to discuss the stabilization functions that the deltoid provides. While carrying large objects while completely adducted (such as a dead-lift movement or carrying weights), the deltoid prevents inferior displacement of the glenohumeral joint. The deltoid also provides compensatory force during the abduction of the arm. In a 2018 study, shoulders with rotator cuff tear required as much as 108.1% of the normal 193.8 N deltoid force to stabilize and abduct the arm 79.8 degrees.