Complications associated with balanitis include the development of pain, ulcerative lesions of the glans/foreskin, phimosis, paraphimosis, meatal/urethral stricture, and malignant transformation of premalignant lesions.

Phimosis is an abnormal constriction of the opening in the foreskin that precludes retraction over the glans penis, results from chronic inflammation and edema of the foreskin. Development of phimosis often complicates sexual function, voiding, and hygiene. If the patient or medical staff forcibly retract the foreskin, paraphimosis (trapping of the foreskin) can occur.

Phimosis is treatable in the emergent setting by dilation using a surgical clamp and pain medication. In the event this is not successful, a dorsal slit circumcision can be performed by a urologist to temporize the problem. Definitive treatment, under elective circumstances, is complete circumcision.

Paraphimosis refers to the trapping of the foreskin behind the glans penis and is a urologic emergency. The constricting foreskin has become located proximal to the glans penis. Under these circumstances, the constricting band will limit the venous and lymphatic outflow while allowing continued arterial inflow. Over the course of minutes to hours, the glans will increase in size and become exquisitely painful and must undergo treatment by a urologist with reduction of the paraphimosis.

Genital yeast infection (termed “candidiasis” or “thrush”) is uncommon in healthy individuals, but in immunocompromised individuals, such as those with HIV infection, in diabetic and cancer patients C. albicans can also cause bloodstream infection with serious consequences.