The cordotomy is a palliative procedure. It is often performed on patients with a life expectancy under six months and comes with significant risks and with possible significant benefits. Obtaining a thorough history is essential, and the clinician should show empathy to the patient and their condition, whether it be a malignancy or other pathology. This decision is not to be made alone or lightly by the patient, family, or clinician. Patients must not feel rushed when having their options for intractable pain laid out before them. Furthermore, this is a surgical procedure, so interprofessional approaches to conversations must take place. Proper communication should occur between the nurse, palliative physician, the surgeon, the oncologist, and the primary physician. Each specialty should help the patient make an informed decision that the patient feels is best for their own goals of care. As always, especially in palliative care patients with often many co-morbidities, the patient's medical history and background should be clearly defined to members of the patient's healthcare team. Any deviation from thoroughness can create significant challenges and risks for the patients, their family, and their clinicians. Medical errors are to be actively avoided. If any particular nurse or clinician feels that significant palliative procedures, such as the cordotomy, are not the best choice for the patient, they should tactfully bring up their concern to the clinicians involved in that patient's care. This interprofessional approach ensures that they have a full and clear understanding of the procedure, risks, and benefits before approaching the patient with their professional opinion.