In soil, the hookworm eggs hatch, and first-stage larvae called rhabditiform L1 larvae develop in few days. They molt twice to become the infective filariform L3, which is about 0.5 to 0.6 mm in length and can live for 3 to 4 weeks if suitable conditions were available. It waits in soil or on the grass until it comes into contact with human skin and initiates an infection.

The infection starts when larvae penetrate the victim's skin in a process that requires about 30 mins to 6 hours to complete, according to species. Occasionally, larvae might use buccal mucosa to invade the host and make their way down to the circulation. Cutaneous penetration usually goes unnoticed but sometimes might cause what is called 'ground' itch.

Skin penetration occurs under a chemical process that starts with the production of proteolytic enzymes from certain glands in the larvae. Necator americanus produce proteases that could break connective tissue components such as collagen and elastin. On the other hand, Ancylostoma larvae produce hyaluronidase enzyme, which cracks the dermal integrity and allows the larvae to migrate through the skin. One of the significant larval secretions is called Ancylostoma secreted proteins (ASPs), which are pivotal in developing the parasite, representing about one-third of its secreted proteins.

After skin penetration, the larvae migrate passively through the bloodstream to the right side of the heart and hence to the pulmonary vasculature. During pulmonary migration, it might cause a type-1 hypersensitivity reaction within the alveoli (Loeffler syndrome). They penetrate the alveoli and migrate through the bronchial tree to the pharynx and then to the intestinal tract.

Once the larvae reach the duodenum, and after molting twice, they become L5 immature worms that can use their teeth or cutting plates that line their buccal capsule to get fixed into the host's intestinal mucosa. Digestion of blood is helped by metalloproteases and anticoagulant peptides, which maintain the flow of liquid blood through mucosal injury. However, the process by which hemoglobin gets consumed in the parasite gut is poorly understood.

Worms mature in 4 to 6 weeks into adult sexually differentiated worms. After mating, the female produces up to 30000 eggs per day, which exit the host with feces to continue the life cycle.

Blood loss in heavily infected persons could reach up to 9.0 mL/day and occurs by two mechanisms. The first is through consumption of the parasite, which accounts for a small portion of blood loss. The second and the main loss occurs through the attachment site by leakage around it. Iron deficiency anemia occurs when the host becomes unable to compensate for blood loss, especially in heavy infections and nutritionally deprived individuals. The major risk factor for anemia is the worm burden, though, in children, anemia could occur with a lower worm burden.

Simultaneous protein loss might occur and result in symptomatic hypoalbuminemia and hypoproteinemia, leading to anasarca and worsen malnutrition.

Parasites can last for years in the host, and accordingly, it had to develop multiple strategies to ensure survival. The parasite uses broad-spectrum protease inhibitors to neutralize the effect of the host's immune defenses. While it helps the parasite protect itself from proteolytic enzymes, it worsens the host's malnutrition by interfering with absorption. Moreover, it induces apoptosis of T lymphocytes and, consequently, inhibition of local immune response. The down-regulated immune response to the parasite is mainly due to parasite-specific T cell hyporesponsiveness secondary to altered function of antigen-presenting cells, T cell apoptosis, and cytokines modulation.

Interestingly, in individuals with hookworm infections, same as other helminths, patients tend to have a wider variety of gut microbiota. This observation, along with immune regulatory mechanisms in hookworms, prompted research into the potential use of hookworms to treat immune-mediated gastrointestinal diseases like celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease.