In vitro fertilization is the most commonly utilized assisted reproductive technology. It involves the collection of oocytes from the ovary, followed by fertilization in vitro, and is completed with transferring the resulting embryo into a uterus. It involves various steps outlined below, including controlled ovarian stimulation, oocyte retrieval, fertilization, embryo culture, and embryo transfer. Additionally, preimplantation genetic testing and intracytoplasmic sperm injection may also be included in the process. Cryopreservation with vitrification is then used to freeze excess embryos or for fertility preservation of eggs or embryos.

**Controlled Ovarian Stimulation**

The first cases of IVF utilized a natural menstrual cycle where a single oocyte was retrieved. Natural cycle IVF is still in practice. However, controlled stimulation of the ovaries is now more commonly performed to maximize the number of oocytes gained per cycle. The latter also offers a much higher chance of pregnancy success.

Multiple agents and regimens exist for controlled ovarian stimulation. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERM) like clomiphene citrate and tamoxifen are one such avenue for this.  Benefits of minimal stimulation protocols ("mini-IVF") utilizing SERMs include a decreased risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and multifetal gestation. However, it also results in a lower live birth rate (49% versus 63% birth rate between mini-IVF and conventional IVF, respectively).

Injection of exogenous gonadotropins, like follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), is frequently used for controlled stimulation. It maximizes the number of developing follicles during a single cycle. The following gonadotropin protocols are most popular currently.

**Gonadotropin-releasing hormone****(GnRH) Antagonist cycles**- Mixed gonadotropin medications are used through two types of injection, one with FSH activity (Recombinant FSH) and one which has both FSH and LH activity. The premature LH surge is protected from occurring by a GnRH antagonist. These cycles can be started with menses after normal baseline parameters are confirmed with ultrasound and normal hormonal levels of FSH and estradiol levels. On many occasions, the cycle starts after pretreatment with oral contraceptives for 2-4 weeks.

**GnRH Agonist cycles**- Mixed gonadotropins are also used through two types of injection, one with FSH activity (Recombinant FSH) and one with both FSH and LH activity. The premature LH surge is protected from occurring by a GnRH agonist. The GnRH agonist is started in the luteal phase of the cycle before the gonadotropins are started. When the gonadotropins are started, the dose of the GnRH agonist is customarily halved until a trigger is given for final maturation before egg retrieval. Pretreatment with oral contraceptives can also be used in these cycles.

Transvaginal ultrasound monitoring is utilized to track the number and growth of follicles. Serum lab testing is also performed, most frequently measuring estradiol (E2) levels to track ovarian response. Once ovarian follicles are mature (typically when 2-3 follicles reach 18mm in size), final maturation is artificially triggered via exogenous human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) or with a GnRH agonist administration.

Specific dose-based regimens and other less common stimulation protocols are beyond the scope of this review.

**Oocyte Retrieval**

At its inception, oocyte retrieval was initially performed via laparotomy, then by laparoscopy.

Greater numbers of oocytes retrieved (up to 15) are associated with improved live birth outcomes.

Before the ultrasound-guided transvaginal approach, laparoscopic or abdominal retrievals of oocytes were performed. While largely fallen out of practice, laparoscopic and abdominal egg retrievals are occasionally used to obtain oocytes, such as in cases of vaginal agenesis or when the ovaries are not in the pelvis (such as in the case of ovarian transposition in advance of radiation therapy or with patients who have a huge fibroid uterus).

**Fertilization**

Fertilization occurs in vitro by mixing oocytes obtained from retrieval with spermatozoa in a culture medium. Spermatozoa are obtained via an ejaculation sample or surgical retrieval in cases of obstructive azoospermia and isolated via density centrifugation and washing in culture media. For patients with a history of fertilization failure or with male factor infertility, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) is considered as it has been shown to improve fertilization rates.

Embryos are incubated for either a day 3 (cleavage stage) or day 5 (blastocyst stage) transfer. Day 5 transfers are more common and have a higher chance of success. Evaluation of the appearance of embryos is more predictive of success on day 5 at the blastocyst stage rather than day 2 or 3 at the cleavage stage in which the embryos are merely 4 or 8 cells, respectively.

**Preimplantation Genetic Testing (PGT)**

Preimplantation genetic testing is commonly performed in conjunction with IVF. It refers to various genetic assays performed on embryos before transfer to identify possible genetic disorders. For example, preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A) screens for whole chromosome abnormalities, whereas preimplantation genetic testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M) screens for single-gene disorders in high-risk patients.

PGT can be performed with polar bodies or an isolated blastomere of a cleavage-stage embryo, usually from a day 3 embryo. It can also be performed from a sample of cells from the trophectoderm of a blastocyst-stage embryo. The benefit of a trophectoderm sample is avoiding biopsying the inner-cell mass that gives rise to the fetus. However, in the case of mosaicism, it may not represent the constitution of fetal tissue.

With 24 chromosome analysis, evidence for PGT-A is more mixed. A few randomized controlled trials (RCT) comparing elective single-embryo transfer (eSET) of euploid embryos determined by PGT-A versus morphology grade-based selection of embryos found non-inferior or improved pregnancy rates amongst the PGT-A group.

Secondary to the mixed, limited data, ASRM currently does not recommend for or against the universal use of PGT-A. However, it does acknowledge potential benefits, particularly in eSET candidates, and the resultant decrease in multi-gestation pregnancies (discussed below).

While PGT is classically used for selection against aneuploidies and genetic disorders, it can be used in more ethically controversial avenues such as in sex selection. Additionally, individuals in specific communities, such as the dwarf and deaf community, have been reported to request selection for dwarfism or genetic deafness. A shared decision-making model is recommended in such circumstances.

**In Vitro Maturation**

In vitro maturation (IVM) is an alteration to traditional IVF, which can be used in select patients, such as those at risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (i.e., PCOS patients) or women with estrogen-sensitive cancers requiring time-sensitive gonadotoxic treatment. In IVM, immature follicles are collected with minimized to no exposure to hormonal stimulation during the germinal vesicle to metaphase II stage. Typically, a short course of FSH administration is performed, with or without hCG administration for follicular priming.

**Embryo Transfer**

The American Society of Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) developed a standardized protocol for embryo transfer based on a task force that evaluated survey responses regarding individual practices amongst Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (SART) medical directors.

The protocol guideline based on the survey and existing evidence is as follows:

- One should prepare for the embryo transfer by reviewing prior mock/transfer notes

- Patient preparation for the procedure should include analgesics for patient comfort. However, analgesics are not shown to improve pregnancy outcomes.

- Checklist-based time out process to ensure appropriate patient and embryo identification

- Transabdominal guidance to visualize the endometrial cavity and pelvic anatomy, as well as for ultrasound guidance of the transfer

- Standard sterility preparation with hand-washing and sterile gloves

- Placement of the speculum. Flushing of the vagina is recommended with either a cotton swab or gauze utilizing saline or media as the cleansing solution

- Removal of mucus from the cervical-endocervical canal, with some evidence for improvement in clinical pregnancy rates.

- Use a soft embryo transfer catheter to pass through the cervix into the endometrial cavity. The transfer may occur directly in which the catheter is loaded with the embryos before catheter placement, with a trial transfer followed by the actual transfer (empty catheter is passed through the cervix before loading the catheter with an embryo for transfer), or the afterload transfer (The catheter is passed through the cervix, after which the inner catheter is removed, with the outer catheter left in place in the canal. The inner catheter is then loaded with the embryo(s) and replaced for the placement of the embryo(s) into the uterus).

- One should place the tip of the catheter in the upper or middle third of the endometrial cavity. There is some evidence this position improves pregnancy rates.

- One should confirm the catheter does not have retained embryo(s)

- There is no evidence for bed rest after embryo transfer.

While the vast majority of embryo transfers are performed in this manner trans-vaginally, for patients with uterine anomalies or difficult trans-cervical access, intrafallopian transfer via gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) or zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT) is a possible alternative laparoscopic transfer technique.

Current ASRM guidelines recommend single embryo transfer in patients with a favorable prognosis, considering a maximum of two and three blastocyst embryos transferred at once in the 38 to 40 and 41 to 42 age group, respectively.

Following the embryo transfer, the luteal phase is typically supported with progesterone and estrogen supplementation to promote implantation and pregnancy continuation.

**Cryopreservation**

Embryos not used in the current cycle can be cryopreserved. Cryopreservation is typically achieved with vitrification, a rapid freezing process. Vitrification is thought to prevent cryoinjury by decreasing the development of intracellular crystals.