The initial imaging exam of the foot is an anterior to posterior (AP) radiograph, lateral foot radiograph, and oblique foot radiograph. For an AP radiograph, the foot can be placed plantigrade on the bed while the patient is supine by flexing the knee and hip. The X-ray beam is then directed at approximately 10 degrees caudal. This view will allow visualization of the first and second tarsometatarsal joint and medial and middle cuneiforms, metatarsals, and phalanges and a stacked view of the lateral column of the foot.

To obtain an oblique foot image, you leave the foot positioned as described for the AP view and angle the X-ray beam 30 to 40 degrees lateral or inverting the foot. The oblique view gives a better image of the lateral midfoot and forefoot. The lateral foot projection can be made with the foot placed as described above. The X-ray beam is positioned 90 degrees lateral with the plate on the side of the foot, or you could position the patient supine with the foot propped up away from the contralateral leg or contralateral leg flexed to get out of the view and angle beam 90 degrees from the foot. The beam should be centered around the midfoot at the base of the metatarsals. If you are primarily looking at the medial column of the foot, you can do an external oblique, also called the medial oblique. To position, you externally rotate the foot and ankle and lift the medial column of the foot toward the X-ray source.

For evaluation of the calcaneus, you would need a lateral view of the calcaneus and a harris axial view to get orthogonal imaging and appropriately view the joints. The lateral view is where you measure Bohler's angle. To get this view, you have the patient supine and roll onto the affected side with the leg and foot externally rotated until the foot is parallel to the table. Then, center the beam at the midfoot to make sure the foot is in slight dorsiflexion, and the planter foot should be perpendicular to the plate. This allows visualization of the talocalcaneal and calcaneocuboid joints. The Harris view is an axial view of the calcaneus. This can be done with the patient weight-bearing by having them stand on the plate with the ankle dorsiflexed to about 40 degrees. To get the ankle dorsiflexed, the patient will have to flex the knee and hip slightly. Aim the X-ray beam from posterior to anterior approximately 2 cm cephalad to the calcaneus with the beam angled 40 degrees. This should give you an axial view of the calcaneus tuberosity to assess for varus and valgus alignment, as well as visualization of the posterior and middle subtalar articulation. This can be done in the operating room with the patient prone or supine by dorsiflexing the ankle and angling the X-ray beam at 40 degrees.

Additional views of the hindfoot include the Broden view, which allows visualization of the subtalar joint and any associated pathology. The subtalar joint has 3 facets anterior, middle, and posterior in different planes. The patient is positioned supine with the foot internally rotated 45 degrees. Then multiple views taken starting with the X-ray beam angled cranially at 10, then 20, 30, and 40 degrees with the beam centered at the ankle joint.

To evaluate the talus neck and anterior calcaneus process, the canale view can be obtained. The patient will be supine or laying on their side with the ankle plantarflexed with the foot internally rotated 15 degrees. The beam is then angled about 25 degrees caudal.

For the sesamoid X-ray view, you want to get an axial view of the fibular and tibial sesamoids under the first metatarsal head.  You can view the sesamoid position on AP X-ray, but this has been shown to not be as reliable as the tangential view.

It is important to understand the soft tissue anatomy around the sesamoid complex that is not visible on X-ray. In particular, the plantar plate at the plantar surface of the metatarsal phalangeal joint. The plantar plate provides metatarsal phalangeal joint stability. It can be injured with an axial load with the MTP joint in flexion. The plantar plate is a part of the sesamoid complex. Injury ranges from partial to complete tear. When there is a complete plantar plate tear, this causes proximal migration of the sesamoids that can be visible on X-ray.