The majority of commonly performed hand procedures can use WALANT successfully.

Poor access to healthcare is an indication for WALANT. Without the need for an operating room or anesthesia team, ambulatory surgical care is possible in locations that are remote or lacking adequate resources.

The COVID-19 epidemic has highlighted the need for ambulatory surgery to avoid unnecessary exposure. WALANT decreases unnecessary exposure to patients and staff by avoiding both the operating room and overnight stays in the hospital. Without sedation, there are no intubation exposure risks, and fewer staff members are needed to facilitate room turnover. This helps the hospital free up the operating rooms for urgent cases requiring anesthesia.

For complex procedures requiring advanced instrumentation and more support staff, such as tendon transfers and multiple fracture fixations, WALANT can easily be performed in the operating room as well.

The three principal benefits of WALANT are patient safety, greater access to surgical needs, and improved intraoperative diagnosis and assessment.

The preoperative benefits of WALANT are improved access to surgical care and workflow. Multiple studies demonstrate decreased wait times from the first consultation to surgery day.

Patients can only tolerate tourniquets for durations of no more than thirteen minutes on average.

WALANT allows the surgeon to make a diagnosis more accurately. Intraoperative assessments are particularly advantageous with flexor tendon repairs, as it is more challenging to gauge tension without patient participation.

Patient satisfaction and better allocation of resources are the most significant postoperative benefits of WALANT. Studies by Tan (2020) and Rhee (2017) reported that 94% of patients would choose WALANT again in the future. Patients have decreased pain postoperatively in comparison to sedation with a tourniquet. Tahir in 2020 reported that distal radius fractures using WALANT healed more rapidly.