The retina transmits light signals into chemical signals that are sent to the brain. This process requires the ability to sense the stimulus of light and transmit that signal from cell to cell.

**Photoreceptors (rods and cones)**: The detection of light begins at the deepest cell layer in the retina, the photoreceptors, located in the outer nuclear layer. Rods are very light sensitive and are responsible for dim-light vision. Cones, on the other hand, are not very light sensitive but are specific for a particular wavelength of light. Thus, cones are responsible for high acuity color vision.

**Bipolar cells**: Photoreceptors use the neurotransmitter, glutamate, to communicate at the synapse with bipolar cells within the outer plexiform layer.

**Retinal ganglion cells**: These are the final receivers and transmitters of the initial stimulus. They send the information they receive down their axons, which eventually form the optic nerve and project to higher brain centers.

**Amacrine cells**: Amacrine cells modulate the excitation of the retinal ganglion cells through contact with ganglion cell dendrites or bipolar cell axon terminal bulbs, using the neurotransmitters GABA and glycine.

**Horizontal cells**: These cells function to modulate the communication between photoreceptors and bipolar cells. Bipolar cells contact ganglion and amacrine cells at the inner plexiform layer.

**Müller cells**: These are cells are of glial origin and are essential for proper retinal function. They contact almost every cell type in the retina, spanning the entire width from the photoreceptors to the inner retina. They serve to recycle neurotransmitters, prevent glutamate toxicity, and regulate nutrient homeostasis in the retina.