Modern ultrasound instrumentation provides an assessment of blood flow with one of several techniques as follows:

- Color Doppler imaging

- Pulsed Doppler

- Spectral analysis

- Power Doppler imaging

- B-flow imaging

- High-resolution B-mode imaging of artery anatomy

Peripheral arterial ultrasound should be performed using a real-time scanner and transducer with pulsed and color doppler capability. A linear array transducer is preferred over a curved array transducer if it allows adequate penetration.

A 5 MHZ linear array transducer is ideal for examining an average-sized adult. Linear 3.5 MHz probes for iliac and 5 MHz for CFA interventions, including PTA, might be preferred. Higher frequency probes (7.5 to 10 MHZ) are used for thin or small individuals and identifying superficial vessels. However, some centers mention utilizing a 3 to 12 MHz linear probe occasionally in very thin patients.

Some studies mentioned that duplex ultrasound instrumentation for peripheral arterial testing requires the application of curved and linear array transducers. A 3.5- to 7-MHzimaging frequencies to provide both appropriate penetration and comprehensive high-resolution images of the abdomen and lower extremity arteries are recommended.

There are two types of Doppler ultrasound displays: 1. a color flow Doppler image and 2. a spectral Doppler image. While the former demonstrates mean flow velocity distribution as a color-encoded map integrated over the gray-scale B-mode tissue image, the latter shows the time-varying flow velocity distribution within a specific sample volume.