Laboratory and radiographic evaluation can assist in the diagnosis and grading of the severity of an arthritic condition.

Inflammatory arthritides are associated with an elevation in markers of inflammation (ESR and CRP). Anemia of chronic disease is common. Leukocytosis can be seen in septic arthritis as well as gout, pseudogout and Adult-onset Still disease, while leukopenia and thrombocytopenia can be seen in RA and SLE-associated arthritis. Serum uric acid may be elevated in patients with gout, although this shall not be the sole diagnostic criterion. Serologies such as rheumatoid factor, anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies, Anti-Nuclear antibodies, and more specific autoantibodies shall be performed when appropriately indicated to assist diagnosis.

Plain radiographs shall be the initial imaging modality. Joint space narrowing, osteophytes and effusion are common findings in osteoarthritis. Periarticular osteopenia is the first radiographic feature in inflammatory arthritis and erosions, joint space narrowing and secondary osteoarthritis developing later in the disease. Central "gull-wing" erosions are a feature of erosive osteoarthritis, while periarticular erosions are seen in RA. Entheseal calcifications can be seen in seronegative spondyloarthritis especially psoriatic arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. Xrays in axial spondyloarthropathies are normal early in the disease but later can show bamboo spine and sacroiliac joint fusion and erosions. Axial osteoarthritis, on the other hand, presents with osteophytes, disc bulges, joint space narrowing on the X-ray. Pseudogout has characteristic radiographic features of chondrocalcinosis which is calcification of the cartilages, as can be seen in the menisci, triangular fibrocartilage of the wrist, or the cartilages of the 2nd/3rd MCP joints of the hands. X-rays in gout are normal early in the disease, but later, can show the presence of hard tophi, periarticular osteopenia and classic juxta-articular erosions (rat-bite erosions) with overhanging edges.

If radiographs are non-diagnostic, further imaging can be considered. MRI is a very helpful tool and can assist in evaluating the presence or absence of synovitis, erosions, sacroiliitis with a much higher sensitivity than X-rays. Further, MRI may assist in evaluating soft tissue or ligamentous injuries and tumors that are otherwise difficult to identify. CT-scan can assist in identifying bony deformities and can detect chondrocalcinosis but is performed mostly if MRI cannot be performed. Musculoskeletal ultrasound which is an evolving technique is extremely helpful especially in the evaluation of peripheral arthritis and can assist in evaluating the presence or absence of synovitis, effusion, erosion, structural defect such as rotator cuff or meniscus teat and can also assist in performing ultrasound-guided aspiration/injection.

The synovial fluid examination is one of the most important tests especially for the initial diagnosis of arthritis. Cell counts and differentials, crystal evaluation under polarized light microscopy, bacterial/acid-fast bacilli/fungal cultures and Lyme's DNA PCR shall be performed on the synovial fluid as appropriate.  Degenerative arthritis is usually associated with cell counts of less than 2,000 cells/mm3 while in inflammatory arthritis, cell counts are usually more than 5,000 cells/mm3 and may be as high as 50,000 cells/mm3.  More than 50,000 cells/mm3 cells and/or more than 90% neutrophils in synovial fluid analysis shall raise suspicion of septic arthritis, although this can also be seen in the setting of acute gout or pseudogout.  Gout crystals are needle-shaped and strongly negatively birefringent.  Pseudogout crystals are rhomboid-shaped and are weekly positively birefringent.  Basic calcium phosphate crystals are not visible on polarized light microscopy and need special staining to confirm positivity. A synovial biopsy is rarely performed but can be considered especially in cases of monoarthritis where other modalities have failed to provide a diagnosis.