The notion of “cultural syndromes” was first introduced by Lewis-Fernandez in the latest published Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders as 1 of 3 concepts that replaced the concept of “culture-bound syndromes.” Lewis-Fernandez wrote that cultural syndromes are “clusters of symptoms and attributions that tend to co-occur among individuals in specific cultural groups, communities, or contexts.” He led the development of DSM-V Cultural Formulation Interview, a standardized method for cultural assessment in mental health practice.

The following are a few cultural syndromes to be aware of in practice.

An example of a cultural syndrome specific to Koreans and Korean immigrants is Hwa-Byung, and what follows here is a summary of symptoms and possible treatments for this condition.

The incidence of comorbid depression, anxiety, and conversion disorder are high in middle-class, middle-aged Korean women. The prevalence of these symptoms among Korean women is high, as Koreans customarily internalize their emotions. The symptoms of Hwa-Byung are mostly physical, presenting with palpitations, insomnia, and headaches. Psychological symptoms may include but are not limited to, heightened startle response, sad or depressed mood, and guilt or hopelessness. The syndrome is translated into English as "anger syndrome" and explained as suppression of anger.

Treatments for Hwa-Byung vary widely. While some Korean families may be open to the concept of family therapy to benefit the family as a whole, other families may decline family therapy as they identify women to be the primary source of the problem in the family. Korean women often have difficulties verbalizing their distress and directly confronting their spouse and children in therapy. Family therapy in the United States commonly engages families in discussing their interpersonal conflicts and family dynamics in session. But this is often not acceptable to the Korean culture. A family therapist working with this culture needs to be aware that when there are significant tension and stress among family members in a session, it may be necessary to incorporate individual sessions into the treatment. The wife may feel more comfortable discussing personal issues about relationships in a non-threatening and confidential environment of an individual session. In joint sessions, the therapist has to focus on teaching concrete skills rather than discuss the wife's specific concerns. The development of Hwa-Byung may be related to the chronic stress involved with interpersonal family conflicts, however other social issues like poverty, lack of trust in relationships, discrimination of women and other weaker individuals in the family can be an added source of stress. It also merits noting that the syndrome often manifests with physical symptoms rather than psychological symptoms. Thus a clinician should integrate psychotherapy in treatment early on and not just depend on medications to treat the physical symptoms.

Another example of a culture-bound syndrome is Amok. This condition is a dissociative episode characterized by depression followed by outbursts of violence, aggression, and homicidal behavior. This syndrome tends to be caused by a perceived threat to the individual and is accompanied by persecutory ideas. After a stressful stimulus occurs, there is a period of social withdrawal and brooding followed by aimless wandering; this can then transition to a sudden and extremely violent homicidal tendency. Verbalizations may be frenzied and may represent internal conflict. Cessation may occur spontaneously but usually results from being overpowered or killed. Psychosis or depression may occur after the episode. Amok is prevalent only among males from Malaysia, Laos, Philippines, and Polynesia.

Ataque de nervios is a condition reported primarily among Latinos from the Caribbean and Latin America. The most common symptoms include uncontrollable shouting, crying, and verbal or physical aggression. Dissociative experiences, in addition to seizure-like or fainting episodes, can be present. A general feature of ataque de nervios is a feeling of being out of control. It most commonly occurs as a response to a stressful event related to the family. The initiation of the episode is immediate upon exposure to the stimulus. An intense affective storm is followed by bodily sensations (trembling, chest tightness) as well as swearing, yelling, and possible attempts to harm self or others. Partial or total amnesia frequently follows the attack and may include alterations of consciousness. Psychotherapy has proven to be useful, and medication can be indicated to address underlying symptoms of anxiety or depression.

Dhat is a folk term used to describe severe anxiety and hypochondriacal concerns with the discharge of semen that contributes to feelings of weakness and exhaustion in the male population in rural India.

Koro is a syndrome that exists in some East Asian cultures; this presents with intense anxiety related to fears that the genitalia will recede into the body and cause death.

Susto is an illness prevalent among Latinos in the United States that correlates with a scary event that causes the soul to leave the body and leads to unhappiness and sickness. Patients may often present with neuro-vegetative symptoms of disturbances in sleep, appetite, and multiple somatic complaints.