Providers eliciting a history from a patient who has recovered from a critical illness should focus their questions on the physical, cognitive, and mental health impairments included in Post Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS). Supplementary information from caregivers and family can also help in assessing the patient’s level of functioning, particularly in the presence of ongoing cognitive deficits. Some researchers have proposed performing a “functional reconciliation,” inspired by the ubiquitous “medication reconciliation,” to compare the patient’s current functionality to that before the ICU stay. This “functional reconciliation” should include assessment of ADLs, exercise tolerance, mood, and indicators of cognitive function, including the return to work or the ability to manage one’s affairs.

A full physical exam, including assessment of vital signs, should also be performed when assessing a patient after recovery from critical illness as the medical condition may remain tenuous. The patient’s overall appearance may give clues to their functional and health status. For example, bitemporal wasting may indicate sarcopenia, while poor hygiene may suggest limited independence in ADLs. The assessment would not be complete until an evaluation of the patient’s affect and body language that may indicate underlying mental health problems. Specific attention should be paid to the neurologic exam to evaluate for signs of myopathy and or neuropathy given the prevalence of ICUAW. A limited cognitive assessment, such as the Mini-Mental Status Exam, should also be performed and, if indicative of deficits, should be followed up by more comprehensive neurocognitive testing.