**Clinical Presentation of Hypoxia**

Hypoxia symptoms are nonspecific and vary depending on severity, cause, and which parts of the body are affected. When oxygen is low, the patient might feel dyspneic. However, hypoxia may be asymptomatic. Hence patients with advanced chronic respiratory conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), may experience symptoms with resting, exertional, and nocturnal hypoxemia which include:

- Headache

- Restlessness

- Confusion

- Anxiety

- Tachycardia

- Tachypnea

- Dyspnea

**Goal-directed Oxygen Therapy**

Based on current evidence, it is recommended to avoid PaO2 levels exceeding 300 mm Hg to mitigate potential adverse effects, including neurotoxicity and reperfusion injuries.

A recent study by Girardis et al demonstrated that in critically ill patients (with an ICU length of more than 72 h), a conservative protocol for oxygen therapy (to maintain SpO2 between 94 and 97% and median PaO2, 87mm Hg) versus conventional therapy (SpO2 between 97 and 100% and PaO2, 102 mm Hg) resulted in lower ICU mortality. In addition, there has been growing evidence that hyperoxemia could be harmful such as in patients with acute coronary syndromes and following cardio-respiratory arrests.

Likewise, in patients with ARDS, oxygen administration above goal (defined as PaO2 >80 mm Hg and FiO2 >0.5) was reported to lead to worse clinical outcomes at different levels of ARDS severity.

**Accuracy of SpO2 in screening for eligibility for long-term O2 therapy (LTOT)**

Oxygen therapy is recommended for eligible patients with evidence of chronic hypoxia, such as COPD, who have moderate-to-severe hypoxia (SpO2 <88% at rest).2 89-93% or isolated exertional desaturation not exceeding 90%) did not improve all-cause mortality or hospitalization in patients with COPD.

The ability of SpO2 to provide accurate values f oxygenation is limited to mild degrees of hypoxia as the correlation between it and PaO2 is not linear and becomes more variable with more severe hypoxia (SaO2 <88%).2 can lead to significant misclassification in certain conditions, such as in individuals with dark skin (non-white races such as black and Asian).2 has been reported to fail to accurately identify PaO2  values in the hypoxia ranges (<55 mm Hg) and hence the inability to adequately detect LTOT eligibility.