The infraspinatus is supplied arterially by the suprascapular and circumflex scapular arteries.

The suprascapular artery either originates from the thyrocervical trunk or the subclavian artery. The artery runs inferolateral to the anterior scalene muscles, phrenic nerve, subclavian artery, and brachial plexus crossing posterolateral and parallel to the clavicle. Then it passes superior to the transverse scapular ligament to the supraspinous fossa. Finally, it courses laterally to the scapular spine (deep to the acromion) to the infraspinous fossa on the posterior surface of the scapula to supply the infraspinatus. The subscapular artery, a branch of the third portion of the axillary artery, gives rise to the circumflex scapular artery. The circumflex scapular artery courses around the lateral border of the scapula in its entrance into the infraspinous fossa and anastomoses with the suprascapular artery to provide a source of collateral circulation.

The lymphatic drainage is primarily of the subscapular (posterior) nodes. The subscapular nodes consist of 6 or 7 lymph nodes that lie along the posterior axillary fold. These lymph nodes run along the course of the subscapular blood vessels. The subscapular, pectoral, and humeral nodes’ efferent drainage passes through the central axillary nodes. The central axillary nodes consist of 3 or 4 nodes placed deep to the pectoralis minor near the base of the axilla, near the second part of the axilla. Efferent drainage from these central nodes passes to the apical nodes, which lie at the apex of the axilla near the medial side of the axillary vein and the first part of the axillary artery. Efferent vessels that arise from the apical group run across the cervicoaxillary canal. These efferent vessels combine to form the subclavian lymphatic trunk. The subclavian lymphatic trunk either joins the jugular and bronchomediastinal trunk to form the right lymphatic duct or may directly enter the right venous angle.