Initial evaluation for patients with a thyroid nodule should include history, physical examination, measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and thyroid ultrasound to characterize the nodule. Measurement of TSH by itself may be able to detect subtle thyroid dysfunction.

Diagnostic workup includes serum markers, cytology by fine-needle aspiration (FNA), genetic markers, immunohistochemical markers, and several imaging modalities, most commonly ultrasonography, but also elastography, MRI, CT, and 18FDG-PET scans.

In every patient with a thyroid nodule, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) measurement should be the initial test and be used as a guide for further management. A normal or high TSH commonly raises concerns as the risk of malignancy increases in parallel with the level of serum TSH. A low TSH, however, usually favors a benign nodule. The next step in a patient with low TSH is to evaluate the possibility of an autonomously functioning thyroid nodule using iodine-123 (123-I) or pertechnetate scintigraphy scan. Autonomously functioning thyroid nodules are most commonly benign and rarely require further diagnostic workup.

Ultrasound (US) of the thyroid is an important imaging modality used to evaluate thyroid nodules. It provides information regarding dimensions, structure, and parenchymal changes and may detect lesions as small as 2 mm. It is commonly used to differentiate between benign and malignant lesions to avoid the unnecessary use of invasive procedures. Several features have been associated with malignancy and found to be independent risk factors. These include microcalcifications, irregular margins, hypoechogenicity, taller-than-wide shape, and increased vascularity.

US has a high sensitivity for the detection of thyroid nodules that are too small to palpate. However, these nodules may have an indeterminate clinical significance.

In conjunction with the US, FNA forms the cornerstone for thyroid nodule evaluation, representing the most cost-effective diagnostic tool used in the assessment of nodules of the thyroid. Its use under US guidance is preferred over palpation-guided biopsies associated with higher rates of false-negative results and non-diagnostic cytology.

The decision to perform FNA should be based on individual risk-stratification using the patient’s history, clinical and US findings. Nodules smaller than one centimeter are biopsied when there is more than one suspicious US characteristic, cervical lymphadenopathy, or high-risk history. Otherwise, a cutoff size of 1 centimeter is used for solid nodules with only 1 suspicious US feature.

It is suggested to perform a US-FNA in patients with

- Nonpalpable thyroid nodules larger than 1 cm

- Palpable nodules smaller than 1.5 cm

- Deeply found nodules

- Nodules in proximity to blood vessels

- Nodules after nondiagnostic conventional FNA cytology

- Cystic or mixed nodules, especially if a previous conventional FNA was nondiagnostic

- Coexistence of nonpalpable lymphadenopathy

Cystic or spongiform lesions are considered to pose a low risk for malignancy and are either monitored or biopsied if larger than 2 centimeters.