The most important waveforms for clinical evaluation include delta (0.5 Hz to 4 Hz); theta (4 Hz to 7 Hz); alpha (8 Hz to 12 Hz); sigma (12 Hz to 16 Hz) and beta (13 Hz to 30 Hz) waves. Additionally, other waveforms like infra slow oscillations (ISO) (less than 0.5 Hz) and high-frequency oscillations (HFOs) (greater than 30 Hz) have increasingly been considered clinically relevant with the discovery of digital signal processing.

EEG is useful in a variety of cerebral pathologies and is complemented by a spectrum of more advanced imaging modalities. EGG has been used in the evaluation and study of epilepsy, states of altered consciousness, the parasomnias, dementias, toxic confusional states, cerebral infections, and various other encephalopathies. Abnormal waveforms in EEG reflect a wide spectrum of general pathophysiological processes, raised intracranial pressure, cerebral anoxia, edema, epileptogenesis, etc., and do not specify a particular disease most of the times.

There exists a dynamic interaction between specialized regions in the brain that enable processing of information. This interregional communication mediates an eclectic range of neurological processes. These intercortical communications are disrupted in patients with focal epilepsy.

In a study conducted by Foldvary et al., localized ictal onset was seen in 57% of seizures. These included mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE), lateral frontal lobe epilepsy (LFLE), and parietal lobe epilepsy. Lateralized onsets predominated in neocortical temporal lobe epilepsy, and generalized onsets were seen in mesial frontal lobe epilepsy (MFLE) and occipital lobe epilepsy.

Classical EEG morphologies, based on specific lobular involvement and epileptic foci are described below.

**Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE)**

- **Ictal EEG finding:**Ictal EEG is abnormal in about 95% of the patients with focal impaired awareness seizures, with 66% of them showing an electro-decremental pattern. A 5 Hz to 7 Hz rhythmic theta discharge in the temporal regions is specific for temporal lobe epilepsy. Depth electrodes are useful in capturing this pattern and are accurate in diagnosing ipsilateral mesial temporal structures. Scalp electrodes successfully lateralize but fail to accurately localize the focus of the seizure. Ictal EEG changes are difficult to appreciate using the scalp electrodes in frontal lobe seizures because of movement artifacts. Most EEGs would require additional neuroimaging studies using various modalities like magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), interictal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) photon emission tomography (PET), ictal single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), magnetic encephalography (MEG) or functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) for further assessment of the abnormalities.

- **Interictal epileptiform discharges:**Isolated IED like sharps and spikes over the temporal region and temporal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (TIRDA), in addition to clinical history, are strongly correlated with a diagnosis of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE).

- **Seizure semiology:**
- Auras: Visceral sensations and fear are associated with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy, while auditory and vertiginous auras have been associated with the neocortical temporal lobe epilepsy.
- Neocortical temporal lobe epilepsy: At seizure onset, patients with neocortical TLE are more likely to describe any type of hallucination or illusion. Automatisms and dystonic posturing are not found in neocortical TLE.
- Mesial temporal epilepsy: Patients present with a behavioral arrest that is observed as a blank facial expression along with loss of awareness. This change is followed by oral, facial, or alimentary automatisms such as lip-smacking, chewing, sucking, or swallowing or is accompanied by ipsilateral automatisms such as repetitive hand movements, picking, or fidgeting behavior, and contralateral abnormal posturing of limbs. Patients commonly have a period of postictal confusion. Rarely, this progresses to secondary generalization.

**Frontal Lobe Epilepsy (FLE)**

Frontal lobe epilepsy (FLE), after temporal lobe epilepsy, is the second most common type of the localization-related epilepsy of childhood.

- **Ictal EEG:**Scalp ictal EEG changes are difficult to appreciate with most of the frontal lobe seizures due to the movement artifacts obscuring the visibility of the underlying ictal waveforms.

- **Interictal EEG:**IEDs are observed in only 60% to 80% of FLE patients and have a lower localizing value than in TLE since they can be bilateral, involving multiple lobes, or even secondarily generalized.

- **Seizure semiology:**In view of the fact that the ictal EEG in FLE is of less value due to frequent muscle and motion artifacts, analyzing the ictal semiology and clinical history are important to differentiate FLE from psychogenic non-epileptic spells (PNES). This is condition is frequently misdiagnosed as epilepsy.
- Dorsolateral frontal epilepsy: The clinical manifestations of frontal lobe seizures are diverse. Seizures originating from the premotor cortex exhibit forced contralateral head deviation or head-turning called versive seizures. Activation of contralateral frontal eye field causes lateral deviation of the eye. Aphasic seizures are caused due to Broca area involvement.
- Mesial frontal epilepsy: Associated features include loss of consciousness followed by conjugate eye and head deviation, behavioral arrest and immediate recovery of consciousness.

**Parietal Lobe Epilepsy (PLE)**

- **Ictal EEG:**Ictal scalp EEG is rarely localizing in PLE. Even extensive invasive studies done for localization can be inconclusive.

- **Interictal EEG:**It is common to encounter multifocal and multiregional IEDs with cortical involvement, making it difficult to localize the focus. Ristic et al. rightfully called it, 'a great imitator among focal epilepsies.'

- **Seizure semiology:**Most patients with parietal lobe seizures have no symptoms or signs suggesting parietal lobe involvement. If specific symptoms are present, they include unilateral paresthesias and pain that occur early during the seizure. Other symptoms occur due to diffuse cortical involvement and include hallucinations and distortions of space, among other symptoms.

**Occipital Lobe Epilepsy (OLE)**

- **Ictal EEG:**During the ictal period, an EEG recording is more likely to show diffuse bi-occipital activity spreading to the temporal regions than well-localized unifocal discharges in the occipital region.

- **Interictal EEG:**IEDs can occur either spontaneously or following photic stimulation. In spontaneously occurring IEDs, the discharges are in the form of unilateral posterior EEG slowing rather than spike-waves. It is also rarely localized over the occipital cortex. Instead, the posterior temporal region is the most common site. In contrast, photosensitive OLE requires intermittent photic stimulation to elicit IEDs. They occur in the form of either spikes/polyspikes confined to the occipital region or generalized spikes/polyspikes diffusely spread out to the posterior cortex.

- **Seizure semiology:**Seizure in OLE often presents with visual symptoms including hallucinations, blindness, nystagmus, and rapid blinking of the eye. Rarely, it presents as a generalized tonic-clonic seizure and impaired consciousness. This signifies a spread to neighboring cortical regions and thus makes the focus localization rather difficult.

For most focal onset aware seizures, the scalp EEG commonly shows no change in simple partial seizures, because the focal ictal discharge is distant or deep, or involves too small a neuronal aggregate for a synchronized activity to register on the scalp. It becomes more evident after a larger cortical area gets involved prior to secondary generalization.