**Complications of head fixation devices:**

- Scalp laceration

- Skull fractures

- Pin site infections and osteomyelitis

- Venous air embolism and

- Acute epidural, subdural hematoma, and brain contusions.

Complications increased in

- Prone/lateral prone

- Emergency cases

- Low depth of anesthesia

- Increased length of operation, and

- Thin scalp.

**Scalp Flap necrosis**

**Specific complications to flaps:**

**Frontal flaps:**

- Cosmetic deformity

- Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak

- Injury of the superior sagittal sinus

- Retraction-induced bilateral frontal lobes injury.

**Temporal flaps:**

- The vein of Labbe injury.

- Temporal hollowing: Preserving the temporalis origin and avoiding dissection between the leaflets of the deep temporal fascia or intermediate fat pad minimizes temporal hollowing.

**Parietal flaps:**

- Injury to the vein of the Trolard

- Injury to the superior sagittal sinus and overlying cortical veins- bleeding and sinus/cortical vein thrombosis

- Injury to the motor cortex.

**Pterional flaps:**

- The frontal sinus may be violated

- The frontalis branches of the facial nerve may be injured

- Osteotomy involving the sphenoid may extend into the optic canal.

**Orbitzygomatic flaps**

- Fractures of the orbital roof and rim lead to injury of the optic nerve

- Fractures of the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses can cause CSF leaks

**Retrosigmoid flaps:**

- Injury to the lesser occipital and greater auricular nerves causes postoperative headache and dysesthesia

- Retraction injury to the cerebellum

- Transverse, sigmoid, torcula, and occipital venous sinuses injury

- Damage to the cranial nerves and brainstem

- CSF leaks and pseudomeningocele

- The mastoid emissary vein can cause substantial bleeding and be a source of air embolism.

- Injury to the vertebral artery

- Bone-dust-induced meningitis.

**Suboccipital:**

- Pooling of the blood within the operative bed limit visibility in prone positioning

- Pressure on eyes and face in prone positioning

- The sitting position has the risk of venous air embolism and hemodynamic instability

- Injury to the transverse, sigmoid, torcula, and occipital venous sinuses

- CSF leak and pseudomenigocele.

- Cerebellar mutism.

**Complications of burr holes, craniotomy, and durotomy :**

- Opening of air sinus: remove mucosa, pack with betadine-shocked gel foam, and covered with wax or vascularized flap

- Bone bleed: controlled with bone wax

- Dural venous sinus injury: packed or sewn

- Dural lacerations

- Injury to cortical draining veins, and

- The drill perforator plunge into the brain with a cerebral contusion.

**Post-procedure complications of craniotomy:**

- Post-craniotomy headache.

- Extraxial hematomas

- Seizures: Levetiracetam is superior to phenytoin for De novo seizure following craniotomy (DSC).

- Electrolyte abnormalities: the most common being hyponatremia and hypernatremia

- Tension pneumocephalus

- Postoperative infection: the incidence of postoperative meningitis is 2.2%. Gram-negative organisms are the most common cause and overall mortality rate of 5%.

- Intracranial hemorrhage (ICH)

- Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP): via bronchoalveolar lavage and endotracheal tube aspirate

- Cerebral edema

- Cerebral ischemia

- Vasospasm

- Pneumocephalus

- CSF leak: A systematic review has shown that dural sealants do not reduce the number of CSF leaks but minimize the risk of surgical-site infection.

- Hydrocephalus, and

- Infection: soft tissue infections, extradural abscess, empyema, and bone flap infection.

A study has shown that variables such as:

- American Society of Anesthesiologists score (>2)

- Other infection

- Duration of operation > 4 hours

- Sinus entry

- CSF leak (OR 7.817)

- CSF drainage

- Surgical drain

- Number of previous operations, and

- Implants were significant variables for surgical site infections (SSIs).

The reported incidence of major complications is 8.3%, with minor complications rising up to 60%. Mortality owing to major complications is reportedly 22% (0.5% in minor complications).

**Variables associated with major complications include:**

- Age

- An abnormal neurological examination after the end of the surgery, and

- Intra-operative desaturation.