**Blood Sample Collection (phlebotomy)**

- Introduce yourself to the patient and confirm the patient's name and date of birth.

- Explain the procedure to the patient, warning the patient of possible discomfort from the needle prick.

- Position the patient appropriately, exposing the upper arm.

- Follow hand washing and basic universal precautions.

- Tie the tourniquet around the upper arm.

- Identify a prominent vein and clean it with an alcohol swab.

- Introduce the needle attached to a vacutainer.

- Remove the tourniquet and remove the needle after obtaining a sample.

- Apply the cotton ball to the needle site with pressure to stop bleeding.

- Label sample bottles appropriately.

- Send a sample for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) assay.

**Procedure for Amniocentesis (done from 15 weeks gestation)**

- Introduce yourself and confirm the patient's identity and gestational age of the pregnancy.

- Conduct pretest counseling. This usually includes genetic counseling as well.

- Obtain informed consent.

- Follow hand washing and universal precautions.

- Position the patient appropriately.

- The clean exposed area of the abdomen.

- Use a local anesthetic if necessary.

- Carefully introduce the ultrasound-guided, hollow needle through the anterior abdominal wall into the amniotic cavity.

- Aspirate 15 ml to 20 ml of amniotic fluid.

- Send for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) assay.

**Procedure for Alpha-fetoprotein Analysis**

- Competitive radioimmunoassay has been widely used to quantitate AFP.

- Currently, AFP is mostly measured by non-isotopic immunoassays.

- These immunoassay systems employ enzyme, fluorescent, or chemiluminescent labels.

- Immunoassays that are employed to measure AFP are of two major types: (1) competitive and (2) two-site solid-phase immunometric.

- In a typical radioisotopic competitive type, purified iodine-125 labeled AFP is mixed with the sample containing AFP and allowed to compete for a limited amount of AFP antibody.

- In the two-site immunometric assays, a solid phase such as magnetic particles, plastic beads, or microtiter plates is used.

- The solid phase is coated with anti-AFP antibodies and incubated with patient specimens or standards.

- AFP present in the sample reacts with the anti-AFP antibody and is immobilized in the solid phase.

- Unbound components of the specimen are removed by washing the solid phase.

- A second anti-AFP antibody labeled with an enzyme, radioactive, fluorescent, or chemiluminescent label is incubated with the solid phase and reacts with AFP bound at a second epitope site.

- Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies have been used in tandem for each step.

- The unreacted label is removed by washing the solid phase, and any additional reagent needed to generate a signal is added.

- In the case of a fluorescence or radioactive label, the bound label can be measured directly.

- For enzyme labels, the solid phase must be incubated with substrate before the detection step.

- For chemiluminescence labels, a reagent must be added to generate the chemiluminescent signal.

- In all cases, the amount of signal generated with the solid phase is directly proportional to the AFP concentration of the standard or unknown.

- AFP-L3% is measured using a microfluidics-based instrument that utilizes immunochemical and electrophoretic techniques.

**Quality Control Procedure**

- For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours.

- If necessary, laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results.

- Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

-  The laboratory can develop and implement an individualized quality control plan (IQCP) for certain analytes in which QC requirements are different.

- The individualized quality control plan (IQCP) involves performing a risk assessment of potential sources of error in all phases of testing.

- After risk assessment, a QC plan is formulated to reduce the likelihood of errors.

- Westgard multi-rules are used to evaluate the quality control runs.

- If a run is declared out of control, investigate the system (instrument, standards, controls, etc.) to determine the cause of the problem.

- Do not perform any analysis until the problem has been resolved.

**Lab Safety**

- Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious.

- Exercise the normal precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents.

- Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines.

- Wear gloves, a lab coat, and safety glasses when handling human blood specimens.

- Place all plastic tips, sample cups, and gloves that come into contact with blood in a biohazard waste container.

- Discard all disposable glassware into sharps waste containers.

- Protect all work surfaces with disposable absorbent bench top paper, which is discarded into biohazard waste containers weekly, or whenever blood contamination occurs.

- Wipe all work surfaces weekly.