Conservative treatment reduces symptoms in 50 to 90% of patients and should be adopted first. Conservative methods include patient reassurance and education, a soft diet, jaw rest, warm compresses on the painful area, and passive stretching.

**Behavioral Changes**

Muscle activity alters due to increased levels of emotional stress. Managing patients' stress is particularly important in treating TMDs. Behavioral changes like improving sleep hygiene, reducing stress, and treating parafunctional habits can significantly improve symptoms.

**Patient Awareness**

Educating patients regarding the relationship between muscle hyperactivity and stress improves patients' behavior towards the condition, psychological health, and temporomandibular disorder.

**Restrictive Use**

In most TMDs, patients complain of pain in the TMJ and restricted mandibular movement. The clinician can instruct the patient to move the mandible within a trouble-free range of motion, promoting psychological health and pain management.

**Voluntary Avoidance**

The teeth contact can trigger pain in some cases. Patients must try to reduce dental contact time, except during mastication, swallowing, and speaking. Clinicians can teach patients how to disengage the tooth to diminish pain and discomfort. A simple exercise of lip puffing can disengage teeth and enhance patient health.

**Physiotherapy**

Stretching exercises can improve the range of motion but not always alleviate the pain.

**Pharmacological Treatment**

The first-line drugs for treating acute and chronic forms of TMDs are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

**Invasive Procedures**

Invasive strategies include intra-articular long-acting corticosteroid, hyaluronic acid, and botox injections. These interventions are recommended once conservative therapies have failed or in severe acute exacerbations.

Intra-articular steroids are indicated in the acute treatment of osteoarthritis of the TMJ, but multiple doses can lead to the destruction of articular cartilage.

Botulinum toxin injections are used to treat painful trigger points and chronic bruxism, but a recent Cochrane study found inconclusive evidence for myofascial pain.