The use of protamine requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes physicians, nurses, and cardiac perfusionists. Without proper management and communication, the morbidity and mortality from protamine can be high. In cardiac surgery, protamine administration must be communicated to all healthcare team members, as protamine administration before separation from cardiopulmonary bypass can be fatal. Typically after separation from cardiopulmonary bypass, the cardiac surgeon asks for protamine to be given to reverse the effects of heparin. This request should be followed by closed-loop communication from the anesthesiologist that the protamine infusion has begun. This is to inform the cardiac perfusionists to stop all suction devices that drain into the cardiopulmonary bypass machine (to avoid introducing protamine into the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit in the event that the patient needs to be put back on cardiopulmonary bypass), as well as to inform the cardiac surgeon and nursing staff in the room to be vigilant for adverse reactions.

Protamine is useful in several different clinical scenarios in the hospital setting. The proper dosing and speed of infusion or injection of protamine to neutralize the anticoagulant effects of heparin should be appropriately followed. In other clinical situations, physicians and nursing should be extremely vigilant in monitoring patients for adverse reactions. Appropriate resources should be available to monitor and treat patients who experience adverse effects due to its administration. An understanding of the appropriate laboratory tests to follow during its administration is also critical to the safe use of protamine.

For decades since the start of cardiac surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass, investigators have studied the methods to provide a safe, efficient, and reproducible way of performing complex cardiac surgeries. Advances in cardiopulmonary bypass result from evidence-based randomized controlled trials, cohort studies, and anecdotal practice or consensus. After reviewing all available evidence, in 2018, The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, The Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, and The American Society of Extra-corporeal Technology released their clinical practice guidelines for anticoagulation during cardiopulmonary bypass. These guidelines discussed the use of heparin as the primary anticoagulant (bivalirudin if there are heparin contraindications) and protamine as the reversal agent.

Protamine is a medication that requires the collaborative efforts of an interprofessional team, including clinicians, surgeons, anesthesiologists, nurse anesthetists, nursing, and pharmacists. As mentioned above, proper preparation, dosing, and protocol are necessary when using protamine, and each member of the team has the role to play in the bigger picture. Nursing should be monitoring along with anesthesia personnel. The pharmacist should have verified the planned dosing along with the heparin used for the procedure. Clinicians need to seek input and feedback from these other members so that the interprofessional team actually functions as such, not with everyone siloed into their own discipline. This approach will lead to proper protamine use and better patient outcomes. [Level 5]