# Introduction

Simulation consists of any course or technology that creates an environment where learners can perform, feel safe, receive feedback, and gain confidence without compromising patient safety.

# Function

Experiential learning postulates that adult learners learn by participating and reflecting on real-life experiences.

# Curriculum Development

Using a task trainer can allow for the creation of a simple teaching model leading to a standardized teaching approach and, ultimately, a sustainable outcome. For many years, the standard of practice in the medical community has been Halstead's "See one, Do one, Teach one" but this has become less acceptable, particularly when invasive procedures and high-risk care are involved.

For the second step, the teacher can deconstruct the procedure and explain each maneuver on the task trainer as he or she performs it. For the third step, the teacher can test for comprehension by having the learner describe each step as the teacher performs it on the task trainer. The final step of this model refers to the student simultaneously executing and describing each maneuver on the task trainer to demonstrate proper execution of the procedure. With a task trainer, the teacher can easily go through Peyton's 4 step approach to allow for more effective learning.

# Clinical Clerkships

With all the modern advances in medicine, specific procedures are performed less frequently, leaving fewer opportunities for learners to acquire these skills clinically. Despite the decrease in the frequency of these procedures, clinicians-in-training are still expected to be able to perform these procedures on an emergent basis despite never encountering them in their clinical training. With the introduction of non-invasive ventilation, intubations are being performed less frequently in the emergency department.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

Incorporating task trainers into global assessments of a novice’s abilities allows the educator to ensure both retention and expertise in the procedure(s) being taught. Miller’s pyramid, an educational theory developed in the 90s, takes this a step further.

Let’s take an example to illustrate. If I were teaching a novice about central lines on a task trainer, the base of the pyramid would be assessed by True/False questions, for example. The application component could be evaluated by a case presentation (discussing indications for central line placement in patients). The demonstration level would occur in a simulation lab on a task trainer to ensure an understanding of the steps/indications of the procedure. Then, to assess mastery, the learner would be supervised in a patient encounter, where a central line is placed on a live patient. Through this pyramid of learning, incorporating the task trainer, we can watch the learner evolve from a novice to a skilled provider.

# Clinical Significance

High fidelity mannequins can allow for all procedures to be performed on them but can very costly as well. With cost being a major factor for many academic programs, task-trainers allow for a cost-effective option without compromising clinical reasoning, knowledge acquisition, and learner satisfaction.

While task trainers are more cost-effective than high-fidelity mannequins, task trainers can come in variable forms. Some task trainers can be homemade from relatively inexpensive items, while other ones can have a more realistic appearance of skin and muscle.

Task trainers can also be a great hybrid option for objective structured clinical examination (OSCEs). Standardized patients have shown to lead to a more realistic experience by residents with higher post-test scores obtained when compared to using mannequins for OSCEs.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A task trainer allows an instructor to validate a skill before allowing a novice to perform that skill on a human life. From an ethical perspective, clinicians-in-training needs as much experience performing procedures to increase their technical and clinical proficiency to maximize patient safety when they need to perform procedures on real patients.

Spaced repetition is an effective method to increase the efficacy of learning and has tremendous potential to improve educational outcomes.

Studies have shown that attendings with varying years of experience may continue practicing procedures they are comfortable with rather than learning new techniques.

Simulation scenarios involving task trainers allow for training in both high-stakes, low-frequency, and common procedures in a safe environment.