The first branch of the aortic arch is the brachiocephalic artery. The brachiocephalic artery branches into the right subclavian artery, which supplies the right upper extremity, and then the right common carotid, which brings blood supply to the right side of the head and neck. The arch of the aorta then gives off the left common carotid artery, which goes on to supply the left side of the head and neck. The final major vessel to leave the aortic arch is the left subclavian artery, which supplies the left upper extremity.

There has been significant variation reported in the origin of the brachiocephalic (innominate) artery. High-riding innominate artery is perhaps the most commonly identified anomaly; this can include late take-off from the aorta and, more commonly, a late bifurcation into the right subclavian and right common carotid. This results in a brachiocephalic artery located in the neck, which can present major issues during carotid, thyroid, and parathyroid surgeries. There are also reports of a left brachiocephalic artery in rare cases of transposition of the great vessels.

The pulmonary trunk arises directly from the right ventricle of the heart and divides almost immediately into the left and right pulmonary arteries. These carry de-oxygenated blood from the right side of the heart to the pulmonary circulation. They then branch into successively smaller arteries. Oxygenated blood eventually returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary veins.

The superior vena cava also resides within the superior mediastinum. Its major tributaries include the two brachiocephalic veins, the left superior intercostal vein, and the azygous vein. The brachiocephalic veins receive blood from the upper extremities via the subclavian veins and from the head and neck via the internal jugular veins. The left superior intercostal veins receive blood from the first three ribs and intercostal spaces. The 4th through 8th left intercostal veins empty into the accessory hemiazygous vein, and the 9th through 11th left intercostal veins empty into the hemiazygous vein. Both the accessory hemiazygous and the hemiazygous vein empty into the azygous vein, as do all the right intercostal veins. The azygous then drains directly into the superior vena cava.

The thymus is the most obvious structure of the superior mediastinum and sits atop the innominate artery. The gland may extend anteriorly against the posterior surface of the sternum.