The pathophysiology of all infarcts is the lack of oxygen in the tissue, leading to its death. The human brain requires 20% of oxygen consumption even though it accounts for only 2% of the body by weight.

- Depletion of ATP due to lack of aerobic respiration in the mitochondria.

- Loss of function of membrane ion pumps and impaired voltage gradient across membranes, leading to cellular edema.

- Excitotoxicity of the neurons due to the release of glutamate and synaptosomal-associated protein 25, causing further deterioration of energy levels and membrane ion potentials. Production of reactive oxygen species and free radicals, leading to cell death.

While the above apoptotic/ necrotic pathway is in process, specific protective pathways are triggered:

- Expression of heat shock protein 70, B-cell lymphoma 2 gene family, and prion protein to prevent activation of the apoptotic cascade.

- Release of Neurotrophin-3, interleukin-10, and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, helping in the activation of survival pathways and reduction of proinflammatory cytokine activities.

The cellular cascade is potentially reversible, which can lead to vasogenic edema over the next few hours. Vasogenic edema causes an increase in pressure in the surrounding tissue, leading to mass effect, and worsening the situation.

In the case of hemorrhagic etiology, the rupture of blood vessels causes hypoxia, pressure effects, and chemical irritation of brain tissue due to the disruption of blood-brain-barrier.