**Elbow**

The structures of the elbow receive much of their blood supply from branches of the brachial, radial, and ulnar arteries that form a series of anastomosis around the joint. Most of the elbow lymphatics follow the vasculature and flow to the axillary, clavicular, and cervical lymph nodes. Some of the lymphatics from the forearm and hand flow through the cubital nodes.

**Knee**

The structures of the knee receive much of their blood supply from a plexus of arteries with branches from the popliteal artery and femoral artery. The genicular arteries and tibial recurrent arteries are the main contributing branches. Much of the lymphatic drainage from the knee follows vasculature and travels to the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes.

**IP Hand**

The IP joints of the hand receive blood supply from branches of the radial and ulnar arteries. The major contributing branches are the superficial and deep palmar arches. Lymphatics travel superiorly along the upper extremity to the cubital, axillary, cervical, and clavicular lymph nodes.

**IP Foot**

The IP joints of the foot receive blood supply from branches of the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The major contributing branches are the dorsal and plantar metatarsal arteries. Lymphatics flow superiorly up the lower limb through the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes.

**Ankle**

The structures of the ankle receive much of their blood supply from anastomosis between branches of the anterior and posterior tibial and fibular arteries. Lymphatics flow superiorly up the lower limb through the popliteal and inguinal lymph nodes.