The treatment for mediastinal cancers depends primarily on the type of cancer, its location, aggressiveness, and symptoms it may be causing. Treatments of the most common mediastinal cancers are discussed below.

**Thymic Cancers**

Treatment of thymic cancers usually requires surgery, followed by radiation or chemotherapy. Pulmonary function studies and a cardiac evaluation should be done in any patient where surgery is being contemplated on the thymus. This is to determine if the patient has enough cardiopulmonary reserve for the surgery.

Types of surgery that are being performed include thoracoscopy (minimally invasive), mediastinoscopy (minimally invasive), and thoracotomy (performed by making an incision in the chest). In patients for whom complete resection is not feasible as the initial treatment, for example, those with cancer invasion into the innominate vein, phrenic nerve, heart, or great vessels, therapy involving preoperative chemotherapy and postoperative radiotherapy is indicated. If neoadjuvant chemotherapy allows for a partial or complete response, these cancers are considered potentially resectable, and patients should be reevaluated following therapy. If complete resection cannot be accomplished with surgery, these patients should undergo maximum debulking followed by radiotherapy postoperatively if technically feasible. This may control the residual disease.

For unresectable cancers, systemic therapy, radiotherapy, or chemoradiotherapy may be recommended in patients with extensive pleural/pericardial metastases, non-reconstructable great vessel invasion, heart, tracheal involvement, or distant metastases. Although there are no clinical trials that provide evidence of the benefit of surveillance after treatment, monitoring with thoracic imaging is warranted, given early intervention may be more effective.

**Teratoma**

For benign teratomas, complete surgical resection brings a cure. Incomplete resection leads to local recurrence.

**Lymphomas**

Treatment depends on the type of lymphoma, its stage, and metastases. Most lymphomas are generally treated with chemotherapy followed by radiation.

- Primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma originates in the mediastinum and is essentially managed like the early stage of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The primary treatment is around six courses of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) plus rituximab (R-CHOP). This could be followed by radiation to the mediastinum in suitable patients. A PET/CT scan is usually done after the chemotherapy to see if there are any lymphoma remnants in the chest. If no active lymphoma is observed on the PET/CT scan, the patient may be observed without further intervention. However, radiation may be necessary if the PET/CT scan shows a possible active lymphoma in the mediastinum. Often, a biopsy of the chest tumor is ordered by the physician to affirm that the lymphoma is still present before starting radiation.

- Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) is rare cancer. It can be treated with radiation therapy to the stomach, rituximab, chemotherapy, chemotherapy plus rituximab, or the targeted drug ibrutinib. Chlorambucil or fludarabine could be used for single-agent chemotherapy or combinations such as CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) or the combination CVP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone) could be used. Hodgkin lymphoma treatment usually starts with chemotherapy.

- Nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease utilizes the most common 4-drug combination in the United States: AVCD: adriamycin (doxorubicin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine (DITC), which is given in cycles. Radiation therapy is often given after chemotherapy.

**Neurogenic Tumors**

Surgery is the preferred treatment for malignant neurogenic tumors. Procedures include a post-lateral thoracotomy which can give the surgeon good exposure to the tumor, and, more recently, video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). VATS is a minimally invasive procedure that inserts a thoracoscope and surgical instruments through small incisions in the chest. This procedure decreases the access trauma and gives a good view, especially for smaller posterior mediastinal neurogenic tumors, but it is not ideal for giant mediastinal neurogenic tumors because of their huge volume. For dumbbell neurogenic tumors, sufficient preoperative evaluation is required of the intraspinal part of the tumor to prevent uncontrollable hemorrhage during surgery. The cooperation of a thoracic surgeon with a neurosurgeon is recommended for this procedure. For malignant mediastinal neurogenic tumors, the five-year survival rate is low and complete resection is rarely possible. There is frequent use of radiation in conjunction with chemotherapy before surgery to decrease the size of the tumor or after to treat the margin of the resection bed.

**Mediastinal Germ Cell Tumors**

Management of mediastinal germ cell tumors varies with the type of tumor present. It may include chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy, or a combination of these treatments.

- Mediastinal seminoma or dysgerminoma: Treatment essentially depends on the size of the tumor. For smaller sizes, patients usually undergo radiotherapy, which can eradicate the tumor. For larger tumors, the treatment of choice is chemotherapy. This is most commonly a combination of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP). Radiation has a higher rate of recurrence compared to chemotherapy. If these treatments fail to eliminate all the tumor mass and the remaining area is smaller than 3 cm, patients are likely to be monitored periodically by the physician to see if the tumor grows again. If the residual tumor is greater than 3 cm after treatment, the physician can opt for routine monitoring or further surgery to remove the tumor.

- Mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors: Chemotherapy is the first-line treatment for primary mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors. A combination of drugs is traditionally used, the most common being BEP (bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin), and standard therapy consists of 4 courses of BEP. Men with non-seminomatous primary mediastinal germ cell tumors have a worse prognosis of survival compared to men with mediastinal seminoma. After chemotherapy, patients may undergo salvage surgery to remove the remaining tumor. The optimal strategy for long-term survival in patients who present with mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors remains to be defined. A study at Indiana University described 31 patients with mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors who received cisplatin, bleomycin, and either vinblastine (20 patients) or etoposide (11 patients) followed by surgical resection; 15 patients (48%) achieved long-term disease-free survival. A retrospective study of 64 patients with mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCTs), treated in France from 1983 through 1990, estimated a 2-year overall survival rate of 53%. More recently, a 5-year overall survival rate of 45% was reported in an international analysis of 141 patients with mediastinal NSGCT from 11 cancer centers, treated from 1975 through 1996 in the United States and Europe. Treatment variables that may determine survival outcomes include the duration the patient received chemotherapy, the use of additional anti-cancer drugs such as anthracyclines, alkylating agents, and when the surgery was performed.