In the hepatocytes, the Golgi apparatus, microtubules, and microfilaments participate in bile formation. The Golgi complex provides the vesicles for the substances that will get secreted into the bile. The ATP-binding-cassette (ABC) that are newly synthesized will be transferred from the Golgi complex to the canalicular membrane to function as a transporter. This process needs intact microtubules and microfilaments.

Functionally the liver might be divided into three zones. Zone 3 is the zone that is around the central vein while zone 1 is the zone that is most distal from the central vein and surrounds the portal triad (portal vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct) and hence it is also called the periportal zone. Zone 2 lies between zone 3 and zone 1.

Estimates are that the bile flow in humans averages 620 mL/day. The flow of bile is either dependent or independent on the osmotic force of bile acids. When the bile flow is dependent on the osmotic force of bile acids, it is the bile-acid dependent fraction of bile (BADF) while if the flow is not dependent on the osmotic force of bile acids, it is bile acid-independent fraction of bile (BAIF). Moreover, there is a linear realtionship between the amount of water that follows bile acids osmotically and the bile acids in the bile. Certain bile acids retain the capacity to induce a higher volume of bile (hypercholeresis). One classic example is ursodeoxycholic acid. There is a proposal that the hyperocholeresis might be due to the reabsorption of ursodeoxycholic acids from the epithelial cells that line the bile ducts into the bloodstream and then into the hepatic sinusoids. From the hepatic sinusoids, these hypercholeretic bile acids will be taken by the hepatocytes. In the hepatocytes, the hypercholeretic bile acids will be re-secreted into the bile canaliculi thereby increasing the bile-acid dependent fraction of bile flow and resulting in the so-called hypercholeresis. This pathway is called the cholehepatic shunt pathway. The bile acids in the BADF are either newly synthesized in the liver or else they come from the enterohepatic circulation of bile acid.

The mediation of uptake of bile acids from the sinusoids is via Na-dependent bile acid transporter and Na-independent bile acid transporters. The Na-dependent bile acid transporter is called sodium taurocholate-cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP). NCTP does not express at the canalicular membrane; it only expresses at the basolateral membrane. The Na-independent mechanism involves organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) transporter. OATP transporter transports bile acids into the hepatocytes in exchange for bicarbonate or glutathione. Certain Na-independent bile acid transporters (OST/alpha and OST/beta) are present at the basal membrane of cholangiocytes and hepatocytes. In the cholangiocytes, these transporters may participate in the cholehepatic shunt pathway (explained above) while in the hepatocytes these transporters may participate in bile acid efflux into the bloodstream in cases of bile accumulation in the hepatocytes (cholestasis). After the uptake of bile acids from the sinusoids or after they are synthesized endogenously from cholesterol, the unconjugated and conjugated bile acids will get secreted into the canaliculi through a special energy-dependent transporter called bile salt export pump (BSEP). BSEP not only transports bile acids into the canaliculi, but they also aid in the excretion of certain drugs as well. The BAIF of bile flow is mainly determined by the ATP-dependent transport of glutathione through the multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2). Cholesterol and sterols are secreted by ABCG5/G8 protein while phospholipids and lipophilic cationic drugs are secreted by multidrug resistance-P glycoprotein 3 (MDR-3) and MDR1, respectively.

Hormonal and neural mechanisms regulate the secretion of bile. The hormonal mechanism involves secretin, somatostatin, dopamine, and gastrin while the neuronal mechanism involves acetylcholine through the vagus nerve. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide(VIP), in part, also increases secretin-mediated bile flow. Secretin increases the secretion of sodium bicarbonate-rich fluid by binding to its receptors at the basolateral side cholangiocytes. Dopamine, gastrin, and somatostatin inhibit the secretion of secretin-mediated sodium bicarbonate-rich fluid secretion.