Imaging plays a crucial role in the evaluation and management of temporal bone fractures. Computed tomography (CT) has a significantly higher sensitivity for temporal bone fractures than a physical examination.

Once the patient is stable, an MRI can be obtained for patients who suffer cranial nerve palsy not explained by CT findings. MRI can help differentiate between a fluid-filled mastoid and a mastoid containing herniated intracranial contents. MRI may also reveal intracranial pathology not previously diagnosed on CT.

The first classification system for temporal bone fracture described two types relative to the long axis of the petrous ridge: fractures that course parallel are considered "longitudinal" and fractures that course perpendicular are considered "transverse." Longitudinal fractures made up approximately 70-90% of all temporal bone fractures compared with transverse (10-30%), though in reality, it is rare to find a pure example of either, with most fractures taking a somewhat oblique course.

Further workup includes audiometric testing for any hearing loss, vestibular testing for vertigo or nystagmus, and nerve conduction studies for facial nerve paresis or paralysis. Historically the minimal nerve excitability test or maximal stimulation test was used for evaluation of the facial nerve, these have been supplanted by more precise testing and are mentioned for completeness purposes only. If there is an immediate, complete facial nerve paralysis in the setting of a temporal bone fracture, emergent surgical exploration is warranted. If there is a new facial paresis in the setting of a temporal bone fracture, further nerve function testing is indicated. The modern standard battery of tests is a combination of electroneuronography (EnOG) and electromyography (EMG). EnOG provides a qualitative measurement of nerve stimulation by comparing function to that of the contralateral side and can be performed serially to determine if a facial nerve injury is progressing.