The majority of symptomatic patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) develop a mechanical obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract with dynamic gradients of greater than or equal to 30 mmHg.

HCM patients can present with symptoms at any phase of life and may have an elevated risk of sudden cardiac death based on risk factors. Upon presentation, these patients should undergo transthoracic echocardiography at rest to determine if there is left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, with associated mitral regurgitation. Mitral valve anatomy and severity of regurgitation should be evaluated for the presence of systolic anterior motion (SAM) and posteriorly directed mitral regurgitation. If there is intrinsic severe mitral valve regurgitation unrelated to SAM, the patient may need surgical correction.

Transthoracic echocardiography with exercise may also be used to elicit left ventricular outflow tract obstruction severity and assess functional capacity. Further management is based on whether the patient is asymptomatic (no treatment/surveillance), mildly symptomatic (initiation of medical therapy), or severely symptomatic with drug-refractory symptoms (surgical myomectomy or alcohol septal ablation).

Cardiac intervention such as intracardiac defibrillator implantation is based on sudden cardiac death risk factor analysis (family history of HCM with sudden cardiac death, unexplained syncope, documented non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, maximal LV wall thickness greater than or equal to 30mm, abnormal exercise blood pressure response, left ventricular apical aneurysm, or sustained ventricular tachycardia/cardiac arrest) in a patient with known HCM. In patients with left ventricular apical aneurysm, radiofrequency ablation for ventricular tachyarrhythmias is an appropriate cardiac intervention as the arrhythmic focus is known.

For patients with medication (beta-blocker, calcium channel blocker, or disopyramide) refractory symptoms and suitable anatomy, alcohol septal ablation is an established cardiac intervention. This percutaneous procedure was first described in 1995 as an alternative therapy to surgical myomectomy for left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in patients with HCM. The goal of this procedure is the reduction and, if possible, elimination of systolic thickening of the hypertrophied ventricular septum.