Patients who present with a known history of hypersensitivity to benzoyl peroxide should not use benzoyl peroxide products. Patients with hypersensitivity to cinnamon and other benzoic acid derivatives should be cautious in using benzoyl peroxide as cross-reactivity may occur.

Benzoyl peroxide is not indicated for use around the eyes, nose, mouth, mucous membranes, and open skin as it may cause severe irritation. In instances of mucous membrane or ocular contact, thoroughly rinse affected areas with water for a minimum of 15 minutes.

Patients should limit their UV exposure and apply sunscreen to decrease the risk of developing phototoxicity and skin irritation.

**Children**

There is little data available supporting the clinical safety and efficacy of benzoyl peroxide when used in children. Because of its minimal systemic absorption, topical benzoyl peroxide is generally regarded as being safe in the pediatric population.

**Pregnancy**

The FDA classifies benzoyl peroxide as pregnancy risk category C. The effects of benzoyl peroxide on reproductive health and fetal health are unknown. However, because of its minimal systemic absorption, topical application of benzoyl peroxide is generally considered safe during pregnancy.

**Breast-feeding**

There is not much data available on the use of benzoyl peroxide while breastfeeding. Because of its low rate of systemic absorption, minimal risk to the infant is likely, and the topical use of benzoyl peroxide is generally regarded as safe while breastfeeding, as long as its application is not where the infant would have direct contact during breastfeeding or close skin-on-skin contact.

**Drug Interactions**

- Patients should avoid concomitant use of topical sulfone products (e.g., dapsone) with topical benzoyl peroxide as it reportedly causes yellowing of the skin and facial hair.

- Patients should avoid concomitant use of topical hydroquinone with topical benzoyl peroxide as it may result in increased skin irritation and transient staining of the epidermis.

- Concomitant use of oral isotretinoin with topical benzoyl peroxide has been reported to result in increased skin irritation and dryness.

- Patients should avoid concurrent application of topical benzoyl peroxide with topical tretinoin as it results in decreased efficacy of tretinoin. Unlike tretinoin, adapalene is resistant to oxidation by benzoyl peroxide and is an acceptable combination product.

- Concomitant use of topical anesthetics with topical benzoyl peroxide reportedly decreases the efficacy of anesthetics. For optimal results, the recommendation is to thoroughly wash the treatment area before applying topical anesthetics.