The disease tends to affect patients between the ages of 30 to 50. The signs and symptoms classically consist of motor, cognitive, and psychiatric disturbances. Other less common features include weight loss, sleep disturbances, and autonomic nervous system dysfunction.

- **Motor disturbances:**These include the characteristic unwanted involuntary movements which initially begins in the distal extremities and are of a smaller degree but could go on to affect the facial muscles as well. The movements then spread gradually to the more proximal and axial muscles and are of greater amplitude. Motor symptoms tend to be progressive. Early in the disease, they are mostly hyperkinetic with involuntary chorea. In later stages, however, hypokinesia with bradykinesia and dystonia predominate. The balance between chorea and hypokinesia varies from patient to patient and ranges from overwhelming rigidity in the younger patients, also known as the Westphal variant to older patients being severely affected in the later stages of the disease with rigidity and contractures in the extremities leading them to be bedridden. Dysarthria and dysphagia develop during the course of the disease, which could lead to aspiration in patients, with pneumonia being a common cause of death. Dystonia, characterized by increased muscle tone with slower movements, leads to abnormal posturing such as torticollis and can be the first sign of motor involvement in HD. Other involuntary features include tics and cerebellar signs such as ataxia. Pyramidal signs such as the Babinski sign are present. The motor disturbance on daily activities progresses over time and can lead to difficulties in walking, standing, and frequent falls.

- **Behavioral and psychiatric symptoms:**These are present very early in the disease, often even prior to the onset of motor symptoms. Behavioral and psychiatric symptoms are often consistent with frontal lobe dysfunction. Initially, patients may present with poor attention, impulsivity, and irritability. The irritability is often severe and leads to outbursts of anger and aggression. Later on in the disease, there is an emotional blandness with prominent apathy, loss of intuition, and creativity. The frontal lobe symptoms are likely due to the frontostriatal degeneration. The most common feature of the disease is apathy, which is progressive and manifests alongside progressive motor disturbances and cognitive decline. Depression is also commonly reported, but it is unclear whether these are due to the manifestation of the disease or underlying neural pathology. Suicide may occur between the time of gene testing and when a patient's dependence starts to increase. Psychosis can appear in later stages, which goes hand in hand with cognitive decline. Another prominent feature is the lack of insight into the nature of the symptoms they are experiencing. This includes a lack of awareness of all three domains of the disease (motor, cognitive, and psychiatric). Therefore, family members become a crucial source of information and should be involved in decision making and assessment.

- **Cognitive disturbances:**Cognitive decline is one of the main features of HD and could also be present before the onset of motor disturbances. The cognitive changes are more prominent for executive functions with patients finding difficulty in organizing, multitasking, and planning. These symptoms then progress with more cognitive deficits leading to dementia. Dementia in HD is subcortical in nature, and the memory loss originates from an inefficient search of memory rather than a deficient memory, and features such as apraxia and aphasia, which is common in cortical dementia are spared in HD. Psychomotor processes become severely slowed.

Other secondary symptoms include:

- **Ataxia**: Rarely occurs. Patients might exhibit mild degrees of cerebellar atrophy, and the presence of more severe cerebella dysfunction is suggestive of an alternate diagnosis.

- 
**Gait abnormalities**

- **Eye movement abnormalities:**Patients exhibit slow and hypometric gaze with a superimposed dysfunctional gaze. A mild form of oculomotor apraxia can also be seen.

- **Seizures:**these are only present in the juvenile variant, occurring in 30 to 50% of patients before the age of 10.

**Clinical course and classification:**

1) Presymptomatic HD (if genetically confirmed and clinically at risk if not confirmed): there are no signs or symptoms of motor or cognitive disturbances. These patients might exhibit changes in imaging. Generally, no symptomatic treatment is indicated.

2) Prodromal HD (if genetically confirmed and clinically prodromal HD if not confirmed): Patients start to exhibit subtle motor and cognitive disturbance. Behavioral changes, such as apathy and depression, might be present. The changes in imaging are seen. Patients may require symptomatic treatment. Initiating disease-modifying treatments may be appropriate.

3) Manifest HD (if patients are genetically confirmed and clinically manifest HD if they are not genetically confirmed): Prominent motor and/or cognitive disturbances that interfere with the quality of life are seen. Start symptomatic and disease-modifying treatments.

Overall, the mean age of onset is approximately 45 years. Patients who often present with neurological symptoms also exhibit psychiatric changes. Early in the course of the disease following diagnosis, symptoms such as changes in eye movements, mental planning, depressed or irritable mood as well as mild involuntary movements can be observed. The affected patients are generally able to perform their daily activities. Eventually, chorea progresses, and it becomes increasingly difficult to perform voluntary activities. There are intermittent bursts of aggressive behavior and social disinhibitions. Although patients can maintain some degree of independence, most depend on their caregiver for help. In the later stages of the disease, severe motor disability is noted, and patients are completely dependent on caregivers. The median survival after the onset of the disease is 15 to 18 years. In around 25% of patients, a delayed onset is seen, and these patients exhibit symptoms after the age of 50 and some after the age of 70. Chorea and disturbances in gait are noted on them and often exhibit a benign and more prolonged course than typical patients.

**Juvenile Huntington disease:**

The onset of symptoms is before the age of 20 years. The length of CAG repeats is more than 55. Motor, cognitive and psychiatric disturbances exhibited in adult HD are also seen in the juvenile form, but the clinical presentation is different. Most often, behavioral disturbances and learning difficulties are the first signs which are noticed in school. Motor disturbances include hypokinesia and bradykinesia with dystonic components. Chorea is rarely seen in the first decade, and commonly appears in the second decade of life. Epileptic fits are commonly observed. Severe mental deterioration, as well as cerebellar symptoms associate with motor, speech, and language delay, are characteristics of juvenile HD. In teenagers, the manifestation of the disease is similar to adult HD, where chorea and severe behavioral disturbances are often the initial presentations.