**Common Side Effects**

- Sedation/CNS depression

- Dizziness

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Constipation: Opioid-induced constipation is one of the most common side effects resulting from activating mu receptors in the gastrointestinal system, causing increased stool transit time. Tolerance does not occur at the mu receptors in the colon. For this reason, opioid-induced constipation does not decrease over time. Patients who use opioids long-term are encouraged to increase fluid intake, participate in regular exercise, and defecate as soon as they have the urge to void.

- Physical dependence - Dependence often manifests with withdrawal symptoms when opioids are discontinued or decreased. Withdrawal symptoms include rhinorrhea, lacrimation, yawning, hyperventilation, hyperthermia, muscle aches, vomiting, diarrhea, and anxiety. The severity of withdrawal symptoms varies based on the chronicity of opioid intake, the type of opioid, and individual variability.

- Tolerance - As individuals take repeated doses of opioids, they require increased medication to experience the same effect of analgesia.

- Respiratory depression- Individuals with COPD, asthma, or other lung pathologies may experience fatal respiratory impairment.

**Uncommon Side Effects**

- Hyperalgesia - Chronic use of opioids can ironically lead to hyperalgesia.

- Delayed gastric emptying

- Muscle rigidity

- Immunologic and hormonal dysfunction

- Myoclonus

- Cardiac arrhythmia

- Pruritis

- Xerostomia

Narcotic bowel syndrome (NBS) occurs when individuals experience daily moderate to severe abdominal pain for three months or more. Patients may increase opioid intake to deal with the pain. Paradoxically, abdominal pain often increases in response to escalating opioid doses.

Of note, if opioids are taken in intravenous form, as they often are when abused, individuals increase their risk of infections, human immunodeficiency virus, and hepatitis C virus exposure.