# Introduction

Endothelin is a 21-amino acid long peptide that is a vasoconstrictor produced from endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC), macrophages, and the renal medulla. They are known to produce endothelin-1 (ET-1) that acts on the receptors ETA and ETB. These receptors are G-protein coupled cell-surface receptors, and ETA is mainly present on smooth muscle cells. ETB receptors appear on endothelial and renal epithelial cells. Both are present in the lungs. ET-1 is known as a potent vasoconstrictor with proliferative, pro-fibrotic, pro-oxidative, pro-inflammatory properties, and maintenance of the tone of VSMC’s. Other ET’s discovered include ET-2 and ET-3. Endothelins are involved in neurovascular uncoupling, affects cognitive functions and blood pressure. Its influence of blood pressure is an essential part of diseases such as postmenopausal hypertension, pre-eclampsia, and pulmonary hypertension in which it plays a major role in its pathogenesis and hence is a vital cornerstone for appropriate management.

# Cellular Level

**Biosynthesis**

The synthesis of ET gets regulated at the level of transcription. The first protein transcribed would undergo processing by a furin-type proprotein convertase. This process yields a molecule called ‘big ET-1', an inactive intermediate. Endothelin converting enzyme (ECE) acts on big ET-1, converting it into ET-1. ECE conversion consists of two steps: Big ET-1 to ET-1(1-31) by chymase and then to ET-1 by neprilysin.

**Cellular Signaling:**

Arterial vasoconstriction is mainly by ETA, while venous vasoconstriction is by ETB. Vasodilation is otherwise mediated via ETB receptor activation. The same vessel undergoes constriction when the ET-1 passes deeper into the smooth muscle layer and activates the ETA receptors.

**Regulation:**

Angiotensin-II, transforming growth factor-b, thrombin, bradykinin, hypoxia, and low-density lipoprotein (either oxidized or acetylated) induces the expression of ET-1. An inhibitor of expression is nitric oxide (NO).

**Endothelin Converting Enzyme:**

Endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ECE-1) belongs in the family of metalloproteases. The ECE-1 gene is on chromosome 1. The same ECE-1 has four isoforms (ECE-1a, 1b, 1c, 1d), among which ECE-1a and ECE-1c have antagonistic activities of suppressing and increasing the invasiveness of cancer cells.

**Endothelin Receptors:**

There are two types of G-protein coupled transmembrane receptors detected - ETA and ETB.

# Development

The first endothelin was identified by culturing aortic endothelial cells and was named as endothelin-1 (ET-1) from the name ‘endothelium-derived-vasoconstrictor.’ Over time ET-2 and ET-3 were discovered from snakes. They are genetically encrypted into the human genome in chromosomes 6, 1, and 20, respectively. Promoters of endothelin production include factors such as thrombin, insulin, epinephrine, angiotensin II, cortisol, and other extrinsic factors such as cyclosporine, vascular shear stress, and hypoxia. The factors that reduce ET include nitric oxide and its inducers, natriuretic peptides, and prostanoids. ET is produced in an immature form called preproendothelin-1 in the cell and undergoes maturation, which involves the enzyme endothelin converting enzyme-1 (ECE-1), which is responsible for cleaving and thus maturing the molecule to 21-amino acids. A newly discovered endothelin produced from mast cells has 31-amino acids (therefore called ET-11-31) in length and has a more constrictive potency.

# Mechanism

In normal states, the usual function of ET is the maintenance of the stability of the vasculature. The most important interaction with ET is nitric oxide (NO). NO gets released after the utilization of L-arginine by the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) to, therefore, increase cyclic GMP.

**Dysfunctional Endothelium**

There is a plethora of research supporting the loss of NO bioavailability or activity to be a sentinel event in endothelial dysfunction leading to a cardiovascular compromise.

# Pathophysiology

**Pathophysiologic Basis of Diseases**

Endothelin functions in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion. It virtually affects almost all organs of the body. The most important diseases to know, which have established associations with endothelin as a part of their pathophysiology are pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, post-menopausal hypertension, pre-eclampsia, ovarian cancer, and chronic kidney diseases.

**Pulmonary hypertension (PH)**

ET-1 is known to be a responsible contributor to the development of pulmonary hypertension (PH) by increasing the vascular tone and promoting vascular remodeling via its mitogenic activity.

The etiology of the PH also bifurcates in the mechanisms involved — thromboembolism induced PH results in an upregulation of ETB.

**Heart failure (HF)**

The relationship between heart failure and endothelin had been discovered earlier and has begun to show importance in assessing the prognosis of a patient with HF - especially ET-1(1-31).

Although there exists a linear relation with endothelin and HF, studies on receptor blockade have failed to show any improvement in patients.

**Post-menopausal hypertension (PMH)**

Menopause results in multiple changes in the body of a female that begins on average at the age of 52  and can last for up to 2-10 years. Along with these changes also occurs an increase in the prevalence of hypertension in this population. Research has noted that there is an elevation of ET-1 levels after menopause.

**Systemic Hypertension (HTN)**

Essential HTN has normal levels of ET-1; however, there is a local rise in the ET-1 levels in the vascular walls. ETA activation demonstrates an increase in blood pressure, and ETB activity ameliorates hypertension. Thus, the use of blockers of ET receptors has shown an overall reduction of blood pressure.

**Pre-eclampsia**

Pre-Eclampsia is a pregnancy-specific syndrome that also encompasses endothelial dysfunction along with elevated blood pressure and renal vascular resistance. As mentioned earlier, hypoxia is a triggering factor for ET-1 synthesis, and placental hypoxia is one of the causative factors for elevating the ET-1 levels in the blood leading the evolution of pre-eclampsia. ET-1 also causes increased expression of soluble fms-like-tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) that is also involved in the pathogenesis. There is a contribution of increased expression of ETA in the development of preeclampsia along with the dysfunction of the ETB receptor.

**Ovarian cancer**

The mitogenic effect of ET-1 is of significance for tumor growth in malignancies in ovarian, prostate, colorectal, bladder, and breast.

**Pathophysiologic activity in the Kidney:**

Renal endothelium produces endothelin, which regulates sodium and water excretion. In a condition of volume overload, the shear stress on the endothelium leads to the expression of ET-1 that acts on the thick ascending limb and collecting duct to reduce water and sodium reabsorption mediated with the action of intermediates like nitric oxide and other pathways.

**Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis (FSGS):**

Endothelin induces glomerular injury to the podocytes via activation of ETB, leading to proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis. The exact mechanism remains not clearly understood.

**Diabetic Nephropathy (DN):**

Hyperglycemia is an inducer for ET-1 production, which causes disassembly of the actin cytoskeleton in diabetic nephropathy. ET antagonists have proven to reduce proteinuria in patients having diabetic nephropathy and reversing the disassembly to an extent.

**Hypertensive Nephropathy:**

Hypertension leads to increased shear stress and ET-1 production as a cause or effect. Over time, the damage to the kidney ensues and leads to proteinuria. Using ET blockers have shown to be nephroprotective and demonstrated a gradual reduction in glomerulosclerosis and albuminuria along with an increased blood flow with an improved microvessel structure in the cortical kidney.

# Clinical Significance

ET-1 is a peptide hormone that is growing significantly due to the detection of involvement in multiple disease processes and its rising trend with age.