Malnutrition adversely affects the health status of individuals, clinical outcomes, and overall healthcare costs. Since malnutrition is a public health concern, it should be addressed accordingly. To prevent this condition, efforts should be made at multiple system levels (public health, community, and individual). Establishing sustainable food systems, educating individuals about healthy diets and lifestyles, maintaining governmental and local food assistance programs, and arranging nutritional screening programs at schools, housing shelters, nursing facilities, and retirement homes, are just a few ways to improve nutritional status and reduce the burden of malnutrition on the healthcare system.

From a clinical standpoint, a systematic team-based nutritional evaluation helps detect malnutrition or factors causing it early, which allows for early intervention and better clinical outcomes. This requires the involvement of physicians (generalists and specialty care physicians), nurses, dietitians, nutrition specialists/technicians, pharmacists, dentists, and laboratory personnel. The primary attending physician is responsible for overall patient care. Since nutritional status is an important predictor of healthcare outcomes, the primary attending physician’s involvement in nutritional assessment and intervention is critical.

Nutrition specialists/technicians and dietitians also play vital roles in nutritional assessment. For example, dietetic technicians, registered (DTRs) are qualified to assist with general nutrition screenings and may also assist dietitians and other members of the healthcare team with identifying patients at risk for malnutrition in the clinical setting. Clinical dietitians or RDNs are trained to perform medical nutrition therapy (MNT) using the Nutrition Care Process (NCP), which includes nutrition assessment as the first step in identifying potential nutrition problems in patients, such as the risk factors of malnutrition mentioned throughout this article. Many of the components of nutritional assessment in the NCP are synonymous with those mentioned above.

The five domains of nutrition assessment outlined in the NCP include 1) food or nutrition-related history, 2) biochemical data, medical tests, and procedures, 3) anthropometric measurements, 4) nutrition-focused physical findings, and 5) client history.

Nurses also help with early nutritional screening to identify nutrition risk factors and monitor the patient's condition to maintain timely documentation records of clinical status. Pharmacists may also provide information about potential drug side effects or conditions that may impact the risk of malnutrition. They may also provide suggestions to help prevent drug-nutrient interactions that could influence a patient's nutrition status (i.e., antiepileptic drugs and potential impact on vitamin D levels).

Dental professionals can also play a unique role in identifying malnutrition risk factors in patients. For example, a child or adult with multiple dental caries and poor dentition will likely be at higher risk for malnutrition due to limitations with oral intake; a dental professional can assist with alleviating these concerns, thus promoting better overall nutrition. Consultations with specialty physicians may be required not only for the management of underlying conditions but also for the improvement of the nutritional status of patients. Other healthcare team members' services and expert opinions are also essential based on a patient's clinical presentation.

Overall, effective collaboration between each healthcare team member is essential to provide a thorough, comprehensive nutritional assessment. While each collaborating member may not function within the same healthcare system, modern technology and dynamic electronic medical records allow clinicians to communicate remotely to provide better overall care, which can manifest into more detailed nutritional assessment data collection and utilization.

As this article highlights, there are many different components of nutritional assessment, and it would be an overwhelming task for one member of the healthcare team to assume responsibility for performing all of these components alone. Therefore, it is to the benefit of the physicians, nursing staff, and allied health professionals to coordinate the facilitation of obtaining appropriate nutrition assessment data that can be used to enhance healthcare outcomes for patients' health and safety.