The mandible, the bone that comprises the lower jaw, develops embryologically from Meckel cartilage, and the fully-developed mandible has several named regions. The condyle forms the most superior-posterior aspect of the mandible on each side and articulates in the temporomandibular joint, forming the only hinge-and-glide joint in the body and giving the mandible its functional range of motion. The condyle sits on the narrower, neck-like subcondyle. The coronoid process is a triangular projection of bone anterior to the condyle and separated from it by the sigmoid notch; the tendon of the temporalis muscle inserts on the coronoid process. The condyle and coronoid lie superior to the mandible's ascending portion called the ramus, which sits just above the angle. Projecting anteriorly from the mandible angle on each side is the body, and the two bodies of the mandible are connected anteromedially by the symphysis and parasymphyseal regions. The lateral pterygoid and masseter muscles attach along the ramus' lateral aspect and work with the temporalis muscle to open and protrude the jaw.

The medial pterygoid muscle, by contrast, attaches along the medial aspect of the ramus and contracts to close and retrude the jaw. The inferior alveolar nerve, a mandibular nerve posterior division branch (the third branch of the trigeminal nerve, fifth cranial nerve), traverses the inferior third of the mandible through the bony mandibular canal and exits via the mental foramen to provide sensation to the chin and lower lip.

The mental foramen is found inferior to the first pre-molar on each side. The digastric and mylohyoid muscles attach to the inner, lingual cortex of the mandible. The mandible supports sixteen adult teeth that, ideally, occlude against sixteen maxillary teeth.