# Continuing Education Activity

A fistula is an abnormal communication between two epithelial surfaces. An intestinal fistula is a fistula that connects the intestine to an adjacent organ or surface. Examples include enterocutaneous fistulas, which connect the intestine to the skin, and enterovesicular fistulas, which connect the intestine to the bladder. Common causes of intestinal fistulas include surgical procedures, diverticular disease, inflammatory bowel disease, malignancy, radiation, and injury due to trauma or foreign bodies. This activity describes the evaluation, diagnosis, and management of intestinal fistulas and stresses the role of team-based interprofessional care for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the pathophysiology of intestinal fistulas.
- Review the etiology of intestinal fistula.
- Summarize the treatment options for intestinal fistulas.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the evaluation and management of intestinal fistulas and optimize outcomes.

# Introduction

Fistula is an abnormal communication between two epithelial surfaces. This definition is not without exceptions. It is a general description to differentiate fistulae from sinuses

As the definition implies, fistula connects 2 different surfaces or lumens. It often starts from an offending side and makes its way to an adjacent lumen or surface. An intestinal fistula is a fistula that starts from the intestine. It could connect to a variety of adjacent organs or surfaces. Common examples of intestinal fistulae are: entero-cutaneous fistula, enter-enteric fistula, entero-vesical fistula,

Fistulae are named according to the surfaces or organs they connect like the entero-vesical fistula or the entero-cutaneous fistula.

Intestinal fistulae are a challenging surgical condition. Assessment, management, and prognosis depend on the complexity of the fistula and the underlying etiology. In this article, fistulae starting from the intestine both small and large intestine will be the focus of discussion. Details of specific fistulae will not be included.

# Etiology

An underlying disease or surgical event usually causes intestinal fistula formation.

**Surgical Procedure**

Surgical complication is the most common cause of intestinal fistula formation.

**Diverticular Disease**

Complex diverticular disease is a common cause of fistula connecting to an intra-abdominal organ like the bladder.

**Crohn's Disease
**

Chronic inflammatory bowel diseases, especially Crohn's disease, are a well-known cause of intestinal fistulization.

**Malignancy
**

Cancer of intestine or adjacent organs is a known cause of fistulization to and from the intestine.

**Radiation**

Radiation causes long-term chronic inflammation with poor healing and repair processes.

**Non-Surgical Injuries and Foreign Bodies
**

Injuries in trauma or by a foreign body can result in non-healing abnormal connection with the intestine.

There is a number of causes that are abbreviated in the mnemonic "FRIENDS" (foreign body, radiation, inflammation, epithelization, neoplasm, distal obstruction, short fistula). These are known causes of non-healing fistula. Epithelization of the fistula lining prevent its healing, but does not by itself create a fistula. Similarly distal (to the fistula site) intestinal obstruction or short fistula. Failure of an intestinal fistula to heal after appropriate treatment raises the suspicion for these causes and mandates further investigation.

# Epidemiology

The occurrence of intestinal fistulae varies depending on many factors. Underlying disease prevalence, type, and quality of surgical practice, quality of healthcare, the incidence of trauma, and the use of radiation are among the factors influencing the incidence of intestinal fistulae.

In countries where Crohn's disease is prevalent, intestinal fistulae incidence tends to increase.

Age, gender, and racial prevalence of fistulae follow the pattern of underlying diseases. Low-quality healthcare and surgical practice relate with a higher morbidity and mortality from intestinal fistulae.

# Pathophysiology

An intestinal fistula is a complication of an underlying disease, surgical procedure or injury. To better assess, manage, and prevent fistulae a good understanding of the pathophysiology of fistula formation process is needed.

More complex fistulae that result after surgical procedures are formed by a leak of the intestine formation a collection of intestinal content that eventually finds its way to another organ or surface. The similar but slightly simpler process takes place in the fistula-in-ano formation.

# Histopathology

Histopathologic examination of the tissue involved in the fistula reflects an acute inflammatory reaction besides the original pathology of the causative disease except in injuries. The acute inflammation is caused by a combination of more than one factor like the primary pathology causing the fistula (diverticular disease, malignancy, Crohn's, among others), tissue irritation by the flow of intestinal content, and the resulting infection.

Postsurgical intestinal fistulae are acute with a significant, infectious, inflammatory component that may infrequently lead to sepsis. Sudden deterioration of multiple organs can be the presenting clinical picture on some of these occasions. This is the most detrimental pathological component in patients' survival in these complications.

# History and Physical

History and physical exam details in intestinal fistula will reveal signs and symptoms of the underlying disease and complication.

Depending on the underlying disease, a variety of signs and symptoms of abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, gastrointestinal (GI) bleed, weakness, cachexia, poor appetite, and weight loss can be variably encountered. Specific symptoms related to the organ involved in the fistula may be identified. Examples of these symptoms are recurrent UTIs, pneumaturia or fecaluria in an entero-vesical fistula.

In the acute phase of postsurgical intestinal fistula and leak, symptoms are more severe and can be life-threatening. Sudden onset deterioration of vital signs, abdominal pain and tenderness are common clinical findings. Depending on the type and complexity of the underlying disease and the surgical procedure fistula can be further investigated by reviewing operative notes details if the operating surgeon is not available.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of intestinal fistula should be performed according to the acuity and complexity of the fistula. Chronic or subacute fistulae like colo-vesical, recto-vaginal or entero-enteric fistulae can be evaluated in an outpatient sequential setting. The aim of the evaluation would be to:

- Confirm the diagnosis

- Characterize further the site, size, and complexity of the fistula

- Identify the underlying pathology if it is unknown

- Plan for management

- Re-evaluate and follow up progression

A severe or acute intestinal fistula, as in a postsurgical complication, should be evaluated promptly when suspected to verify the suspicion and assess the extent of the complication.

**Evaluation Modalities**

In addition to the clinical evaluation that includes a comprehensive history review and appropriate physical exam, the following modalities are available:

**Imaging
**

Imaging with GI contrast that traverses through the fistula from the intestinal lumen to the other end of the fistula confirms the presence and extent of the fistula. On occasions, the contrast is not seen in the fistula itself but is seen in the end organ (bladder, vagina, extra-abdominally)

CT is often done first, especially with an acute intestinal fistula, for the high accuracy and details it provides about the fistulous organs and the entire abdominopelvic cavities. CT provides details essential for planning for surgical treatment. MRI may be needed in subtle or difficult to diagnose fistulae. It has the advantage of better soft tissue characterization. It is also useful in complex fistulas like in complicated Crohn's disease.

**Endoscopy
**

Colposcopy, cystoscopy, gastroduodenostomy or colonoscopy are used to identify the site of the fistula at the mucosa of the scoped organ. A small area of inflamed, red and possibly elevated mucosa is a sign of possible fistulous tract. Unless the fistula is very wide, it is usually difficult to visualize its lumen endoscopically. Endoscopy can provide further information about the underlying disease like in malignancy or Crohn's. Fistulas might be an incidental finding of endoscopy performed for other reasons. In this situation, further investigations are required.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of enterovesical fistula includes treatment of the fistula itself and the underlying disease.

**Conservative or Non-Operative Approach**

Medical treatment of the symptoms and possible complications like UTI, skin excoriation, dehydration, and site infection is often needed. This approach alone can be considered in high-risk patients and with a severe, underlying disease. The associated complication rate from this approach is found to be low in recent studies.

Medical treatment includes treating UTI and the associated symptoms, maximizing medical treatment of the underlying disease like in Crohn's or diverticulitis, and support of the general patient's condition.

Other conservative treatment includes non-operative measures to close the fistula like fibrin glue or other occlusive measures. The success rate of these measures is not high. They are still an option to consider in high-risk patients.

**Operative Approach**

The basic principle of the surgical approach is to excise the involved segment of the bowel and the fistula. After the diagnosis of the fistula and the underlying disease is confirmed and characterized, surgical treatment can be planned accordingly.

Some fistulae, for example, enterovesical fistula, may sometimes be identified intraoperatively while operating on the underlying disease. Dense adhesions of the intestine on the bladder are the trigger to suspect the fistula. Unless it is cancer surgery, the operative approach is usually the same. If the pathology cannot be confirmed, a frozen section of the fistula tissue is needed to role out malignancy.

Operative treatment of the entero-cutaneous fistula might be different. The focus is on the intestinal part where the leak started. When the conservative treatment fails, and after medical optimization of the patient, surgical treatment is planned to excise the diseased intestinal segment with primary anastomosis when possible. The fistulous tract is debrided and drained as part of the intra-abdominal adhesiolysis and debridement. Debriding all unhealthy tissue and closing with viable, healthy tissue edges is essential for successful healing and fistula closure.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Abdominal abscess

- Abdominal aortic aneurysm

- Aortitis

- Appendicitis

- Blunt abdominal trauma

- Colon cancer

- Cystitis

- Diverticulitis

- Enterovesical fistula

- Inflammatory bowel disease

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of intestinal fistula is a complex and potentially challenging task. It requires multi-modal efforts, and interprofessional collaboration, assessment, and planning of nurses and clinicians.