The kidneys are surrounded by a smooth, tough fibrous capsule that has limited space and a small amount of fluid under the capsule can cause compression of the kidney parenchyma resulting in Page kidney. Gerota fascia, on the other hand, is a larger space and can accommodate a considerable amount of blood or fluid before kidney parenchyma is compressed. In most cases of Page kidney, the compression causing hypertension is extracapsular.

External compression of the kidney may be due to a collection of blood or from some other source. Bleeding around the kidney may result from the following:

- Blunt trauma - sports injuries like football, hockey, other contact sports, motor vehicle accident, violence, or fall.

- Iatrogenic - following biopsy of native or transplant kidney, extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy, ureteral surgery, sympathetic nerve block.

- Spontaneous - anticoagulation, AV malformation, tumor, vasculitis, pancreatitis.

Non-bleeding causes of external compression include lymphoceles particularly around the transplanted kidney, urinoma, retroperitoneal paraganglioma, or large simple cysts.

The iatrogenic or traumatic subcapsular hematoma has been observed to be the most commonly found cause of Page kidney.

Non-traumatic or spontaneous causes of Page kidney are rare with isolated cases occasionally reported in the literature. The causes generally include spontaneous renal hemorrhage because of arteriovenous malformations, underlying tumors, cyst rupture, vasculitis, or glomerulonephritis. Lymphatic collections and subcapsular urinomas have also been observed. In some rare cases, Page kidney could be idiopathic.