Postpartum infections can be roughly grouped into those caused by ascending vaginal microflora into the reproductive tract and those which result from iatrogenic trauma to the abdominal wall or perineum during delivery. Because of the complexity of the birthing process, it is important to remember that ascending vaginal flora plays a role in surgical site infections, and surgical intervention likewise plays a role in the ascension of vaginal microflora into the reproductive tract.

Infections resulting from ascending infection into the reproductive tract include endometritis and septic abortion. Endometritis is an infection of the endometrium and myometrium. Endometritis occurs most commonly in the postpartum period, as childbirth allows ascending vaginal bacterial flora to infect the upper reproductive tract. This infection is five to ten times more common following cesarean section compared to vaginal delivery.Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella pneumonia.

Chlamydia trachomatis should be suspected in endometritis presenting > 7 days postpartum and in high-risk populations, such as women under age 25. Septic abortion is an infection of the products of conception following spontaneous or induced abortion.

As the pregnancy progresses, the placenta enlarges, and there is more tissue to become infected; thus, mortality from septic abortion increases with increasing gestational age.

Surgical site infections (SSI) are relatively common following birth, complicating 2-7% of cesarean deliveries.

Incisional site infections present with erythema and purulent drainage at the site and can be associated with systemic symptoms such as fever and malaise. Like endometritis and septic abortion, SSI can be caused by contamination of the wound with microflora from the genitourinary tract; however, they can also be caused by commonly isolated skin flora.Ureaplasma urealyticum, Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, and Staphylococcal species.

More rarely, necrotizing fasciitis of the surgical site can develop, characterized by rapid necrosis of the fascia and subcutaneous tissue with relative sparing of the musculature. Postpartum patients who develop necrotizing fasciitis typically have underlying medical comorbidities, with diabetes being the most commonly reported. Type I necrotizing fasciitis results from polymicrobial infection with aerobic and anaerobic organisms; type II results from infection with group A streptococcus. Both types can occur in the postpartum period and can complicate cesarean deliveries as well as episiotomies.