The indications for the use of transthoracic echocardiography is vast, and the basis of using this test is known or suspected cardiac disease. The Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography has published appropriate use criteria in 2019, which covers the criteria in its entirety.

The use of echocardiography in asymptomatic patients includes screening patients who have first degree relatives with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), aortic aneurysms or dissections, and those athletes that have electrocardiographic (ECG) changes. These patients may not have any immediate complaints, but their strong family history should give the clinician a high pretest probability to order an Echocardiogram. For example, patients with HCM may have a family history of sudden cardiac death in 1st-degree relatives at a young age.

Second, the initial evaluation of patients with clinical signs of or symptoms of heart disease. This includes palpitations, syncope, pre-syncope, newly diagnosed bundle branch blocks, arrhythmias, ACS, exertional shortness of breath, and evaluation of pulmonary hypertension.

Third, follow-up on previously diagnosed heart failure or valvular disease. In regards to the former, a re-evaluation of the patient's ejection fraction with echocardiography, especially in those with acute heart failure exacerbations, would provide important information to better treat the patient.

Finally, the evaluation of patent foramen ovale in those with cerebrovascular accidents (CVA).

Bedside echocardiography has many indications in addition to the above listed. Since the early 1990s, bedside echocardiography use by intensivists and emergency medicine physicians has been increasing. Bedside echocardiography is routinely employed in critically ill patients who may or may not have previously diagnosed cardiac disease, but now require vascular support. Bedside echocardiography in the undifferentiated shortness breath can help elucidate cardiac failure vs. pericardial effusion vs. non-cardiac etiology. Some of the most common indications for bedside echocardiography include suspicion for pulmonary embolism, hypotension or respiratory failure of unknown etiology, complications after cardiothoracic surgery, identifications of pericardial effusion, and evaluation of right ventricular dysfunction.

The indications for the use of stress echocardiography is the suspicion for coronary artery disease. This includes patients with stable angina with intermediate probability for coronary artery disease, with a pre-test probability of 15% to 85%.

Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE) is used because it provides a superior imaging quality of the posterior heart chambers and structures when compared to TTE, can be used during coronary artery bypass graft surgery, aids in placement of transcatheter devices, and may be performed at the bedside in clinically ill patients.

Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) is used during transcatheter cardiac interventions. This includes closure of atrial septal defects, catheter-directed biopsy, thrombectomies, and during electrophysiological procedures, which include transeptal puncture.

Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) may be performed during cardiac catheterization to directly visualize atherosclerosis within the vessel walls; this is utilized when the extent and severity of stenosis are indeterminant during PCI.

Strain rate (STR) Echocardiography, also known as deformation echocardiography, is indicated when there is high suspicion for wall motion abnormalities. However, TTE is initially used to evaluate wall abnormalities; it is based on visual estimates, which may be subjective because it is operator dependant.

Three-dimensional (3D) echocardiography is used when a clearer image of cardiac structures, and how to relate to each other is required. This is used most often used with presurgical planning for interventional procedures, as it can prove improved views of valvular structures.

Contrast echocardiography has been studied extensively in the assessment of myocardial perfusion and has been found to be of independent prognostic and diagnostic benefit.