As with all traumatic injuries, it is important to start with trauma principle basics by starting with the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) and treating any injuries found. After addressing those, treatment of the fracture can begin.

An acute fracture requires initial treatment with a closed reduction with appropriate anesthesia. Salter-Harris 1 and 2 fractures that present 7 to 10 days out from injury should be given more leniency in acceptance of fracture displacement due to possibly causing more injury to the physis.

The risk of causing growth arrest after the fracture has begun healing is higher, and any deformities encountered later can be addressed by osteotomies. SH1 and SH2 injuries with greater than 3mm of displacement are also at increased risk of growth arrest. Salter-Harris 3 or 4 fractures should be reduced regardless of acute or late presentation due to the involvement of the joint. SH3 and SH4 fractures should have less than 2mm step off at the articular surface. Post-reduction CT may be considered to assess reduction quality.

In patients who develop physeal bars and growth arrest, there are multiple options for treatment based on the amount of growth remaining. Skeletal age must be determined to help guide treatment. Boys typically grow until 16, while girls grow until 14 years old. Green and Anderson came up with growth grafts that can be used based on the patient's skeletal age to determine the amount of skeletal growth left in the patient.

- Observation:

- The entire physis is involved.
- Limb length inequality acceptable
- Acceptable angular deformity 
- Minimal growth remaining in contralateral extremity

- Completion of bar:

- Angular deformity is acceptable and may become unacceptable if growth continues.
- Must evaluate limb length inequality before the procedure

- If >2 to 2.5 cm growth remaining, perform contralateral epiphysiodesis. 
- In ankle and wrist should consider doing epiphysiodesis of ulna or fibula to avoid ulnar impaction of the wrist or subfibular impingement due to continued growth of the other bone, respectively.

- Resection:

- Lots of growth remaining
- partial arrest
- must have large enough area of healthy physis left to continue growing 

- Bony bar resection with interposition of fat autograft:

- bar spans <50% of physis with two years of growth left or >2cm growth left
- >50% bar unlikely to do well
- Type A bar - resect until area surrounded completely by healthy physis
- Type B or C - make window or osteotomy to reach the area, may also consider using drill excision
- Can evaluate growth postop if radiographic markers placed intraop

- Osteotomy:

- > 20-degree angulation 
- < 20-degree angulation likely to correct with growth

- Not always the case