Patients should be instructed to take triptans at the first onset of the headache phase of a migraine attack; they are not effective if taken during the aura phase before the start of the headache.

Some of the most commonly prescribed triptan agents are:

- Sumatriptan

- Zolmitriptan

- Frovatriptan

- Eletriptan

- Naratriptan

The above is not an exhaustive list. Triptans are available in multiple dosage forms, such as oral tablets, orally disintegrating tablets, nasal sprays, and subcutaneous injections.

The choice of agent should be an individualized therapy. If a patient has no response to one of the triptans after three trials, increasing the dose, switching to a different dosage form of the same agent, or another triptan might work.

During a migraine attack, patients may experience a decreased gastric motility, causing a delay in gastric emptying; this may affect the rate and extent of triptan absorption when administered orally. Metoclopramide, an antiemetic agent, exhibits prokinetic activity and is FDA-approved to treat gastric stasis. Metoclopramide can improve the inconsistent absorption of orally administered triptans when taken concomitantly. However, metoclopramide has a boxed warning because of the risk of adverse effects like extrapyramidal symptoms and hyperprolactinemia. Alternatively, an injectable or a nasal triptan formulation is an option, as these formulations bypass the gastrointestinal tract.

A post hoc analysis of five randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trials compared the efficacy of triptans at relieving nausea associated with migraines two hours after therapy.

To prevent menstrual migraine, patients may initiate frovatriptan or naratriptan two days before menses begin and continue for 5 to 7 days.

Propranolol, which has a role in migraine prophylaxis, increases rizatriptan serum concentrations. Rizatriptan dose should not exceed 5 mg for patients using propranolol.