The involvement of multiple organ systems in incontinentia pigmenti requires a multidisciplinary approach to management.

- Pediatric dermatology should be consulted for the management of cutaneous lesions.

- An early blistering rash can be misdiagnosed as congenital herpes simplex, epidermolysis bullosa, and varicella.
- All stages of skin lesions should be kept cool and dry, and devoid of trauma.
- All stages of skin lesions can overlap in the first year of life and recur after the disappearance in the setting of infection or viral illness.
- Hypohidrosis occurs in IP, which results in heat intolerance and the risk of life-threatening overheating.
- No specific therapies have been established for cutaneous lesions. Treatment is focused on wound care and treatment of secondary infections as needed.

- A pediatric ophthalmologist should be consulted to examine the retina and periodic follow-ups. 

- A dilated fundus examination should be performed to evaluate the optic nerve, macula, and retinal periphery.
- A retina specialist should re-evaluate abnormal findings
- The goal is to prevent retinal detachment or vitreous hemorrhage secondary to retinal neovascularization.
- The peripheral avascular retina is treated with laser photocoagulation similar to retinopathy of prematurity.
- Retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage may require pars plana vitrectomy.

- Pediatric neurology consultation is needed for the management of seizures and neurologic imaging.

- Baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with or without contrast during the neonatal period is recommended to establish baseline neurologic imaging.
- Repeat imaging in seizures and other neurologic abnormalities can be performed.
- Seizures are the most common neurologic manifestation. An electroencephalogram (EEG) may be considered in the setting of seizures. A periodic follow-up to assess for focal motor deficits and delay in developmental milestones is necessary.

- A genetic counselor and a geneticist can help in genetic testing. Approximately 25 to 35% of cases are familial, and the rest are sporadic. A thorough exam of patients and at-risk relatives can help determine inheritance. If there are no physical findings, molecular genetic testing for a mutation in the IKBKG gene can be done if the diagnosis is suspected.

- Follow-up with the pediatrician is necessary to screen for developmental delays. Neuropsychiatry testing for children who are struggling with school activities is essential.

- Other systemic complications include damage to the microvasculature and pulmonary hypertension without cardiovascular disease.

- In pregnancy, fertility is not impaired in women with IP, but the risk of spontaneous abortion is higher for those carrying a male fetus.

- Women with IP considering pregnancy should have prenatal testing and counseling. Males with IP have somatic mosaicism, not a germline mutation; therefore, transmission from an affected male to a daughter is unlikely.