Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a common pathologic process affecting more than 15 million Americans every year.

Cardiac catheterization with angiography is a minimally invasive diagnostic procedure and imaging modality that has become a mainstay in the evaluation of CAD.

Significant lesions, those with greater than 70% luminal narrowing, via visual estimation qualify for intervention utilizing techniques such as balloon angioplasty or percutaneous intervention with coronary artery stent placement. Lesions displaying less than 40% stenosis are determined non-significant and the recommendation in these cases is for optimization of medical therapy for the treatment of CAD. Interventions in patients with indeterminate lesions, between 40% and 70% stenosis, previously were subject to debate. In the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE, 2007), revascularization with PCI in stable CAD with high-grade stenosis failed to display benefit over optimal medical therapy.

To better characterize these lesions and identify those that would benefit from intervention, additional diagnostic modalities have been developed including fractional flow reserve (FFR) and instantaneous wave-free ratio (IFR). FFR is described in depth within its own review article; however, in brief, FFR is a guidewire-based technique that measures blood pressure and flows through a specific lesion. In the DEFER trial (2007) it was determined that the five-year event-free survival was not significantly different between a patient who performed and deferred PCI on intermediate coronary stenosis with an FFR greater than 0.75.

IFR is a newer physiologic measurement that utilizes similar principles to FFR but does not require the use of a hyperemic agent. In a 2017 JACC study, IFR and FFR demonstrated no significant differences in the prediction of myocardial ischemia.