- Asymptomatic patients with limited findings should be educated regarding the presence and potential significance of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy (PPCD).

- Early vision screening is essential.

- Amblyopia therapy is required for young children with high or asymmetric refractive error.

- Periodic ophthalmic evaluation is necessary to screen for anterior segment irregularities.

- Initiate immediate referral to a pediatric ophthalmologist if non-clearing corneal edema is present.
- Amblyopia therapy is recommended for young children with corneal edema affecting form perception.
- If endothelial findings are present, gonioscopy should be performed to evaluate the anatomic angle. 
- If intraocular pressure is elevated, a careful glaucoma workup should be initiated. 
- If there are iris or pupillary distortions a glaucoma workup should be initiated.

- If findings substantiate a diagnosis of glaucoma, glaucoma therapy is imperative.

- Options include topical, laser, surgical and minimally invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS).

- 

- Laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) is not recommended if epithelialization of the trabecular meshwork has been identified.
- If unable to achieve or maintain rigid IOP control, glaucoma filtering surgery may be necessary.

- Minimally invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS) offers promise.

- Penetrating Keratoplasty (PK) has historically been successful, but has slow and challenging recovery as well as variable visual outcomes.

- Lamellar corneal transplantation offers faster recovery and improved visual outcomes.

- Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty (DMEK) if the corneal stroma and epithelium are unaffected.
- Descemet stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty (DSAEK) is preferred if the corneal stroma and epithelium are unaffected.
- If iridocorneal adhesions are present corneal grafting procedures are at risk for failure.