The deltoid is a significant factor when considering the anterior surgical approach to gain access to the shoulder joint. Some of these technical procedures include, but are not limited to the following:

- Open Bankart repair/capsular reconstructions

- indicated in the setting of recurrent anterior (or other directional) instability of the shoulder

- Shoulder arthroplasty

- indicated for cases of post-traumatic deformity, advanced degenerative arthritis, and/or avascular necrosis
- includes hemiarthroplasty, total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA), reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (rTSA)

- Long head of the biceps tendon (LHBT) repair versus tenotomy versus tenodesis procedures

- indicated in the setting of either LHBT/bicipital groove instability or advanced/end-stage LHBT tendinopathy and degeneration

- Rotator cuff repair

- contemporary indications remain somewhat controversial, although most of these procedures are now being performed arthroscopically 
- popular approaches (as opposed to the deltopectoral approach) include the mini-open approach (lateral deltoid-splitting approach)

**Deltopectoral (DP) Approach**

When marking out the anatomic landmarks for the DP approach, the coracoid process is marked on the skin to plan out the trajectory for the surgical incision. From there, an incision is made, which follows over the deltopectoral groove. The deltoid and pectoralis major muscle fibers are appreciated, and this most often includes direct visualization of a "fat stripe," which includes the cephalic vein in the center of the incision/approach.

The deltoid is retracted laterally, while the pectoralis major muscle is retracted medially. The cephalic vein is retracted either laterally or medially (depending on surgeon preference).

**Other Approaches**

Other surgical approaches that involve the deltoid are the anterolateral and direct lateral approaches to the shoulder. A modified anterolateral approach can be preferred over the more anterior approach for humeral fractures because this may facilitate access to the specific fracture fragments.

The anterolateral approach to the acromioclavicular joint and subacromial space is used primarily to repair the rotator cuff and anterior decompression of the shoulder joint. This incision uses the coracoid process and the acromion as landmarks. After the acromioclavicular joint is exposed, retraction of the deltoid is required. If the surgery requires repairs of the rotator cuff, splitting the deltoid muscle is required. According to a 2018 study, the anterolateral surgical approach is especially useful when exposing the posterior aspect of the shoulder.

The lateral approach also requires the splitting of the deltoid. It involves a 5 cm longitudinal incision from the acromion to the lateral aspect of the arm. Division of the deltoid is necessary, including splitting it downwards for 5 cm. Like the anterolateral approach, it requires a suture at the apex of the incision for inadvertent splitting and axillary nerve damage. Minimally invasive approaches to the shoulder also involve splitting of the deltoid. The lateral minimally invasive technique requires making two incisions of the deltoid. One will be proximal, and one will be distal, with the axillary nerve running between the two incisions. The minimally invasive anterolateral part involves pressing a guidewire through the substance of the deltoid. Radiographic imaging will confirm the placement, which subsequently leads to the splitting of the deltoid.

**Complications**

Complications relating to these surgical approaches include deltoid injuries. One of these complications involves detachment of the deltoid from the clavicle. Reattachment of the deltoid would require full-thickness sutures and transosseous sutures and 4 to 6 weeks of complete healing. The deltoid is also at risk of being denervated. The axillary nerve runs under the deltoid muscle and travels posterior to anterior. It is at risk if the anterior deltoid is vigorously retracted laterally or if retractor placement is under the deltoid. Denervation can cause loss of arm abduction past 15 degrees and sensory loss over the deltoid. Incorrect retraction of the deltoid might also lead to cephalic vein rupture, leading to upper limb edema.