The mammary gland develops from the embryonic **Milk Ridge (Milk line) **between the fourth and sixth weeks of intra-uterine life. It is an ectodermal thickening extending from the axilla to the inguinal region. In animals, several mammary glands develop along this ridge, but in the case of humans, most of the ridge regress and degenerates entirely except for a small part in the pectoral region, which develops as breasts. This area develops into mammary buds and sends off 15 to 20 solid cords. These cords grow in underlying mesenchyme, evolving into lactiferous ducts and branches. They later canalize under the influence of maternal sex hormones. The surrounding mesenchyme contributes to the development of fibrous connective tissue and fat. The ectoderm thickens to form the nipple and areola.

**Congenital Anomalies:**

- **Ectopic breast**- Ectopic breasts present when the mammary gland develops away from its usual site. Its presentation is usually in the chest (other than the regular site), axilla, abdomen, and sometimes even in the vulva.

- **Polymastia**- A condition where the female presents with more than one breast on each side.

- **Polythelia**– In this condition, a single breast will have multiple nipples, usually numbering 2 or 3. Often, one of them is functional, and the others are rudimentary. Polymastia and polythelia combined occur in almost 0.2% to 5.6% of women.

- **Micromastia**– In this condition, the mammary gland fails to proliferate and remains small.

- **Macromastia**– It is a condition where the mammary gland grows much more than the usual size and hypertrophies.

- **Gynecomastia**– Although the mammary glands are rudimentary in males, in certain conditions, they enlarge to look like a female breast. This condition is known as gynecomastia. Though large, they are non-functional. In the case of Klinefelter syndrome, approximately 80% of patients have gynecomastia.

- **Retracted nipple or inverted nipple**– This is because of the failure or incomplete development of the nipples.

The most common congenital anomaly of all the above is the ectopic breast. Ectopic breasts usually are seen over the milk line, but in some cases, they can also occur away from the ridge, such as the face, ear, neck, buttocks, knee, lateral thigh, etc.