Symptoms of ulnar neuropathy at the elbow usually start slowly unless it is associated with trauma. The patient may have numbness and paresthesia,  radiating distally to the ulnar aspect of the hand, the fifth digit and the ulnar aspect of the fourth digit. It is usually associated with elbow flexion, particularly at night. Unless it is associated with an acute injury to the elbow, pain is not a dominant feature; however, some patients may complain of pain due to overuse of the forearm flexors such as the FCU.

Sensory symptoms involving the fifth digit and medial half of the fourth digit may indicate an ulnar neuropathy at the wrist. However, similar findings can be seen in ulnar neuropathy at the elbow. It is suggested that the fibers destined for the FCU, PUC, and DUC lie in individual fascicles at the elbow in a deep dorsolateral position, rendering them less susceptible to damage.

When the disease gets worse, the symptom may progress to constant numbness and paresthesia and weakness of the innervated muscles. Weakness may start from clumsiness and loss of hand dexterity. This may then progress to a decrease in handgrip and pinch strength (Froment sign). In more severe cases, there may be atrophy of the hand intrinsic muscles and clawing of the fourth and the fifth digits, classically known as claw hand.

Ulnar neuropathy at the wrist and hand can range from pure sensory to pure motor deficits. The most common type of ulnar neuropathies at the wrist is compression of the deep palmar branch. Ulnar neuropathies of the wrist and hand are divided into 3 types. Type I is a lesion of the ulnar nerve just proximal to or within the Guyon canal involving deep and the superficial branches; this causes mixed motor and sensory deficits and subsequent weakness of all the ulnar hand muscles. Type II is a lesion involving the deep branch which causes a pure motor deficit with a varied pattern of weakness based on the compression site. Type III lesion is limited to the superficial branch, causing purely sensory deficits to the palmar aspect of the medial half of the fourth digit and the fifth digit. The sensory loss in type I and type III lesions spares the dorsal aspect of the hand and fingers and the hypothenar eminence due to the more proximal innervations from the DUC and the PUC, respectively.