Anemia can present with a wide range of signs and symptoms. For example, anemic patients may be light-headed, confused, weak, fatigued, irritable, and have headaches, decreased exercise tolerance, palpitations, or dyspnea. Generally, symptoms do not occur until the hemoglobin level drops to less than 7 g/dL.

The most common systems involved in hemorrhage are the gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and pulmonary systems. Therefore, menstrual history in women should be explored, as well as asking about hematemesis, hemoptysis, hematuria, hematochezia, and melena.

A thorough past medical history should include the following:

- Medications such as aspirin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, bisphosphonates,carbamazepine, cephalosporins, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, phenytoin, sulfa drugs, and chemotherapy agents

- Supplements such as iron, folate, and B12,

- Family history such as Sickle cell anemia, glucose-6-phosphate deficiency, spherocytosis

On exam, signs of acute blood loss associated with emergent anemia can include hemodynamic abnormalities such as hypotension, tachycardia, and tachypnea. In addition, the patient may experience decreased urine output, increased thirst, and altered mental status. These clinical manifestations depend on factors such as patient comorbidities, age, baseline medications, and severity of illness or injury. For example, younger adults may be able to compensate with an increased heart rate. However, older patients with baseline medical problems are more commonly unable to compensate. This may be especially true if they are chronically on beta-blockers. The examination is often normal in patients with chronic anemia, although several findings suggest specific causes. Pallor, scleral icterus, and jaundice are associated with hemolytic anemia.

In addition, physicians should assess for evidence of cardiac murmur, crackles, hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, thyromegaly, and lymphadenopathy. On rectal examination, evaluation for tenderness, joint deformities, rashes, and melena or blood is essential. Evidence of bleeding with chronic anemia suggests a coagulation disorder. As discussed, patients can adapt to low hemoglobin levels, such as 5 to 6 g/dL, if anemia is slow in onset.