Enlargement of thyroid, i.e. goiter is an adaptive reaction of thyroid follicular cells to any process that blocks thyroid hormone production. The most common cause of goiter is iodine deficiency. In countries that use iodized salt and in others where iodine deficiency is not a problem, Hashimoto thyroiditis is an important cause of goiter. However, iodine deficiency still remains the most common cause worldwide. Goiters have various morphological, hormonal, and clinical presentations and not all causes of goiter can be attributed to iodine deficiency. Genetic, demographic, and environmental factors are also responsible for the development of goiter. Other causes include Graves disease, inborn errors of thyroid hormone synthesis, congenital hypothyroidism, inflammatory thyroid diseases like postpartum thyroiditis, infiltrative diseases of thyroid like sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis, TSH secreting pituitary adenomas, and others.

**Pathophysiology of Diffuse Nontoxic Goiter**

Iodine deficiency: Iodine deficiency leads to subtle decreases in thyroid hormone production with T4 and T3 levels remaining in the reference range. The decrease of thyroid hormone levels from baseline increases TSH secretion from the pituitary gland. Increased demand for thyroid hormones due to physiological requirements like adolescence or pregnancy also leads to pituitary stimulation and increased TSH secretion. The increased TSH causes increased cellularity and hyperplasia of the thyroid gland. The thyroid follicular cells are stimulated and contribute to follicular hyperplasia and thyroid enlargement.

Autoimmune thyroid disorders: Goiter can be the initial symptom of autoimmune thyroid disease. In Hashimoto’s thyroiditis thyroid enlarges gradually and can be detected by inspection, palpation, or ultrasonography. Occasionally it may enlarge rapidly and gives the impression of subacute thyroiditis. Elevated TSH levels due to hypothyroidism may also contribute to goiter in autoimmune thyroid disease. As Hashimoto’s thyroiditis progresses and follicular cells are destroyed by inflammation and fibrosis component increases, the thyroid volume decreases and the gland becomes atrophic with chronic atrophic thyroiditis. There are several variations in the clinical course and heterogeneity in presentation for Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and also other autoimmune thyroid disorders. The most common cause of diffuse toxic goiter is Graves’ disease, an autoimmune thyroid disease. Patients with diffuse toxic goiter have a diffusely enlarged, vascular gland. The follicular cells are hypertrophic and hyperplastic, and lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrate into the gland and group into lymphoid follicles. Antibodies (TSI: thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin) are directed towards the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptors that are present on follicular cells. This stimulation of the receptors leads to the production of increased T4 and T3. Eventually, the thyroid gland becomes enlarged leading to the development of a goiter.

Hereditary factors: Goiter is common in some families. In iodine deficiency areas, after iodine is supplemented, the goiter incidence does not drop to zero and there is the persistence of goiter in some families. The concordance of goiter is higher in monozygotic twins than dizygotic. Mutations in sodium iodide symporter, thyroid peroxidase, dual oxidase 2, pendrin, and TSH receptor gene have been identified responsible for the development of goiter.

Goitrogens or endocrine disruptors: Lithium can cause hypothyroidism and goiter. Amiodarone, interleukin-2, sunitinib, sorafenib, ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, and nivolumab can cause thyroiditis and hence goiter. Thiocyanate, perchlorate, and NO3- inhibit transport of iodide to the thyroid gland and decrease iodide uptake and thyroid hormone formation. Perchlorate has a pharmacological use, but these monovalent anions are not accepted as widespread causes of goiter, although in theory, they may cause goiter if ingested over prolonged periods of time in small quantities. Phthalates, isoflavones and organochlorides, certain foods containing cyanogenic glucosides like cassava, sorghum, maize, millets or containing thioglucosides like cabbage, kale, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, kohlrabi, rutabaga, mustard, and horseradish were suggested as goitrogens but they are not proven conclusively as major etiological factors of goiter formation.

Rare causes

- Nonautoimmune autosomal dominant hyperthyroidism

- TSH secreting pituitary adenoma

- Thyroid hormone resistance syndrome

- Tumors secreting human chorionic gonadotropin

**Pathophysiology of Nodular Goiter**

Diffuse nontoxic goiter is considered to be the precursor of euthyroid thyroid nodules and nontoxic multinodular goiter. So the pathophysiology of diffuse nontoxic goiter also applies to nodular goiter. In addition, the following mechanisms can be considered:

Radiation: Accidental or medical radiation, by external ionizing radiation or radioactive iodine, causes thyroid abnormalities. Individuals exposed to radiation under the age of 20 years have an increase in the incidence of thyroid nodules in early years and papillary thyroid cancer as they age.

Genetic factors, mutations: SPOP, ZNF148, and EZH1 in benign nodules and PAX8/PPARg, RET/PTC, BRAF, and RAS in papillary thyroid cancer.

Insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, stimulation of MAPK cascade by insulin signaling while showing insulin resistance in other pathways like the phosphoinositide-3 kinase pathway, and activation of the IGF receptor pathway.

**Pathophysiology of Toxic Adenoma**

Up to 70% of toxic adenomas harbor a somatic point mutation in the TSH receptor gene. These mutations cause constitutive activation of the TSH receptor without TSH stimulation. A minority of toxic adenomas has a mutation in the G protein genes. EZH1 gene mutation has been found in toxic adenomas that have a TSH receptor activating mutation suggesting a second hit.

**Pathophysiology of Toxic Nodular Goiter**

Nontoxic multinodular goiter and/or single toxic adenomas are considered as precursors of toxic multinodular goiter (Plummer’s Disease). When a nodule or several nodules in nontoxic multinodular goiter gain autonomy, they secrete excess thyroid hormones and lower TSH levels causing the development of toxic multinodular goiter. During the transition from nontoxic to toxic goiter, pathophysiological and morphological alterations occur. Histology of toxic multinodular goiter shows nodules well demarcated from the rest of the thyroid gland. Some of these nodules may be hot whereas some of these nodules may be cold or somewhere in between (cool, warm, or normoactive) with the remaining of the non-nodular thyroid tissue either partially or completely suppressed. Microscopically nodules have large follicles with epithelial hyperplasia. The non-nodular tissue is not hyperplastic and may contain areas of degeneration and is functionally less active or inactive as seen in the nuclear medicine radioiodine scan.

As in toxic adenomas up to 60% of toxic multinodular goiters carry a TSH receptor mutation, few have G protein mutations and the rest is still unknown and understudy.

In summary toxic multinodular goiter contains single or multiple solitary hyperfunctioning nodules with or without single or multiple hyperfunctioning adenomas on the background of suppressed non-nodular tissue.