Dysfunctional angiogenesis is thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of HHT, and research has focused on whether anti-angiogenic substances and immunomodulatory agents can effectively treat HHT.

Bevacizumab is a humanized recombinant monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is elevated in HHT. VEGF stimulates arterial, lymphatic, and venous development and suppresses endothelial cell apoptosis. Elevated VEGF levels can result in immature, abnormal vessel formation with constant remodeling.

Double-blind, randomized control trials and other comparative studies evaluating both topical and intranasal submucosal bevacizumab demonstrate mixed conclusions when evaluating the severity of HHT-related epistaxis.

Primary risks associated with topical or submucosal injection of bevacizumab include septal perforation and osteonecrosis. In one clinical trial, systemic therapy with bevacizumab (5 mg/kg IV every two weeks for six treatments) demonstrated a reduction in epistaxis episodes and high cardiac output.

Side effects of systemic bevacizumab at oncologic doses (5 to 15 mg/kg) include GI perforation, hemorrhage, thromboembolism, poor wound healing, and reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy, which were not noted in the lower doses used to treat HHT. However, common adverse effects included hypertension, nausea, diarrhea, headache, and muscle or abdominal pain when used systemically.

Tacrolimus, a calcineurin inhibitor used for immunosuppression, has been shown to activate the ALK1-SMAD1/5/8 pathway and improve defects due to ALK1 loss.

Thalidomide, an immunomodulatory imide drug, has been shown to downregulate VEGF levels in HHT, improve the integrity of vessel walls, and reduce epistaxis.

Studies have evaluated the use of selective estrogen response modifiers (raloxifene, tamoxifen), progestins, and estrogens to reduce epistaxis and GI bleeding; however, findings are inconsistent.