When an ovarian mass is suspected, the provider should first determine whether the patient is pre or postmenopausal. If the former is true, the first step is to perform a serum beta hCG or urine pregnancy test. Once pregnancy is ruled out, imaging should be done for further evaluation. A complete blood count should focus on the hematocrit and hemoglobin levels to evaluate for anemia caused by acute bleeding. Urinalysis should be obtained to rule out urinary tract infections and kidney stones. Endocervical swabs should be collected to assess for pelvic inflammatory disease. Cancer antigen 125 (CA125) is a protein present on the cell membrane of healthy ovarian tissues and ovarian carcinomas. A blood level of less than 35U/ml is taken as normal. CA125 values are raised in 85% of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer, while it is raised in 50% of patients with stage I cancer confined to the ovary. The finding of an elevated CA 125 level is most useful when combined with an ultrasound while evaluating a postmenopausal woman with an ovarian cyst.

Due to the proximity of the transvaginal probe to the ovaries, the most common imaging modality used for an initial evaluation is transvaginal ultrasonography. It is the imaging of choice when attempting to differentiate between benign or malignant mass. Abdominal ultrasonography can be used in conjunction if pelvic anatomy is distorted due to previous surgeries. Ultrasound evaluates for laterality, size, the composition of the mass (cystic, solid, or mixed, septations, papillary excrescences, mural nodules), presence of pelvic free fluid, and assessment of blood flow and vascularity via color doppler. Ultrasound findings consistent with benign cysts in any age group are thin, smooth walls, an absence of septations, solid components, and internal flow on color doppler.

An important concern for patients with pain and adnexal mass is the possibility of torsion, which can lead to necrosis and loss of the ovary. It is important to note that the presence of blood flow on the doppler exam cannot rule out adnexal torsion. This is evident in a case-control study performed with 55 confirmed cases, and 48 controls showed normal doppler flow in 27% of left ovarian torsion cases and 61% of right ovarian torsion cases. The persistence of normal Doppler flow in suspected torsion can be due to intermittent torsion or to the double blood supply of the ovary.****

Cyst size greater than 10 cm, complex multilocular mass, papillary excrescences or solid components, irregularity, thick septations, evidence of ascites, and increased vascularity on color doppler should raise suspicion for malignancy and requires further evaluation.