**Spontaneous Breathing Trial (SBT)**

Patients should be assessed daily for readiness to wean off mechanical ventilation. Trials are often part of an ICU protocol for ventilator liberation and usually start after the patient fulfills many of the criteria mentioned previously. Trials should be conducted with the patient off sedation, on minimal ventilator support (pressure support ventilation PSV of 5-8 mmHg or less and/or a small amount of PEEP. There is some data to suggest using zero PSV and zero PEEP (known as ZEEP trials), which seems to correlate with higher chances of successful ventilator weaning.

For a spontaneous breathing trial to be considered successful, a patient should be able to breathe for at least 30 minutes without signs of hemodynamic derangement (respiratory rate <35, no significant elevation or drop in blood pressure, oxygen saturation >90%), and with the absence of signs of distress or anxiety is usually combined with one of the readiness indices, such as the RSBI calculated at the beginning and end of each trial. Other factors to consider include respiratory secretions burden, the presence of a strong cough, and the ability to maintain adequate wakefulness. A successful trial is usually followed by a cuff leak test and removal of the endotracheal tube, and discontinuation of mechanical ventilation.

The cuff leak test is to ensure there is an adequate gas leak around the endotracheal tube after the cuff is deflated. This ensures the airway is patent without significant laryngeal edema. Failure to fulfill one or more of the aforementioned parameters usually correlates with higher chances of weaning failure and reintubation. Those patients should be placed back on comfortably, controlled mode with appropriate sedation. A careful work-up should be done to examine underlying barriers to a successful weaning process. It is worth mentioning that the clinician’s judgment is an important consideration when considering extubation. An experienced clinician can often combine all the data and see through an apparently failed weaning parameter.SBT duration (30–120 min) has almost an 80% chance of safe extubation**.**

**Extubation to Non-invasive Ventilation (NIV)**

Although previously thought of as a failed weaning attempt, it is currently endorsed by the American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) and the American Thoracic Society (ATS) to extubate patients to preventive non-invasive ventilation. Multiple studies correlated extubation to NIV with shorter ICU length of stay and short-term mortality. Patients who should be considered for such intervention include high-risk intubated patients, including those who repeatedly fail their SBT, patients with advanced COPD or CHF, hypercapnic patients, and those >65 years of age. NIV is applied to patients with failed weaning from prolonged ventilation.

If the patient fails SBT, gradual reduction in pressure support (PS) or daily T-piece trials), or following ventilatory setup can be adopted:

- Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV)

- Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)

- Adaptive support ventilation (ASV)

- Airway pressure release ventilation (APRV)

- Proportional assist ventilation (PAV) or

- Neurally adjusted ventilator assist (NAVA)

The protocol-based approach is recommended for a safe and effective weaning process.