The thigh muscles are divided into the anterior, medial, and posterior and gluteal compartments. The femur sits within the anterior compartment.

Anterior compartment is composed of muscles that are mainly used for hip flexion and knee extension. Hip flexors include pectineus, iliopsoas, and sartorius muscle. The femoral nerve innervates all the hip flexors other than iliopsoas. The iliopsoas muscle is the most powerful hip flexor, and it is made up of psoas major and iliacus. Psoas major originates from the posterior abdominal wall and joins the iliacus muscle of the pelvis attaching at the lesser trochanter of the femur.

Posterior compartment muscles are mainly hip extensors and knee flexors. It is made up of bicep femoris, semitendinous and semimembranous muscles. The tibial division of the sciatic nerve innervates most of the posterior thigh muscles except for bicep femoris. Bicep femoris has 2 heads, the long and short head. The long head is innervated by the tibial branch of the sciatic nerve. The short head is innervated by the common peroneal (fibular) division of the sciatic nerve.

Superficial and deep layers of muscles organize the gluteus. The superficial layer is composed of the gluteus maximus, medius, and minimus. Hip extension, abduction, and internal rotation is the superficial gluteal’s main function. Superior gluteal nerve innervates gluteus medius and minimus. Inferior gluteal innervates gluteus maximus. The deep layer is made up of the piriformis, obturator internus, quadratus femoris, and superior and inferior gemellus. The sciatic nerve is the longest and largest nerve in the body. It passes between the piriformis and superior gemelli. These shorter and deeper gluteal muscles help with external rotation of the hip.

Medial compartment’s function is mainly leg adduction. It includes the adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, and obturator externus. Main nerve innervation of the medial compartment is the obturator nerve from the lumbar plexus.