The sternal angle is an important clinical landmark for identifying many other anatomical points:

- It marks the point at which the costal cartilages of the second rib articulate with the sternum. This is particularly useful when counting ribs to identify landmarks as rib one is often impalpable. The counting of ribs is essential when one is attempting to make a thoracic incision. If the wrong rib is counted, access to the internal chest organs can be difficult. Additionally, making an incision at the first or second rib interspace can result in damage to large, important blood vessels and the brachial plexus. Identification of the second rib and thus the second intercostal space inferiorly is also useful when auscultating heart sounds. The optimal location for auscultation of the aortic valve is generally the right second intercostal space, whereas the optimal location for auscultation of the pulmonic valve is generally the left second intercostal space.

- It is at the level of the T4-T5 intervertebral disc.

- It marks the level of the transverse thoracic plane which divides the mediastinum into the superior and inferior mediastinum.

- It overlies the aortic arch on the left and the superior vena cava on the right.

- The pericardium extends from just superior to the angle of Louis to the level of the xiphisternal joint.

- It is roughly at the level of the bifurcation of the trachea.

- The tracheal carina is deep to the sternal angle.

- It is roughly at the level of the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk.

- Ligamentum arteriosum attaches to the aortic arch deep to the angle of Louis.