Paranasal sinuses' development is heralded by the appearance of a series of folds on the lateral nasal wall at approximately the eighth week of gestation, known as the ethmoturbinals. Six to seven folds emerge initially, but eventually, only three to four persist through regression and fusion.

- First ethmoturbinal: they are rudimentary and incomplete in humans. The ascending portion forms the agger nasi descending portion forms the uncinate process.

- Second ethmoturbinal: it forms the middle turbinate.

- Third ethmoturbinal: it forms the superior turbinate.

- Fourth and fifth ethmoturbinals: they fuse to form the supreme turbinate.

As development progresses, furrows form between these ethmoturbinals, which establishes rudimentary meati and recesses.

The frontal sinus originates from the anterior pneumatization of the frontal recess into the frontal bone. The frontal sinus does not appear until the age of 5 to 6 years old.

The sphenoid sinus develops during the third month of gestation. During this time, the nasal mucosa invaginates into the posterior portion of the cartilaginous nasal capsule to form a pouch-like cavity. The wall surrounding this cartilage is ossified in the later months of fetal development. Then, during the second and third years of life, the cartilage is resorbed, and the cavity becomes attached to the body of the sphenoid.

By the sixth or seventh year of life, pneumatization of the sphenoid sinus progresses. By twelve years of age, the pneumatization is complete with pneumatization of the anterior clinoids and pterygoid process.

The maxillary sinus starts developing during the 10th week of intrauterine life.****The sinus ossification starts during the 16th week.

The ethmoid sinuses are comprised of three to four air cells at birth. By the time an individual reaches adulthood, they consist of 1 to 15 aerated cells.