Managing patients on cenegermin therapy requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including a referring optometrist, primary care physician, ophthalmic technician, pharmacist, and ophthalmologist. At the primary care level, a high index of suspicion and prompt referral to an ophthalmologist is necessary to diagnose neurotrophic keratitis early. In addition, ophthalmologists monitor care and assess therapeutic effectiveness. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs) should be aware that patients rarely complain of symptoms due to a lack of corneal sensation. More often, patients complain of blurred vision and occasionally present with redness of the affected eye.

Following diagnosis, clinicians should emphasize strict adherence to cenegermin therapy to achieve complete corneal healing. Ophthalmic technicians educate patients on medication compliance and treatment schedule and reinforce proper administration. Pharmacists should ensure proper dosing and counsel the patient about adverse drug reactions. Specialty trained nurses should counsel the patients on important safety information, expected side effects, and adherence to therapy. Clinicians should refer patients to an ophthalmologist for possible surgical intervention if there is a failure to achieve corneal healing despite adequate cenegermin therapy.

Without proper management, the morbidity from neurotrophic keratitis is high. Cenegermin offers a unique non-surgical approach to managing neurotrophic keratitis and restoring corneal integrity. Each healthcare provider needs to understand the indications, administration, and adverse effects of cenegermin therapy. An interprofessional team-based approach involving clinicians, specialists, ophthalmic technicians, pharmacists, and patients leads to the achievement of desired therapeutic outcomes on cenegermin therapy, minimizes adverse drug reactions, and decreases disease recurrence, which translates to improved quality of life.