Diagnosing an autoimmune condition requires a multistep approach, as many laboratory tests on their own are not specific to a particular disease. Obtaining a complete blood count (CBC) and comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) is an initial part of the work-up. Immunologic studies, acute-phase reactant levels, cytokine analysis, and HLA-typing are all techniques that can be utilized as well. Autoimmune conditions are associated with inflammation, and key inflammatory markers assessed are erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and ferritin. Less frequently, ceruloplasmin, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and albumin levels are also obtained to assess the inflammatory state. Inflammatory markers, while not specific to a particular autoimmune disease, are helpful in monitoring disease activity.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is a tool used to detect specific antibodies. Many autoimmune diseases have strong associations with the presence of certain antibodies. Rheumatoid factor, an autoantibody that attacks the Fc region of the IgG immunoglobulin, is one such molecule found in many autoimmune conditions. It is associated with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjogren syndrome, cryoglobulinemia, and interstitial fibrosis, among others. A more specific autoantibody for rheumatoid arthritis that can be tested for is anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP). Several more examples of key autoantibodies and associated diseases are listed below. While this list is not exhaustive, it reflects very common, high-yield autoantibody associations.

- Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA): SLE, Sjogren syndrome, scleroderma, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, autoimmune hepatitis, Graves disease, primary pulmonary hypertension, primary autoimmune cholangitis

- Anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA): SLE

- Anti-signal recognition particle (anti-SRP), anti-JO-1, anti-PM/Scl: polymyositis and dermatomyositis

- Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA): Wegener Granulomatosis, Churg-Strauss syndrome, microscopic polyangiitis

- Anti-cardiolipin (aCL)/antiphospholipid (aPL): anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome

Flow cytometry is another laboratory technique that can be used to study certain cell populations based on the presence or absence of various cell-surface markers. For example, it serves to quantify CD4+ T-lymphocytes in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which is used to gauge the severity of infection.

HLA-typing studies examine MHC class I and II genes, which are implicated in various autoimmune diseases. Gel electrophoresis and polymerase chain reaction, along with ELISA, are some of the techniques used to analyze certain types of HLA molecules. Strong associations of certain HLA alleles with autoimmune conditions are listed below.

- HLA-B27: ankylosing spondylitis

- HLA-DR1, HLA-DR4: polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis

- HLA-DR3, HLA-DR2: lupus

- HLA-DRB1: rheumatoid arthritis

- HLA-DQ2, HLA-DQ8: celiac disease

Utilizing one or more of these techniques is common in the diagnostic approach toward autoimmune diseases.