Long-leg anteroposterior radiographs are used for screening and measuring varus in the early stages. Proper measurement can be done only when the radiograph projects from hip to ankle bilaterally.

On X-ray evaluation of tibia Blount disease is suspected in the pediatric population if varus focused at proximal tibia with asymmetric bowing with sharp angular deformity and metaphyseal breaking:

- Medial and posterior sloping of proximal tibial epiphysis: physeal deformity is more severe in infantile variety. This variant is associated with compensatory distal femur deformity. In the adolescent variant, it is associated with less severe physeal abnormality and compensatory distal femur, distal tibia deformities. Spontaneous regression is seen up to stage IV in the infantile form.

**Metaphyseal-diaphyseal Angle**(Drennan)

- This angle is between the line connecting metaphyseal beaks and a line perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the tibia. Greater than 16° is considered abnormal and has a 95% chance of progression. Drennan angles between 11-16° necessitate close observation for the progression of tibia vara. Angles <10° has a 95% chance of natural resolution of the bowing.

- The angular abnormalities include intra- and extra-articular varus malalignment, internal tibial rotation, procurvatum, distal tibial valgus, lateral and medial laxity, and distal femoral deformities.

MRI evaluates cartilage, menisci, ligaments, and vascularity of physis effectively. MRI detects cartilaginous changes effectively compared to radiographs. That's why it is more accurate than radiograph in measuring the slope as the main pathological lesion is tibial cartilage at epiphysis.