# Definition/Introduction

Drusen bodies are extracellular deposits of lipids, proteins, and cellular debris which are found within the layers of the retina and appear as small, yellow deposits on dilated eye exams. Specifically, drusen reside between the basal lamina of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and the inner layer of the Bruch membrane (BM). These sub-RPE deposits are seen with the progression of normal aging; however, depending on the size, number, location, and type of drusen involved, they can be associated with increased risk of developing age-related macular degeneration (AMD).

Although there is speculation regarding the exact mechanisms involved in the formation of drusen bodies, there is a general consensus that deposits are lipid and protein-rich and are driven by age-related biochemical changes. Current evidence suggests that drusen bodies are composed of cholesterol-containing lipid droplets forming the core structure upon which hydroxyapatite (HAP) spherules precipitate. These HAP spherules facilitate protein deposition to their surface which results in an oligomerization process ultimately forming the sub-RPE deposits. One focus of the study has been the proteins involved in the formation of drusen, and many different proteins have been implicated in this process. Some of the most common proteins involved include amyloid-beta, apolipoproteins, vitronectin, and complement proteins.

# Issues of Concern

While drusen bodies are a common finding upon standard ophthalmic exams in the aging population, they are of most concern as early signs of AMD. AMD is one of the most prevalent eye diseases in the world affecting roughly 1% to 3% of the total population.

**Types of Drusen**

There are various types of drusen bodies, each of which is associated with a different prognostic value. The types of drusen are based on the size, consistency, and histological features present. Hard drusen, also termed “small drusen” are defined as small, round, well-defined deposits with a diameter measuring less than 63 microns. Hard drusen are common and are the only type of drusen considered as normal age-associated findings.

**Number of Drusen**

The smaller the number of drusen present, the lower the risk of progression to AMD. Just as an increase in the size of drusen increases the likelihood of progression to AMD, an increase in the number of drusen increases the likelihood of progression to AMD.

**Location of Drusen**

Drusen bodies located on the peripheral retina are less concerning than drusen bodies located within the macula or central region of the retina. Within the macula, an area called the fovea exists which is where the highest visual acuity originates. Hard drusen are typically widespread so they can be found within the peripheral or the central retina. The same can be said for cuticular drusen. Soft drusen tend to be located more within the central retina or macula which may contribute to the fact that soft drusen have a higher likelihood of progressing to AMD.

# Clinical Significance

Drusen bodies are a common clinical finding on an ophthalmologist’s fundoscopic exam with hard drusen being the most abundant. According to the Beaver Dam Eye Study, hard drusen had a prevalence of 93.6% in study participants between 43 to 86 years of age.

Although drusen bodies are most commonly described in AMD, it is important to note that they are not pathognomonic of AMD. Drusen-like deposits can also be seen in some less prevalent inherited conditions such as Sorsby fundus dystrophy, North Carolina macular dystrophy, Stargardt disease, and Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy, just to name a few.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

While an ophthalmologist is almost always responsible for detecting drusen bodies on fundoscopic examinations, there are other roles to play in possibly preventing progression to AMD. Extensive studies on the modifiable and unmodifiable risk factors for the progression of drusen deposits to AMD are currently ongoing. Increasing age seems to be the most consistent unmodifiable risk factor for progression to AMD; however, female sex, Caucasian race, and certain genetic markers have a higher risk for AMD.

Primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, and other members of an interprofessional team play a vital role in the recognition and prevention of AMD. The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) concludes that there is insufficient evidence to make a recommendation on screening for visual acuity in elderly adults with grade I evidence.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

One important aspect of achieving high-quality eye care for patients is an interprofessional team working towards a common goal. A team includes physicians, nurses, assistants, medical technicians, front office staff, and many others who work in unity to provide individualized care to each patient. Each member of the interprofessional team should be appropriately trained and should work in accordance with their skill level in a professional manner putting patient care above all else.