# Introduction

Asthma is becoming a more prevalent disease since the early 1990s. From 1982 to 1992, the rate of asthma jumped from 34.7 to 49.4 per thousand.

# Organ Systems Involved

The organ system affected by asthma is the lungs. The lungs consist of lobes and segments, with the right lung having ten segments, and the left lung has eight or nine, depending on the division of the lobe.

# Mechanism

There are two phases of an asthma exacerbation, which include the early phase and late phase. The early phase is initiated by IgE antibodies that are sensitized and released by plasma cells. These antibodies respond to certain triggers in the environment, such as the risk factors listed above. IgE antibodies then bind to high-affinity mast cells and basophils. When a pollutant or risk factor gets inhaled, the mast cells release cytokines and eventually de-granulate. Released from mast cells are histamine, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes. These cells, in turn, contract the smooth muscle and cause airway tightening.

Airway hyperresponsiveness is a crucial feature of asthma; this is an exaggerated bronchoconstrictor response, usually to different stimuli. There are a variety of mechanisms leading to airway hyperresponsiveness. Some explanations are due to increased histamine from mast cells or increase airway smooth muscle mass. Also, there is an increased vagal tone and increased intracellular free calcium that further enhances airway smooth muscle cell contractility.

Remodeling occurs by epithelial cells transitioning to mesenchymal, increasing the smooth muscle content. Epithelial cells lose their cell adhesion and functional polarity with tight junctions, reformatting their cells to develop into mesenchymal cells.

# Related Testing

To diagnose asthma, clinicians can do a variety of tests. Tests must determine: expiratory airflow limitation, documentation of reversible obstruction, and rule out any exclusion of an alternative diagnosis. Assessing the patient’s obstruction via spirometry and checking for a reversible change after a bronchodilator is suggestive for the diagnosis of asthma. By using spirometry, physicians can diagnose asthma as well as the severity of obstruction.

# Clinical Significance

Asthma can paint a slightly different clinical picture, and clinicians must identify them. Asthmatic patients can usually have but are not limited to, wheezing, shortness of breath, and a cough, which is often worse at night. There are various triggers in which intensify asthma. Such triggers are cold air, exercise, and the pollutants listed above. Other non-specific symptoms that could suggest a severe obstruction can be tachypnea, tachycardia, or a patient seated in a tripod position. Asthma can be a severe disease if not treated and managed correctly**.**Since there are two phases of asthma, it is essential to try to target and decrease bronchoconstriction, inflammation, and airway remodeling. Asthma is defined in different stages depending on spirometry and/or clinical indications. There are four stages regarding the severity of asthma, intermittent, mild, moderate, and severe. Depending on the specific stage of asthma, treatment, and management change. Intermittent asthma occurs when one has symptoms less than two days a week, and nighttime awakenings less than two times a month. Mild asthma consists of having episodes more than two days a week (but not daily), while there are nighttime awakenings of 3 to 4 times a month. Moderate asthma is where the patient is symptomatic daily and has nighttime awakenings greater than once a week but not nightly. Severe asthma is where a patient is symptomatic throughout the day and often has nighttime awakenings more than seven times within a week. Based on these criteria, correct treatment can be administered to decrease the symptoms of the patient. The most common medications used are short-acting beta-agonists, long-acting beta-agonists, muscarinic antagonists, and inhaled and systemic glucocorticoids**.**The idea behind a beta-agonist is to try to bronchodilate the patient’s lungs when they become constricted during an asthma attack. The mechanism behind beta-agonists is that they are G protein receptors that activate cAMP. cAMP then activates smooth muscle relaxation by a mechanism not fully understood. Also, a glucocorticoid may be used to decrease the inflammation and remodeling of the lungs. The primary mechanism of a glucocorticoid is to increase the production of IL-10. IL-10 inhibits inflammatory cytokines, T-cell activation, and different white cells such as mast cells and eosinophils.