Since their discovery, corticosteroids have been used in almost all areas of medicine and by nearly every route.

The term corticosteroids in practice, however, is generally used to refer to the glucocorticoid effect. Glucocorticoids are primary stress hormones that regulate a variety of physiologic processes and are essential for life.

They have both endocrine and nonendocrine indications. Their endocrine role is often in the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome or the management of adrenal insufficiency and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Their nonendocrine role regularly takes advantage of their potent anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects to treat patients with a wide range of immunologic and inflammatory disorders.  Corticosteroids are used at physiologic doses as replacement therapy in cases of adrenal insufficiency and supraphysiologic doses in treatments for anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects.

Common indications for corticosteroids, by field, include

- Allergy and Pulmonology: asthma exacerbation, COPD exacerbation, anaphylaxis, urticaria and angioedema, rhinitis, pneumonitis, sarcoidosis, interstitial lung disease.

- Dermatology: contact dermatitis, pemphigus vulgaris

- Endocrinology: adrenal insufficiency, congenital adrenal hyperplasia

- Gastroenterology: inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmune hepatitis

- Hematology: hemolytic anemia, leukemia, lymphoma, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

- Rheumatology: rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, polymyalgia rheumatica

- Ophthalmology: uveitis, keratoconjunctivitis

- Other: organ transplantation, antenatal lung maturation, nephrotic syndrome, cerebral edema, multiple sclerosis