# Continuing Education Activity

Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a progressive disease, but only a small subset of patients develop severe symptoms. Supportive management is recommended with a patient with mild symptoms, while the patient with severe symptoms can be managed surgically, with liver transplantation being the only curative option. This activity reports on the diagnosis and management of PLD and explains the interprofessional team's role in the management of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of polycystic liver disease.
- Review the risk factors associated with polycystic liver disease.
- Identify the indications for liver transplantation in patients with polycystic liver disease.
- Summarize elements of a well-coordinated interprofessional team approach to provide effective care to patients affected by polycystic liver disease.

# Introduction

Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by mutations in genes encoding for proteins involved in the transport of fluid and growth of epithelial cells in the liver.

# Etiology

The cause of PLD is the result of mutations in several genes. In isolated PLD, germline mutations occur in the PRKCSH, and SEC63 genes are in charge of making the proteins sec-63 and hepatocystin and are responsible for fluid transportation and epithelial cell growth.

# Epidemiology

For years, the belief was that the only way PLD could develop was in patients with PKD. Clinically, isolated PLD was identified as a separate condition in the 1950s, and it received genetic confirmation in 2003, following the analysis of eight Finnish families.

# Pathophysiology

Isolated PLD results from embryonic ductal plate malformation of the intrahepatic bile ducts and cilia of the cholangiocytes. In normal bile duct formation, there is a complex sequence of events that involves both growth and apoptosis. In patients with isolated PLD, there is a disruption in this sequence, and no apoptosis occurs. As a result, complexes of disconnected intralobular bile ductules known as “Von Meyenburg complexes” form. Cysts arise from these complexes and continue to grow with time.

# Histopathology

Liver cysts originate from medium-sized bile ducts. On histopathology, liver biopsy showed multiple diffuse cystic lesions resembling solitary cysts, lined by cuboidal to flat biliary epithelium surrounded by fibrous stroma, containing straw-colored fluid.

# History and Physical

Most patients with isolated PLD are asymptomatic, and estimates are that 80% of patients are usually diagnosed incidentally on imaging studies. Symptomatic severity is dependent on the number, size, and location of the cysts. In symptomatic patients, the cysts are impeding on nearby intrahepatic structures such as the inferior vena cava, hepatic veins, portal veins, or bile ducts. The common symptoms in patients with PLD include abdominal distension, shortness of breath, postprandial fullness, esophageal reflux, abdominal pain, and back pain. If patients have reflux or early satiety/postprandial fullness, they can be at risk for malnutrition and failure to thrive.

Compression of nearby vascular structures can lead to portal hypertension, and patients may present with variceal bleeding, jaundice, ascites, and/or encephalopathy.

Liver cysts can also cause a Budd-Chiari-like syndrome if venous drainage from the liver is obstructed and may present with the classic triad of abdominal pain, ascites, and hepatomegaly.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of PLD is made with imaging studies. Unfortunately, at this time, there are no unified radiologic diagnostic criteria. Most individuals are diagnosed in the fourth to fifth decades of life. Ultrasound imaging will show hyperechoic areas in the subcapsular portion of the liver. MRI and CT imaging is another alternative, and on non-contrast images, the cyst will appear hypodense and well circumscribed.

Reynolds criteria for PLD are typically used for diagnosis. This takes into account family history, age, and liver phenotype. An ultrasound to identify cysts in the liver and kidney is recommended as the initial test. ADPKD should be excluded before making the diagnosis of isolated PLD, and the unified Ravine criteria for ADPKD diagnosis can be used to make this exclusion. Unfortunately, up to one-third of patients with isolated PLD can have a few kidney cysts, making it difficult to distinguish between the two. In patients with renal cysts and kidney phenotype, the diagnosis of ADPKD is made for patients aged 15 to 39 years with the presence of three or more renal cysts, two or more renal cysts for patients aged 40 to 59 years, and four or more renal cysts for patients over the age of 60.

Some studies propose that sporadic cases of isolated PLD can be diagnosed when a patient has 15 to 20 cysts and no family history. However, based on Reynold’s criteria, patients need a positive family history and exclusion of ADPKD. If these two criteria are met, they are subdivided by age and liver phenotype. Patients under the age of 40 and with one or more hepatic cysts or patients over the age of 40 and with four or more hepatic cysts meet the criteria for isolated PLD.

A laboratory diagnostic test does not yet exist for pure isolated PLD. Most patients have normal synthetic liver function and, on occasion, can have mild elevations of gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) and alkaline phosphatase. On the other hand, patients with ADPKD have signs of renal dysfunction and variations in their creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and/or glomerular filtration rate (GFR) levels.

# Treatment / Management

Most patients are asymptomatic, and no treatment or management is necessary for patients with isolated PLD. For symptomatic patients, the principal aim of treatment is to reduce symptoms by decreasing cyst volume and liver size. These interventions can divide into three broad categories: medical therapy, surgical therapy, and liver transplant as a last resort.

**Medical Therapy**

There is a lack of adequate medical treatment options available for patients with PLD and are currently under investigation in clinical trials.

**Somatostatin Receptor Antagonist**

Octreotide is a somatostatin receptor antagonist that has been shown to affect patients with PLD positively. cAMP plays a vital role in the development of cell proliferation and fluid secretion. Octreotide inhibits cAMP in cystic cholangiocytes and therefore leads to decreased fluid production and cell proliferation. Clinical trials have demonstrated its success in reducing liver volume and improving patient symptoms.

**Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) Inhibitor**

mTOR is inappropriately activated in patients with PLD and is thought to be responsible for cystic epithelium proliferation. Also, it increases the synthesis and secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), leading to the growth of cystic epithelium. The mTOR inhibitor sirolimus has been demonstrated to block the disordered, unregulated proliferative response of polycystic epithelial cells.

**Vasopressin-2-receptor Antagonists**

Vasopressin-2 receptor, when stimulated, increases cAMP production and can lead to the growth and formation of cysts. Several studies have shown that using antagonists to block this receptor can slow down cyst formation and growth. One of the larger studies completed by Torres et al.

**Estrogen Receptor Antagonists**

The current belief is that estrogen plays a role in cyst growth, and as a result, the disease tends to affect women more than men. However, there have been no formal studies conducted besides anecdotal reports that look at the effects of estrogen receptor antagonists in both forms of PLD.

**Surgical Therapy**

**Percutaneous Cyst Aspiration and Sclerotherapy**

It involves aspiration of a cyst under ultrasound or CT guidance followed by injection of a sclerosing agent that leads to the destruction of the epithelial lining, inhibiting fluid production.

**Laparoscopic Cyst Fenestration**

It involves aspiration and deroofing of the cyst in a single procedure. The main advantage of the procedure that multiple cysts are treatable at the same time. Indications for this procedure are when there are a few large dominant cysts in the anterior segments of the right lobe or the left lateral segments. The main complications include post-procedure drainage, ascites, pleural effusion, arterial or venous bleeding, and bile leaks.

**Segmental Hepatic Resection**

Segmental hepatic resection merits consideration in patients whose cysts are clustered to individual segments but have enough remnant liver with normal liver parenchyma. The procedure is usually only for patients with massive hepatomegaly with severe symptoms and when liver transplantation is unwarranted.

**Liver Transplantation**

Liver transplantation is generally only for symptomatic patients where resection is not a feasible option due to diffuse cystic disease; this is also recommended in the rare scenario where there is impaired hepatic function. The current guidelines for liver transplant rely on the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD). Patients with PLD have low MELDs due to the preserved synthetic function of the liver. They can, however, achieve exception points if there is evidence of malnutrition and failure to thrive.

Patients are proposed for transplant if they have high symptomatic PLD, have failed alternative interventions, and have severe malnutrition. Severe malnutrition is defined as a serum albumin level less than 2.2 g/dL, or mid-arm circumference in the non-dominant arm of less than 23.1 cm in a female and less than 23.8 cm in a male. This patient will receive an initial MELD of 15 if their creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/minute or a score of 20 if the creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. While listed, their score increases three points every three months. Patients with ADPKD should consider evaluation for both a liver and kidney transplant. Patients receiving a liver transplant have a five-year graft survival rate of 87.5% and an overall survival rate of 92.3%.

# Differential Diagnosis

When considering PLD, other potential causes should be ruled out. These include neoplasm, infections, and trauma. Imaging allows the distinguishing of PLD from hepatic metastases or an abscess. Other communicative biliary tree disorders to consider would be Caroli disease and Caroli syndrome. These two diseases are congenital genetic disorders of the intrahepatic bile ducts. These are typically seen in childhood, while isolated PLD occurs in adulthood. They are also associated with congenital hepatic fibrosis.

# Prognosis

PLD is a progressive disease, and only a small subset of patients develop severe symptoms. Supportive management with as-needed analgesics is the first-line treatment in PLD patients with acute or chronic abdominal pain. The primary aim of PLD treatment is focused on the reduction in liver volume to improve symptoms and quality of life.

# Complications

Several complications are notable with PLD patients.  These complications can be broken down into intra-cystic complications and liver volume complications.

**Intra-cystic Complications**

**Hepatic cyst hemorrhage**

It typically manifests as acute right upper quadrant abdominal pain that progresses in the first few days and resolves spontaneously.

**Hepatic Cyst Infections**

Hepatic cyst infections are rare (1%) complications in patients with PLD and are believed to result from the translocation of bacteria from the intestines. It is typically present as right upper quadrant pain, fever, and malaise.Escherichia coli and Klebsiella species. A fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) can be used to identify the infected cysts, as the epithelia of these cysts will accumulate the FDG. Unfortunately, it is not the gold standard, as the accuracy only seems to improve in the later stages of the infection.CA) 19-9 levels were found in patients with hepatic cyst infection and declining during recovery.

**Hepatic Cyst Ruptures**

Hepatic cyst rupture is an extremely rare complication and has only been published in case reports.

**Liver Volume Complications**

Liver volume-related complications are another rare occurrence. This refers to complications arising from the cyst putting pressure on adjacent organs or by an enlarged liver. This has only been reported in case reports. Patients can develop obstructive jaundice, portal vein occlusion, portal hypertension with splenic varices, Budd-Chiari syndrome, and compression of the inferior vena cava, leading to edema and ascites. Treatments are individualized and based on the complications.

The last rare complication that can develop in patients with isolated PLD is cystic carcinoma. This typically presents with abdominal pain and weight loss. The patient usually has the advanced liver disease at this point.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

PLD is a progressive disease, and only a small subset of patients develop severe symptoms. Supportive management is recommended with a patient with mild symptoms, while the patient with severe symptoms can be managed surgically, with liver transplantation being the only curative option. There is a lack of effective medical treatment options available for patients with PLD and are currently under investigation in clinical trials.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Enhancing outcomes in symptomatic patients with PLD requires an interprofessional team approach from primary care providers, hospitalists, hepatologists, specialty-trained nurses, pharmacists, and interventional radiologists and surgeons at times, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Clinicians and other specialists will manage the condition overall, but medications should be vetted through a board-certified pharmacotherapy pharmacist, who can collaborate on agent selection, verify dosing, and oversee the medication regimen for drug interactions. Specialized nursing can administer medications, monitor treatment effectiveness, and alert clinicians to any possible adverse effects. In surgical cases, nursing will have involvement throughout the process from surgical prep, assisting during the procedure, and post-operative care, informing the clinician of any issues that they encounter. Such an interprofessional team of health professionals providing an integrated approach to the care of these patients can help to achieve the best possible outcomes. [Level 5]