Renal colic is caused by dilation of the renal pelvis and ureteral segments. While usually colic is from an acute obstruction such as a ureteral calculus, it may also be due to a variety of other problems and disorders such as from ureteral spasms immediately after double J stent removal or ureteroscopy. Similar ureteral blockages from chronic sources (such as ureteropelvic junction obstructions, prostate, cervical or pelvic cancer, scarring and retroperitoneal fibrosis among others), do not generally cause acute pain or colic.

Flank pain can be caused by multiple etiologies. These include:

- Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm

- Angiomyolipoma

- Costochondritis (rib pain)

- Dermatological (skin) disorders (Herpes Zoster)

- Dietl's crisis

- Double J stent placement or recent removal

- Endometriosis

- Extrinsic ureteral compression (surgical clips, staples, cancers)

- Local mass or growth

- Neurological disorders and neuropathic pain

- Musculoskeletal conditions

- Papillary necrosis

- Pleural pain

- Pyelonephritis

- Referred pain from back or thoracic pathologies (radiculitis)

- Renal abscess, infarction or venous thrombosis

- Retroperitoneal fibrosis

- Retroperitoneal pathology (abscess, hematoma)

- Subcapsular spontaneous renal hematoma (Wunderlich syndrome)

- Ureteral stricture

- Ureteropelvic junction obstruction

- Ureteroscopy

Ureteral calculi are a common cause of the most acute and severe level of flank pain. The bulk of this review will therefore focus on renal colic from obstruction by a ureteral stone.

There are multiple predictors and risk factors for kidney stone formation. The following are the most common:

- Inadequate urinary volume: Patients with extremely low urine volumes (usually less than 1 liter per day) increase the concentration of solutes (indicated by urine with an osmolarity greater than 600 mOsm/kg) and promote urinary stasis, which can cause supersaturation of solutes and lead to stone formation. Optimal daily urine volumes for stone formers is 2,500 ml with a minimum acceptable level of 2,000 ml.

- Hypercalciuria: Most often, this is an idiopathic finding. It can be secondary to increased intestinal absorption of calcium, higher circulating serum calcium, reduced renal calcium reabsorption (renal calcium leak), hypervitaminosis D, hyperparathyroidism, high protein load, or systemic acidosis. Hypercalciuria increases the urinary saturation of calcium salts like oxalate and phosphate, causing the formation of crystals and calculi. Calcium containing stones form approximately 80% of all renal calculi. Hypercalciuria is usually defined as urinary calcium of 250 mg or more per 24 hours. Treatment involves minimizing excessive daily oral calcium intake, correcting phosphate deficiencies that lead to increased Vitamin D activity, and the use of thiazides to increase calcium reabsorption in the nephron.

- Hyperoxaluria: Oxalate naturally occurs in plants where it binds tightly to calcium in the plant's tissue fluid. Ingestion of vegetable material results in intestinal oxalate absorption and urinary excretion. As oxalate has no nutritional or beneficial role in human physiology, it is excreted in the urine where it can form crystals and stones with calcium. Oxalate is considered the strongest chemical promotor of stones. Normal urinary oxalate is up to about 40 mg per day but optimal 24-hour urine levels are generally at 25 mg/day or less. Green leafy vegetables like spinach, rhubarb, and collard greens are particularly high in oxalate.

- Hyperuricosuria: High urinary uric acid levels can promote both calcium oxalate and uric acid stone formation. Uric acid stones account for 5% to 10% of all renal calculi. Hyperuricosuria can be secondary to a high animal protein diet or a genetic defect causing increased uric acid excretion. Most pure uric acid stones are caused by high total urinary acid levels and not by elevated urinary uric acid levels. Allopurinol or febuxostat (Uloric) can be used to reduce uric acid production and potassium citrate is used for aciduria. Goal of therapy is to achieve a pH of approximately 6.5 or more. Sodium bicarbonate can also be used to increase urinary pH.

- Infection stones: These are caused by urea-splitting organisms (Proteus or Klebsiella spp but not Escherichia coli) that break down urea in the urine, increasing concentrations of ammonia and pH which promote struvite stone formation and growth. Infection stones are also called struvite or triple (Magnesium, Ammonium, Calcium) phosphate calculi. Treatment includes control of infection with total surgical removal of all stones which are considered infected. A specific urease inhibitor, acetohydroxamic acid, may be useful in selected cases.

- Hypocitraturia: Inadequate urinary citrate levels can contribute to new nephrolithiasis formation. Citrate is the urinary equivalent of serum bicarbonate. It increases urinary pH, but it also acts as a specific inhibitor of crystal aggregation and stone formation by forming soluble complexes with calcium and magnesium. Optimal levels are approximately 300 mg (or more)/L of urine. Potassium citrate supplements are also recommended to optimize urine pH in cases of uric acid stones and aciduria.