There are guidelines available for the diagnosis of LAE, but no therapeutic management geared towards its management. Hence, the most critical feature in terms of management of the condition is the treatment of any underlying cardiac pathology and patient education to avoid fatal consequences. Since LAE is a prognosticator of cardiovascular events, both fatal and non-fatal, management of the condition is best with an interprofessional health care team approach, including doctors, nurses, pharmacists, physiotherapists, dietitians, physical trainers, and psychologists.

Following an established diagnosis of LAE is established, the patient should receive education about the disease and the need for further evaluation of other coexisting cardiac pathologies. Asymptomatic patients should continue to get annual exams, including echocardiograms. Patients with underlying hypertension need strict blood pressure control. Patients with underlying heart failure require medical management and lifestyle modification, as well. A dietary consult can help patients to adjust to low salt diet and healthy eating habits. A patient with LAE and palpitation must undergo an EKG and a Holter monitor to evaluate any underlying arrhythmia that can develop as a consequence of LAE. Many patients might require anticoagulation therapy to avoid any thromboembolic event. Pharmacists can help ensure patients get all their medications in a timely fashion. They can also recommend medication selection, dosing, and reconciliation to avoid any drug interactions. Pharmacists can also help report any adverse drug reaction to the health care team and assist in subsequent medication changes as well as patient counseling. Nurses, especially cardiovascular trained, are a vital part of the patient team care. Nurses are an extension of the treating physician in an appropriate clinical setting. They can help administer medications while the patient remains in the hospital. Their role is also vital in monitoring patient compliance, providing counseling, and answering questions from the patient and the family members. A fully collaborative, interprofessional team approach can help achieve optimal results in patients with LAE. [Level 5]