The management of trigger finger can be divided into the following two classes:

**Non-surgical**

Treatment of trigger finger usually is nonoperative particularly especially if it is uncomplicated and of a short duration of symptoms. It includes steroids injection and splinting.

Steroid injection

Injection of steroids is often successful and first-line treatment strategy for patients with trigger finger. It is inexpensive, easily performed, and less invasive than surgery. Delivery of steroid into the tendon sheath is important for its effectiveness. A steroid injection may be helpful in many patients, although recurrence of symptoms can occur. Steroid injections may cause tissue atrophy, skin discoloration, hypopigmentation or even infection. Patients with prolonged symptoms are less likely to have a resolution.

Splinting

It is based on the concept that is limiting tendon gliding; inflammation can be reduced. In an MCP blocking splint, at 10 to 15 degree of flexion for 6 to 10 weeks. However, it .is less likely to benefit those patients who suffer from severe or prolonged symptoms.

**Surgical**

Open release of the A1 pulley is considered the gold standard for surgical management of trigger finger. A surgical release should be considered when there is

- No improvement with splinting and/or injection treatment

- Irreducibly locked trigger finger

- Trigger thumb during infancy: it is believed that at this age, without surgical release, these infants are likely to develop a fixed flexion deformity of the interphalangeal (IP) joint. Since the causes of trigger finger in children are more varied than merely from a thickened A1 pulley, the outcomes of conservative treatment are unpredictable.

Percutaneous release of the A1 pulley is an alternative management strategy. This requires understanding and recognition of certain specified landmarks. Although the percutaneous technique has been shown effective and safe for the thumb, many physicians advocate avoiding the use of this approach on the thumb, because of the digital nerve courses over the A1 pulley. Incomplete pulley release and damage to the flexor tendons and digital nerves constitute possible concerns with this approach.