Caspofungin, along with other echinocandins, works by noncompetitive inhibition of the enzyme beta-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase, which is a critical component to the synthesis of the fungal cell wall; this enzyme is not present in mammalian cells.

Caspofungin exhibits a fungicidal activity against Candida species, including triazole-resistant isolates and fungistatic activity against Aspergillus species.

The reduction of the dose in hepatic insufficiency is recommended based on Child-Pugh (C-P) score. However, in critically ill patients, the dose should not be reduced unless there is evidence of liver cirrhosis.

The pharmacokinetics of caspofungin also show an increased accumulation as the dose increases, and there is a dose-related dependency in the time to reach steady-state upon multiple-dose administration. Therefore, a loading dose followed by a lower once-daily dose is required to attain an initial therapeutic plasma concentration and avoid drug accumulation. This approach results in a trough concentration of at least 1 mcg/mL (proposed target concentration in invasive infections; derived from in vitro susceptibility testing of Candida spp.).

Caspofungin has a short alpha-phase half-life (t 1/2 ) of 1 to 2 hours (volume of distribution of 9.7L) and a beta-phase t 1/2 of 9 to 11 hours that exhibits log linearity. Unlike the other phases, the gamma-phase t 1/2 of 40 to 50 hours appears to be nonlinear and is responsible for the accumulation of caspofungin over time. Caspofungin gets slowly eliminated from plasma, with a clearance of 10 to 12 ml/minute. Approximately 75% of a radioactive dose gets recovered after 27 days, with 41% in urine and 35% in feces. Only about 2% of caspofungin is excreted unchanged in the urine.