Cryosurgical techniques vary based on the lesion being treated. Benign lesions can typically be treated with a single freeze-thaw cycle with a target temperature of -25 C for keratinocytic tumors and -5 C for pigmented lesions. Whereas, malignant lesions are typically treated with 2 cycles and a target temperature of -50 C. An exception to benign lesions receiving one freeze-thaw cycle is verruca which due to there relative resistance to treatment can be treated with 2 freeze-thaw cycles at the discretion of the surgeon

Although cryosurgery is the first-line treatment for actinic keratosis, cryosurgery is not a first-line therapy for malignant lesions. Treatment of actinic keratosis or malignant lesions is typically performed with 2 freeze-thaw cycles with the size of the margin dependent on the malignancy. Actinic keratosis is typically frozen for approximately 10 to 15 seconds with 2 mm margin The target temperature for malignant lesions is -50 degrees for each of the 2 freeze-thaw cycles. It typically takes approximately 40 to 90 seconds to achieve these temperatures. In general, nonmelanoma skin cancers should have a margin of at least 5 mm. There have been reports of melanoma in situs being treated with cryosurgery with a margin of 10 mm

There are several different techniques for the administration of liquid nitrogen. The most common cryosurgical technique is the open technique in which liquid nitrogen is sprayed onto the target lesion. Intermittent release of liquid nitrogen provides a more controlled and precise application compared with spraying in a continuous fashion. The semi-open technique is best for papular lesions. In this technique, a cone or plate covers or directs liquid nitrogen to the target area and allows for a more targeted treatment area. The closed/contact technique uses a probe cooled with liquid nitrogen applied directly to the skin. Probes may freeze to the skin during the procedure and forcefully removal of the probe can rip tissue off of the treatment area and lead to bleeding. To prevent this, the probe should be frozen prior to touching the skin. In the event that the probe does become frozen to the skin, it should be gently warmed or warm water can be applied to release the probe. Another form of the close/contact technique is the use of liquid nitrogen to the cool the tips of forceps or needle drivers, which are then used to grasp pedunculated lesions.