It is imperative for the provider who will be performing the vasectomy to meet and discuss the vasectomy with the patient before the procedure. This consultation should begin with a complete medical, sexual and social history. The medical history should focus on genitourinary problems, scrotal pain, trauma to the genitals, surgery to genitals, sexual function and any testicular malignancy. Hematologic issues, including anticoagulation or medical coagulopathy, require discussion. Social history should include consideration of their partner and pregnancy potential, prior pregnancies, and previous difficulties with pregnancy.

Next, a physical exam should follow, focusing on the genitalia. The scrotum gets evaluated with a focus on the tolerability of the exam, the vas deferens mobility, the presence of hernias, varicoceles, spermatoceles, testicular masses, or testicular tenderness.

After the provider evaluation, a frank discussion regarding the risks, benefits, and alternatives to vasectomy should be performed, allowing informed consent. The following are key concepts that require consideration:

- Vasectomy is considered permanent

- The patient is not considered sterile until a semen analysis shows azoospermia or rare non-motile sperm

- Risk of pregnancy with a negative semen analysis is 1 in 2000

- 0.24% of men require repeat vasectomy

- Risks of the procedure as well as the alternatives

The risk of hematoma and infection is about 1% to 2%, with very rare cases of Fournier gangrene.

Alternative types of vasectomies include: operating room, no-scalpel technique, laparoscopic, and open (which are typically associated with another abdominal surgery). Alternatives forms of pregnancy prevention include abstinence, withdrawal, condoms, spermicidal solutions, diaphragm, cervical cup, IUD, OCP, implants, depot injections, lactation amenorrhea method, emergency contraception, and tubal ligation.

Our policy is to ask the patient to take a shower the night before and again the morning of the procedure to get the scrotal area as clean as possible.  We also suggest that they shave the scrotum themselves the night before and give them detailed written instructions or refer them to a YouTube video that explains exactly how to do the shaving.