Thorough patient history and physical exam are necessary to direct diagnostic testing and subsequent treatment. In the case of obvious cues on history or physical exam, the workup can be streamlined and focused and appropriate therapy implemented. If the etiology of anemia is not obvious, generalized diagnostic testing is used to narrow potential causes.

The differential for anemia is broad and includes:

- Chronic disease and neoplasia

- Nutritional deficiency

- Injury

- Genetic illness

- Infection

- Auto-immune

- Medication and chemical exposure

The first question to ask is whether the patient is actively bleeding and, if so, how much. This will help determine the need for rapid should intervention. ATLS outlines clear guidelines to treat trauma-related hemorrhage. The most common non-traumatic causes of hemorrhage include gastrointestinal (GI), gynecologic (GYN), and genitourinary (GU) bleeding. The patient's hemodynamic stability is a primary guide to ensuring appropriate intervention. More subtle hemorrhage can be observed with anticoagulation and occult chest, abdominal, or pelvic bleeding or hematoma formation. As always, treatment is aimed at restoring blood volume and treating the cause of the bleeding.

If acute hemorrhage is deemed unlikely, it is important to categorize the anemia by cell size and hemoglobin density and to look at red blood cell morphology on peripheral smear. Anemia falls into the categories of macrocytic, microcytic and normocytic based on RBC size and hypo or normochromic based on relative hemoglobin concentration. Characteristic cell dysmorphisms may also be evident on a blood smear. An additional view of red cell dysmorphism can be elicited with hemoglobin electrophoresis to define the cell structure at the level of the amino acid chains binding the heme moiety.

Two additional fundamental questions are:

- Is the patient's bone marrow actively producing red blood cells to compensate for anemia?

- Reticulocyte count and % of reticulocytes, though somewhat non-specific, is the best peripheral estimate available to determine the answer to this question.

- Is hemolysis present?

- Elevated LDH, haptoglobin and indirect bilirubin are individually non-specific for hemolysis but in conjunction may suggest hemolysis.

With the above data in hand, algorithms are applied based on red blood cell size:

- Microcytic anemia is further evaluated and differentiated based on iron profile test results.

- Macrocytic anemia is further evaluated and differentiated based on B-12, folate, methylmalonic acid, and homocysteine levels and in some cases, presence of thyroid disease.

- Normocytic anemia can be classified as resulting from hemolysis, blood loss, or decreased bone marrow red cell production.

Per the American Acadamy of Family Medicine (AAFP) position statement issued on March 15, 2011:

"Transfusion of RBCs should be based on the patient's clinical condition. Indications for RBC transfusion include acute sickle cell crisis, or acute blood loss of greater than 1500 cc or 30% of blood volume. Patients with symptomatic anemia should be transfused if they cannot function without treating the anemia."

The authors go on to site an updated Cochrane review supporting the use of a restrictive transfusion trigger in non-cardiac patients that supports maintaining hemoglobin levels of at least 7 g/dl. This more restrictive criterion is a significant change from the previously cited 10 g/dl threshold. Statistical analysis supports the 7 g/dl threshold, demonstrating a 54% relative decrease in the number of units of blood transfused and decreased 30-day mortality rate with implementation of the new criterion.