One of the purposes of the pulmonary system is to remove CO2 from the body through gas diffusion. This requires a diffusion gradient from the high concentration arteriolar blood into the relatively low concentration environmental air.  As such, the CO2 gradients are developed and maintained where PaCO2 in arterial blood is directly proportional to the rate of CO2 metabolic production and inversely related to the rate of CO2 elimination by the lung via increased alveolar ventilation. Alveolar ventilation is the removal of alveolar air into the environment, defined as the expired minute volume that reaches the alveoli and is determined by minute ventilation and the ratio of dead space to tidal volume. The human body is very adapted and capable of eliminating CO2 from the body as excesses are produced. Essentially, unless there is a significant loss of pulmonary ventilation metabolic processes will not induce hypercapnia.

PaCO2 = 0.863 x VCO2/ VA

and

VA = VE – VD

and

VE = RR x TV

and

TV = RR x dead-space volume

Where VCO2 is the metabolic production of CO2, VA is alveolar ventilation, VE is minute ventilation, VD is dead space ventilation, RR is the respiratory rate, and TV is tidal volume.

These relationships indicate that respiratory rate and tidal volume are the two components of ventilation that are physiologically or artificially controlled to moderate CO2 elimination. Therefore, a failure in either of these fields will induce hypercapnia.  It is important also to note that as PACO2 increases, oxygenation decreases. This is explained using the alveolar gas equation:

PaO2 = FiO2 (Patm – PH2O) – PaCO2 / R

Where FiO2 is the fraction of inspired oxygen (0.21 at room air), Patm is atmospheric pressure (760 mm Hg), PH20 (47 mm Hg), PaCO2 as calculated from the arterial blood gas, and R (0.8 standard value).