# Continuing Education Activity

Central serous chorioretinopathy is a retinal disorder characterized by localized serous detachment of the macula. It is secondary to retinal pigment epithelial decompensation and choroidal vascular changes. Most of the cases resolve spontaneously and gain normal vision. Some cases are non-resolving and require treatment. Such chronic cases, if not treated, will lead to permanent loss of vision. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of central serous chorioretinopathy and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of central serous chorioretinopathy.
- Explain the typical presentation of central serous chorioretinopathy.
- Review the typical imaging findings and treatments associated with central serous chorioretinopathy.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve the outcome of patients affected with central serous chorioretinopathy.

# Introduction

Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR) is a retinal disorder characterized by localized serous detachment of the macula with or without focal serous pigment epithelial detachment (PED). It is mostly seen in young men aged 20–45 years.

# Etiology

- Yannuzzi suggested a relationship between CSCR and type A personality.

- Psychological stress and depression also predispose to CSCR.

- A definite association exists between CSCR and exogenous corticosteroid use.

- CSCR has also been reported following kidney, heart, and bone marrow transplantations.

- Increased endogenous cortisol production, such as Cushing disease and pregnancy, increases the risk of CSCR.

- Drugs other than corticosteroids that have been associated with CSCR are

- oral MEK inhibitors
- phosphodiesterase inhibitors
- pseudoephedrine
- oxymetazoline

- Association between H. pylori infection, peptic ulcer disease and CSCR has been reported in some studies.

- It is associated with stress and sleep disturbances. Treatment of the underlying cause resolves CSCR.

- Familial association of CSCR has been reported.

- Single nucleotide polymorphisms in complement factor H and cadherin 4 is thought to be associated.

- CSCR associated pachychoroid can be inherited as a dominant trait.

- Other systemic associations of CSCR include

- Sleep apnea syndrome
- Systemic hypertension
- Psychopharmacologic medications
- Systemic lupus erythematosus
- Gastroesophageal reflux disease

# Epidemiology

CSCR is the fourth most common retinal disorder threatening the vision.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of CSCR is multifactorial, which causes retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) disturbances and circulatory changes in the choroid.

Normally, the RPE keeps the retina in a dehydrated state by pumping out fluid from the subretinal space to the choroid. With the loss of polarity, the pumping reverses and fluid is directed towards the subretinal space. The non-perfusion in the choriocapillaris may lead to the widening of venous channels and increased hydrostatic pressure.

Experiments have shown that intravitreal injection of aldosterone causes dilatation of choroidal veins and congestion, which leads to the accumulation of fluid in the subretinal space.

# History and Physical

The patient complains of unilateral blurred vision, micropsia, metamorphopsia, relative scotoma, and color vision disturbances. There is temporary hyperopia. Vision ranges from 6/9-6/60, though in most cases, it is better than 6/12. On examination, there is a well defined circular or oval area of neurosensory detachment over the posterior pole. Occasionally, a yellowish feathered-edge subretinal material (presumably fibrin) and PED may also be seen.

The acute episode generally resolves within 3 to 6 months. If fluid persists beyond this period, it is called “chronic CSCR.” It is generally seen in older patients or those receiving long term corticosteroids.

# Evaluation

Ancillary tests

OCT (optical coherence tomography)

This is the first line of investigation. The presence of subretinal fluid (SRF) is characteristic of CSCR. The resolution of SRF can be documented on serial OCT. Sometimes band-like fibrin deposits can be seen in the subretinal space.**.**IPCV and CSCR constitute the pachychoroid spectrum and ICGA helps in differentiating the two. Tiny white dots may be seen in CSCR on ophthalmoscopy, which appear as hyper-reflective dots in the outer retina on OCT.

Fundus autofluorescence (FAF)

In acute CSCR, focal areas of hypo-autofluorescence are seen that may correspond to the leak on FFA. In chronic CSCR, hyper-autofluorescent tracks are present due to the accumulation of photoreceptor pigments.

Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA)

Three types of fluorescein leakage patterns are seen in CSCR- inkblot, smokestack, and diffuse. In the inkblot pattern, pinpoint leakage occurs in the early phase, which then concentrically enlarges in the late phase. In smokestack pattern, the leakage starts as a pinpoint and gradually expands to form an umbrella-like (or tree-like) appearance. Inkblot pattern is more common. In the diffuse leak, there are multiple small/inconspicuous leaks in a localized area, which cause an increase in the size and intensity of the area of hyper-fluorescence. In chronic CSCR, patchy areas of hyper-fluorescence are seen corresponding to areas of RPE atrophy. Serous PED shows early hyper-fluorescence with a progressive increase in the intensity, but size remains the same.

Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)

ICGA is helpful in imaging the choroidal vasculature. It shows hypocyanescence in the early phase denoting choriocapillaris nonperfusion and delayed filling. In mid-phase, hypercyanescence is seen, indicating choroidal vessel hyperpermeability. This hypercyanescence slowly fades in the late phase.

OCT angiography (OCTA)

It is useful in detecting CNVM in chronic CSCR by a non-invasive method. It shows dilated choriocapillaris in most eyes with CSCR.

# Treatment / Management

The majority of cases of CSCR resolve spontaneously, so observation is done for 3-6 months.

Indications for early intervention include

- Visual demand of profession (pilot) or the patient for early recovery

- Recurrent disease

- Severe decline of vision in the other eye due to chronic CSCR

Laser photocoagulation:

The RPE leakage sites, as seen on angiography, can be treated with laser photocoagulation. Such therapy seals the leakage point and hastens the resolution of subretinal fluid.****The laser does not reduce the chances of recurrence. To overcome these problems, a micropulse laser can be used.****

Photodynamic therapy (PDT)

CSCR with a subfoveal leak, juxtafoveal leak, multiple leaks, and chronic cases with diffuse decompensation of RPE are better managed with PDT. PDT causes vascular remodeling of the choroid and choroidal hypoperfusion.

Anti-vascular growth factor (VEGF):

Anti VEGF therapy has been proposed to reduce choroidal hyperpermeability. They upregulate the tight junctions between endothelial cells and the reduction of vascular fenestrations.

Anti-corticosteroids

Patients with CSCR commonly have endogenous hypercortisolism, thus drugs targeting cortisol pathways might be effective.

Mifepristone (RU-486) is an abortifacient agent. Its mechanism of action is mediated through its glucocorticoid and progesterone receptor antagonistic effects. It has been used in chronic CSCR patients with varied responses.

Finasteride is a weak anti-androgen that works through inhibiting type II 5 alpha-reductase that is necessary for converting testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a potent androgen. It has been investigated in CSCR, but more trials are needed to evaluate the effect.

Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone-receptor antagonist and potassium-sparing diuretic, was originally approved in 2002 by the FDA for the treatment of hypertension. The medication is generally well-tolerated, but drug interactions must be ruled out prior to initiation, and serum potassium and blood pressure must be monitored during treatment. Studies have shown it to improve visual acuity and decrease central macular thickness in a small series of patients with chronic CSCR.

Rifampicin is an anti-tuberculous medication that facilitates the catabolism of endogenous steroids. It increases the cytochrome P-450 content in the liver, thus affecting the metabolism and bioavailability of endogenous corticosteroids, consequently aiding in the resolution of CSCR and improving its symptomatology.

Adrenergic blockers

As CSCR is closely associated with type A personality, which is characterized by high adrenergic activity, it was proposed that blocking adrenergic receptors might have a positive effect on CSCR.

Anti-Helicobacter pylori treatment

The therapy of Helicobacter pylori-related peptic ulcer disease has shown variable results in CSCR.

# Differential Diagnosis

Other diseases of choroid and retina can closely mimic CSCR. They are ARMD (age-related macular degeneration), IPCV, and optic disc pit associated maculopathy. ARMD is seen in patients above 50 years. Chronic CSCR can develop secondary CNVM on follow up or after laser photocoagulation.

OCT angiography is helpful in delineating the neovascular complex of ARMD. EDI OCT shows thicker choroid in CSCR and thin to normal choroid in ARMD. IPCV produces serous macular detachment and RPE changes similar to CSCR. The polyp and branching vascular network are characteristic findings on ICGA. OCT typically shows serosanguinous or notched PED.

Optic disc pit causes serous macular detachment at the macula. On careful slit-lamp biomicroscopy, focal excavation can be seen on the temporal part of the optic disc. Retinal schisis is commonly observed in optic disc pit, while these changes are infrequently seen only in chronic CSCR. The sub-internal limiting membrane cavity after the resolution of sub-internal limiting membrane hemorrhage (including after Valsalva retinopathy) may simulate CSCR on cursory examination.

# Prognosis

Most of the cases resolve spontaneously by 3-6 months. Some cases persist beyond 6 months. Such cases of chronic CSCR need treatment. Recurrence may be noted in up to 50% of untreated cases.

# Complications

Chronic CSCR cases, if not treated, can have complications. Chronic CSCR with PED can develop RPE rip with secondary exudative retinal detachment. Such patients complain of sudden diminution of vision. Other complications can be CNVM and macular degeneration. Diffuse retinal pigment epitheliopathy in CSCR may be the cause of the irreversible visual decline.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patient should be counseled properly regarding the prognosis of CSCR. Acute idiopathic cases require observation and avoidance of predisposing factors.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Any patient presenting with CSCR should receive treatment by an ophthalmologist and an interprofessional team evaluation by primary clinicians and endocrinologists. Interprofessional communication can lead to better patient management. The patient will most often present to the primary clinician, and these professionals should be aware of the condition as it is treatable. Prompt referral to an ophthalmologist is necessary.

These patients can then be followed by their primary clinicians and should ensure compliance with treatment. Pharmacists can ensure correct dosing on the medication management aspect of the condition. Nursing will be the first in the department to come in contact with patients on followup and can assess treatment progress as well as evaluate compliance with both medication and lifestyle measures, and report any issues to the primary care clinician. This collaborative, interprofessional approach to care can ensure optimal patient outcomes.