Angiotensin II is often useful in the management of unresponsive shock vs. the traditional inotropic agents. However, healthcare workers, including the ICU nurse, intensivist, cardiologist, infectious disease specialist, pharmacist, and internist, need to be fully aware of the drug's potential toxicity. The patient requires monitoring in an ICU setting with an interprofessional team. The drug should be infused in large veins, preferably central veins, as it has the potential to cause severe vasoconstriction of the peripheral vessels; this is the responsibility of the nursing staff. Because of the potential for both arterial and venous thromboembolic events, all treated patients should receive concurrent deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis, which the pharmacist can help drive appropriate agent selections and verify dosing and medication reconciliation. All patients need to have their renal function monitored while the patient is on angiotensin II. One significant caveat to the use of this agent is the lack of mortality benefit with this agent. The ATHOS 3 trial did not report any mortality improvement; this study was not powered to prove the mortality benefit. Small case studies indicate that angiotensin II can raise blood pressure, but it often does not improve survival in patients with shock. The argument for the use of this agent is that clinicians wait till it is very late in the clinical process before initiating this agent, leading to mortality. The hypothesis of angiotensin II deficiency states that the condition, as reflected by elevated renin levels, can be used to identify patients where this agent may potentially be more effective, justifying its early use in the vasoplegic shock state. However, renin testing is not done in routine labs and is a send-out test for most hospitals, with results delayed for days. The cost of angiotensin II is another concern in its widespread adoption. Daily therapy with this agent is approximately three thousand dollars, which, when compared to norepinephrine, is many times more expensive. Use of this medication requires complex decision making requiring an interprofessional team, including clinicians, specialists, nursing, and pharmacy, necessary for successful treatment with angiotensin II. [Level V]