A sudden surge in COVID-19 ARDS patients led to the conversion of regular hospital wards into negative pressure-capable intensive care units.

The ICUs should have dedicated stations with segregated equipment for endotracheal intubation with appropriate protocols in place. The intubation equipment box should be equipped with proper personal protective equipment (PPE), including gloves, gown, an N-95 mask, and face shield to protect the intubating team from exposure. Based on availability, a Powered Air Purifying Respirator (PAPR) should be considered, as endotracheal intubation is inherently a high-risk procedure with the potential for significant aerosolization.

COVID-19 airway management and intubation should be carried out by skilled operators, and all efforts should be made to allow for high first-pass intubation. The use of video laryngoscopy-assisted devices for intubation is encouraged as these devices allow the operator to be at a safer distance from the patient's oropharynx compared to direct laryngoscopy. Operators need regular orientation regarding the placement of such specialized equipment in the intensive care unit. The use of a clear plexiglass shield or an “intubating box” has been described to allow for minimizing aerosolization during intubation; whether that leads to less aerosol exposure is unclear.

Healthcare personnel should use proper personal protective equipment (PPE), including gloves, gowns, an N-95 mask, and face shields to protect themselves from exposure. Over the course of the pandemic, the importance of conserving PPE and preventing unwarranted exposure to healthcare staff has been stressed. Simple measures like extension tubing can be used to connect infusion pumps to patients while keeping the pumps outside the patient room. A similar strategy can be used in extension cables for ventilator screens, which allows for the placement of ventilator screens outside the patient room. This allows for routine adjustments to the ventilator settings without entering the patient room.

Special grommets have been designed for the door in ICU rooms allowing for the cables and extension tubing. They can be utilized for the safe passage of wires while maintaining negative pressure and avoiding expulsion of air from the room into the hallways. Figure 5 depicts an example of an easily available grommet that can be placed on the ICU doors. The high-efficiency particulate filters (HEPA) should be applied to each room with an intubated patient to minimize the diffusion of viral particles and decrease the risk of intra-hospital transmission of COVID-19. Ideally, the HEPA filters should be assessed daily and changed if needed.

ECMO requires specialized equipment and 1:1 trained nurses with experience in handling patients on ECMO. Constant monitoring of the equipment with communication with the intensivist and perfusionist is key to the safe management of ECMO. Extra supplies of ECMO tubing, membrane lungs, cannulas, and a spare circuit should be in close proximity should an emergency arise to change the equipment.