**Anatomy**

It is essential to understand the anatomy of the lymphatic system to understand the chylothorax. The lymphatic system is composed of lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, and the cisterna chyli. The thoracic duct is the main collecting vessel of the lymphatic system. It drains three-quarters of the lymph in the body into the venous bloodstream. The lymphatic system, which connects the lymphatics of various organs, is an important network for the circulation of fluid throughout the body. The lymph from the lower limb finally terminates at the para-aortic nodes. They join with the lymph from the viscera of the pelvis and form bilateral lumbar trunks. The intestinal trunks consist of large lymphatic vessels that receive lymph from the stomach, intestine, pancreas, and spleen. Cisterna chyli is a triangular dilation of the lymphatic system located in the retroperitoneum, just posterolateral to the abdominal aorta adjacent to the second lumbar vertebra. The thoracic duct starts from the cisterna chyli and is located at the level of the second or third lumbar vertebra. It enters the thorax through the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm and ascends in the posterior mediastinum. It is located between the descending thoracic aorta on the left and the azygos vein on the right. At the level of the fifth thoracic vertebra, the thoracic duct inclines toward the left side to enter the superior mediastinum. It ascends behind the aortic arch and the thoracic part of the left subclavian artery, between the left side of the esophagus and the left pleura, to the thoracic inlet. Finally, the duct terminates by opening into the junction of the left subclavian and jugular veins. However, the duct may open into either of the great veins near the junction, or it may divide into a number of smaller vessels before termination. In adults, the thoracic duct varies in length from 38 cm to 45 cm. It is approximately 3 mm to 5 mm in diameter at its commencement but diminishes in caliber at the mid-thoracic level and then slightly dilates before its termination. So, a breach in the integrity of the thoracic duct anywhere in its course in mediastinum will lead to seepage of chyle in the pleural cavity leading to chylothorax.

**Composition of Chyle**

Chyle is made primarily of chylomicrons, an aggregate of long-chain triglycerides, cholesterol esters, and phospholipids. It is also rich in lymphocytes, primarily T lymphocytes as the major cellular component with concentrations that range from 400 to 6800 cells. Chyle as similar electrolyte concentration plasma but is rich in immunoglobulins with fat-soluble vitamins.