Unfortunately, there is no cure for dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy. Treatment is predominantly supportive. Genetic counseling of patients and their family members is essential given that the condition is autosomal dominant, with important ethical considerations before diagnosis disclosure.

When there is clinical suspicion of seizures; selecting an anti-epileptic drug (AED) could be individualized to the predominant clinical scenario of the seizures. No AED is found superior to others in randomized controlled studies. However, levetiracetam and perampanel show promise in juvenile-onset DRPLA.

A neuropsychological and psychiatric assessment is instrumental for evaluating major neurocognitive deficits and associated mood disorders, for enhanced quality of life. Physical and occupational therapy is important to maintain functional activities of daily living. Structured and individualized educational programs for children with the disease is another important consideration. Involving an interprofessional team of providers can help address all the co-morbidities associated with the disorder and enhance the number of quality life years. Avoiding general anesthesia during surgical procedures can decrease the rate of breakthrough seizures.

CAG repeat expansion disorder and developments in transcription silencing is a promising venue for curative treatment. This is currently used for SCA and HD with some success in animal models. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) interference of multiple alleles is possible within the CNS, although it is costly and time-consuming, and still in an experimental phase. Another promising strategy is to use targeted RNA small molecules that affect the translation of mutant ATN-1 and has the advantage of crossing the blood-brain barrier. Challenges include poor absorption and allergic reactions.