When the cell undergoes stimulation by a messenger molecule, it elicits a cellular response. This response is due to the interaction between a ligand (messenger) and a specific receptor to that ligand. Almost all messengers interact with cell surface receptors, but there exist exceptions. For example, steroid hormones interact with intracellular (nuclear) receptors.

The GPCR is the largest class of membrane coupled receptors, composed of a seven-transmembrane segment and a heterotrimeric G protein. Ligands of GPCR can be light, ions, or complex proteins.s, Gi,****and Gq. The Gs alpha subunit leads to the stimulation of the enzyme adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase converts ATP to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). The cAMP is a second messenger that activates protein kinase A and also interacts with other effector molecules. The Gi alpha subunit inhibits adenylyl cyclase. It results in cAMP depletion due to the tonic phosphodiesterase activity. The Gq alpha subunit activates the phospholipase C (PLC). PLC cleaves phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). These molecules act as second messengers. IP3 causes calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum, and DAG activates protein kinase C. Protein kinase C can phosphorylate many other proteins.

The RTK are usually single transmembrane polypeptide chains with an intracellular tyrosine kinase domain; RTKs are involved widely in embryonic development and play essential roles in cell growth and proliferation. Examples of RTKs are insulin receptor, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, nerve growth factor receptor, and fibroblast growth factor receptor.

Intracellular receptors are located in the cytoplasm or within the nucleus. Glucocorticoids have receptors in the cytosol. It binds to the receptor and hormone-receptor complex then migrates into the nucleus to modify gene expression. Thyroid hormone receptors are intranuclear. Thyroid hormones enter the nucleus, bind to the receptor attached to the DNA, and modify gene expression. For the receptor to be intracellular, the messenger molecule needs to be lipophilic. Intracellular receptors also include the IP3 receptor on the endoplasmic reticulum. IP3 receptor activation causes the mobilization of calcium stores from the endoplasmic reticulum.