# Continuing Education Activity

Stillbirth has many causes: intrapartum complications, hypertension, diabetes, infection, congenital and genetic abnormalities, placental dysfunction, and pregnancy continuing beyond forty weeks. It is a catastrophic event with lasting consequences on all of society. We need to learn more about why stillbirths occur to help those impacted deal with grief and, more importantly, prepare to reduce stillbirth risk in subsequent pregnancies. This activity reviews the interprofessional team's role in evaluating, managing, and improving care for patients with this diagnosis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of stillbirth.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of stillbirth.
- Outline the management options available for stillbirth.
- Explain some team strategies to optimize care coordination and communication to advance the care provided for stillbirth and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

The United States Center for Health Statistics defines a fetal death as the delivery of a fetus showing no sign of life, as indicated by absent breathing, heartbeats, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite movements of voluntary muscles, irrespective of the duration of pregnancy. Stillbirth is a fetal death after a defined gestational age and/or fetal weight, both of which have historically lacked uniformity. Currently, the most recognized definition of stillbirth is a fetal death that occurs at or greater than 20 weeks gestation or at a birth weight greater than or equal to 350 grams. Standardization of the definition of stillbirth is a current priority.

Comparison of stillbirth rates among and within countries is limited due to the non-uniformity of the definition of stillbirth and incomplete collection of stillbirth data. Globally, less than 5 percent of stillbirths are recorded.

Stillbirth has many causes: intrapartum complications, hypertension, diabetes, infection, congenital and genetic abnormalities, placental dysfunction, and pregnancy continuing beyond forty weeks. This is a catastrophic event with lasting consequences on all of society. We need to learn more about why stillbirths occur. This knowledge can help those impacted deal with grief and, more importantly, prepare to reduce stillbirth risk in subsequent pregnancies. This activity reviews the healthcare team's role in evaluating, managing, and improving care for patients diagnosed with stillbirth.

# Etiology

Global data on causes of stillbirth are limited due to difficulty in assigning causation.

The Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network study found stillbirth risk factors known at the start of pregnancy accounted for only a small fraction of stillbirth risk.  Only prior stillbirth or pregnancy loss from preterm birth or fetal-growth restriction demonstrated predictive value.

The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health Development (NICHD) created the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network. It evaluated the cause for stillbirth at 20 weeks or greater between 2006 and 2008 in 59 hospitals in five US states. The main causes of stillbirth in the US were obstetrical, including abruption and multifetal gestation complications and spontaneous labor or rupture membranes before viability. This study showed the cause of stillbirth could be assigned in 75% of cases when a systematic evaluation is performed, as will be outlined below.

**Placental Abnormalities:**

Fetal growth restriction and placental abnormalities are the most prevalent findings in stillbirth. Most pregnancies with these findings, however, do not result in stillbirth.

Placental factors such as a placental abruption are found in six percent of stillbirths.

**Diabetes**

Diabetes increases stillbirth risk up to five times.

**Race**

Non-Hispanic, black women in the U.S. have a higher rate of stillbirth (11 per 1000 births) compared to other racial groups. This group also has a higher incidence of diabetes, hypertension, premature membrane rupture, and abruption may account for the higher rate of stillbirth.

**Obesity**

Obesity is an independent risk factor for stillbirth, even after controlling for diabetes, smoking, gestational diabetes, and preeclampsia. Obesity is a major health problem in developed countries and is defined as a body mass index greater than 30 kg/m2. Nonobese women have a stillbirth risk of 5.5 per 1000. The risk is 8 per 1000 for BMI 30 to 39.9 kg/m^2 and 11/1000 for BMI greater than 40 kg/m^2.

**Age**

The risk of stillbirth is augmented by advanced maternal age due to an increased risk for aneuploidy and medical complications of pregnancy. Even after controlling for these risk factors, maternal age over 35 has an increased risk for stillbirth, which is accentuated by nulliparity. At age 40, the risk is 1/116 for a nullipara and 1/304 for a multipara.

**Substance Misuse**

Smoking tobacco increases the risk of stillbirth, both antepartum and intrapartum (15/1000). Quitting by the beginning of the second trimester reduces the risk to that of a nonsmoker.

The direct cause for stillbirths associated with alcohol consumption has not been identified, yet the risk is well documented. In pregnancy, 11.5% of pregnant women consume at least one drink in 30 days, and 3.9 % consumed four or more drinks on at least one occasion over a period of 30 days. The odds ratio for stillbirth associated with alcohol use is 1.36 (95% CI: 1.05-1.76).

In pregnancy, 4.4% of women use illicit drugs. There is a 1.5 OR for stillbirth associated with opioid use in pregnancy (95% CI: 1.3-1.8) and a 5.1 OR for stillbirth associated with methamphetamine use in pregnancy (95% CI: 3.7-7.2).

The most common finding in pregnancy complicated by substance use is growth restriction. Placental dysfunction, vasoconstriction, hypoxia, and alteration in endogenous chemicals responsible for regulating optimal wellbeing, are attributed to the increased risk of stillbirth associated with substance misuse.

**Gestational Age >38 weeks**

Stillbirth risk is increased by early and late-term gestational age. Induction of labor after 40 weeks may decrease the risk of stillbirth and cesarean delivery. 145  The risk of stillbirth at 37 weeks is 0.21/1000. At 38 weeks, the risk of stillbirth in pregnancies managed expectantly is equivalent to those managed by induced delivery. At 42 weeks, the risk of stillbirth is 1.08/1000.  When considering the benefit of inducing labor to reduce stillbirth, other factors, including neonatal and maternal adverse outcomes, must be considered. At 41 weeks, over 1400 deliveries would have to be induced to prevent one stillbirth. 22914394 Induction of labor is recommended after 42 weeks and might be considered after 41 weeks of gestation.

**Hypertension**

Chronic hypertension increases stillbirth risk three-times.

**Birth Defects**

Congenital defects, defined as physical or biochemical abnormalities, occur in 1/33 pregnancies and are associated with a higher risk of stillbirth. The detection of congenital defects prenatally may impact antenatal surveillance policy in hopes of reducing the risk of stillbirth. Stillbirth risk is 11/1000 for bladder exstrophy and 490/1000 for the limb-body-wall complex; even for isolated congenital defects not affecting major organs, the risk of stillbirth increases. The risk for stillbirth associated with cleft lip with cleft palate is 10/1000,  transverse limb deficiencies 26/1000, longitudinal limb deficiencies 11/1000, and the amniotic band associated limb defects 110/1000. The increased stillbirth risk for sacral agenesis is 13/1000, isolated spina bifida 24/1000, and holoprosencephaly 30/1000 may be underestimated due to failure to account for elective termination of pregnancy.

**Polyhydramnios**

Polyhydramnios complicates 1% to 2% of pregnancies. It is defined as an amniotic fluid index over 24 cm or a deepest vertical pocket of fluid greater than or equal to 8 cm, as assessed by abdominal ultrasound. Fifty percent of the time, the cause of polyhydramnios is idiopathic. In these cases, there is an association with an increased risk for fetal macrosomia, as well as two to five times increased relative risk of stillbirth.

The relative risk for stillbirth is 7.7 for persistent polyhydramnios compared with pregnancies with resolved polyhydramnios. Compared with pregnancies unaffected by polyhydramnios, the risk of stillbirth for women with polyhydramnios increases with gestational age, with the lowest risk at 26 weeks gestation, seven times increased relative risk at 37 weeks, and 11 times increased relative risk at 40 weeks. The risk persists even after excluding confounding variables and sharply increases at term.

**Oligohydramnios**

Oligohydramnios is defined as an amniotic fluid index (AFI) less than or equal to 5 cm, or a maximum vertical pocket of under 2 cm. The deepest vertical pocket is the preferred measurement since the AFI detects more cases of suspected oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios, which results in more inductions of labor with no improvement in perinatal outcome.

Oligohydramnios is associated with an increased risk for small for gestational age fetuses and stillbirth. For stillbirth, the risk is 11.54 (95% CI: 4.05-32.9).

**Umbilical Cord**

The umbilical cord may be implicated in stillbirth; however, a nuchal cord may be present in up to 30% of normal births. Evaluation of evidence of cord obstruction or circulatory compromise is necessary when evaluating for the cause of stillbirth.

**Late-onset Prenatal Care**

Late-onset prenatal care and prior home delivery are independent risk factors for subsequent adverse perinatal outcomes.

**Multiple Gestations**

Twin gestations increase the stillbirth rate by four times (19.6/1000), and for higher-order multiples, the rate is even higher at 30/1000.

Rhesus immunization, gestational hypertension, and gestational diabetes showed a higher odds of stillbirth but did not reach statistical significance**.**

**Infection**

Infection as a cause of stillbirth may be underrepresented because signs and symptoms of infection are often undetected, and evaluation for infection is often not conducted.Escherichia coli 29%, group B streptococcus (GBS)12%, enterococcus 12%, and rarely Listeria monocytogenes. The placental evaluation found evidence of infection in 99% of culture-positive cases. Non-bacterial organisms causing stillbirth included cytomegalovirus 8%, parvovirus 3%, syphilis 2%, and herpes simplex virus 2%. Infection is unlikely the cause of stillbirth unless it results in significant autopsy or placental findings. Serologic screening for toxoplasmosis, chlamydia, rubella, or herpes is usually not indicated when these infections are not detected on placental or autopsy examination.

Group B streptococcal infection is linked to the cause of stillbirth in 1% of stillbirths in developed countries and 4% in African countries.  These estimates are poor given the low quality of collected data. In Mozambique, the rate of group B streptococcal associated stillbirth was 17%, which may be due to the high rate of screening performed there.

Having a treated chlamydia infection before or during pregnancy does not increase the risk for preterm delivery, intrauterine growth restriction, or stillbirth.

**Antiphospholipid Syndrome**

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), in addition to thrombotic events, has been linked to stillbirth since 1984.

An increased risk for pregnancy morbidity in women with (APS) is seen in women with a history of systemic lupus erythematosus, thromboses, previous adverse pregnancy outcomes, and low complement levels in the first trimester.

Clinical criteria for the diagnosis of APS include a confirmed history of a thrombotic event without evidence of inflammation in the vessel wall, one or more unexplained fetal deaths after 10 weeks gestational age, three or more deaths before the 10th week of gestation, or a preterm delivery due to eclampsia, preeclampsia with severe features or other placental insufficiencies.

Currently, available treatment for APS remains associated with an unsuccessful pregnancy 20% to 30% of the time.

Lifelong anticoagulation is recommended for anyone with antiphospholipid syndrome and a prior thrombotic event. With pregnancy diagnosis, warfarin must be stopped, and low molecular weight heparin started. Unlike warfarin, which crosses the placenta and increases the risk for fetal teratogenicity and hemorrhage, LMWH does not cross the placenta and is safe for the fetus.

A personal or family history of thromboembolism appears to have an increased risk for stillbirth.

**Intrahepatic Cholestasis**

Intrahepatic cholestasis may affect 0.1% to 2 % of pregnant women.

# Epidemiology

Each year, over 2.6 million pregnancies result in a third-trimester stillbirth worldwide, which is 18.4/1000 total births.

The stillbirth rate surpassed the infant mortality rate in the USA in 2013.

# Pathophysiology

The survival of a fetus in utero is dependent on several factors. These factors can be broken down into the well-being of the host in its environment, the function of the uteroplacental unit, the condition of the environment in which the fetus lives, and the absence of lethal fetal factors. A single insult or a combination of factors may affect the function of these life-sustaining factors and lead to a stillbirth. The ability to maintain and support a pregnancy is dependent on multiple physiologic, hormonal, and anatomic adaptations.

The integrity of the uteroplacental unit may be compromised by structure, function, or genetic anomalies or insults such as hemorrhage or infection. Placental findings could include 1) single umbilical cord insertion, 2) velamentous umbilical cord insertion, 3) furcate umbilical cord insertion, 4) circummarginate insertion of the placental membranes, 5) circumvallate insertion of the placental membranes, 6) terminal villous immaturity, 7) terminal villous hypoplasia, 8) terminal villous hyperplasia, 9) acute chorioamnionitis of placental membranes, 10) acute chorioamnionitis of the chorionic plate,  11) acute funisitis, 12) acute umbilical cord arteritis, 13) acute umbilical cord phlebitis, 14) chorionic plate acute vasculitis of the fetal blood vessels, 15) chorionic plate vascular degenerative changes, 16) acute villitis, 17) chronic villitis, 18) avascular villi, 19) retroplacental hematoma, 20) parenchymal infarction, 21) intraparenchymal (intervillous) thrombosis, and 22) perivillous fibrin deposition, 23) intervillous fibrin deposition, 24) placental weight, 25) ratio placental weight/birth weight.

In a study of placental pathology and stillbirth, of the 25 examined findings, 15 were significantly associated with stillbirth and 11 with growth restriction. Placental abnormalities were linked to stillbirth both in fetuses with and without evidence of growth abnormality. 10/11 placental findings associated with growth restriction were also associated with an increased risk for stillbirth. Five placental findings, however, were associated with stillbirth but not with growth restriction. In this study, looking at placental pathology, five patterns were highlighted.

In group 1, stillbirth occurred in the absence of growth restriction. The effect was acute and severe. Findings included chorioamnionitis, fetal chorionic plate vascular degenerative changes, perivillous and intervillous fibrinoid deposits, fetal vascular thrombi in the chorionic plate.

Group 2 demonstrated growth restriction associated only with stillbirth. This included velamentous cord insertion, terminal villous hyperplasia, and parenchymal infarcts.  With these conditions, it may impair placental function and lead to growth restriction and stillbirth. In its milder forms, it might not affect growth and result in a live birth.

Group 3 had growth restriction in live births only.  Findings included a single umbilical artery, which may impair circulation chronically and lead to growth restriction without causing stillbirth. Terminal villous hypoplasia and parenchymal infarction had different effects depending on whether the fetus was preterm or term. Preterm, they were associated with growth restriction and stillbirth, and term, they were associated with growth restriction and live birth. This suggests that greater severity may result in stillbirth before term, and a less severe condition may result in growth restriction and live birth.

Group 4 had similar growth restriction in live births and stillbirths. Placental weight in preterm births and intraparenchymal thrombus formation in term births were both associated with growth restriction in both stillbirth and live birth. In these cases, a second insult may have accounted for the stillbirth.

Group 5 had different patterns of growth restriction for live births and stillbirths. There was a more severe effect on placental function; the group with growth restriction and stillbirth and a milder effect on placental function resulted in the group with growth restriction and live birth. Preterm stillbirth demonstrated terminal villous immaturity, avascular villi, placental edema, or retroplacental hematoma. Term stillbirth demonstrated retroplacental hematoma. All placental abnormalities associated with growth restriction were also associated with stillbirth except for terminal villous hypoplasia.

# History and Physical

The history and data obtained during routine prenatal care and perinatal care will help establish a cause of stillbirth in the majority of cases regardless of the availability of autopsy.

**History**

The maternal history includes age, gravidity, parity, any history of hypertension, diabetes, hypercoagulability, autoimmune disease, or cancer: exposure to infection (Zika, parvo, CMV, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, malaria): family history of genetic disorders, recurrent miscarriages or stillbirth: paternal age and history of genetic disorders.

The current pregnancy history includes abnormal uterine bleeding, trauma, reproductive treatment, exposure to drugs or radiation, weight gain, infections, sexually transmitted diseases, hypertension, preeclampsia, diabetes, anemia, fetal anomaly, or growth restriction.

The past obstetrical history includes preterm delivery, stillbirth, or a fetus affected by growth restriction, as well as any pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia, diabetes, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or a blood transfusion.

The immunization record includes the record of all completed immunizations.  Testing for immune status may be indicated for endemic diseases such as measles.

The social history includes employment, nutrition, substance use, domestic violence, travel history, and exposure to any animal exposures.

Prenatal lab test results include CBC, type and screen, HbsAg, syphilis, HIV, rubella, prenatal testing for aneuploidy, urine toxicology, diabetic screening.

**Physical Findings**

Examine the patient for whom fetal well-being is a concern as expeditiously as possible to allay concerns and to initiate care in a timely fashion.  Attempt to auscultate fetal heart tones with the fetal doppler and, if indicated, initiate electronic fetal monitoring.   If unable to doppler fetal heart tones, perform an abdominal ultrasound to confirm the presence or absence of fetal heart tones as soon as possible.

- Vitals- weight, blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature

- Mental status-alert, oriented, confused, agitated

- Skin- turgor and quality of the pulse

- Abdomen- signs of blunt or sharp trauma including bruising or bleeding, contour, pain including uterine pain, guarding, rebound tenderness, contractions, symphysis fundal height,  Leopold maneuver

- Back- pain, CVA tenderness

- Extremities- reflexes, edema, rash, itching, petechiae

- Skin- rash or signs of drug abuse

- Pulmonary- shortness of breath, tachypnea, rales or crackles

- Cardiac- rate and rhythm

- Pelvic- bleeding, discharge, cervical assessment, cultures, wet mount, ferning

**After Delivery**

Perform a gross examination of the umbilical cord and the placenta and record findings, including measurements.  Photograph the placenta and cord.

Culture the placenta as indicated by swabbing between the chorionic and the amniotic membrane with aerobic and anaerobic culture swabs.

**Examination of the Baby**

The birth attendant should perform a complete examination of the baby shortly after birth and by a pathologist.  A chart should be available to guide the examiner to record each of the following bullets.

- Measurements: weight, length, head circumference, foot length (if less than 23 weeks, foot length may be used to estimate gestational age)

- Facial features: ears, eyes, nose, mouth, cranium.

- Neck and back: cystic hygroma, spina bifida, abnormal pigmentation

- Skin: maceration, sloughing, color

- Cord insertion: central, marginal, membranous

- Abdominal wall

- Gender: ambiguous, female, male

- Extremities, digits, palmar creases

- Photograph the head, face, whole body, hands, and feet. Take detailed photos of the baby from the anterior, posterior, and lateral directions. Photograph and record any abnormality.

Obtain consent to photograph the baby and be aware that some cultures, such as the Amish, may not consent to photography.

**Examination of the Placenta**

The placental examination is the single most important study, other than an autopsy.  It may contribute to a diagnosis of stillbirth in 53% of cases.

The macroscopic placental evaluation may be performed by the delivery attendant,  a pathologist, or both.  A ruler, to reference dimensions, should be included with all images.

- Reconstitute the membranes for completeness. Take photographs of the fetal and the maternal sides of the placenta.

- Measure the shortest distance from the membrane rupture to the edge of the placental disc.  Note the membrane insertion type (normal, circummarginate, or circumvallate), color, and sheen.

- If the pregnancy is multifetal,  describe the thickness and attachment of the dividing membranes to the disc.  Note the location and type of umbilical cord insertion by measuring the distance from the disc edge to the insertion of the cord.

- Note the length of unprotected umbilical vessels, intravascular umbilical thrombi, and the total length of the cord.

- Describe how the cord coils.  If the coiling is uniform, count the number of 360-degree coils over a 5-centimeter length of cord. If the coiling is non-uniform, count all 360-degree coils in the cord and divide by the entire cord length.

- Document any false or true cord knots or twists.  Comment on cord edema, hemorrhage, laceration, or avulsion.

- Cut the cord every 5-centimeters and record the thickest and thinnest diameter and the number of arteries/ veins in every segment.

- Cut the cord leaving only a 1-centimeter stump of cord attached to the placenta. Weigh the placenta after it is drained of blood.

- Measure the longest and the shortest placental dimension and note any extra lobes or unusual shape

- Cut the placenta in strips 1-centimeter wide, leaving 1-centimeter on either side of the umbilical stump.  Measure the full thickness of each cut and record the thickest and thinnest measurement. Examine all surfaces.

- Note any lesions found and take photographs of them.

# Evaluation

**Microscopic Evaluation of the Placenta**

Take 1 x 1 cm blocks from 4 locations of the placenta. Retrieve the specimens with the maternal side of the placenta up and send samples unfixed.

**Autopsy**

The remains must be handled with respect, and an autopsy should be performed in a timely fashion to help the family establish closure. The approach to the autopsy of a stillborn has not been standardized. However, keep in mind that the documentation of negative findings is just as important as that of positive findings.

Some patients and some caregivers may find it difficult to address the topic of a stillborn autopsy. The performance of an autopsy requires written consent. Fetal tissue is not considered part of the product of conception after 20 weeks of gestational age, and therefore insurance may not cover its examination.

An autopsy may identify the cause for stillbirth in 46% of cases and may provide new findings in 51% of cases.

A pathologist who is experienced in the evaluation of stillbirth is an integral part of the team. If someone with this expertise is not locally available, the fetus and or placenta may need to be transferred, per regulations, to another center for evaluation.

Cardiac malformations are not readily detected on postmortem imaging, and hence an autopsy is invaluable to evaluate for them. These anomalies may be missed on routine obstetrical ultrasound and often require a fetal echocardiogram to be diagnosed prenatally.

A complete autopsy includes an examination of the brain and the internal organs. It may include retrieving and preserving organs for later study; however, upon request, all organs may be returned to the body following the autopsy.

A partial autopsy can also be done. In this case, the family specifies what body cavities may be entered. Examination of the head may be declined, and the family may only give consent for an external exam. Some families are much more accepting of an autopsy knowing this information.

An autopsy may be performed in concert with radiological studies. MRI, CT, or high-quality ultrasound may uncover concerning intracavitary lesions. If detected, these lesions may be evaluated using a guided needle biopsy to screen for infection, tumor, or malignancy. In some cases, these radiological studies may help to obviate the need for a complete autopsy.

An autopsy may help to provide valuable information when multiple anomalies are found that do not conform to a syndrome. It may also be used to evaluate for renal anomalies and causes of nonimmune hydrops in the absence of a cystic hygroma.

Photographs should be taken of any detected abnormalities as they can be reviewed at different times and by multiple care team members and help identify the cause of stillbirth and direct future pregnancy management.

**Imaging**

Various imaging modalities can be employed to help in the evaluation of the cause of stillbirth. A Babygram is a lateral and anterior-posterior X-ray of the whole fetus. It may uncover skeletal dysplasia, costovertebral malformations, ectopic calcifications, and gas collections suggestive of infection. This study may confirm or suggest a cause of stillbirth in 16% of cases and serves as the only method of diagnosis in 1.5% of cases.

**Chromosomal Study**

In 5% of normal-appearing stillborns, a chromosomal abnormality will be detectable.

Chromosome testing for aneuploidy should be offered for all stillbirths to confirm or to seek a cause of the stillbirth. After 20 weeks of gestation, "fetal tissue" is not considered a product of conception, and thus the evaluation of this tissue may not be covered by the mother's insurance. Genetic amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling before delivery offers the highest yield (80% to 100%) for successful cytogenetic analysis.

Because amniocentesis results are still pending at the time of the delivery, additional tissue samples should still be obtained immediately following the delivery as a back-up to increase the odds of obtaining a result.

If amniocentesis results in failure to culture tissue, fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FiSH) may still be performed to rule out aneuploidy, the benefit of amniocentesis/fluorescence in situ hybridization is that it is cheaper than microarray.

Cord blood collected for the blood bank is not anticoagulated and is not useful for cytogenetic testing. Cord blood needs to be collected in a green or a purple top tube for cytogenetic testing, which contains an anticoagulant (EDTA, heparin).

Avoid using a skin biopsy for cytogenetic testing if there is any maceration as this tissue will not yield a result. Placental tissue is viable much longer than fetal skin and should be collected as the product of conception of choice if there is fetal maceration. Viable, nonfixed tissue is preferred.  The tissue should be placed in lactated Ringer's solution and not in formaldehyde. If fixed in formaldehyde or alcohol, some labs may still offer genetic testing, but this is not preferred.

Chromosomal microarray testing (CMT) is now the preferred test performed on tissue collected from the fetus or the placenta after delivery. Intact skin, the patella, or costochondral tissue may be collected and submitted unfixed using lactated ringers solution at room temperature.

Gene sequencing with whole-exome sequence panels may be performed in cases with suspected skeletal dysplasia or sudden death. Testing for Mendelian conditions is emerging. Mutations in genes controlling for sudden cardiac death have been discovered and may be found in 10% of stillbirths, which remain unexplained despite undergoing a thorough investigation.

**Lab Testing**

All patients should be offered amniocentesis if delivery is not imminent, even if a prior cell-free DNA screening was unremarkable.

All patients require CBC, glucose, as well as type and screen for HIV and syphilis. These help screen for maternal hemoglobinopathy, infection, poor glycemic control, or undiagnosed diabetes and red cell alloimmunization.

Urine drug screen should be considered, especially for cocaine, which has links to maternal hypertension and placental abruption.

Most maternal and fetal thrombophilias are not associated with stillbirth, and routine testing for thrombophilias is not recommended.

Immediately after a stillbirth, evaluate all women for fetomaternal hemorrhage using the Kleihauer Betke test. This is an acid elution test looking for fetal RBC in the maternal circulation and may help to identify the cause of stillbirth.  It is not an exact test as it uses an estimation of maternal blood volume to calculate the estimated quantity of fetal blood transferred to the maternal circulation. If the mother is Rh-negative and the fetus is Rh-positive, this test is used to calculate the dose of Rhogam necessary to prevent Rh isoimmunization.

Consider screening for TSH, liver chemistry, and bile salts if there is clinical suspicion for an underlying problem. Screen for lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin IgM, and IgG if there is a family history of blood clots or if there is evidence of placental infarction or arteriopathy.

**Screening for Infection**

Screening for infection is complicated because many women have positive serology from previous infections. The most common bacterial pathogens associated with stillbirth are E. coli, group B Streptococcus, and Enterococcus species. Most infection-related stillbirths occurred before 24 weeks of gestation.

CMV is the most prevalent infection transmitted in utero. Usually, there are no abnormal ultrasound findings, although cerebral hemorrhage, cardiomegaly, hepatomegaly, mild ascites, and echogenic bowel may be reported. Thrombotic vasculopathy is noted on autopsy. The kidney is the most frequently involved organ, and CMV inclusions may be found in epithelial cells on histology. Cytomegalovirus DNA may be found in the kidney, liver, brain, thyroid, lung, heart, pancreas, and placenta.

Intrauterine herpes infection is very rare. 95% of neonatal infections are acquired peripartum. Although intrauterine herpes may be acquired during a primary or secondary outbreak, the risk is highest during a disseminated herpes infection. Intrauterine transmission is most common during the first 20 weeks of gestation and may lead to stillbirth or congenital abnormalities. Clinical findings may include skin vesicles or scarring, eye lesions (chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, cataracts), neurologic damage (microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, seizures, encephalomalacia). An autopsy may reveal ulcerated skin and necrosis of the liver, adrenal glands, brain, and placental membranes. Fluorescent in situ hybridization may confirm the herpes infection.

Coxsackievirus infection may be asymptomatic or may result in fetal myocarditis, meningoencephalitis, or generalized sepsis. Autopsy findings may include mild arthrogryposis, necrotic meningoencephalitis with vascular calcifications, mild myocardial hypertrophy, and chronic monocytic placental villitis. Molecular techniques may confirm infection.

Aerobic, anaerobic, and listeria placental cultures may be obtained if clinically indicated. To prevent contamination, the swab should be taken from the potential space which is exposed by separating the chorionic from the amniotic membrane. Cultures from the stillborn infant are best obtained from internal organs.

Syphilis RPR may be positive for months after the patient is treated. Syphilis spirochetes infect the placenta causing villous enlargement, acute villitis, necrotizing funisitis, and amniotic infection. Placentomegaly results in stillbirth in 50% of infected fetuses due to placental dysfunction. The infected fetus may demonstrate involution of the thymus, hepatosplenomegaly, and hydrops. Mucocutaneous lesions are rare. Where the incidence of syphilis is high, this is the leading infectious cause of stillbirth and has the greatest potential for improved outcomes if screened and treated.

Malaria, in endemic regions, is responsible for a large number of stillbirths due to its damaging effect on the placenta. Prophylaxis and the use of bednets could reduce stillbirths attributed to this infection.

**Screening for Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC)**

Disseminated intravascular coagulation is very rare in the context of stillbirth today due to early diagnosis and management. In cases of fetal demise undiagnosed for more than three weeks or in stillbirth cases complicated by placental abruption or sepsis, DIC may need to be ruled out. The is no single laboratory or clinical test to diagnose DIC. If encountered in the context of a stillbirth, the treatment of DIC includes delivery of the stillborn and management of hemorrhage and or sepsis; supportive care with the administration of blood products as indicated; close clinical surveillance and repeat labs; and rapid response/specialist consultation.

To aid in diagnosing DIC in non-emergent cases where only a clinical diagnosis can be achieved, the EREZ (modified ISTH score) is recommended.

A) Platelet count, (10^9/L)   <50 = **1**: 50-185 =**2**: > 185 =**0**

B) Prothrombin time, (seconds)  <0.5  = **0**: 0.5-1 =**5**: 1.0-1.5 =**25**

C) Fibrinogen, (grams/liter)  3.0 = **25**: 3.0-4.0 =**6**: 4.0 - 4.5 =**1**: >4.5 =**0**

A calculated EREZ score, obtained by adding the score of (A) + (B) + (C), which is greater than 26, predicts a high probability for DIC even in the absence of obvious clinical symptoms.

The platelet count is the most useful test for DIC. Thrombocytopenia, or a down-trending platelet count, is the most important lab value to note, even if it remains above 100 x 10^9/L.

The PT and PTT may become prolonged, but they may also remain normal even in the event of acute hemorrhage and more so in the case of an acute abruption. This is attributed to the change in clotting factors during pregnancy, which favors thrombosis. Treatment for DIC may, therefore, be initiated even when the PT and PTT are minimally prolonged.

A low fibrinogen level is diagnostic of DIC, and in pregnancy, low levels are uncommon except for the setting of a massive postpartum hemorrhage. A fibrinogen level <2 g/L has a positive predictive value of 100% for progression to severe DIC. Consider replacing fibrinogen with cryoprecipitate when the fibrinogen level is <1.5 g/L and replacing platelets when they are less than 50 x 10^9/L, and replacing fresh frozen plasma (30 mL/kg) when the PT and PTT are prolonged.

# Treatment / Management

**Communicating the Diagnosis with Patients**

Stillbirth may be confirmed by a second ultrasonographer as deemed necessary. The diagnosis is conveyed to the mother by a health care provider as quickly as possible, making all attempts to provide privacy, empathy, and support. How this occurs will depend on the situation. Ultrasonographers usually contact a provider and arrange for immediate consultation if the diagnosis is made without prior warning. If the provider makes the diagnosis at the bedside, the diagnosis should be confirmed immediately and conveyed to the patient. The patient may be given the option to view the ultrasound images with the provider. The patient will require compassionate support. Some patients may need to leave immediately, as a coping mechanism, and should be encouraged to do so if they are medically stable. Some patients may appreciate a hand to hold until a family member can arrive for support. Empathy and support are demonstrated by saying you are sorry and by offering the support the patient desires. This may include providing written information instructing the patient how to reach you when they are ready and how to schedule a follow-up appointment as soon as desired.

An attempt to obtain fetal measurements and to scan for any obvious abnormalities may be attempted as permitted.

It is important to tell the patient that they did nothing wrong and to demonstrate respect to the baby by addressing them by name.

If the patient is not medically stable secondary to complications associated with the fetal demise, then one must provide information in a calm, clear, and concise fashion to obtain informed consent for any urgent procedure(s).

**Meeting Emotional Needs**

When caring for a patient/couple/family experiencing a stillbirth, it is important to convey compassion, empathy, and sensitivity while being mindful of their emotional needs. The diagnosis of stillbirth is often made or confirmed by ultrasound when there is an inability to detect fetal heart tones or randomly at the time of an ultrasound performed for something other than stillbirth evaluation. The patient may have an underlying concern regarding the wellbeing of her fetus or may be presented with this diagnosis unawares. Emotions should be validated.

Communicating bad news is not a natural skill, and one's ability to deliver bad news does not necessarily improve with experience.

A copy of the ultrasound may be placed in a sealed envelope and offered to the patient as a keepsake.  It may be offered either at the time of the exam or at subsequent visits.

The patient may ask about the management plan after the diagnosis of stillbirth, and the caregiver should be prepared to convey this information in a private and comfortable environment. The caregiver should ask if any religious or cultural practices need to be respected.

**Management**

Discussion on the mode of delivery will depend on the gestational age of the stillborn, the desires of the patient, the physical status of the patient, and prior obstetrical/surgical history. Information is provided presented clearly and concisely, and confirmation of understanding should be obtained.

Coagulation abnormalities caused by a release of tissue factor from the placenta may occur if the dead fetus is retained for several weeks.

Usually, a vaginal delivery is the safest route of delivery even after a previous lower segment cesarean delivery. Some women may request a primary or a repeat cesarean section to avoid experiencing labor. This is an option provided the patient is fully aware of the risks versus benefits.

Stillbirth before 24 weeks is best managed by a dilation and evacuation (D & E) by a competent provider. This involves dilation of the cervix and manual removal of the product of conception. The cervix is often pre-dilated using laminaria placed in the cervix the night before the procedure. This risk of the procedure is greater when the fetus measures greater than 24 weeks in size. An ultrasound estimated fetal size less than 24 weeks is, therefore, more important than the estimated gestational age in determining the appropriateness of a D&E. A fetus on ultrasound may measure smaller than the established gestational age due to either growth restriction caused by the underlying pathology or the stillbirth predating the diagnosis. This procedure is considered less morbid than the induction of labor because it is associated with a lower risk of infection.

Stillbirth after 24 weeks with a favorable cervix (Bishop score >6) is conducted with standard doses of synthetic oxytocin.

Stillbirth after 24 weeks with an unfavorable cervix (Bishop score <6) in the absence of a previous hysterotomy scar is achieved with misoprostol 50 mcg vaginally repeated every 4 hours for a maximum of 6 doses.

Different protocols may be followed if approved by the delivery facility. In some cases, a foley balloon is used to ripen the cervix. In some cases, a high dose of [itocin regimen is used.

Vaginal delivery is not contraindicated in pregnancies less than 24 weeks complicated by placenta previa.

Women with a prior single, low transverse, cesarean delivery, and second-trimester stillbirth may receive mechanical ripening agents or misoprostol less than or equal to 200 mcg vaginally every 4 hours. The risk of rupture is 0.28 percent versus 0.04 percent in these women with no prior cesarean section.

Women with third-trimester fetal demise and an unfavorable cervix, and a prior history of a cesarean section should use a mechanical method of cervical ripening followed by oxytocin for induction. Misoprostol may be considered as an option only after rigorous informed consent. The lowest dose of 25 to 50 mcg vaginally should be used, and the dose should not be doubled to reduce the risk of uterine rupture.

Fetal-pelvic disproportion seldom is a concern for the delivery of a stillborn, whether breech or cephalic, in the absence of macrosomia. Overlapping skull bones and fetal deterioration often allow the delivery of even large fetuses. A persistent shoulder or transverse lie may require an attempted internal or external version.

**Emotional Intelligence**

For the patient (and her support), a stillbirth is a catastrophic event. Although staff may be empathetic, their experience does not compare to that of the parents. As a result, communication can be perceived as cold. While the focus of caregivers is on the mother and the future, the parents remain focused on their baby. Parents may not understand why vaginal birth is being recommended and will need clear communication to understand why a cesarean section is not the norm. Part of care includes discussing coping strategies and supporting the variety of normal behaviors and will support healing. Parents may be influenced by staff. Counseling regarding autopsy should be done in a respectful way, which allows the family to understand its purpose and timescale.

At delivery, if a name has been chosen, the baby should be addressed by their name. Contact between the mother and the stillborn should be offered; the patient/family should be counseled well before delivery on the things for which they need to prepare. Developing a connection with the baby makes the death real, helps prevent emotional withdrawal from the loss, and helps in the transition to parenthood.

The options for autopsy, it's benefits and costs must be presented in a sensitive, informative, and non-biased fashion. Most religious leaders support autopsy provided burial occurs within a reasonable time frame, and the parents are adequately counseled.

Some women/families will not want to be around other new families at this time. Pictures of newborns and families displayed in their immediate care area may also provoke negative feelings. All efforts should be made to identify the patient's loss so that inadvertent comments or gestures are avoided by caring staff. The patient should also be offered housing in an area away from newborns if requested.

Counseling regarding breast engorgement, which may lead to physical and emotional pain, is essential. Some mothers will request information on how to stop milk production as quickly as possible, while others may wish to consider donating milk helpful emotionally.

If there are other children in the home, they need to be included in the grieving and healing process. The importance of talking about the baby, addressing feelings/grief, and displacing guilt has been validated.

At an appropriate time, concerns regarding family planning and future pregnancy may be discussed. An interpregnancy interval of fewer than six months is not associated with an adverse pregnancy outcome in the next pregnancy.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Viable Pregnancy**

A stillbirth must be confirmed by ultrasound to rule out a live fetus. Fetal heart tones may be undetected by a fetoscope in the case of a viable pregnancy.

**Miscarriage**

A stillbirth must be differentiated from a miscarriage. The most accurate gestational age is calculated by comparing the estimated gestational age (EGA) calculated from the last menstrual period (LMP) with the (EGA) calculated from the first-trimester ultrasound and following established dating rules. If the LMP is unknown and there is no prior ultrasound, the EGA may be estimated by the birth weight or foot length of the fetus.

**Multifetal Pregnancy**

A multifetal pregnancy must be ruled out in the event there is a stillbirth accompanied by a living twin or triplet fetus.

**Underlying Maternal Illness**

Approximately 1/17 stillbirths are associated with severe maternal morbidity attributed to maternal illnesses.

**Infection**

Infections must be treated per CDC guidelines.

**Physical Assault**

Blunt trauma to the abdomen may result in fetal demise.

**The following are rarely associated with stillbirth but must be considered.**

**Poisoning**

The ingestion of drugs, food poisoning, or exposure to environmental toxins such as carbon monoxide may result in fetal demise and, if undiagnosed and untreated, may contribute to maternal morbidity and mortality.

**Abdominal Pregnancy**

This is very rare and is missed on ultrasound up to 45% of the time.

**Uterine Rupture**

This has been documented during medical induction for stillbirth in a patient with no prior history of uterine surgery and must be considered if indicated by the patient's symptoms.

**Partial Molar Pregnancy**

This fetus has 69 chromosomes and may present as a stillbirth. Triploidy is a fatal disorder. On occasion, a triploid fetus may survive for several months postnatally. Very rarely, due to mosaicism, the fetus may be diploid and the placenta triploid. A molar pregnancy is associated with a higher risk for preeclampsia and postpartum hemorrhage. Avoidance of pregnancy and surveillance of the quantitative Bhcg for up to one year is required to screen for persistent gestational trophoblastic disease.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

A study evaluating pregnancies between 35 to 37 weeks demonstrated that biochemical markers provide a poor estimation of stillbirth in both small for gestational age and non-small for gestational age fetuses.

However, placental growth factor level (PIGF) when low in late pregnancy is strongly associated with small for gestational age fetuses, preeclampsia, fetal compromise, NICU admissions, and stillbirth. This angiogenic protein is produced in the placenta and contributes to the development of a low resistance circulation in the placenta. Normally, the level peaks at 30 weeks and then falls toward term. A low level in the first and second trimesters negatively impacts placental development. The ability to predict adverse pregnancy outcomes based on a low level in the third trimester is under evaluation. Many studies use the ratio of fms-soluble tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1)/ PlGF ratio instead of just the PlGF level. The screening performance of these measurements is being evaluated to predict adverse pregnancy outcomes. At this time, a preferred assay is not recommended.

Induction of labor at or beyond 39 weeks to reduce the stillbirth rate is being evaluated. Induction of labor after 39 weeks is associated with fewer perinatal deaths, fewer cesarean sections, fewer NICU admissions, and low Apgar scores. A value of 426 inductions at or beyond 39 weeks is estimated to prevent one perinatal death. The optimal timing for induction requires further research.

# Treatment Planning

**Prevention Strategies**

Screening and monitoring strategies to prevent stillbirth are controversial. It is appropriate to monitor patients with conditions that increase their risk of stillbirth with some form of antenatal testing during antepartum care. However, providers should be aware that false-positive rates are high for most tests. Intrapartum global use of cardiotocography and the ability to perform cesarean section for nonreassuring fetal heart tones has led to a decrease in stillbirth rates in developed countries. This resource must be made available in low and middle-income countries where the majority of stillbirths are occurring.

Risk scoring systems have good sensitivity but a poor predictive value when it comes to predicting negative birth outcomes.

There is no evidence that fetal kick count monitoring is useful in all pregnancies or helps prevent stillbirths.

Although a pregnancy ultrasound has several benefits, the routine use of ultrasound in pregnancy has not demonstrated benefit in reducing stillbirth.

Uterine artery Doppler has been shown to identify fetuses with intrauterine growth restriction at risk for stillbirth, but this identification requires timely and appropriate measures to prevent stillbirth, which requires ongoing research.

Stillbirth incidence is not affected by the use of pelvimetry, but the cesarean section rate increases.

Diabetes in pregnancy warrants screening and treatment aimed at maintaining glucose control to reduce stillbirths, especially in populations where the prevalence of diabetes is high. Pregestational control of diabetes has the most benefit in reducing the risk of stillbirth. Stillbirth risk is not increased in women with good diabetic control and no evidence of diabetic vasculopathy.

In the USA, a reduction in the stillbirth rate was noted when the cardiotocography/nonstress test (NST) was introduced for the management of high-risk pregnancies.

Although vibroacoustic stimulation may help to reduce the testing time for cardiotocography and the incidence of nonreactive tests, it has not been shown to reduce stillbirth rates.

Although polyhydramnios is associated with an increased risk for stillbirth, the benefit of diagnosing polyhydramnios to reduce the stillbirth rate is uncertain and warrants further study.

Home-based care for pregnancies complicated by non-proteinuric hypertensive disease of pregnancy and multiple gestations does not appear to be inferior to hospital-based care.

Compared to no or intermittent auscultation in low-risk women, admission cardiotocography was associated with higher caesarean rates and fewer neonatal seizures but no improvement in stillbirth rates.

A fetal electrocardiogram or pulse oximetry, in addition to cardiotocography, has not been shown to prevent stillbirth.

# Prognosis

The follow up for a woman after management for a stillbirth includes counseling on the risk of recurrence. After experiencing a stillbirth, the risk of recurrence is nearly twice that of women who had a live birth. This risk is impacted by multiple factors, including maternal risks, gestational age, and identified cause(s) for the stillbirth.

# Complications

After a stillbirth, physical complications may include incomplete passage of product of conception requiring medical or surgical management, infection, hemorrhage, disseminated intravascular coagulation, a uterine injury requiring surgical repair, or hysterectomy. There is an increased risk for recurrent stillbirth in the future.

Based on risk factors identified at the time of stillbirths such as preeclampsia or diabetes,  the patient may be at increased risk for developing cardiovascular disease in the future. If the anticardiolipin syndrome is identified during the evaluation of a stillbirth, the woman may be at future risk of having a stroke or deep venous thrombosis (DVT).

Psychosocial stressors may include loss of employment or income and the financial burden of health care costs incurred in treating this pregnancy complication. Depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic disorder may arise associated with unresolved grief and or guilt. Relationship dysfunction may be experienced and complicated by the associated stigma of being unable to deliver a healthy child. Incongruent coping mechanisms between the patient and her partner may lead to discord. The patient may develop a fear of having a future pregnancy, which may lead to a decision to avoid future pregnancy. Dysfunctional grief resolution may arise in other family members, including younger children in the home.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Early detection and effective management of maternal diseases are necessary to improve pregnancy outcomes. Improved prenatal and intrapartum care can help to reduce stillbirths.

Only a few identified risk factors for stillbirth are considered modifiable. Maternal BMI and glucose control may be modified in women with diabetes to reduce the risk of recurrent miscarriage. Given that many stillbirths in this population occur at term, change in prenatal care and a planned early delivery may impact risk.

The use of tobacco and recreational drugs are additional modifiable risk factors. Universal screening for substance abuse is supported, and women with identified needs must be directed to receive treatment if desired. The goals of treatment are to review their self-efficacy and what they have tried in the past, recognize there are different life options, and identify that they are worthy of a better life. This is achieved with the help of mental health units, substance use disorder specialists, and the use of addiction recovery coaches.

For pregnancy complicated by obstetric cholestasis (OC), planned delivery by 37 to 38 weeks gestation should be replaced by individualized decisions given the known perinatal risks of early-term delivery and the lack of evidence associating OC with stillbirth risk.

Perinatal audits may help to reduce the stillbirth rate.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Investment in stillbirth prevention is necessary. Stillbirth must be integrated into initiatives for women's and children's health globally. There needs to be intentional leadership; champions must be identified to act, educate, and make changes. The voice of women must be heard and have advocates. We must be prepared to invest in interventions, and indicators must be put in place to allow us to measure the success of our actions.

Stillbirth needs to be clearly defined. Every death must be counted, and actions to prevent these deaths must be tracked and monitored. High quality obstetric and midwifery care should be universally available. Childbirth must be provided with skilled attendants who can perform assisted vaginal deliveries and cesarean sections for fetal and maternal indications. Of all stillbirths, half occur during birth. Seventy-five percent of these are preventable with access to quality care. The ability to provide induction of labor for premature rupture of membranes and post-term pregnancy needs to be addressed.

Women who have experienced a stillbirth need social recognition, and we must work to abolish the long term stigma of stillbirth that serves only to degrade women and hide their burden. Respectful and supportive care is essential, including bereavement care after a stillbirth.

Stillbirth can be prevented by addressing and treating infection, malnutrition, non-communicable diseases, lifestyle factors, preterm labor, and post-term birth. Addressing birth control in adolescents, pregnancy spacing, and poverty will also benefit. We must strive to provide all women access to family planning and access to resources, which can help to prepare women of all ages for pregnancy. This includes providing effective antenatal care and support: folic acid supplementation, intermittent treatment of STIs (syphilis), smoking cessation counseling, screening and management of maternal illnesses, and the detection and management of fetal growth restriction identified as early as possible in pregnancy.

We must promote stillbirth investigation as part of peer review.