The flow of electrons through a conductive material, down a potential gradient from high to low concentration, generates electricity. The potential gradient, or the difference between the high and low concentration of electrons, represents the voltage and may vary depending on the electrical source. Electrical injuries can be separated based on low-voltage or high-voltage injuries, where a threshold of either 500 V to 100 V may be used. This is considered high. Household electricity in the United States is set at 110 V, though some high-power appliances may be set as high as 240 V. In comparison, industrial and high-tension electrical power lines can be set at greater than 100,000 V.

Current (I), describes the amount of energy (volume of electrons) flowing down a potential gradient and is measured in amperes (A). This describes the amount of energy that flows through the affected individual’s body as a result of an electrical injury. Individuals vary in the amount of maximum current they can tolerate touching while still being able to let go of the electrical source before induction of muscle tetany.

Resistance (R) is a measure of how a material reduces the amount of electrical flow that passes through it, measured in ohms. In the body, the resistance varies between tissues, depending on the level of water and electrolytes that are present. The highest concentration of electrolytes and water (and therefore the lowest resistance) are found in blood vessels, neurons, and muscles. For this reason, these are excellent conductors of electricity in the body. Bone, fat, and skin are, contrastingly, poor conductors of electricity (with high resistance). Skin resistance also increases with increased thickness, dryness, and keratinization. Moist mucous membranes or openings in the skin (e.g., punctures, lacerations, or abrasions) contrastingly have a lower resistance.

Tissues with the highest resistance tend to suffer the greatest level of damage as a result of an electrical injury. High skin resistance will cause a larger amount of energy dissipation at the level of the skin resulting in skin burns, thereby reducing the level of resultant internal damage. On the other hand, low skin resistance may result in less obvious skin injury or no skin injury at all, while a larger amount of electrical energy is transferred to internal tissues. For this reason, the extent of external burns on the skin does not predict the level of damage that will be found internally, nor does the total absence of external burns predict the total absence of internal electrical injury.

The resistance of internal tissues themselves further determines the level of damage that is encountered. An additional factor to consider is the current density which is determined by the cross-sectional area of a particular tissue. For example, as electrical energy travels down an arm which is mainly composed of low-resistance tissues like muscle, nerve, blood vessels, the current density is relatively low and constant throughout. This is true until the electrical energy reaches the joints (e.g., elbow, wrist, fingers) where a larger proportion of the cross-sectional area is comprised of tissues with higher resistance (e.g., bones, tendons) and fewer low-resistance tissues. Therefore, at the joints, the electrical energy becomes more focused on fewer low-resistance tissues, and for this reason, these types of tissues tend to suffer the most injury at the joints throughout the body.

Other determinants of electrical injury throughout the body are the source (i.e., entry point) and ground (i.e., exit point) of the current. The most common source is a hand, followed by the head, while the most common ground is usually a foot. Any current passing through the head may result in central nervous system (CNS) damage. The heart is most often affected if the current travels from hand to leg or hand to hand across the body, and this may result in a potentially fatal arrhythmia.

Ohm’s law describes the relationship between current, voltage, and resistance, such that voltage is directly proportional to current, while indirectly proportional to resistance.

The degree of electrical injury experienced by an individual can be predicted by Kouwenhoven factors include the type of current, current strength, length of time of exposure, body resistance, and the pathway the current takes in the body in addition to electrical field strength.

Type of current refers to either alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC). AC, the current found in household electrical outlets (generally 50 Hz to 60 Hz; low frequency), changes direction rhythmically, while DC, the current found in most batteries, constantly flows in one direction. Most cardioverters and defibrillators also use DC.

The higher the current and voltage associated with AC or DC, the greater the electrical damage will be. High-voltage current (greater than 500 V to 1000 V) typically will result in deep burns, while low-voltage current (110 V to 120 V) is more likely to result in tetany.

Muscle tetany typically occurs in response to electrical stimulation at a frequency of 40 Hz to 110 Hz, a range in which most household currents exist. If this muscle contraction occurs in the hand, contraction of flexors will cause the affected individual to grasp the source and prolong contact with the electrical source.

Most humans can perceive electrical energy, to touch, at a current of 1 milliamp (mA). Let-go current refers to the amount current (amperage) that will still allow an individual to release the source, even though muscle contraction is induced. The amount of amperage tolerated per individual (let-go current) varies depending on his or her size (i.e., muscle mass and weight). An average 70 kg man, for example, will have a let-go current of approximately 75 mA for DC and 15 mA for AC. Most children can tolerate a let-go current of 3 mA to 5 mA, which is much lower than the current generated by most circuit breakers. An electrical switch is designed to interrupt the electrical flow when there is an excess of electrical current found in the home.

It is mainly the frequency of AC that determines the effect it will have on the body. Low-frequency AC tends to cause tetany (prolonged muscle contraction), making it difficult for an affected individual to release the current source, thereby prolonging the length of exposure. For this reason, low-frequency AC can often be more hazardous than high-frequency AC. In general, AC is also approximately three to five times more damaging than DC of equal voltage and current. In addition, DC only causes a single convulsion or contraction, usually propelling the person away from the electrical source.

Finally, electrical field strength must be considered when determining the level of tissue injury. Field strength is determined based on the amount of voltage that is encountered, in addition to the size of the area with which it comes in contact. For example, a very high voltage that comes in contact with a larger surface area may have a field strength that is equal to or perhaps even less than a much smaller voltage coming into contact with a much smaller surface area. For this reason, low-voltage injuries (spread out over a smaller area) can often result in the same amount of damage as high-voltage injuries (spread out over a larger area).

Low electrical field strength is associated with an immediate, uncomfortable sensation (“shock”) that will not result in any significant injury. High electrical field strength, on the other hand, tends to result in either electrochemical or thermal damage to affected tissues with the risk of causing protein coagulation, coagulation necrosis, hemolysis, thrombosis, muscle or tendon avulsion, or dehydration. In addition to the electrical injury itself, high electrical field strength injury can result in massive tissue edema (e.g., secondary to thrombosis, vascular congestion, and muscle swelling secondary to damage), leading potentially to compartment syndrome. Dehydration (with associated hypovolemia and hypotension) may also occur as a result of this tissue edema. Severe muscle injury may lead to rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, and additional electrolyte disturbances. Altogether, these sequelae place individuals at a very high risk of acute kidney injury.