# Continuing Education Activity

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are the FDA-indicated treatment of choice in preventing asthma exacerbation in patients with persistent asthma. Persistent asthma is classified by symptoms more than two days a week, more than three nighttime awakenings per month, more than twice a week using short-acting beta-2 agonists for symptom control, or any limitation of normal activity due to asthma. Regular use of these medications reduces the frequency of asthma symptoms, bronchial hyper-responsiveness, risk of serious exacerbation, and improves the quality of life. This activity describes the mode of action of inhaled corticosteroids, including mechanism of action, pharmacology, adverse event profiles, eligible patient populations, monitoring, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the mechanism of action of inhaled corticosteroids.
- Identify the indications for using inhaled corticosteroid therapy.
- Review the potential adverse reactions of inhaled corticosteroids.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance inhaled corticosteroid therapy and improve outcomes and minimize adverse events.

# Indications

Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are the FDA-indicated treatment of choice in preventing asthma exacerbations in patients with persistent asthma.

Recently updated guidelines also recommend ICS to be used for acute asthma symptoms in conjunction with beta-2 agonists in adolescents and adults.

# Mechanism of Action

Inhaled corticosteroids have potent glucocorticoid activity and work directly at the cellular level by reversing capillary permeability and lysosomal stabilization to reduce inflammation. The onset of action is gradual and may take anywhere from several days to several weeks for maximal benefit with consistent use. Metabolism is through the hepatic route, with a half-life elimination of up to 24 hours.

# Administration

These drugs are administered through the inhalation route directly to their sites of action. This mode of administration decreases the dose required for the desired effect as it bypasses the first-pass metabolism in drugs taken orally. The reduced systemic bioavailability also minimizes side effects.

Nebulizer

- Advantages: Coordination with the patient not required, high doses possible

- Disadvantages: Expensive, more time required (10 to 15 minutes per dose), contamination of the machine

Metered Dose Inhalers (MDI)

- Advantages: Less expensive than nebulizers, convenient, faster to use, has a dose counter.

- Disadvantages: Coordination is essential if not using a mask, pharyngeal deposition, difficult to deliver high doses

Dry Powder Inhaler (DPI)

- Advantages: Portable, dose counter, less coordination needed compared to MDI

- Disadvantages: Needs higher inspiratory flow to use effectively, pharyngeal deposition of medication, cannot use in mechanically vented patients

Drug deposition of inhaled corticosteroids in children older than five is similar to that of adults, so the method of administration of ICS in these age groups should be decided based on patient and family preference. However, toddlers and infants cannot reliably generate a sufficient inspiratory flow rate to use dry powder inhalers, so this method of delivery is not recommended for this age group. The recommendation is that young children either use a nebulizer or MDI with a mask and spacer to deliver inhaled corticosteroids.

Many different brands of inhaled corticosteroids are available on the market with similar efficacy between the formulations. Widely used inhaled corticosteroids include budesonide, fluticasone, beclomethasone, flunisolide, mometasone, and triamcinolone.

# Adverse Effects

Local adverse effects of inhaled corticosteroids include dysphonia, oral candidiasis, reflex cough, and bronchospasm. These adverse effects are less common with low-dose inhaled corticosteroids than with high-dose inhaled corticosteroids. These adverse effects are also mitigated by spacer use when taking the medication via metered-dose inhalers.

Up to 50-60% of patients report dysphonia while using inhaled corticosteroids. It is due to myopathy of the laryngeal muscles and mucosal irritation, and it is reversible after withdrawing treatment.

Inhaled corticosteroid use has correlations with a reduction in growth velocity in children with asthma. However, these effects in low doses of inhaled corticosteroids are small, nonprogressive, and potentially reversible. Inadequate control of asthma also is associated with reductions in growth velocity, and early intervention with inhaled corticosteroids significantly improves asthma control.

There is conflicting evidence on the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on bone metabolism and osteoporosis. High doses of ICS are associated with an increased risk of fracture. Adult patients on chronic ICS therapy should undergo bone density measurement. Routine testing of bone density in children is not needed, but recommendations include supplementation with adequate vitamin D and calcium.

# Contraindications

There are few absolute contraindications to the various inhaled corticosteroids available in the United States.not demonstrated an increase in the risk of congenital malformations or impaired fetal growth.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Many healthcare professionals prescribe inhaled corticosteroids, including the nurse practitioner, primary care provider, pulmonologist, ENT surgeon, allergist, and emergency department physician. It is essential to know the adverse effects of inhaled corticosteroids. Patients should receive education about the local adverse effects and strategies to reduce their impact. More importantly, inhaled corticosteroid use correlates with a reduction in growth velocity in children with asthma. However, these effects in low doses of inhaled corticosteroids are small, nonprogressive, and potentially reversible.

There is conflicting evidence on the effect of inhaled corticosteroids on bone metabolism and osteoporosis. High doses of ICS correlate with an increased risk of fracture. Adult patients on chronic ICS therapy should have periodic bone density measurements. Routine testing of bone density in children is not needed, but the recommendation is for supplementation with adequate vitamin D and calcium.