The aforementioned age groups and corresponding play patterns are approximations of normal development for childhood play. Whenever there is a deviance from the established pattern, there is potential for concern regarding development, the home environment, or the individual mental welfare of the child.

The infant-caregiver dyad defines an infant's world. Concerns appear when poor interactions between the two are common. In the context of play, be aware of play that borders on abuse, or when expectations of the caregiver exceed the infant’s developmental ability. Unsafe play and ignoring the baby at times when the baby is in danger or in need of feedback should alarm anyone observing. Other red flags may suggest underlying organic brain issues such as developmental delays in achieving milestones, a minimal response to the parent’s stimulation, or withdrawn and detached affective responses.

During toddlerhood, a child’s play and behavior may be reflective of stress and trauma. While children at this age are expected to have tantrums and go through “the terrible twos,” there is a fine line for normal and abnormal behavior that could indicate a more severe underlying problem. For example, a toddler having uncontrollable tantrums, screaming, yelling, or becoming dangerously aggressive is abnormal. Behavior that becomes disorganized, out of control or dangerous should raise alarms. This may be evidence of social and or communication impairments. They may also have difficulty reading social cues and empathizing with peers. Play that remains primitive and isolative and not representational is also a deviation from normal behavior. The beginning of language delay will first appear at this stage and, again, can be observed in a child’s play.

Among preschoolers, be mindful if a child has difficulty establishing peer relationships or is overly reliant and clingy to caretakers. Other developmental issues include limited vocabulary and understanding of language evidenced by an inability to play with peers of the same age or follow the directions of the teacher. Play may cross the boundary between fantasy and aggression. Note repetitive themes that lack creativity and variety or contain frequent fearful themes. This may be evidence of abuse or neglect occurring at home. Difficulties in play also may indicate the beginnings of mental illness manifesting itself such as a developmental delay, ADHD, or an anxiety disorder.

During school age, problems often appear as aggression or impulsivity. Poor peer relationships will result when a child is unable to play cooperatively with others. Bullying or being bullied, social withdrawal, social immaturity, rejection by peers, or a variety of other issues may cause a child to struggle with peer relationships. Mental illness may further manifest itself in many forms, including generalized anxiety, separation anxiety with or without school refusal, depression, a learning disability, or oppositional defiant disorder.

Aberrant play can be the first symptom of an underlying problem in a child, and close observation and evaluation should follow to ensure adequate development of the child.