Mucolytics are drugs belonging to the class of mucoactive agents. They exert their effect on the mucus layer lining the respiratory tract with the motive of enhancing its clearance. Mucus is the first line of defense for the various epithelia inside our body against harmful pathogens. Its job also entails the protection of the epithelium from the excoriating irritants found in the gastrointestinal tract. It houses an assemblage of proteins such as immunoglobulins, various glycoproteins, and even some antimicrobial enzymes like lysozyme. The cross-bridging of polymeric gel-forming mucins chiefly determines the biophysical properties of mucus. This layer is very protective against bacteria through bacterial growth inhibition and the prevention of biofilm formation. The mucus layer also works as a physical barrier against respiratory irritants and prevents fluid loss as well. Expectorated mucus is called sputum.

The amount of mucus in our body is regulated chiefly by two mechanisms, which are the mucus-secreting cells and the mucociliary escalator. Goblet cells of the mucous membranes and the submucosal glands of the respiratory, GI, and reproductive systems are responsible for the secretion of mucus, and the mucociliary escalator is responsible for the clearance of mucus towards the pharynx, where it is eventually expectorated out by the cough reflex. However, there are some conditions where this regulation breaks down.

In conditions like COPD****and****asthma,****chronic irritation of the airways leads to mucus hypersecretion. Excessive mucus production overwhelms the mucociliary clearance mechanisms, thus leading to the accumulation of this excess mucus. This leads to the formation of mucus plugs, which further decrease the clearance. The airways respond by secreting an excess of inflammatory mediators in an attempt to clear the obstruction. Unfortunately, this only worsens the condition as mucus viscosity increases, leading to further decreased clearance as well as the initiation of inflammation and fibrosis. This condition is only worsened because this static mucus is invaded by bacteria likePseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Thus, a vicious cycle initiates, which invariably ends with an acute exacerbation of the condition. Classic mucolytics like N-acetylcysteine are indicated in such conditions because they decrease mucus viscosity and increase its flowability, thereby improving its clearance.[

In conditions like cystic fibrosis, mucus secretion is impaired, and thus the airway secretions mostly include filamentous actin polymers and inflammatory-cell derived DNA. These secretions are also thick and viscous and a frequent target of bacteria. Here, another class of mucolytics is helpful that targets the DNA polymers.