Several post-simulation evaluation tools have been created to meet this need, but vary in focus. Some assess the simulation as a whole. Others focus only on the debriefing portion. A few focus specifically on the facilitator.

**OSAD**

One early tool created to evaluate the faculty debriefer is the Objective Structured Assessment of Debriefing (OSAD).

A similar development process was used to develop a pediatric-specific OSAD.

Citing concerns for the traditional, paper-based form of the OSAD, other researchers have created a modified electronic version (eOSAD).

**DASH**

An alternative to the OSAD for evaluating faculty debriefing and simulation sessions is the Debriefing Assessment for Simulation in Healthcare (DASH). This tool, first described in 2012, evaluates six elements of debriefing.

Authors of the DASH boast that it applies to simulations in a variety of domains and disciplines.

**PADI**

More recently, allied health literature introduced an alternative evaluation tool. The Peer Assessment Debriefing Instrument (PADI) adds a component of self-evaluation to the post-debriefing assessment.

Creators of the PADI suggest its benefits include the short time necessary to learn and implement the tool.

**Other Tools**

Some authors have created their own debriefing evaluation tools for their studies, but these are not in common use outside of that particular setting.

Still, others allocate a portion of more comprehensive tools for focusing on debriefing. These include the more holistic evaluation of nursing simulation facilitators, as was done with the Facilitator Competency Rubric.

Several tools seek participant evaluations of the debriefer as part of a larger assessment of the simulated learning session. These include the Simulation Design Scale, created by the National League for Nursing, the Simulation Effectiveness Tool-Modified, and the Debriefing Experience Scale.