Mucormycosis can invade different body systems. Sites of infection include the lung, central nervous system, paranasal sinuses, gastrointestinal system, and the skin. Its clinical manifestations are varied but characteristically demonstrate rapid progression. The clinical manifestations largely depend on the route of entry of the fungus and the predisposing disease.

Rhinocerebral mucormycosis is initiated with inhalation of spores into the paranasal sinuses and the invasion of blood vessels in the tissue. The infection starts with nasal congestion or discharge, though it may progress to facial numbness, blurry vision, nasal discharge, nasofrontal headache, ocular pain, fever, diplopia, and chemosis. Intranasal lesions characteristically have painless ulcerations with exudate and necrotic tissue, and usually progress rapidly over days. In an immunocompromised patient with prolonged nasal symptoms, one should maintain a low threshold to obtain a biopsy to rule out mucormycosis (often termed "invasive fungal sinusitis - IFS).

Pulmonary mucormycosis consists of the development of bilateral pneumonia, which is rapidly progressive and the result of the inhalation of infectious material.  The most common clinical features are fever, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and cough. This clinical form is seen more frequently in patients with hematological diseases. This pulmonary condition can present as bronchitis, bronchopneumonia, and even pulmonary embolism. The infection can spread to contiguous tissues, such the mediastinum and heart, though it may also lead to cavitary lesions that can mimic tuberculosis or more benign allergic fungal disease.

Cutaneous mucormycosis presents in both primary and secondary disease. In primary disease, the skin infection results from direct inoculation and in secondary form, by dissemination from other locations. The primary form often occurs in patients with burns and traumatic skin wounds, usually appears as a single and indurated area of cellulitis that progresses a necrotic lesion, other forms of manifesting are abscesses, skin swelling, and necrosis.

Gastrointestinal form occurs via the ingestion of contaminated food, though the use of contaminated herbal medicines has been linked to gastrointestinal disease development. There may be nausea, vomiting, ulceration, and thrombosis of the gastric, esophageal and intestinal mucosa, manifested by diarrhea, hematemesis, and melena. Perforation and peritonitis can result from necrotic ulcers. Also, the presence of bowel infarctions and hemorrhagic shock lead to poor prognosis. Gastrointestinal symptoms are rare in all but the most severely immunocompromised (leukemia patients, intestinal transplant patients, etc.), owing to a large amount of immune tissue in the GI tract.

Disseminated form of mucormycosis may originate from any primary sites of infection, manifestations are nonspecific, which makes diagnosis even harder, but a metastatic skin lesion is undoubtedly a sign to suspect disseminated mucormycosis and portends a dismal prognosis.