- All patients require complete blood count and liver enzymes every two weeks for six to eight weeks since starting azathioprine or mercaptopurine treatment. The testing should be followed by changes or adjustments in treatment as well.

- Monitoring 6TG level concentrations to be maintained between 230 and 400 proves to be related to sufficient bone marrow suppression and reduces the chances of liver toxicity.

- Research has found some medications to increase mercaptopurine levels in the plasma. Allopurinol and febuxostat inhibit the first-pass metabolism of 6MP via enzyme xanthine oxidase (XO), which resulted in a fivefold increase in plasma 6MP concentrations and a threefold increase in steady-state erythrocyte 6-TGN concentrations.

- Methotrexate can also increase 6MP plasma levels by forming active metabolites via XO inhibition and other mechanisms.

- In patients with IBD, vigilant monitoring of CBC counts is necessary when receiving combined therapy that includes mercaptopurine. 5-aminosalicylates cause in vitro inhibition of TPMT. Combining 6MP with mesalazine or sulfasalazine induced mild to moderate leukopenia.

- Concurrent treatment of warfarin while being treated with 6MP is known to diminish the anticoagulant effects. Also, discontinuing 6MP with an adjusted warfarin dose can lead to bleeding in a previously stable patient.

- NSAIDs such as naproxen, mefenamic acid, tolfenamic acid exhibit noncompetitive inhibition of TPMT activity in vitro and thus require monitoring while the patient receives treatment with mercaptopurine.

- Mercaptopurine therapy should be reduced by 50% of the current dose or discontinued if the patient exhibits leukopenia (WBC =< 4000 cells/mm^3) or thrombocytopenia (platelet count < 150,000/microL). If the patient continues to show persistent cytopenia with the dosage reduction, the medication should be permanently discontinued.

- If mild hepatitis (transaminitis) is present, it is reversible by lowering the dose of 6MP. If ALT and AST levels continue to remain elevated, a further dose reduction by 33 to 50% will be necessary. Liver function tests require monitoring and evaluation every two weeks. ALT and AST levels should not exceed two times the upper limit of normal. If such an event occurs, the medication should be discontinued until the liver enzyme levels normalize, at which point 6MP may be reintroduced cautiously at a lower dose.

- Macrocytosis should have close monitoring, with CBC every two weeks for one month to exclude other causes such as vitamin B12 or folate deficiencies.

- Mercaptopurine may be used during pregnancy with close monitoring. There is no known risk of teratogenicity or higher rates of pregnancy complications with the use of this medication. Concentrations of 6MP have not been detected in breast milk.