Benzathine penicillin is available as an injectable suspension that is administered intramuscularly, not intravenous, intra-arterial, or subcutaneous. The medication should be warmed to room temperature before administration to lessen the pain associated with the injection, and it should not be given near an artery or nerve. In adults, administer the injection to the upper outer quadrant of the buttocks. In children less than two years old, administer the injection to the mid-lateral muscle of the thigh, not the gluteal region, and rotate the injection site on repeat doses.

Benzathine penicillin is opaque and viscous with very low solubility. Therefore, the antimicrobial is slowly released from the injection site and hydrolyzed to penicillin G. Due to the slow absorption and the hydrolysis, the concentration of the drug in the blood remains lower but for a prolonged period of time. After a 1.2 million unit injection, adults have detectable drug concentrations for 14 days, often longer.

The antimicrobial typically is manufactured in 600,000 units/1 mL, 1.2 million units/2 mL, or 2.4 million units/4 mL syringes. The antimicrobial should be stored in a refrigerator from 36 to 46 degrees Fahrenheit (2 to 8 degrees Celsius) and never frozen. Dosing recommendations are as follows:

**Adult**

- Pharyngitis/tonsillitis, group A streptococci (1.2 million units IM x 1)

- Upper respiratory infection, group A streptococci that are mild to moderate and are susceptible to low, prolonged concentrations of benzathine penicillin (1.2 million units intramuscularly [IM] x 1)

- Secondary prevention of glomerulonephritis (prophylaxis for patients with a history of acute glomerulonephritis) (1.2 million units IM every four weeks or 600,000 units IM twice monthly)

- Secondary prevention (prophylaxis) of rheumatic fever (1.2 million units IM every 3 to 4 weeks or 600,000 units IM twice monthly)

- Syphilis: Primary, secondary, or latent less than one year (2.4 million units IM x 1, may repeat dose x 1 after one week in pregnant patients); latent greater than one year (2.4 million units IM weekly for three weeks)

- Yaws, bejel, and pinta (1.2 million units IM x 1)

**Pediatric**

- Pharyngitis/tonsillitis, group A streptococci: Acute treatment (less than 27 kg = 600,000 units IM x 1; greater than 27 kg = 1.2 million units IM x 1); Chronic carrier treatment (less than 27 kg = 600,000 units IM x 1 in combination with oral rifampin; greater than 27 kg = 1.2 million units IM x 1 in combination with oral rifampin)

- Upper respiratory infection, group A streptococci: (less than 27 kg = 300,000 – 600,000 units IM x 1; greater than 27 kg = 900,000 units IM x 1)

- Secondary prevention of rheumatic fever (less than 27 kg = 600,000 units IM every 3-4 weeks; greater than 27 kg = 1.2 million units IM every 3 to 4 weeks)

**Geriatric**

- Refer to adult dosing

**Infants and Children**

- Syphilis: Primary, secondary, and early latent less than 1 year duration (50,000 units/kg/dose IM x 1, maximum 2.4 million units/dose); late latent greater than 1 year duration (50,000 units/kg/dose IM weekly for 3 doses, maximum 2.4 million units/dose)

**Renal Impairment**

The medication is excreted by renal tubular excretion.

- Creatinine clearance 10 to 50 mL/min = decrease dose by 25%

- Creatinine clearance less than 10 mL/min = decrease dose by 50% to 80%

- Hemodialysis = give dose after dialysis

- Peritoneal dialysis = decreased dose by 50% to 80%

**Hepatic Impairment**

There are no dose adjustments for patients with hepatic impairment.

**Seizure Disorders**

Clinicians should use this drug with caution in patients with a seizure disorder, especially in patients with renal impairment, due to a potential increase in the risk of seizures.

**Pregnancy (Category B)**

Reproduction studies performed in mice, rats, and rabbits have revealed no evidence of harm to the fetus. Human experience with penicillin during pregnancy has not shown to have any adverse effects on the fetus. However, studies with pregnant women are inadequate or not well-controlled and cannot conclusively report harmful effects of penicillin medications on the fetus.

**Nursing Mothers**

Soluble penicillin G is excreted in breast milk. Clinicians should exercise caution in this patient population.