Initial treatment of the acutely painful, edematous knee in which meniscal tear is suspected should consist of the RICE principles for acute soft tissue injury (rest, ice, compression, and elevation).  Oral analgesics and NSAIDS may be prescribed to reduce pain and swelling.  Bracing or knee sleeves may be used for protection and compression, and early pain-free knee and ankle ROM exercise may help to limit the loss of motion and aid in edema control.  For simple tears confined to the outer 1/3 of the meniscus and degenerative tears, it is reasonable to perform a 4-6 week course of relative rest and physical therapy to determine if spontaneous healing and return to the desired level of function will occur. Despite conservative management, patients with persistent pain, swelling, and mechanical symptoms should be assessed for potential surgical intervention.  For tears requiring arthroscopic surgery, meniscal repair is preferred over meniscectomy if possible since the risk of accelerated osteoarthritis increases with the removal of meniscal tissue due to decreased cushioning and increased force transmission across articular cartilage surfaces.  Factors that increase the likelihood of successful meniscal repair include tears that occur in the red zone of the meniscus, tears that are shorter than 2cm, vertical longitudinal tears, and acute tears.  Rehabilitation following meniscal repair typically includes restrictions in knee flexion ROM and the weight-bearing status during the first 6 weeks postoperatively, depending on the location of the tear and type of repair. Meniscal allograft transplantation is considered a salvage procedure for symptomatic patients less than 50y/o with a meniscus-deficient compartment and otherwise stable knee.