The management of tongue carcinoma is primarily surgical, with radiation also having an important role mainly in advanced disease, poor surgical candidates, unresectable disease, and importantly, as an adjuvant to surgery in some cases. Unless there is a clear contraindication for surgery or the tumor is unresectable, surgery should be offered as primary treatment for tongue squamous cell carcinoma. The ultimate goal of treatment is complete cure while minimizing therapy sequela and preserving functionality.

In general, early-stage tongue carcinoma (T1 or T2) can be treated successfully with single-modality therapy, namely surgery or radiation. However, when long-term morbidity of treatment, cost, and other factors are considered, surgery is recommended upfront.

On the other hand, patients with advanced disease (T3 or T4) have a poor response to single-modality treatment. Two independent clinical trials found that postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation offered improved survival when compared to single-modality therapy in these patients.

Surgical interventions range from simple wide local excision and primary closure in small tumors to composite resections of the tongue/floor of mouth/mandible in advanced tumors with the need for locoregional flaps or microvascular free flap reconstruction. Regardless of the extent of surgery required, several fundamental cancer surgery principles should be followed for the best oncologic outcomes. The primary tumor resection should include at least a 1cm margin of resection when possible. Intraoperative frozen sections should be sent to pathologically confirm disease-free margins. If a significant functional deficit is anticipated, reconstruction with free vascularized tissue (free flap) should be offered when available, as this offers optimal functional outcomes after surgery in terms of swallow and speech function. The radial forearm free flap and the anterolateral thigh free flap are the two most commonly used free flaps for tongue reconstruction. The fibula free flap is also commonly used when large resections are needed, and mandibular reconstruction is necessary. Although free flaps are the mainstay of reconstructive options, locoregional pedicled flaps are a viable alternative when free flap reconstruction is contraindicated, not available, or has failed. These include the submental island flap, latissimus dorsi pedicled flap, and the pectoralis major myocutaneous flap. When compared to free flaps, these have the advantage of shorter operative times, decreased donor site morbidity, and good reliability.

Regarding the base of tongue HPV-related squamous cell carcinoma, the treatment algorithm has completely shifted during the last decades. Trans-oral robotic surgery has a role mainly in early-stage disease, while advanced tumors in this region are usually treated with primary radiation and chemotherapy, given its excellent response.

Management of the neck is essential, as recurrence or persistence of disease in the neck after primary therapy confers a poor prognosis. The tongue has a rich network of lymphatics that drain to neck levels I-III, which is the usual pattern of spread when these tumors metastasize. As stated before, the depth of invasion is a major prognostic indicator. Studies show that tongue tumors with anywhere between three and eight millimeters of the depth of invasion have up to a 40%-50% risk of occult nodal metastasis and up to 65% overall incidence of nodal metastasis.

Patients with pathologic confirmation of disease presence in the locoregional lymph nodes, most of the time, require additional treatment after surgery to achieve a cure. Usually, this consists of a combination of cisplatin-based chemotherapy and radiation. Positive surgical margins and pathologically confirmed extranodal extension of the disease are two absolute indications for adjuvant chemoradiation. Other indications for radiation therapy include advanced stage (T3 or T4) disease, close surgical margin, lymphovascular invasion, perineural invasion, and two or more positive neck lymph nodes.

Immunotherapeutic agents, specifically tyrosine kinase inhibitors and PD-1 inhibitors, are now being used more frequently in combination with cisplatin-based chemotherapy or alone, and there is ongoing clinical research regarding their potential benefits in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Patients with known distant metastatic spread of disease are not surgical candidates and are offered primary chemoradiation, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy.