**Immediate Fever**

Fever occurs immediately after surgery or within hours on postoperative days (POD) 0 or 1.

- Malignant hyperthermia: high-grade fever (greater than 40 C), occurs shortly after inhalational anesthetics or muscle relaxant (e.g., halothane or succinylcholine), may have a family history of death after anesthesia. Laboratory studies will reveal metabolic acidosis and hypercalcemia. If not readily recognized, it can cause cardiac arrest. The treatment is intravenous dantrolene, 100% oxygen, correction of acidosis, cooling blankets, and watching for myoglobinuria.

- Bacteremia: High-grade fever (greater than 40 C) occurring 30 to 40 minutes after the beginning of the procedure (e.g., Urinary tract instrumentation in the presence of infected urine). Management includes blood cultures three times and starting empiric antibiotics.

- Gas gangrene of the wound: High-grade fever (greater than 40 C) occurring after gastrointestinal (GI) surgery due to contamination with Clostridium perfringens; severe wound pain; treat with surgical debridement and antibiotics.

- Febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction: Fevers, chills, and malaise 1 to 6 hours after surgery (without hemolysis). Management: Stop transfusion (rule out hemolytic transfusion reaction) and give antipyretics (avoid aspirin in the thrombocytopenic patient).

**Acute Fever**

Fever occurs in the first week (1 to 7 POD).

- POD 1 to 3: Pyretic response to surgery occurs during the first 48 hours.

- POD 3: Unresolved atelectasis resulting in pneumonia (respiratory symptoms, Chest x-ray with infiltrates or consolidation, sputum culture, empiric antibiotics and modification according to culture result and sensitivity), or development of urinary tract infection (urine analysis and culture, treat with empiric antibiotics and modify according to culture result and sensitivity)

- POD 5: Thrombophlebitis (may be asymptomatic or symptomatic, diagnose with Doppler ultrasound of deep leg and pelvic veins and treat with heparin)

- POD 7: Pulmonary embolism (tachycardia, tachypnea, pleuritic chest pain, ECG with right heart strain pattern (a low central venous pressure goes against diagnosis), arterial blood gas with hypoxemia and hypocapnia, confirm the diagnosis with CT angiogram, and treat with heparin if recurrent pulmonary embolism while anticoagulated with therapeutic INR, Inferior vena cava filter placement is the next step

- POD 7 (5 to 10): Wound infection: Risk increases if the patient is immunocompromised (e.g., diabetic), abdominal wound, duration of surgery greater than 2 hours, or contamination during surgery. Signs include erythema, warmth, tenderness, discharge. Rule out abscess by physical exam plus ultrasound if needed. If an abscess is present, drainage and antibiotics are needed. Prevention is by careful surgical technique and prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., intravenous cefazolin at the time of induction of anesthesia as well as postoperatively if needed)

**Subacute Fever**

Fever occurs between postoperative weeks 1 and 4.

- POD 10: Deep infection (pelvic or abdominal abscess and if abdominal abscess could be sub-hepatic or sub-phrenic). A digital rectal exam to rule out the pelvic abscess and CT scan to localize intra-abdominal abscess. Treatment includes re-exploration vs. radiological guided percutaneous drainage.

- Drugs: Diagnosis of exclusion includes rash and peripheral eosinophilia

**Delayed Fever**

Fever after more than 4 weeks.

- Skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI)

- Viral infections

The above differential diagnosis is for causes that are categorized based on timing. However, there are many other causes that may have specific signs on physical exam and occur after specific surgery that are not included in the above differential.