The birth control pill is the most commonly prescribed form of contraception in the US. Approximately 25% of women aged 15-44 who currently use contraception reported using the pill as their method of choice. Oral contraceptive pills are either combined estrogen-progesterone(also called combined oral contraceptive pill- COC) or progesterone-only pill (POP). The most commonly prescribed pill is the combined hormonal pill with estrogen and progesterone. Progesterone is the hormone that prevents pregnancy, and the estrogen component controls menstrual bleeding.

- Perfect use, meaning the method is used consistently and correctly every time, is less than one woman out of 100 will become pregnant in the first year of use.

- Typical use, meaning the method may not always be used consistently or correctly, results in a failure rate of 9 women out of 100 that will become pregnant during the first year of using this method. Unfortunately, due to human error, the quoted failure rate for combined oral contraceptive pills is the typical use of 9%.

Most women take OCP’s to prevent pregnancy, but 14% use them for non-contraceptive reasons. OCP’s can be used to address other health conditions, particularly menstrual-related disorders such as menstrual pain, irregular menstruation, fibroids, endometriosis-related pain, and menstrual-related migraines.

Strong epidemiologic evidence supports a 50% reduction in the risk of endometrial cancer among women who have used combined OCs compared with those who have never used combined OCs. This effect lasts for up to 20 years. Combined OC use decreases the risk of ovarian cancer by 27%; the longer the duration of use, the greater the risk reduction. OCs have also been reported to reduce the risk of colon cancer by 18%. Some formulations even have indications for the treatment of acne and hirsutism.