For asymptomatic patients, routine screening laboratory studies are not necessary. Evaluation should be done for patients with a moderate to severe clinical course. The lab results depend on whether the patient is a carrier (HbAC) or has a disease (HbCC). But most importantly, hemoglobin C in both of the states, the homozygous (HbCC), and in the heterozygous (HbAC, HbSC) induces red cell dehydration resulting in red cells with increased mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC). A study performed on a 17-year-old male with hereditary xerocytosis-hemoglobin C trait showed that the hemoglobin C accentuates the erythrocyte dehydration of hereditary xerocytosis.

The most common method used to detect hemoglobinopathies is hemoglobin electrophoresis or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Patients who are homozygous for hemoglobin C disease mostly show HbC; HbA is absent, and HbF is slightly increased while patients who are heterozygous for hemoglobin C disease may show 30% to 40% HbC, 50% to 60% HbA, and HbA2 is slightly increased.

Peripheral smear or blood film findings: P.S. reveals the presence of hexagonal or tetragonal crystals due to decreased solubility of HbC. In addition to the presence of crystals, there are red blood cells microcytosis, irregularly contracted cells, and numerous target cells, as shown in the picture.

In the patients with the hemoglobin C trait, hemoglobin concentrations are usually within the low normal to the normal range. The life span of red cells gets decreased but despite this, the reticulocyte counts are not increased. The peripheral smear may show target cells and intracellular crystals. Likewise, the patients with Hemoglobin C disease, as mentioned earlier, show the lab findings suggestive of hemolysis: increased LDH, reticulocyte count, and direct bilirubin. The peripheral smear shows microcytosis, a large number of target cells, spherocytes, and crystallized hemoglobin.

A study showed that in a diabetic patient presenting with "HbS" or "HbC," there is a considerable false decrease in the values for glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) despite persistent hyperglycemia and this decrease is proportional to the percentage of abnormal hemoglobin.

There is a study describing the use of miniaturized paper-based microchip electrophoresis for point of care hemoglobin testing in low resource settings, which identifies hemoglobin variants easily and affordably with the sensitivity of 100% and an accuracy of 98.4%.

A large cohort study done in Brazil described the use of an automated pyrosequencing technique for large-scale confirmatory testing of hemoglobin mutation, which could also describe beta+ and beta- mutation present in sickle cell disease.

Likewise, there is a study describing the use of a new polymerase chain reaction test (LAMP assay) that can be performed directly on dried blood cards without DNA extraction and has an accuracy of 100% for detecting HbS and HbC.