Unfortunately, there is no cure available for Lafora disease. Management is only supportive, targeting seizure control and improving the patient's functional status. Given the diversity of seizure types, including generalized tonic-clonic seizures, wide-spectrum antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as levetiracetam, sodium valproate, topiramate, and benzodiazepines are usually considered.

Valproate is the treatment of choice as first-line monotherapy, with a dose range from 15 mg/kg to 60 mg/kg, depending on the clinical response. However, it should be avoided in patients with suspected mitochondrial disorders due to inhibition of cytochrome C oxidase (complex IV) leading to decreased respiratory chain activity and carnitine uptake in addition to high ammonia blood levels.

Clonazepam is effective in treating myoclonic seizures; it can be used in Lafora disease, usually as add-on therapy, at doses ranging from 3 to 16 mg/day.

Phenobarbital is another wide spectrum AED that can be used in Lafora disease. The dose ranges from 3 to 8 mg in children and 30 to 200 mg in adults. It should be used with caution when added to valproate to avoid toxicity.

Piracetam, a pyrrolidone derivative, is another effective medication for myoclonus with few adverse effects and a positive tolerability profile. It has long been used for patients with PMEs. One double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial of 20 patients with ULD showed significant reduction of myoclonic jerks and improvement in gait, particularly with doses close to 24 g/day. A linear dose-effect relationship was also established in this study.

Levetiracetam is a potent wide spectrum AED with few adverse effects. Like piracetam, it is another pyrrolidone derivative. It binds and stimulates synaptic vesicle protein 2A (SV2A), leading to inhibition of neurotransmitter release.

Efficacy of levetiracetam, particularly in the treatment of generalized seizures and myoclonus, has been demonstrated in multiple studies and case series of patients with PME. In a study involving 23 patients with ULD, clinical improvement was seen in over two-thirds of the patients on doses ranging from 1000 to 4000 mg daily.

Brivaracetam is a novel molecule with the same mechanism as levetiracetam but at least a 10-fold higher affinity for the SV2A binding site compared to levetiracetam. It was proposed as a drug with high potential efficacy for myoclonus. In an animal study done on rat models with post-cardiac arrest and anoxic brain injury seizures, low dose brivaracetam of 0.3 mg/kg was superior to 3 mg/kg of levetiracetam in controlling post-anoxic seizures. Anti-seizure activity for both AEDs started 30 minutes following intraperitoneal administration and was maintained for 150 minutes

Perampanel is a selective, noncompetitive antagonist of AMPA-type glutamate receptor that is usually used for the treatment of refractory focal onset seizures, but it is also effective for generalized epilepsy.

Two case reports document perampanel effectiveness in Lafora disease when used as first-line monotherapy or add-on. One case was a 15-year-old female with Lafora disease who was treated with 10 mg of perampanel as monotherapy. The treatment resulted in a significant and dramatic decrease in seizure frequency in addition to improvement in neurological and cognitive functioning. The second case was a 21-year-old Turkish female given perampanel at a dose of 8 to 10 mg in addition to a regimen that included clonazepam, levetiracetam, piracetam, valproate, zonisamide, a ketogenic diet, and vagal nerve stimulation (VNS). This was followed by seizure remission for more than 3 months and was associated with decreased epileptiform discharges on EEG.

Topiramate is another wide-spectrum AED, usually used for the treatment of refractory focal seizures as well as generalized seizures. It is a sulfamate-substituted monosaccharide molecule. Beneficial use topiramate for seizure treatment in patients with PMEs and Lafora disease stems mostly from case studies. Effectiveness in treating myoclonus and myoclonic seizure was demonstrated when used as add-on therapy. In one study, five out of eight patients with PME improved after adding topiramate to their AED regimen with improvement in myoclonic seizures and functional capacity. However, topiramate efficacy tended to decrease over time, and the drug was discontinued in two out of five patients because of a rapid increase in cognitive impairment and vomiting.

Zonisamide, a sulfonamide derivative, chemically distinct from any of the previously established AEDs, is indicated for the treatment of refractory partial epilepsy but also is useful for a variety of generalized epilepsies, including epileptic encephalopathies, such as Lennox-Gastaut (LGS) and West syndromes.

Some case reports and small studies have suggested that zonisamide may be effective in treating patients with PME. In long-term observation and clinical follow up of a brother and a sister with LD who had resistant, repeated attacks of severe myoclonus, tonic, and tonic-clonic seizures, the use of oral zonisamide as add-on therapy resulted in dramatic seizure control for about 12 to 14 years in both patients, not only for myoclonus but generalized tonic-clonic seizures as well.

More specifically, almost all patients with ULD who were treated with zonisamide as add-on therapy showed a dramatic reduction in myoclonus and a marked improvement in generalized tonic-clonic seizures and functional capacity, although efficacy tended to decrease over time. Doses of up to 6 mg/kg per day were used.

Lamotrigine was noted as an effective treatment for infantile and juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. The use of lamotrigine in addition to some GABA-ergic drugs (vigabatrin and tiagabine) could exacerbate myoclonus in patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. Such exacerbation was also observed in five patients with ULD, and therefore, the use of lamotrigine in PMEs can be avoided. Clinicians also advised patients to avoid using other sodium channel blockers (phenytoin, carbamazepine, and oxcarbazepine) for the same reason.

VNS appears to be effective in reducing the seizure frequency in a few cases of Lafora disease.

A ketogenic diet (low carbohydrate-high cholesterol) that is proven effective in a variety of refractory epilepsies including infantile myoclonic seizures and LGS was shown to be ineffective in treating Lafora disease patients in an Italian study of five patients but was unable to stop the disease progression.