Treatment for juvenile open-angle glaucoma aims to stop further degeneration of the optic nerve by decreasing the IOP. Imaging of the optic nerve is often necessary to assess disease progression. Frequently, the IOP in juvenile open-angle glaucoma tends to be resistant to medical therapy, and surgical treatment is often needed.

**Medical Therapy**

The first-line treatment of juvenile open-angle glaucoma is medical therapy, followed by surgery if medical therapy fails. Often medical therapy is applied as a bridge to surgical intervention. According to one study performed on 23 patients, 83% of patients with juvenile glaucoma require filtration surgery (trabeculectomy).

Medical therapy for juvenile open-angle glaucoma includes β blockers, topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, prostaglandin analogs, and α-adrenergic agonists. If no contraindications such as asthma exist, β-blockers are often the first-line therapy for juvenile open-angle glaucoma. Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are less effective than β blockers, but they are useful as additional therapy or as alternatives when β blockers are contraindicated. Prostaglandins are more effective in adult glaucoma than childhood glaucoma. The α-adrenergic agonists can be effective but have potential systemic side effects, which request close observation when used in young patients.

**Surgery**

Surgical therapy has multiple options, such as trabeculectomy, drainage implants, angle procedures (goniotomy, trabeculotomy), and cycloablative procedures.

For juvenile open-angle glaucoma, trabeculectomy is the backbone of surgical therapy, which has a good outcome. In an Indian study that included 60 eyes of 41 patients, 50 to 87% of cases have reported IOP control without medications for three years after the operation.

Glaucoma drainage implants (GDIs) are an alternative surgical option for JOAG; they include many types of implants such as the Ahmed glaucoma valve, Baerveldt implant, and Molteno implant. Glaucoma drainage implants (GDIs) are preferable in the case of conjunctival scarring that prevents trabeculectomy.

**Laser**

Laser trabeculoplasty is an alternative option to treat glaucoma. It works to lower intraocular pressure IOP. Selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT) is one of the modalities of laser trabeculoplasty, which uses a Q-switched, frequency-doubled Nd:YAG (532 nm) laser. It enhances aqueous outflow through the trabecular meshwork to decrease IOP. SLT induces less coagulative damage and structural change than older laser trabeculoplasty techniques. SLT does not typically provide the same IOP lowering effect as surgical therapy, and due to goniodysgenesis in juvenile open-angle glaucoma, it often is not as effective as other forms of primary open-angle glaucoma.