The cranial nerve examination is a key component of any neurological evaluation, but it is particularly crucial in comatose patients and brain death evaluation.

A diminished or absent pupillary light reflex has significant prognostic value and is often an indicator of increased intracranial pressure, cerebral edema, secondary brain injury, hydrocephalus, or intracranial shift.

Signs discovered during cranial nerve testing can aid in narrowing the differential diagnosis of neurologic disease and differentiate among various pathologies. For example, multiple sclerosis and neurosarcoidosis can both present with diplopia.

**Cranial Nerve I**

Head trauma, particularly anterior skull base fractures, concussion, and whiplash injuries, lead to anosmia 5% to 17% of the time.

No specific treatment has been shown to improve olfactory dysfunction's speed or odds of recovery. Recovery rates of post-traumatic anosmia range from 33% to 36%; improvement is seen predominantly within the first year following the injury.

**Cranial Nerve II**

Damage to the optic nerve leads to visual field defects or vision loss. The location of the disruption to the optic nerve determines the visual field defect. Compromise of the optic nerve anterior to the optic chiasm causes ipsilateral monocular blindness.

For example, a lesion in the right optic tract results in a loss of the left visual fields of both eyes. Damage to the inferior retrochiasmatic pathway (Meyer loop in the temporal lobe) produces a superior quadrantanopia, while injuries to the superior retrochiasmatic pathway (Baum loop in the parietal cortex) lead to an inferior quadrantanopia.

An altitudinal deficit is decreased vision in the inferior or superior visual field that does not cross the horizontal midline. This deficit is typically caused by occlusion of a branch of the retinal artery, retinal detachment, or ischemic optic neuropathy. Blind spot enlargement can be caused by papilledema and optic nerve drusen. Loss of the bilateral nasal or medial visual fields is termed a binasal hemianopia, which is rare and caused by glaucoma or retinitis pigmentosa. Glaucoma, retinitis pigmentosa, and bilateral occipital lobe infarction can also lead to loss of the peripheral visual fields. Central scotoma, or vision loss in the central visual field, is typically seen with macular disease and optic neuropathy.

Damage to the optic nerve may also attenuate the pupillary light reflex resulting in an afferent pupillary defect (APD) or a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), also known as a Marcus Gunn pupil. Optic neuropathies, such as glaucoma, optic neuritis, as seen in multiple sclerosis, and severe macular degeneration, may all cause an RAPD.

Optic neuritis can be treated with steroids. Underlying disease processes such as tubercular or cryptococcal meningitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis, or compressive tumor should be treated. Vascular causes of acute ischemic optic neuropathy are treated with platelet aggregation inhibitors; however, the effects are modest. A diagnosis of giant cell arteritis warrants immediate steroid therapy to prevent severe vision loss.

**Cranial Nerve III**

Complete oculomotor palsy involves loss of parasympathetic function and levator palpebrae superioris function.

Conservative management of acquired oculomotor palsy leads to complete resolution of symptoms in 63% of patients.

**Cranial Nerve IV**

Trochlear nerve palsy manifests as vertical binocular diplopia, a duplicate image appearing superiorly and to the side of the actual image.

Trochlear nerve palsy is usually unilateral. Frontal head trauma from boxing or motor vehicle collisions and lesions of the dorsal midbrain can cause bilateral trochlear nerve palsy.

Surgical interventions such as tucking the superior oblique tendon or inferior oblique weakening correct most cases of trochlear nerve palsy.

**Cranial Nerve V**

Common trigeminal nerve pathologies include trigeminal neuralgia, cluster headache, and lateral medullary or Wallenberg syndrome.

Trigeminal neuralgia presents as neuropathic, shock-like facial pain within the trigeminal dermatomal distribution (V2 and V3 divisions).

The presentation of cluster headaches is similar to that of trigeminal neuralgia, and the two diseases are often considered within the same differential. Cluster headaches are unilateral in the trigeminal dermatomal distribution, with nasal congestion, swelling, and lacrimation of the ipsilateral side. Prophylactic treatment of cluster headaches includes trigger avoidance and pharmacotherapy. Acute attacks are managed with oxygen supplementation and fast-acting triptans.

The lateral medullary or Wallenberg syndrome is caused by damage to the lateral medulla, commonly from a posterior circulation stroke.

**Cranial Nerve VI**

The abducens nerve is the ocular motor nerve most frequently affected by pathology. Abducens palsy results in binocular diplopia or double vision in the horizontal plane when looking at objects side by side and with distance vision. Etiologies leading to abducens palsy can be classified based on the location of the nerve. Tumors and trauma such as skull base fractures or orbital trauma can injure the abducens nerve anywhere along the path of the nerve.

In the pons, ischemic stroke, demyelinating disease, and metabolic diseases such as Wernicke encephalitis damage the abducens nucleus and fascicles. An aneurysm can damage the portion of the abducens nerve within the subarachnoid space; infections like syphilis, tuberculosis, and Lyme disease; inflammatory diseases such as neurosarcoidosis or lupus; and carcinomatous meningitis.

Abducens nerve palsy is typically self-limiting in adults, and patients can be observed. For dysfunction caused by a significant underlying disease process, treatment of the disease is warranted.

**Cranial Nerve VII**

Facial nerve palsy is iatrogenic in 70% of cases, colloquially known as Bell palsy. Trauma accounts for 10% to 23% of facial nerve palsy cases, most commonly due to fractures of the petrous portion of the temporal bone or deep facial wounds that disrupt the nerve.

Accompanying signs of facial nerve palsy are dictated by etiology and may include hemotympanum, battle sign, and nystagmus. Iatrogenic injury can occur by stretching, crushing, or lacerating the nerve during parotid gland surgery, vestibular schwannoma resection, or otologic procedures. Other etiologies include various infections such as varicella-zoster virus, acute otitis media, otitis externa, and COVID-19 with 4.5% to 7% incidence, and various neoplasms such as a parotid malignancy, vestibular schwannoma, meningioma, facial neuroma, or arachnoid cyst in another 2.2% to 5%.

While bilateral facial nerve palsy has a rare occurrence of 0.3% to 2%, it is a crucial finding as it usually indicates systemic disease. Lyme disease is the cause in 35% of these cases. Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis, and pseudobulbar palsy can also cause bilateral facial nerve palsy.

Various treatment modalities are utilized in the management of facial nerve palsy. Artificial tears, lubrication, and taping the eye closed at night prevent corneal ulceration.

Over 70% of patients with Bell palsy have complete motor recovery without treatment. Appropriate antibiotic therapy is used for cases caused by otitis media, otitis externa, or Lyme disease. Surgical intervention is indicated in cases of Bell palsy with over 90% degeneration on electroneuronography or temporal bone fractures with immediate and complete facial paralysis. Myringotomy or mastoidectomy can be undertaken in patients with suppurative otitis media or mastoiditis.

**Cranial Nerve VIII**

There are multiple etiologies of vestibulocochlear nerve dysfunction, and pathology can occur anywhere along the auditory pathway. Presenting symptoms include vertigo, nystagmus, tinnitus, and sensorineural hearing loss.

The most common mechanisms of injury are infarcts and demyelination diseases such as multiple sclerosis. Patients can present with unilateral or bilateral sensorineural loss, depending on the location of the injury. Additionally, traumatic injury to the temporal bone can present with unilateral sensorineural loss due to an internal auditory canal or bony labyrinth fracture. There can also be a concussive injury to the labyrinth. Imaging studies for such injuries are typically negative unless magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) shows an intralabyrinthine hemorrhage.

Notable congenital malformations of CN VIII can be classified as aplasia or hypoplasia. These malformations are subdivided into three subtypes: 1, 2A, and 2B. Type 1 refers to an aplastic CN VIII with a normal labyrinth. Type 2A is an aplastic or hypoplastic cochlear branch with an accompanying labyrinth malformation. Type 2B, the most common subtype, refers to an aplastic or hypoplastic cochlear branch with a normal labyrinth.

Vestibular schwannomas arise from Schwann cells. These are the most common cerebellopontine angle tumors, followed by meningioma.

Acute vestibular syndrome (AVS) is characterized by the acute onset over minutes to hours of vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and gait disturbances associated with nystagmus and head-motion intolerance over the following days to weeks. The etiology of AVS can either be peripheral, most commonly vestibular neuritis, or central, such as brainstem or cerebellar stroke. Vestibular neuritis is usually viral in origin and self-limiting, while a central stroke can have permanent effects. Therefore, it is critical to distinguish between these two etiologies to ensure proper patient care. This can be done at the bedside using the “Head-Impulse—Nystagmus—Test-of-Skew” (HINTS) exam.

The horizontal head-impulse test, which assesses the vestibulo-ocular reflex, would be normal with central etiologies and abnormal with peripheral etiologies. Nystagmus would be vertical or bidirectional with central etiologies and unidirectional with peripheral etiologies, regardless of gaze direction. A skew deviation would be present with central etiologies and absent with peripheral etiologies.

The mainstays of treatment for vestibulocochlear nerve dysfunction focus on managing the underlying cause. The Epley maneuver is recommended for benign positional vertigo, and other conservative measures, such as physiotherapy or gait training, can be used for multiple types of vestibular dysfunction.

**Cranial Nerve IX**

Etiologies of glossopharyngeal nerve palsy or dysfunction include trauma (styloid fracture), iatrogenic injury (carotid endarterectomy, laryngeal mask airway placement), Eagle syndrome, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, stroke, and tumor (tonsillar carcinoma).

Presentation of glossopharyngeal nerve palsy involves dysphagia, dysphonia, impaired taste over the posterior third of the tongue and palate, absent gag reflex, loss of carotid sinus reflex, decreased parotid gland secretions, and diminished sensation of the posterior third of the tongue, palate, and pharynx.

Glossopharyngeal neuralgia consists of episodic, unilateral sharp pain in the posterior throat, tonsils, base of the tongue, and inferior to the angle of the mandible that can last from seconds to minutes.

Treatment of glossopharyngeal neuralgia includes carbamazepine, gabapentin, and pregabalin medications as first-line treatment. Microvascular decompression is indicated in patients with refractory symptoms.

**Cranial Nerve X**

The recurrent laryngeal branch of the vagus nerve can suffer injury in head or neck surgeries such as carotid endarterectomy.

Management of dysphagia requires dietary and postural modifications. Placement of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) may be necessary for instances of severe prolonged dysphagia. Active oral exercises help strengthen swallowing musculature. Botulinum toxin type-A injections have been used to treat severe dysphagia associated with trismus.

The vagus nerve also has clinical implications as a minimally invasive treatment modality for central neurologic structures. Vagus nerve stimulation has been approved for the treatment of epilepsy and depression.

Conventional vagus nerve stimulation involves the placement of a device under the skin in the chest, with electrical wires connected to the left vagus nerve (the left is used more frequently than the right, as the right vagus nerve is more likely to have branches to the heart).

**Cranial Nerve XI**

Due to the superficial course in the posterior triangle of the neck, the spinal accessory nerve is subject to injury secondary to blunt or direct trauma. Blunt trauma can cause injury during contact sports such as football or hockey. Penetrating trauma from a gunshot wound or a deep laceration from sharp objects or weapons can also compromise the spinal accessory nerve.

Iatrogenic injuries are most common and may occur during lymph node biopsies or tumor resection within the posterior triangle of the neck, carotid or internal jugular vein surgeries, neck dissections of any complexity, or cosmetic surgery. Palsy usually stems from the mechanical stress exerted on the neck due to positioning throughout the procedure.

Neurologic causes of spinal accessory nerve palsy occur from nerve compression, such as that seen with a tumor at the jugular foramen.

The approach to managing accessory nerve injury and resulting trapezius muscle deformity is an interprofessional approach that revolves around conservative care, physical therapy, and surgical treatment. Treatment and management depend on the severity and the cause of the spinal accessory nerve injury. Immediate therapy should be considered for severe presentations, such as penetrating traumas and iatrogenic injuries.

Surgical interventions include re-anastomosis and nerve grafting. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, nerve stimulation, local or regional nerve blocking, and physical therapy with rehabilitation are non-surgical treatment options.

**Cranial Nerve XII**

The hypoglossal nerve can be damaged at the hypoglossal nucleus (nuclear), above the hypoglossal nucleus (supranuclear), or interrupted at the motor axons (infranuclear).

Upper motor neuron (supranuclear) lesions occur in the cerebral cortex, the corticobulbar tract of the internal capsule, cerebral peduncles, or the pons. Supranuclear lesions do not tend to cause atrophy but can lead to an uncoordinated tongue with slow, spastic tongue movements. Supranuclear lesions frequently result from strokes but can also be caused by pseudobulbar palsy or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Unilateral lesions portend a favorable prognosis for patients as deficits are partially compensated for by the remaining hypoglossal nerve. Bilateral lesions can be caused by radiation therapy and cause impairment of speech and swallowing as the patient cannot protrude the tongue for these necessary functions.

In obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), the decrease in muscle tone of the genioglossus muscle causes the tongue to retract and impede airflow into the trachea. The hypoglossal nerve stimulator is one possible treatment if the patient is refractory to continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), oral devices, or surgery. Mild hypoglossal nerve stimulation causes the nerve to pull the tongue forward, enabling better airflow.