Almost all diuretics act by targeting ion transport receptors present on the luminal surface in the renal tubules, except for ARAs, which act on cytosolic steroid receptors. All the diuretics are bound to albumin, and as glomerular filtration excludes macromolecules such as albumin, active secretion of diuretic agents into the lumen is a prerequisite for their action. ARAs reach the distal tubule via the blood and act on the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) in the cytoplasm of the principal cells.

Certain general principles regarding renal physiology are critical for a thorough understanding of diuretic action and its adverse effects. The following section will explain the mechanisms of action of different diuretics, starting with a brief physiological introduction of the concerned portion of the renal tubule followed by the mechanism of action of the particular diuretic.

- 
**Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors**

In the Bowman’s capsule, plasma from the renal artery passes through the three-layered glomerular ultrafiltration system and delivers an ultrafiltrate that is isotonic to that of plasma. The contiguous PT reabsorbs about 60 to 70% of the filtered load, including Na+, water along with bicarbonates (HCO3+), organic solutes (glucose and amino acids), electrolytes, and other substances. Such massive reabsorptive capacity occurs with the help of the specific transport receptors in the brush border cells, which increases the surface area of the PTs yielding a fluid, in the end, that is isotonic (300 mOsm/kg) with the plasma.

Acetazolamide, the only CAI, acts on this segment. Acetazolamide interferes non-competitively with both the luminal and cellular carbonic anhydrase enzymes resulting in impairment of Na+, HCO3+, and water reabsorption. Though acetazolamide targets the proximal portion of the renal tubule, where the majority of the Na+ ions undergo reabsorption, compensatory processes develop in the distal portions to reabsorb the increased distally delivered Na+ ions. These processes include the Na+ reabsorption mechanisms in the loop of Henle, the distal convoluted tubule (DCT), the activation of tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF), and in amiloride-sensitive distal nephron (ASDN) through ENaCs. Increased HCO3+ leads to alkaline diuresis, causing decreased serum HCO3+ levels which further undermines the substrate availability for carbonic anhydrase mediated Na+ reabsorption in the PTs resulting in decreased efficiency of acetazolamide.

Acetazolamide acts on carbonic anhydrase, causing loss of HCO3+ ions in the urine leading to metabolic acidosis. The physiological response of the body to compensate for this loss of HCO3+ ions is by decreasing the levels of CO2, in other words, by causing respiratory alkalosis; this takes place by hyperventilation, which leads to increased expiration of CO2, leading to higher partial pressures of O2 in the arterial blood. As high altitude is a low O2 environment, the action of acetazolamide decreases the incidence of tissue hypoxia in high altitudes. Thus it is the drug of choice in altitude sickness.

- 
**Loop Diuretics**

The cortical proximal convoluted tubule descends into the outer medulla to continue as the thin descending limb of the loop of Henle, forms a hairpin loop in the inner medulla, and ascends back as thin and thick portions of the ascending limb of the loop and reaches back to the cortex. This structural arrangement is critical for the urinary concentrating ability of the kidney achieved by the countercurrent multiplier system of the loop of Henle. Electroneutral Na+-K+-2Cl- co-transporter 2 (NKCC2) present in the apical surface of thick ascending limb (TAL) reabsorbs 25 - 30% of the filtered Na+ into the cells. The driving force for this action is the favorable low Na+ concentration in the tubular cells achieved by the Na+-K+-ATPase antiporter pump present in the basolateral membrane. This channel pumps 3 Na+ out of the cell (into the interstitium) for every 2 K+ that comes into the cell. Excess chloride from the cells is transported via the chloride-specific channels (ClC-Ka and ClC-Kb) and the basolateral side, which requires Barttin beta-subunits for their action. Renal outer medullary K+ (ROMK) channel present in the luminal membrane, in turn, secretes and recycles back the K+ from the cell into the lumen with the help of ATP. Collectively, this not only results in creating a hyperosmolar medullary interstitial environment but also a luminal positive charge that repels luminal cations Na+, Ca2+, and Mg2+ via the paracellular pathway into the interstitium. Of note, TAL, devoid of aquaporins, is impermeable to water, and reabsorption of only the tubular solutes leads to dilution resulting in a hypotonic fluid inside the lumen (thus aka diluting segment). The thin descending segment of the loop is permeable to water, and the hyperosmolarity in the medulla draws the water out of this segment through the aquaporin-1 channels resulting in a hypertonic tubular fluid. As this tubular fluid flows continuously in the loop, repeated actions in thick and thin limbs create an osmolar gradient in the length of the medulla with concentrations in the inner medulla that can reach up to 1200 mOsm/kg of H2O.

Loop diuretics act principally by blocking the electroneutral NKCC2 (isoform in the kidneys) channels located on the luminal (apical) membrane of the TAL. Every loop diuretic has a distinct chemical structure, but all are anions that assist in blocking the chloride-binding site of the translocation pocket of the NKCC2 transmembrane receptor.

Acute tolerance to loop diuretics occurs within sometime after dosing and can cause a ‘braking phenomenon,’ which is rebound retention of Na+ due to increased reabsorption from the distal tubules, while chronic tolerance can occur due to distal tubular structural adaptation by the kidneys to increase Na+ retention. Acute tolerance can be overcome by choosing the correct dosage, dosing frequency, the timing of diet, and dietary salt restriction. Chronic tolerance in HF may cause diuretic resistance leading to refractory HF, and this can sometimes be overcome by increasing the dose of loop diuretics, co-administering thiazide-like diuretics along with loop diuretics to perform a sequential nephron blockade and/or dopamine can be administered to improve renal perfusion. Also, the combination of acetazolamide and loop diuretics has demonstrated effectiveness in diuretic resistance as acetazolamide can overcome the proximal tubular Na+ reabsorption.

Mutation of NKCC2 channels causes Type I Bartter’s syndrome, which is usually present at birth and characterized by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and nephrocalcinosis.

- 
**Thiazide Diuretics**

The distal convoluted tubule (DCT) starts at the macula densa and ends at the collecting duct, and 5 to 10% of the filtered Na+ load is reabsorbed here via the NaCl co-transporter (NCC). NCC channels can be activated by aldosterone, insulin, vasopressin, and angiotensin II, leading to increased NaCl reabsorption. NCC is an electroneutral Na+ and Cl- symporter, expressed throughout the DCT, and like NKCC2, derives its energy from low cellular Na+ achieved by basolateral Na+-K+-ATPase pump. As NCC channels are the predominant mechanism for Na+ reabsorption in DCT, this segment is endowed with abundant mitochondria to supply ATP for the pump. Reabsorbed Na+ exits the cell via the basolateral Na+-K+ pump into the interstitium, while Cl- is transported to the interstitium via the basolateral ClC-Kb and K+-Cl- co-transporter4 (KCC4). Tubular K+ secretion occurs through both ROMK and “maxi”-K+ channels in high-flow conditions and only through ROMK in low-flow conditions. In contrast to TAL, 10% of both Ca2+ and Mg2+ reabsorption occurs only via active transport via transient receptor potential (TRP) channel subfamilies. The early portion of DCT (with only NCC channels) has a zero potential, while the late DCT has a luminal negative voltage due to the presence of electrogenic ENaC channels here. Due to the absence of aquaporins, it is considered the terminal diluting segment of the nephron and dilutes the urine further before it reaches the next segment. Thiazide diuretics and ENaC inhibitors act on this segment.

Thiazide diuretics are superior to any other diuretic agent for hypertension treatment and subdivide into two subcategories, i.e., thiazide-type and thiazide-like diuretics. Thiazide-like diuretics are so-called because they lack the benzothiadiazine backbone (thus the chemical properties associated with it), which is characteristic of Thiazide-type agents. Among the thiazides, thiazide-like drugs are exceptional and better than thiazide-type diuretics in handling high BP with the least adverse effects such as metabolic or electrolyte disturbances.

In the DCTs, the most abundant Na+ reabsorption occurs through the NCC channels, which are the lone targets of thiazide diuretics. Thiazides exert their action by competitively binding to the chloride binding site of the NCC’s transmembrane domain and inhibiting the Na+ reabsorption. The important role of NCC channels is well-established as in patients with loss-of-mutation of this channel causes Gitelman syndrome manifesting with hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, hypocalciuria, and lower systemic BP. Gordon’s syndrome is the inverse of Gitelman’s phenotype in that they cause gain-of-function mutation of NCC leading to salt retention and is treatable with thiazides.

TGF mechanism is not inhibited by thiazides (in contrast with loop agents) as the anatomical positioning of DCTs is after the macula densa. Increased renin secretion by thiazides is mediated only through volume depletion rather than low-salt delivery to the macula densa, as in loop diuretics.

Low-dose thiazide-like agents are considered the best antihypertensive agent as it lowers BP on chronic use irrespective of volume depletion.

- 
**Potassium-sparing Diuretics**

Connecting tubules are short segments of renal tubules connecting the DCT with the collecting duct. Collecting duct forms the concluding segment of the nephron and receives only about 10% of the glomerular filtrate, and the Na+ reabsorptive capacity of this segment varies significantly from 1 to 5%.

Apart from these structural segments, there is a functional segment of the distal nephron comprised of late DCT, connecting tubules, and collecting ducts (both cortical and medullary) are referred to as the aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron (ASDN). The principal cells are one of the major epithelial cell types located in ASDN and identify with the cytoplasmic MR for aldosterone and luminal membrane ENaC receptors. ENaC receptors expressed in ASDN are responsible for the final fine-tuning of the tubular fluid and accounts for the reabsorption of about 3% of the filtered Na+ load. The energy required for the function of ENaC derives from the electrochemical gradient created by the basolateral Na+-K+-ATPase pump. Increased reabsorption of Na+ through electrogenic ENaC creates a more negative luminal potential, paving the way for the cells to secrete K+ through the luminal ROMK channels, which express specifically in ENaC positive cells.

As the name suggests, PSD overcomes the increased loss of K+ ions in the urine, thereby preventing hypokalemia, a predominant side effect of other diuretics. ENaC inhibitors and ARAs, two subcategories belonging to this class, are structurally different, and they target different types of receptors. ENaC inhibitors are pteridine analogs and are secreted in the PTs to reach the tubular lumen to bind to ENaC receptors located in the principal cells of ASDN, while ARAs are synthetic steroid analogs and bind to the cytoplasmic MR. Notwithstanding these differences, K+ retaining ability of both the subtypes of this class at the end is by their action on ENaC receptors, while the ENaC inhibitors achieve this by acting directly to suppress these receptors, ARAs act indirectly by suppressing the aldosterone-induced proteins, which increase production, redistribution (from the cytosol to membrane) and activation of ENaC receptors.

These drugs account for the inhibition of only 3% of the filtered Na+ load and are thus not very potent diuretics. ENaC inhibitors, amiloride, and triamterene are primarily used in situations to correct hypokalemia induced by other diuretics without mineralocorticoid excess. They are also used to treat hypomagnesemia that can occur with diuretics, antibiotics, chemotherapeutic drugs, and immunosuppressants.

- 
**Osmotic Diuretics**

As opposed to other agents, osmotic diuretics do not interfere with electrolyte reabsorptive mechanisms, and their main diuretic action is mediated through increasing osmolarity of the tubular fluid in PT and TAL of the loop of Henle. Mannitol is freely filtered nonmetabolized sugar, which increases the osmolality of both plasma and renal tubular fluid, causing osmotic diuresis. Mannitol raises the serum osmolality and since it does not cross the blood-brain barrier causes a positive blood-cerebrospinal fluid osmotic-gradient resulting in brain dehydration (without affecting the brain blood flow), the effect required for reducing the intracranial pressure. Mannitol is poorly reabsorbed and causes a wash-out of medullary solute gradient inhibiting the countercurrent urinary concentration function, thus drawing water along with it to the collecting ducts. This osmotic effect is similar to that of excess tubular glucose due to diabetes mellitus leading to polyuria.

- 
**Miscellaneous Diuretics**

Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors are novel oral anti-diabetic medications that inhibit the low affinity, high capacity SGLT2 receptors in the PT. SGLT2 receptors are involved in the reabsorption of 90% of filtered glucose along with Na+ ions from the renal tubules and become overexpressed in Type-2 diabetes mellitus. By blocking these receptors, SGLT2 inhibitors increase glucose excretion in the urine, thereby increasing the tubular osmolarity, which in turn causes osmotic diuresis. These agents ending with the suffix –gliflozins can thus cause diuresis, natriuresis (due to associated Na+ loss) and reduce extracellular fluid volume. The diuretic action of these agents is only transient due to the development of compensatory adaptive mechanisms to maintain fluid volume by the kidneys.

ACEIs and ARBs can cause natriuresis and diuresis primarily by blocking the production of the downstream molecules of the RAAS pathway, angiotensin II and aldosterone, which are involved in renal conservation of water and salt.

Conivaptan and tolvaptan are not classified under diuretics but are called aquaretics due to their effects in increasing only the water excretion without any saluretic action of a diuretic. Conivaptan (IV route only) acts nonselectively on both V1A & V2 vasopressin receptors, whereas tolvaptan (oral agent) is a selective antagonist of V2 vasopressin receptors. Arginine vasopressin agonist action on its receptor leads to increased expression of luminal aquaporin-2 channels (thus promoting water reabsorption), whereas its antagonism by aquaretics leads to enhanced aquaresis. Aquaretics, with their electrolyte-sparing effect, are currently indicated for use only in hyponatremia.