Compression, stretch, or traumatic disruption of the nerve may result in median nerve palsies. As noted, the key to providing appropriate care to patients with median nerve palsy is accurately identifying the source of nerve dysfunction through a careful physical examination and when needed, confirming injury with advanced diagnostic techniques. Penetrating injuries to the upper arm can result in a median nerve palsy. Injuries to the median nerve at this location often result in a vascular injury given the nerve’s proximity to the brachial artery. Such an injury to the brachial artery will most often result in an under perfused extremity, constituting a vascular emergency. There have also been case reports of damage to the median nerve in the upper extremity after a brachial angiography.

Compression of the median nerve can occur at multiple sites in and around the elbow. Median nerve impingement may occur at the ligament of Struthers and supracondylar process of the medial epicondyle, or slightly more distal at the bicipital aponeurosis as well as between the heads of pronator teres.

Penetrating injuries between the elbow and wrist may result in laceration or injury to the median nerve or the anterior interosseous nerve (AIN) and the palmar cutaneous branches of the median nerve.

Most commonly, palsies of the median nerve are caused by compression at the carpal tunnel. Known as carpal tunnel syndrome, symptoms are often alleviated by conservative measures but have a high treatment success rate when surgical intervention is required.