There is no cure for Alzheimer disease. Only symptomatic treatment is available.

Two categories of drugs are approved for treatment of Alzheimer disease: cholinesterase inhibitors and partial N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists.

**Cholinesterase Inhibitors**

Cholinesterase inhibitors act by increasing the level of acetylcholine; a chemical used by nerve cells to communicate with each other and is important for learning, memory and cognitive functions. Of this category, 3 drugs: donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine are FDA-approved for treatment of Alzheimer disease.

Donepezil can be used in all stages of Alzheimer disease. Galantamine and rivastigmine are approved for treatment in mild to moderate Alzheimer disease only. Donepezil and galantamine are rapid, reversible inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase. Rivastigmine is a slow, reversible inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase. Donepezil is usually preferred of all because of once-daily dosing. Galantamine is available as a twice daily tablet or as a once-daily extended-release capsule. It cannot be used in end-stage renal disease or severe liver dysfunction. Rivastigmine is available in an oral and transdermal formulation. Most common side effects of cholinesterase inhibitors are gastrointestinal-like nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Sleep disturbances are more common with donepezil. Due to increased vagal tone, bradycardia, cardiac conduction defects, and syncope can occur, and these medications are contraindicated in patients with severe cardiac conduction abnormalities.

**Partial N-Methyl D-Aspartate (NMDA)****Memantine**

Partial N-Methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist memantine blocks NMDA receptors and slows intracellular calcium accumulation. It is approved by FDA for treating moderate to severe Alzheimer disease. Dizziness, body aches, headache, and constipation are common side effects. It can be taken in combination with cholinesterase inhibitors.

It is also important to treat anxiety, depression, and psychosis, which is often found in mid to late stages of Alzheimer disease.

Environmental and behavioral approaches are beneficial especially in managing behavioral problems. Simple approaches such as maintaining a familiar environment, monitoring personal comfort, providing security object, redirecting attention, and avoiding confrontation can be very helpful in managing behavioral issues.

The expected benefits of treatment are modest. Treatment should be stopped or modified if no significant benefits or if intolerable side effects.

Regular aerobic exercise has been shown to slow the progression of Alzheimer disease.