Both operative and non-operative care have been described and should be considered case-by-case. Preferences for either option will depend on individual factors, including expectations, time frame since the injury, level of symptoms, functional demands, and response to treatment to date.

In the typical younger active patient, there needs to be a recognition that we do not know enough about this condition to understand how likely a trial of non-operative treatment will be successful. Time, analgesia, and physical therapy may treat a proportion of patients. However, operative intervention is an option to improve the glenoid articular surface and labral injury. It becomes especially relevant if patients do not improve with a trial of non-operative management or have too much pain to engage with that adequately.

It is known that there is an increase in incidental findings on the imaging of older patients, and clinicians should be more cautious of making this diagnosis in such patients; cartilage and labral degeneration are common with increasing age, and even if there is a traumatic event at the onset the emphasis would be a non-invasive approach with analgesia and physiotherapy - controlling pain and optimizing function.

An established arthroscopic approach will include the treatment of the labral and chondral pathology. The labral surgery may be a debridement of any unstable labral fibers, though any substantive partial tear might be suitable for stabilization. The chondral defect debridement removes loose chondral material and may involve the microfracture of any exposed glenoid bone. The definitive procedure will often depend on the size of the chondral defect encountered or, indeed, the combination of labral and chondral injury. Sometimes a full-thickness glenoid cartilage defect may be debrided, and the labrum advanced over it to cover the defect. If the defect is too large, only the articular surface is debrided, and the labrum is left in situ.