The side effects of methimazole are mostly dose-related, like (most commonly) hives and itching, which improves with anti-histaminic medications or by discontinuing the drug.

Serious adverse effects:

Agranulocytosis

- The cut-off criterion for it is an absolute granulocyte count of less than 500 per mL.

- It most frequently occurs in the first three months of starting therapy but can occur even after a year or more of exposure or during repeated exposures when treating a relapse.

- Regular monitoring of granulocyte count is considered useless by most experts.

- Fever and sore throat are the most common presenting features of agranulocytosis. Therefore, all patients should get verbal and written instruction regarding the importance of getting an urgent white cell count if these symptoms arise for confirming the absence of this complication for continued antithyroid drug therapy.

- Stop methimazole if the count is less than 1000 per ml. Treat fever or any apparent infections with intravenous antibiotics.

- IV granulocyte colony-stimulating factor is known to reduce the length of hospitalization and recovery time.

- Propylthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole have cross-reactivity for agranulocytosis, so avoid using the former in such patients.

Hepatotoxicity

- The hepatic toxicity of methimazole is more of a cholestatic process than allergic hepatitis seen in propylthiouracil and recovers slowly after discontinuing the drug.

Teratogenicity

- Methimazole can cross the placental membrane readily due to its insignificant protein binding. During the organogenesis phase, it causes immense fetal adverse effects, especially when administered in the first trimester. Possible congenital disabilities seen in infants born to mothers who received methimazole during pregnancy include goiter, cretinism, aplasia cutis, umbilical abnormalities, facial dysmorphism, esophageal atresia, craniofacial defects, and choanal atresia.

- Propylthiouracil is the preferred antithyroid drug during pregnancy, especially for the first trimester, since the incidence of congenital anomalies is much less than methimazole.

Hypothyroidism

- Methimazole can cause hypothyroidism.

Drug Interactions

- The anti-vitamin-K activity of methimazole might increase the activity of oral anticoagulants.

- Hyperthyroidism can increase the clearance of beta-blockers. Therefore, dose reduction of beta-blockers might be required when a patient with hyperthyroidism reaches a euthyroid state.

- Dose reduction of digoxin might be required when a patient with hyperthyroidism reaches a euthyroid state.

- Theophylline level increases when hyperthyroid patients on a stable theophylline regimen become euthyroid; a reduced dose of theophylline may be needed.