The hypothalamus plays many roles in maintaining homeostasis. However, its role in the limbic system receives less attention. Connections between the hypothalamus, nucleus accumbens, ventral tegmental area, hippocampus, and amygdala have been established. The neural interface between these structures is essential for behaviors such as food-seeking and escape and fear from predators. This interface has been described as the “limbic-motor interface,” it is a model for the initiation of actions by limbic forebrain structures and helps explain how the “emotive brain” and “cognitive brain” operate together to initiate a response.

The olfactory bulbs are involved in the sense of smell. They transfer olfactory information to the amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, and hippocampus for processing.

The hippocampus is an allocortical structure that is important for the consolidation of information, including short-term, long-term, and spatial memory.

The fornix is the major output tract of the hippocampus. Its exact function is not clear, but lesions along the fornix have been shown to cause problems with recall memory.

The amygdala is a subcortical structure of the limbic system, located in the medial temporal lobe, whose role involves processing emotional responses- specifically fear, anxiety, and aggression. Additionally, the amygdala further processes memory and decision-making.

The cingulate gyrus is a cortical structure that lies immediately above the corpus callosum. Its major afferents are from the thalamus and neocortex. The cingulate gyrus, like most of the limbic system, is involved in emotion formation, learning, and memory.

The entorhinal cortex is located in the medial temporal lobe and is the main gateway between the hippocampus and neocortex. The EC-hippocampus system is an essential part of the limbic system responsible for declarative memories, spatial memories, memory formation, and memory consolidation.