The underlying etiology of MEBT is inadequate pressure equalization between the middle ear space and the external environment. As per Boyle’s law, an increase in ambient pressure results in a proportional decrease in the gas volume in air-containing body spaces. This increase in ambient pressure can occur when an individual moves down in a column of air (passenger in an aircraft, hyperbaric chamber), a column of water (diver), or due to blunt force trauma or blast injury to the EAC. As ambient pressure (atmospheric or hydrostatic) increases external to the body, it causes pressure to rise in the EAC, while the gas volume in the middle ear space decreases, creating a vacuum. In order to compensate for this decrease in gas volume, equalization of the middle ear space pressure is required. When the middle ear space is not filled sufficiently with air from the nasopharynx, MEBT occurs. As the largest gas volume changes underwater occur near the surface, restricting diving to shallow depths does not prevent MEBT.

An individual may fail to equalize their middle ear space due to unforeseen requirement in the case of trauma, or improper technique and/or inability of the ET to open during activities involving increased ambient pressure. MEBT can occur at depths as shallow as 4 feet (1.2 meters) of seawater (fsw), and it only takes a pressure equivalent of 10 fsw (4.4 psi) to close the ET completely. This explains why it is one of the most common disorders observed in patients participating in these activities. Once complete closure of the ET occurs, it seldom reopens with the usual equalization techniques such as the Valsalva maneuver. At this point, decreasing the ambient pressure is required to reopen the ET. It is important to note that decreasing ambient pressure does not guarantee immediate reopening of the ET, and may not be feasible depending on the activity that caused the ETD. Divers may decrease their depth in the water by swimming toward the surface; hyperbaric chamber operators may decrease the depth of treatment by increasing the chamber exhaust until such time as the patient can clear their middle ear space. Unfortunately, pilots cannot necessarily stop landing the commercial pressurized aircraft and increase altitude when an occupant complains of ETD or MEBT.