Pepsin is an endopeptidase that breaks down dietary proteins reaching the stomach into amino acids. It functions by digesting peptide bonds, the predominant chemical bonds found in proteins. In response to various stimuli, small basophilic cells in the deeper layers of gastric glands, known as Chief cells, produce pepsinogen. Notably, acetylcholine, gastrin, and low pH directly stimulate chief cells to secrete pepsinogen. Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter released from vagal parasympathetic nerve terminals in the "cephalic phase" of food digestion. Besides enhancing chief cell activity, it also stimulates parietal cells to produce hydrochloric acid (HCl) via their proton pumps. The low pH imposed by HCl breaks down pepsinogen into its active form, pepsin. Gastrin is another gastrointestinal hormone released by G cells in the stomach antrum and the duodenum. G cells secrete gastrin in response to many stimuli, including stomach distension, amino acids and peptides, high pH, and vagal stimulation. Similar to acetylcholine, gastrin also activates parietal cells to secrete hydrochloric acid (HCL) on top of its chief cell stimulatory effects. It does so both directly, and indirectly, through the action of histamine released by enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells. Histamine is, in fact, the most potent activator of parietal cells. Somatostatin, on the other hand, is an inhibitory gastrointestinal hormone released by D cells in the duodenum and stomach antrum. It inhibits pepsinogen release from chief cells, thereby opposing the effects of gastrin, HCl, and acetylcholine.