The diagnosis of EPP needs to be considered in any patient who presents with acute and non-blistering photosensitivity. The proper diagnosis provides an explanation for years of unexplained pain and impaired quality of life. The specific screening test is measuring the total blood protoporphyrin levels followed by fractionation. A 5 to 50 times higher than the normal range of protoporphyrins confirms the diagnosis of EPP. The normal total protoporphyrin level in erythrocytes is 80 mcg/dL, but in a patient with EPP, it is elevated up to 300 to 8000 mcg/dL. There is an increased percentage of erythrocyte metal-free protoporphyrin rather than zinc protoporphyrin. In patients with EPP, the urinary porphyrin levels are normal, but with liver complications, i.e., hepatopathy develops. To avoid diagnostic delay, plasma porphyrins should be measured at the same time with erythrocyte protoporphyrin.

Molecular and genetic testing is more important in the case of EPP than other porphyrias because of the familial mutation identification and genetic heterogenicity. Other investigations include liver function testing at the time of diagnosis and then monitor at the interval of 6-12 months. Complete blood count for iron deficiency anemia, vitamin D level, ultrasonography of abdomen, or other imaging in cases of suspected cholelithiasis should also be done. Osteoporosis or osteopenia due to vitamin D deficiency may be revealed by bone mineral density testing. A tissue biopsy (skin and bone-marrow) is rarely indicated except for a liver biopsy in order to exclude other causes of chronic liver disease.