**Epidemiology**

The prevalence of potentially inappropriate medication use in the geriatric population varies widely depending on geographical, institutional, cultural, and idiosyncratic factors.

The most important predictor for PIM use is polypharmacy, which is present in up to 91% of long-term care facilities patients. Other factors, such as female sex and comorbidity, are associated with PIM risks.

**Aging, Pharmacokinetics, and Pharmacodynamics**

The epidemiological transition has led to an aging population, with a significant increase in chronic conditions and a need for geriatric care. Older adults are at increased risk for adverse drug effects due to comorbidities and changes in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics associated with aging.

The main age-related changes in pharmacokinetics are a decrease in first-pass metabolism, variations in the volume of distribution due to sarcopenia, and progressive renal function decline. These and other disease-related changes make drug responses challenging to predict. These factors vary from patient to patient and are not linearly related to age or disease progression. Therefore, drug administration should be individualized, considering goals, indications, and expectations.

**Polypharmacy**

Polypharmacy is classically defined as the use of 5 or more medications by a single patient in a chronic manner. However, utilizing a numerical cutoff does not account for many factors involving this concept, and thus qualitative definitions should be considered. Polypharmacy includes using multiple inappropriate, unwarranted, and harmful medications.

Medication appropriateness encompasses adequacy, cost-effectiveness, the patient's preferences, comorbidities, cognitive states, and treatment goals. Patients with multiple comorbidities, attending physicians, and residing in assisted-living facilities are at a higher risk of suffering from polypharmacy.

**The Prescribing Cascade**

The prescribing cascade is a term coined in the late 20th Century by Rochon and Gurwitz; it entails the utilization of one or more drugs to prevent or treat the side effects caused by another medication. For instance, when prescribing a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), physicians often add a proton-pump inhibitor to prevent gastrointestinal bleeding; or when using opioids to treat pain, a laxative is given to treat opioid-induced constipation. The prescribing cascade should be avoided when possible, considering the risks and benefits of adding multiple medications to a patient's pill burden.

Some consequences of polypharmacy and the prescribing cascade are provoking drug-drug interactions, potentiation of adverse effects, frailty, geriatric syndromes, cost burden, and negative outcomes.

**Inappropriate Prescriptions**

The spectrum of inadequate drug prescriptions ranges from misprescribing to underprescribing and overprescribing. Misprescription occurs when the risk of adverse effects of medication significantly outweighs its clinical benefits, including incorrect dosing or drug combinations. Underprescription is the omission of an indicated drug. Overprescription is the introduction of a drug not indicated for treating a condition.

**Awareness and Prevention**

The relevance of the AGS Beers Criteria® relies on professional awareness. Many approaches have been described to reduce the use of PIM, to reach the goal of informed, safer prescribing practices. Explicit and implicit criteria should be utilized to assess patients holistically.

The AGS Beers Criteria® names potentially, not definitively, inappropriate medications and should be applied with a comprehensive understanding of each patient's clinical scenario and the medication in question.

A comprehensive geriatric assessment should be performed when possible, evaluating the individual's functional, cognitive, social, and health status. In addition, automatized warnings and reviews could be implemented in digital health records to address potential mistakes.

Comprehensive medication monitoring and pharmacovigilance are innovative strategies that prevent adverse drug effects. Implementing these systems, which physician assistants, students, and other healthcare professionals can track at discharge and in the ambulatory setting, leads to further awareness among attending physicians.