**1. Creation of a complete set of policies and procedures specific to your simulation center:**

We recommend that a simulation program assigns one or two “champions” to review the accreditation requirements and create the initial drafts of all required and recommended policies and procedures applicable to their simulation center.  If not pre-existing, creating a simulation-specific steering committee should merit consideration, which includes representation from the simulation center, facilitators, learners, administration, and stakeholders.  Such a steering committee would not only oversee the activities and operations of the simulation center but would also review all newly created policies and procedures for accuracy and completeness.  Such a steering committee may also serve as the integral “link” of a larger institution’s multiple levels of administrative oversight of a given simulation center.

Many organizations already adhere to a set of policies and procedures (P&Ps) and have a pre-existing mission statement applicable to their overarching institution(s).  Aligning those documents with document requirements for SSH accreditation may be difficult, as they must be complementary and non-contradictory to any organizational P&P’s.  It is often necessary to have policies and procedures specific to the simulation center only.  A simulation center steering committee is again useful in reviewing such documents and submitting them to the simulation center’s governing organization, human resources, specific stakeholders, etc.  Since this may involve multiple approving bodies, this can become time-consuming and tedious.  Such documents may also require legal and/or risk management involvement before final approval. Adequate time, well before SSH accreditation application, should be allotted to this important task.

**2. Preparation of the simulation Lab:**

Sufficient time should be allowed to prepare the laboratory to meet accreditation standards, including labeling all medical equipment and medications as “for simulation use only.”  Organization and inventorying of all equipment, moulage supplies, repair tools, etc., should be demonstrated.  Although a free-standing simulation center, for example, may feel “immune” to potential confusion of “live” medications with simulation medications, etc., this has been shown not always to be the case. Consideration of signage instructing all exiting learners to check their clothing and bags for any supplies/simulation medications/medical adjuncts should be made, as well as a “drop-off” box should such items be discovered.

Prominent display of the simulation center’s Mission and Vision statement is part of the accrediting team’s evaluation. The simulation center should attend to all safety requirements of their particular building/site, such as assuring that hallways and exits are unobstructed, building safety/entry policies and precautions have been taken, site security established, etc.

**3. Consistency of message from all administrators and stakeholders:**

The accreditation team will interview a broad spectrum of simulation center members, learners, and stakeholders.  In many centers, there are several levels of administrative oversight of a simulation center.  There must be consistency in expression, by all of these individuals, of the overarching mission of the simulation center, the planned future for the said center, and a well-prepared plan of financial sustainability of the center and its future potential growth.  Clear demonstration of administrative support for the simulation center and its integral role in medical education now and in the future should be clear.

**4. Advice and preparation of learners to be interviewed:**

Learners should not receive any pre-prepared answers to potential questions or inquiries from the accreditors. They should be instructed to be honest and forthcoming with the interviewing parties. Learners should understand that their answers are confidential and private. Learners can be advised as to areas in which the accreditors might be interested, such as perceived benefits of simulation education, maintenance of a psychologically safe environment during simulation activities, qualifications of simulation personnel and facilitators, and areas of potential improvement in the simulation education experience.  Such knowledge allows learners to better reflect on these areas of their simulation experiences and better articulate those experiences, and their recommendations, to their interviewers.

**5. Documentation of staff meetings, modes of personnel communication, and team planning**

The simulation center leadership should document the team dynamic in the simulation center and how the team communicates (e.g., emails, huddles, staff meetings, bulletins, etc.). Techniques used to promote staff satisfaction, well-being, and comradery should be demonstrable and well documented.  All staff meetings should have recorded minutes. If action plans have been created during staff meetings, staff should be prepared to discuss how these action plans have been enacted/addressed and what specific steps were implemented to achieve specifically identified goals.

**6. Clear establishment of policies and procedures for learner/staff/facilitator complaints and/or potential breach of psychological safety:**

Accreditors are consistently vigilant in assuring that all complaints, at all levels, are adequately and professionally addressed.  The simulation center should have clear guidelines of “escalating” avenues of addressing complaints dependent on either their lack of resolution at a first-line level or the seriousness of the complaint or issue. These guidelines should include specific departmental resources (such as human resources, graduate medical education office, institutional legal team, etc.) depending on the nature and seriousness of any given grievance.

Similarly, the preparation of resources for learners psychologically stressed during simulation activities should exist and be well documented. Not only should there be adequate and specific resources for all learners felt to be unduly stressed or affected by a simulation event, but said learners, before all activities, should know such resources are available to them.  Stressed learners are often managed effectively and adequately by skilled facilitators in private debriefings, for example, but more formal resources such as mental health facilities/workers should be established and available for more serious learner issues.