Hypothalamic hamartoma frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. Patients may exhibit rare symptoms of gelastic seizures and precocious puberty associated with neuropsychological and psychiatric symptoms. The etiology is usually suspected, but it is difficult to identify without proper imaging studies. While the pediatrician is almost always involved in the care of patients with a hypothalamic hamartoma, it is essential to obtain an evaluation with an interprofessional team of specialists that include a neurosurgeon, neurologist, and pediatric endocrinologist. Nurses also compose a vital member of the interprofessional group, as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education to the patient and his family. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection, seizures, and nausea, pharmacists will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, antiepileptic drugs, and appropriate antibiotics. Neuroradiologists also portray a vital role in determining the etiology. It is imperative to provide a proper history to the neuroradiologist so that the particular diagnostic images may be ordered.

When the patient is to be discharged home, consultation should be made with a social worker and home health nurses who can monitor the patient for seizures. Social workers can make referrals for equipment and trauma-prevention modalities as needed. Essential characteristics for obtaining the best outcomes are teamwork, shared decision-making, and efficient communication between the different health professionals. The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning, evaluation, and management of patients with hypothalamic hamartomas.