As the Na+-K+ ATPase is essential for maintaining various cellular functions, its inhibition could result in diverse pathologic states. Studies show that patients with heart failure have a 40% lower concentration of total Na, K-ATPase.

Another significant clinical application includes the effect of beta-adrenergic agonists in increasing the number of Na+/K+ ATPase channels; this is because beta-adrenergic agonists can enhance the gene expression of the Na+-K+-ATPase pump, which ultimately results in an increased quantity of the enzyme and therefore increased the activity of the enzyme. Because of this increased quantity of Na+/K+ ATPase, more potassium is pumped into the cell, causing a buildup of intracellular potassium. Therefore, extracellularly, this inward shift of potassium results in hypokalemia in the extracellular blood. Thus beta-adrenergic agonists can cause increased Na+ transport out of the cell as well. Increased Na+ transport extracellularly across alveolar epithelial cells for example, which would then cause lung liquid to follow this flow of Na+, ultimately stimulating lung liquid clearance.

Insulin also causes clinically significant effects on the Na+/K+ ATPase. Insulin increases the number of Na+/K+ ATPase pumps in the membrane as well, this leads to an intracellular shift of potassium, causing hypokalemia in the extracellular space of the blood.

There are reports of abnormal expression levels, or activity of the Na+K+ pump in diabetes, hypertension, Alzheimer's disease, and in various tumors including glioblastoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, breast cancer, melanoma, colorectal carcinoma, and bladder cancer.

Na+ K+-ATPase and its endogenous regulators, the endogenous cardiac steroids (ECS), play a role in the etiology of bipolar disorder and are a potential target for drug development for the treatment.

Both RNA and DNA viruses can directly affect Na, K-ATPase function, in particular, viral infections targeting the host cell components. Na, K-ATPase holds promise as an antiviral strategy to minimize the resistance to antiviral drugs and has been shown to be effective.

There is evidence of a Na/K-ATPase oxidant amplification loop in the process of aging, obesity, and cardiovascular disease.