Pathological findings should undergo careful evaluation when deciding on treatment options. Patients can often benefit from non-surgical interventions; therefore, the clinician should evaluate and determine an end goal with the patient for treatment before deciding on the route of treatment.

**Non-surgical Treatment**

- If the symptoms are purely the result of mechanical factors such as leaning over the desk at work with weight on the elbows or sleeping with bent elbows, then correcting these postures that provoke ulnar neuropathy can be the mainstay of treatment.

- In an Italian study, Padua et al. followed up 24 patients who had willingly declined surgery after the initial diagnosis. About half of these patients reported improvement in their symptoms during their follow-up appointments. Their further nerve conduction studies also showed an improvement, which further supports the evidence that patients with mild symptoms can be managed without surgical interventions.

- Splinting at night time to keep the elbows straight has been suggested in published papers as an initial management option in patients with mild symptoms.

- Simple analgesia such as NSAIDs will also help with the pain.

**Surgical Treatment**

Patients with severe signs and symptoms such as atrophy of interossei and handgrip strength weakness might not improve with conservative management. Also, patients who have failed conservative treatment for 6 months would require surgical intervention to improve their symptoms. Surgical management involves decompression of the nerve throughout the entire cubital tunnel. Some surgeons release the pressure in the cubital tunnel region, while others prefer free mobilization of the ulnar nerve.

Various methods of surgical treatment have been discussed and performed. Some of the well-accepted surgical procedures for the treatment of cubital tunnel syndrome are 1) in-situ decompression; 2) endoscopic decompression; 3) decompression followed by subsequent subcutaneous transposition, intramuscular transposition, or submuscular transposition and 4) medial epicondylectomy along with in-situ decompression.