The management of the Cockayne syndrome must start as soon as possible and be multidisciplinary. It is symptomatic and aims primarily to prevent complications.

**Feeding Assistance**

Most babies need help to feed themselves enough during the first months of life. Muscle weakness and neurological impairment may prevent some children from eating enough. The use of a nasogastric tube or even gastrostomy is sometimes necessary.

**Treatment of Ocular Anomalies**

Cataracts can be treated through surgery to remove the opaque lens. Implantation of a transparent artificial lens (graft) is not recommended.

Strabismus, when it exists, must be taken care of very early. The treatment is based on re-education sessions with the help of an orthoptist. The masking of the healthy eye (occlusion), by an eye mask or an opaque eyeglass lens, makes it possible to force the affected eye to work. Surgery may be necessary to remove or reduce a persistent deviation.

**Dental Care**

A dentist should regularly monitor children because of their sensitivity to caries. This will provide the appropriate care as needed.

**Prevention Against the Sun's Harmful Effects**

Affected individuals need to protect themselves from UV light. It should also be known that some artificial lights, including neon and halogen, emit harmful UV radiation which patients must be protected. It is recommended to wear hats with a large brim, clothes that do not let the UV, closed collars. Similarly, the use of sunscreen with a 50 or greater sun protection factor during activities and trips outside is recommended, even in winter or late afternoon when the brightness seems low. The eyes must also be protected by special glasses or a mask filtering the UV.

**Other Measures**

Hearing disorders may require the introduction of the auditory prosthesis. The equipment must be accompanied by orthopneic sessions which must begin early. This re-education is also essential in the acquisition of reading and writing.

Most patients require psychomotor rehabilitation and physiotherapy appropriate to the degree of their impairment. Some equipment may be necessary to maintain and support the body in a good position (corset for example) and allow movement (canes, walker, wheelchair).

Specific socio-educational support is necessary in case of deficit intellectual. It takes into account the personality, age, intellectual level, and behavioral characteristics of the child. Psychological support is also needed.