The main feature of the mitral valve is the mitral apparatus, which is composed of the left atrial wall, left ventricle wall, the mitral annulus, the anterior and posterior leaflets, chordae tendinae and papillary muscles. The mechanical and metabolic balance of the valve is guaranteed by the presence of interstitial cells, which are very sensitive to mechanical information (mechanotransduction) and help in valve remodeling. The valve surface is rich in endothelial cells that communicate with interstitial cells to maintain the strength and shape of the valve.

**Mitral annulus:**The mitral annulus is a fibrous ovoid ring located around the mitral opening, it works as a sphincter; it contracts during systole and reduces the mitral valve area by completely closing the leaflets. At the posterior leaflet insertion, the mitral annulus is thinner than other parts of the annulus, making it more vulnerable to dilatation and resulting in inadequate leaflet closure. When severe dilation occurs, the leaflets are unable to approximate each other, and mitral regurgitation is the result.

**Leaflets:**Unlike the tricuspid valve, the mitral valve has two leaflets, the anterior leaflet, and the posterior leaflet.

The anterior leaflet is located at the posterior part of the aortic root and also fixed to it. The anterior leaflet corresponds to one-third of the annular ring and two-thirds of the valvular orifice approximately. The anterior leaflet is a semicircular shape and has a free edge without indentations; it is larger and thicker compared with the posterior leaflet. It has two zones, the rough zone and clear zone that are separated by a ridge on the atrial surface. This prominent ridge is located 1 cm from the edge of the anterior leaflet. During systole, the rough zone of the anterior leaflet will be adjacent to the posterior leaflet.

The posterior leaflet comprises the other two-thirds of the annular circumference and also has the name ventricular or mural leaflet. It is in the posterior part of the two commissural areas. Different from the anterior leaflet, the posterior leaflet divides into three areas zones or segments, the basal, the clear, and the rough zones, defined as P1, P2, and P3. The rough zone is distal to the ridge and broadest at the scallops. Similar to the anterior leaflet, the clear zone in the posterior leaflet is clear on transillumination and is in the middle between the basal and rough zone. The basal zone only exists in the posterior leaflet and is located at the middle scallop between the mitral annulus and clear zone.

From the histological point of view, one can distinguish three layers in the leaflets of the mitral valve:

- The fibrosa, which is rigid and superficial with thick collagen fibers

- The atrial, which is thinner and towards the atrial surface, with elastic fibers

- The spongiosa, a layer consisting in particular of glycosaminoglycans (GAG) and proteoglycans.

Finally, there is another very thin layer of elastic fibers on the ventricular side, in continuity with the elastic fabric of the chordae tendinae.

**Chordae tendinae:**

Are part of the subvalvular apparatus, the chordae tendinae are composed of fibrous strings that originate from the papillary muscles or the ventricle wall and that its insertion is into the ventricle, the anterior leaflet, posterior leaflet, and commissural leaflet. Two kinds of chordae tendinae are distinguished based on their insertion into the leaflets. The primary or marginal chordae are thinner and are attached to the leaflets at the free edge, preventing leaflet edge to prolapse for its characteristic of being high collagen fibers with reduced tension.

The chordae consist mainly of elastin and crimped collagen fibers. Chordae tendinae can have six classifications: depending on the origin they can be apical and basal; depending on the area concerned, true or false; depending on the anatomical attack they are cusp, cleft and commissural; depending on the interest of the valve area they are first-order chordae or second-order chordae; depending on the shape they can be straight, branched, dichotomous or irregular; and depending on the constitution they can be tendinous, muscular, or membranous.