Adapalene is a third-generation topical retinoid prescribed for the treatment of acne vulgaris.

The pathogenesis of acne vulgaris is multifactorial. However, the main factors associated with acneiform lesion development are follicular hyperkeratinization, sebum production by sebaceous glands, and inflammation. In acne-prone patients, keratinocytes accumulate in the lumen of the hair follicle due to increased keratinocyte proliferation and cohesiveness, leading to the formation of a keratotic plug, resulting in the microcomedone. The microcomedone is the precursor to all visible acne lesions like open comedones, closed comedones, inflammatory papules, pustules, and nodulocystic lesions. Adapalene normalizes the differentiation of follicular epithelial cells to prevent microcomedone formation. In addition, adapalene, when applied topically, penetrates the hair follicles due to its lipophilic nature.

In addition to follicular hyperkeratinization, acne is also a disorder associated with inflammation. Propionibacterium acnes is a gram-positive, anaerobic rod found in the sebaceous follicle. P. acnes is present in both acne-prone individuals and those without acne. The hypothesis is that there may be differences in the strains of P. acnes or in the host response to P. acnes, which leads to its varying degrees of pathogenicity. P. acnes release mediators that contribute to comedones rupture and stimulate inflammatory cells. P. acnes stimulates the toll-like receptor II (TLR-2) pathway, which releases pro-inflammatory modulators. This action leads to neutrophil recruitment and the release of enzymes that result in follicular epithelium rupture. One mediator, IL-12, promotes a TH1 immune response. Adapalene is thought to suppress polymorphonuclear lymphocyte chemotaxis and down-regulate 15-lipoxygenase and TLR-2, contributing to its anti-inflammatory effects. The anti-inflammatory action of adapalene is comparable to betamethasone-17-valerate and indomethacin.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Systemic exposure of adapalene following topical application of adapalene gel is minimal.

**Distribution:**Adapalene drug molecules are distributed in the epidermis and dermis.

**Metabolism:**Information regarding adapalene metabolism in humans is unavailable, although it is known to accumulate in the liver. The major products of metabolism are glucuronides. Approximately 25% of the adapalene is metabolized, and the rest is excreted in unchanged form.

**Excretion:**The terminal apparent half-life is 7 to 51 hours. Excretion of adapalene is primarily through the biliary route.