The optic canal is a very important structure due to the structures that pass through this canal, mainly the optic nerve and the ophthalmic artery. Damage to the optic nerve can lead to permanent loss of vision. Disorders of the optic nerve can be classified into two main categories:

Hereditary optic nerve disorders:

- Autosomal dominant optic atrophy: This is the most common hereditary optic neuropathy. It leads to bilateral optic nerve degeneration. The genetic defect has been attributed to the coding of inner mitochondrial membrane proteins. Some of the genes responsible are OPA1, OPA3, OPA4, OPA5, and OPA8. The disease course is highly variable but it can lead to insidious vision loss, especially during the first decade of life in those with associated extra-ocular features. It can also present with central, centrocecal and paracentral scotomas, color perception deficits. A visual evoked potential test could demonstrate reduced amplitudes and prolonged latencies. Currently, there is no established treatment for this condition.

- Leber hereditary optic neuropathy: an inherited mitochondrial disorder characterized by bilateral, painless vision loss during young adulthood. Vision loss occurs simultaneously or sequentially. There is a severe reduction of visual acuity by central or centrocecal scotoma. Other symptoms include postural tremor, peripheral neuropathy, and myopathy. This condition results from the degeneration of retinal ganglion cells and their projecting axons forming the optic nerve. The diagnosis is through genetic testing. Most commonly identified genes are MT-ND1, MT-ND4, or MT-ND6. There is no cure, and the management is supportive.

Non-hereditary optic nerve disorders:

- Glaucoma: the worldwide leading cause of progressive vision loss. It classifies into open-angle glaucoma and angle-closure glaucoma, with the latter being more common. They can also classify into primary and secondary diseases. Secondary glaucoma could result from trauma, corticosteroids, inflammation, or tumor.
- Prostaglandin analogs (e.g., latanoprost, travoprost, tafluprost, unoprostone, bimatoprost): Increase outflow of aqueous humor. 
- Beta-adrenergic blockers (e.g. timolol, levobunolol, carteolol, metipranolol, betaxolol): Decrease aqueous humor production.
- Alpha-adrenergic agonists (e.g., brimonidine, apraclonidine): Decrease aqueous humor production and increase outflow. 
- Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., dorzolamide, brinzolamide, acetazolamide): Decrease aqueous humor production.
- Cholinergic agonists (e.g., pilocarpine, carbachol): Increase aqueous humor outflow.

- Optic neuritis: inflammation of the optic nerve. It could be caused by a variety of conditions such as multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, ischemic optic neuropathy, or infection. Common symptoms include visual loss, periocular pain, and dyschromatopsia. The first line of treatment is intravenous steroids. Spontaneous visual improvement is possible in greater than 90% of the cases.

- Ischemic optic neuropathies: includes anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) affecting the optic disc and posterior ischemic optic neuropathy (PION) affecting the retrobulbar part of the optic nerve. Both types are further subdivided into arteritic and non-arteritic. Arteritic ischemic optic neuropathy is caused by giant cell arteritis mediated by arterial inflammation whereas non-arteritic ischemic optic neuropathy is caused by small arterial occlusive disease. Early treatment with corticosteroid therapy is necessary to avoid permanent vision loss.

- Papilledema: the swelling of the optic disc (most often bilateral) as a result of increased intracranial pressure. Possible underlying causes include space-occupying brain lesions, cerebral hemorrhage, head trauma, hydrocephalus, meningitis, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, and idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Treatment should be tailored based on the underlying etiology.

- Optic nerve sheath meningiomas (ONSM): a rare finding. ONSM is a benign neoplasm of the meningothelial cells of the meningeal sheath around the optic nerve, either intraorbital or intracanalicularly. While the growth itself is benign, mass compression can lead to compression of the optic nerve or the surrounding blood vessels. This complication can lead to progressive vision loss.

Another essential structure within the optic canal is the ophthalmic artery. Some disorders of the ophthalmic artery include the following:

- Ophthalmic artery occlusion: severe cases can lead to ocular ischemic syndrome.

- Ophthalmic artery aneurysm: 5% of cerebrovascular aneurysms are ophthalmic artery aneurysms. It tends to be asymptomatic until it becomes large enough to become symptomatic. Most common symptoms are diplopia and headache. When symptomatic, they are surgical emergencies in most cases. Embolization techniques are the standard of treatment.