**Pharmacological Management**

- Cholinesterase inhibitors: Used to treat the cognitive symptoms of LBD and are the mainstay of treatment. Initially developed for Alzheimer disease treatment, they are probably more effective in patients with LBD. These include rivastigmine, galantamine, and donepezil.

- Carbidopa-Levodopa: Used to treat movement symptoms.; however, it has serious side effects and can lead to delusions, hallucinations, and confusion and practitioners should use them with caution in these patients, and they should start with low doses if required.

- Atypical antipsychotics: Used to treat hallucinations that cause significant distress in patients not responding to standard cholinesterase inhibitors. Commonly used drugs include pimavanserin, clozapine, quetiapine, and aripiprazole. Use with caution due to neuroleptic sensitivity in these patients.

- Clonazepam/melatonin: Used for REM sleep behavior disorder.

- SSRIs: Depression is common in patients with LBD and often requires antidepressant therapy with SSRIs.

- Memantine has been investigated in clinical trials and may work in patients with early disease.

**Support and Therapies**

Patient and caregiver education regarding symptoms of a disease and their management is necessary. Understanding the disease helps the caregivers cope with everyday challenges. They require home modifications occasionally and individual patient needs should specifically guide them.

Patients can take part in different therapies to improve their quality of life, including:

- Physiotherapy

- Occupational therapy

- Speech therapy

- Support groups

- Individual and family psychotherapies.

- Exercise