**Radical Prostatectomy**

Radical prostatectomy offers the greatest potential for a definitive cure for localized prostate cancer and a significant improvement in overall survival, cancer-specific survival, and the development of distant metastases. These benefits over other definitive, curative therapies are not evident before ten years after treatment for localized disease and are most pronounced in men younger than 65 years at the time of diagnosis. Radical prostatectomy is not an appropriate therapy if the tumor is fixed to surrounding structures or there are distant metastases.

The majority of such surgeries are now being done robotically or laparoscopically. There does not appear to be much difference overall in side effects or survival between minimally invasive (robotic) or open surgical approaches. The surgeon's experience appears to be the most critical factor associated with a successful outcome, regardless of which technique is used.

Individual patient issues would include activity level, age, continence, comorbidities, performance status, presurgical erectile function, whether or not lymphadenectomy will be performed, and if a nerve-sparing technique will be used. It is recommended that a bilateral nerve-sparing approach is used whenever it will not compromise the complete removal of the malignancy. MRI imaging is very helpful in making these determinations.

**Lymph Node Dissections**

Performing a lymph node dissection is based on the expected incidence of finding malignant involvement. In general, it can be safely omitted in selected patients with low-risk disease (smaller tumors with lower PSA levels and favorable Gleason scores).

The optimal extent of the lymph node dissection is uncertain. A greater and more extensive lymph node dissection is likely to find a larger number of positive lymph nodes. In the past, a pelvic lymph node dissection was sufficient, but it is now known that metastases will often go directly to the common iliac, paraaortic, perirectal, or presacral nodes, so a more extended dissection is recommended; particularly in higher-risk disease.

No improvement in overall longevity from lymph node dissections has been clearly demonstrated, although some men with the microscopic lymphatic disease have had prolonged survival, suggesting the possibility of a benefit from the procedure.

**Salvage Radiation Therapy After Radical Prostatectomy**

The serum PSA should become and remain undetectable after successful radical prostatectomy surgery. If this cannot be achieved or if there are positive margins after surgery, salvage radiation therapy should be considered.

This is recommended based on the likelihood that the supplemental radiation may control the relatively small amount of cancer that might remain in the vicinity of the resected prostate. Typically, salvage radiation therapy is 60 to 70 Gy, which is substantially less than primary definitive radiation therapy.

Without treatment, metastatic disease can develop from microscopic cancer remnants after radical prostate surgery in about eight years, and overall survival averages about 10 to 13 years.

Salvage radiation therapy may also be recommended if the PSA becomes detectable at a later date, indicating possible residual disease that was present but previously undetectable could now be growing in the immediate area of the prostatic bed. Of course, there is no guarantee that all remaining cancer will be within the radiation field, and it should not be considered with clear evidence of distant metastatic tumor spread.

Early data suggest that everolimus at 10 mg/day can be safe, helpful, and effective when combined with salvage radiation therapy for post-prostatectomy biochemical failures or recurrences.

Alternatively, some patients with only limited positive margins or extracapsular extension may choose close monitoring and delay the salvage radiation therapy until there is a PSA spike, rise, or other evidence of disease progression. However, this risks developing distant metastases that could have been prevented with earlier radiation treatment. A genomic classifier designed to predict the development of distant metastases after surgical treatment of prostate cancer can help assess and reliably estimate an individual patient's relative risk in these situations.

PSA doubling time is another prognostic indicator. A slow doubling time might reasonably suggest observation instead of therapy for lower-risk patients. Patients with a rapid PSA doubling time generally have poorer outcomes.

A meta-analysis compared the results of definitive radiation therapy for Blacks compared to Whites using seven different randomized clinical trials. It found that Black men actually had a higher overall success rate with radiation therapy.

Identifying the location of recurrent disease can be difficult when there is a biochemical recurrence. There is little point in salvage radiation therapy to the prostatic bed if there are distant metastases or spread outside the possible radiation field. Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) gallium PET/CT scans can help identify local recurrences, but the PSA level needs to be over 1 to 1.5 for the recurrence site to be visible on the scan.

**Complications of Radical Prostatectomy**include erectile dysfunction (especially if no nerve-sparing surgery was performed), urinary incontinence (especially stress type reported in 52% initially), urethral strictures (8% to 11%), and an increased risk of inguinal hernias (by 6% to 8%). Overall mortality rates are less than 1% in most series. Rates for erectile dysfunction vary greatly depending on pre-operative potency and age, as well as the type of surgery performed (nerve-sparing or not) and the use of penile rehabilitation techniques.

If radiation therapy is done first and fails, then salvage radical prostatectomy surgery becomes challenging and often impossible due to scarring, fibrosis, and loss of anatomical landmarks. However, cryotherapy would still be possible as a salvage treatment.

**Cryotherapy**

The use of freezing technology to kill cancer cells is not new; it was first used in London in the 19th century for breast and cervical cancers.  Modern cryotherapy required the development of closed circulation liquid Nitrogen probes, and one of the first uses of this new technology was for benign prostatic hyperplasia in 1966.

Cryotherapy provides very good tissue ablation and destruction but has some complications and is very technology-dependent. Early use of this technology was delayed due to the size of the original Nitrogen probes, the development of urethral injuries, and the inability to monitor the exact location of the probes and ice-ball in real-time. These problems were solved by technological advances, including the use of transrectal ultrasound to visualize the size and shape of the ice ball, more precise freezing probe placement, the use of multiple strategically placed interstitial temperature sensors to prevent over-freezing, simultaneously utilizing multiple smaller probes based on Argon gas for freezing instead of the harder to use liquid nitrogen, adding a thaw cycle to the protocol, and the standard placement of urethral warming catheters to protect the urethra from injury.

Using two freeze/thaw cycles instead of just one, rapid freezing to -40 C with slow thawing, and appropriate use of hormonal therapy to shrink larger prostates (greater than 60 gm) before treatment appear to improve the cancer-free results.  Hormonal therapy can help reduce the prostate size but does not otherwise improve survival outcomes with cryotherapy.

The incidence of erectile dysfunction is relatively high with cryotherapy, which is an issue that should be discussed with patients before treatment.

Cryotherapy can be the primary surgical therapy for prostate cancer, but it is probably most useful as a salvage surgical treatment after radiation therapy has failed.  In these cases, evidenced by persistent or rising PSA after radiation treatment, additional radiation or radical surgery is often extremely difficult, hazardous, or no longer even possible. Hormonal therapy is often used in such cases but is not a curative option.

Cryotherapy has shown it can control tumors resistant to all other therapies, which will still be susceptible to ablation by alternating freeze-thaw cycles that disrupt cell membranes resulting in tissue destruction. In such cases, it is important to be sure that the malignancy is still confined to the prostate. Since cryotherapy cannot treat nodal involvement, lymph node dissections may be needed.

Focal or limited cryotherapy is a possible experimental option in selected patients.