The yolk sac is clinically significant as it is the first structure that is visible sonographically during pregnancy. Clinicians can detect the yolk sac on transvaginal ultrasound starting at five weeks post-fertilization. The gestational sac refers to the round, fluid-filled pouch within the uterus surrounding the developing embryo and yolk sac. On transvaginal ultrasound, the gestational sac appears as a round or oval structure surrounded by a smooth, circular, and echogenic lining. The yolk sac appears as a round, hypoechoic structure inside the gestational sac with surrounding walls that are echogenic. Normal yolk sac size ranges from 3 mm to 5 mm, and the normal shape is circular.

A normal yolk sac seen on ultrasound confirms that the pregnancy is viable and intrauterine. If a yolk sac is not visible, the pregnancy is not viable, or the gestational age may be incorrect. The recommendation is that clinicians repeat the transvaginal ultrasound 1 to 2 weeks later. For example, if the patient does not remember the date of her last menstrual period, the yolk sac may not be visible due to her actual gestational age being less than five weeks post-fertilization (seven gestational weeks). Having a history of irregular menstrual cycles may also cause inaccurate dating of gestational age.

Underlying maternal conditions and factors that may cause irregular menstrual cycles are broad. They include polycystic ovarian syndrome, diabetes, systemic lupus erythematosus, immature hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis, endometriosis, thyroid disorders, and eating disorders.