# Continuing Education Activity

Eales disease is a disease of young males usually, who are generally residents of the Indian subcontinent. It is a disease of retinal vessel wall inflammation that leads to the obliteration of the lumen of the vessel, thereby leading to ischemia and neovascularization. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of Eales disease and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Eales disease.
- Describe the physical findings associated with the Eales disease.
- Outline the management considerations for patients with Eales disease.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients affected by Eales disease.

# Introduction

Eales disease classically presents with repeated vitreous hemorrhage in young adults. It is most commonly found in the Indian subcontinent.

In such cases of retinal periphlebitis, systemic causes, including tuberculosis and sarcoidosis, should be ruled out. The clinical spectrum of Eales disease is divided into several stages, and the management is determined by the stage of the disease. Management includes intraocular and periocular steroids and oral corticosteroids, which are needed to control the activity of bilateral retinal vasculitis. Laser photocoagulation is needed in stages of retinal ischemia and neovascularization. Cases in which vitreous hemorrhage persists and does not resolve in several months, with or without retinal detachment need vitrectomy, the results of which are quite satisfactory.

# Etiology

Eales disease was considered a form of vasomotor neurosis by Sir Henry Eales, but it was Wardsworth, in 1887, who explained the disease's association with retinal inflammation.

The etiology of Eales disease still stands to be controversial and, to date, is very poorly understood. Its etiology is purportedly multifactorial in origin. It is presumed that Eales disease is an immunological reaction in response to an exogenous agent.

One study hypothesized that Mycobacterium chelonae and M. fortuitum, which are rapidly growing nontuberculous mycobacteria (RGNTM), are associated with Eales disease.M. fortuitum has been isolated from the aqueous humor of a patient with Eales disease.M. chelonae and M. fortuitum.

A highly immunogenic protein is translated by the MPT64 gene in M. tuberculosis. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) for this gene has been diagnostically used successfully.

Another prospective case-control study was done on 65 patients (31 with Eales disease and 34 controls).M. tuberculosis in patients having Eales disease. The results of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were compared using the clinical symptoms of patients, their erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and tuberculin skin test (TST) values. In patients having Eales disease, the PCR positivity was 38.7%. There was a strong corroboration between the PCR positivity and high TST and ESR values. Interestingly, 6 from 34 control vitreous samples were also PCR positive for MPT64.

Another study reported the presence of Mycobacteria in the vitreous humor of patients having Eales disease.M. tuberculosis (MTB).Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Enucleated eyes were subjected to a nested polymerase chain reaction for the detection of the M. tuberculosis genome, and positive results were noted, suggesting a possible correlation between the Eales disease and tuberculosis.

Nested polymerase chain reaction utilized for the demonstration of the genome of M. tuberculosis in the epiretinal membranes of many patients having Eales disease underlines the possible association between Eales disease and tuberculosis.

Eales disease may be associated with ocular tuberculosis, which may show its signs in the late stages of Eales disease.

It is quite possible that patients having Eales disease may not carry viable organisms, or they may just be having the DNA of M. tuberculosis. The role of tuberculosis in the pathology of Eales disease is still questionable. It is postulated that the incidence of Eales disease is low in western countries, possibly due to the low prevalence of tuberculosis in those countries. Mantoux positivity has been reported in a significant number of patients having Eales disease in several studies. However, one case-control study in India concluded that there isn't any statistically significant difference as far as Mantoux positivity is concerned between the cases and the controls.

Neurological manifestations have been reported in some cases of Eales disease.

Experimental studies have demonstrated other immunity-related mechanisms, like the predominant involvement of T-cells in the disease etiology. HLA B5, DR1, DR4, and several autoimmune diseases have been thought of as playing a role in the etiology of Eales disease.

Levels of haptoglobin and galectin-1 in the serum may be used as biomarkers of Eales disease. Retinal neovascularization is supposed to be because of increased vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).

# Epidemiology

Eales disease is largely reported in Asia, especially the Indian subcontinent. Eales disease is very rarely reported in the western world. It more commonly affects males than females. Males are generally afflicted by the disease at 20-40 years of age.

The pediatric population may also be afflicted by Eales disease, though it is uncommon.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of Eales disease involves retinal periphlebitis, retinal ischemia, and neovascularization.

Vitreous hemorrhages generally resolve in 3 to 6 months. If they happen to persist beyond this duration, the probability of membrane formation in the vitreous increases with increased chances of tractional retinal detachment. Eales disease follows a very variable course of progression. Some patients may show spontaneous regression of new blood vessels, and others may have relentless vitreous hemorrhages.

Eales disease was classified by Charmis into the following stages:

- Stage I: This stage has mild periphlebitis. It is detected by ophthalmoscopy, and peripheral small retinal capillaries are affected.

- Stage II: Large veins are affected, and perivasculitis is present in large parts of the retina.

- Stage III: Neovascularisation with abundant vitreous and retinal hemorrhages.

- Stage IV: This stage is characterized by repeated vitreous hemorrhages and is the end-stage disease. Tractional retinal detachment may be present with vitreous hemorrhage.

The above-mentioned classification is no longer popular and is seldom used now.Recently, a new classification has been suggested by Saxena and Kumar.

- Stage 1: superficial retinal hemorrhages with inflammation (periphlebitis) of small (1a) and large (1b) caliber vessels

- Stage 2a: capillary non-perfusion, 2b: neovascularization of disc/elsewhere

- Stage 3a: fibrovascular proliferation, 3b: vitreous hemorrhage;

- Stage 4a: tractional/combined rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and 4b: neovascularization of iris, neovascular glaucoma, complicated cataract, and optic atrophy.''

So far, no classification system has been adopted as standard and accepted universally.

# History and Physical

**History**

In the initial stages of Eales disease, patients may not be having any symptoms. Mostly young males present with cobwebs floating in front of the eye called floaters with or without associated diminution of vision and photopsia.

**Physical Examination**

- Visual acuity - Since the disease predominantly affects the peripheral retina and spares the macula, visual acuity at presentation is generally 20/40 or better. Although vision may be poor in cases with vitreous hemorrhage or cystoid macular edema. No perception of light may be reported in cases with long-standing retinal detachment and in neovascular glaucoma leading to optic atrophy.

- Anterior segment - Anterior uveitis is uncommonly seen, and if at all present, it is non-granulomatous. Granulomatous uveitis, if seen, should point in the direction of sarcoidosis.

- Vitreous - Vitritis is uncommon. Mild vitreous haze may be observed over areas of vasculitis. Late stages may have a recurrent vitreous hemorrhage. Dense vitreous hemorrhage will preclude the view of the fundus. Hemorrhage in the vitreous is usually because of delicate proliferating new blood vessels.

- Optic nerve - Neovascularisaton may develop in the late stages. Optic disc pallor usually develops in cases of neovascular glaucoma.

- Retina

Early (Inflammatory) Stage

The hallmark of this stage is periphlebitis.

Middle (Ischemic) Stage

Capillary ischemia is characteristic of this stage. Veno-venous shunts and venous beadings may be noted. Ischemia leads to increased production of VEGF, which may lead to macular edema or the proliferative stage.

Late (Proliferative) Stage

Neovascularisation occurs at the boundary of the non-perfused and perfused retina. This neovascularization may lead to repeated hemorrhages in the vitreous, which may or may not be associated with retinal detachment.

# Evaluation

**Diagnostic Procedures**

- Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) - FFA is an important tool to diagnose Eales disease. A delayed venous filling is seen in case of venous obstruction. The early venous phase shall show the staining of inflamed vessel walls, while the late phase may show extravasation of the dye. Sclerosed vessels may show capillary nonperfusion. In cases of neovascularization, the early arteriovenous phase shall show hyperfluorescence, while in the late venous phase, leakage shall be noted. The ischemic stage shall highlight venovenous shunts and areas of capillary closure. Capillary non-perfusion areas will show up as hypofluorescent areas.

- B-scan (ultrasound) - When the fundus view is precluded by vitreous hemorrhage, B-scan is useful to know whether retinal detachment is present or not. Variable echo density is seen in cases of vitreous hemorrhage. Ultrasound also reveals the presence of posterior vitreous detachment, vitreoretinal attachment (neovascularization), sub-hyaloid hemorrhage, vitreoschisis, and membranes in the vitreous cavity.

- Optical coherence tomography (OCT) - Macular edema may be quantitated with the help of OCT. Its resolution on serial follow-ups with treatment may also be seen on OCT.

**Laboratory Investigations**

Other diseases causing vasculitis need to be ruled out with appropriate laboratory investigations before making the diagnosis of Eales disease. To rule out leukemia and other hematological diseases, a complete blood count is needed. Erythrocytic sedimentation rate (ESR), blood sugar, and coagulation profile may be ordered. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest or chest X-ray and Mantoux test are needed to account for tuberculosis. HRCT chest is considered the highest diagnostic value in pulmonary tuberculosis.

Hemoglobin electrophoresis is done to rule out sickle cell retinopathy. To rule out sarcoidosis, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme and HRCT chest is required. Serum antinuclear antibody test may be needed to rule out systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); however, arterioles are more involved (in Eales disease, veins are predominantly involved), and systemic lupus erythematosus has multiple soft exudates (cotton wool spots) around the optic disc or whitish retinal patches causing Purtscher-like retinopathy. Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test (VDRL) and Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) test are required for syphilis.

In patients with associated retinitis or other suggestive features, HIV serology should also be done.

# Treatment / Management

The stage of the Eales disease determines the management. Management options include - observation, medical therapy, laser photocoagulation, and vitreoretinal surgery. Both eyes of the patient may have different stages of the disease, so more than one mode of treatment modalities may be required.

**Observation**

Patients who do not have active peripheral vasculitis should be kept under observation with follow-ups at 6 to 12 monthly intervals. Those with a new vitreous hemorrhage with an attached retina need to be reviewed after every 2 to 6 weeks. Such vitreous hemorrhages usually clear in about 6 weeks.

**Medical Therapy**

Steroids (systemic and/or periocular) are the first line and mainstay of treatment in the inflammatory stages.

Oral prednisolone is given in the dose of 1 mg/kg body weight and is tapered by 5 to 10 mg per week, over a duration of 6-8 weeks. A maintenance dose of 15 to 20 mg per day for a duration of up to 2 months may be needed in some patients. Generally, response to corticosteroids is extremely good in Eales disease. Thus, Eales disease seldom requires cyclosporine and other immunosuppressive drugs. Cyclosporine or azathioprine may be required in patients who have unacceptable side effects due to systemic corticosteroids or do not respond to them.

In some cases, systemic therapy may be much less effective, and in order to halt the disease progression and for reducing the recurrence, an intravitreal sustained-release dexamethasone implant may be needed in such cases.

Cases with vitreous hemorrhage, precluding a view of the fundus, require serial follow-ups with B-scan ultrasound 2 to 6 weekly to rule out retinal detachment, which needs urgent surgery. The role of vitamin C and E in fighting oxidative stress is controversial.**Laser Photocoagulation**It is the treatment of choice in Eales disease with the proliferative stage.

Optic disc neovascularization mandates the need for pan-retinal Photocoagulation. Some minor complications may arise because of laser photocoagulation. Retinal hemorrhages may occur in some cases with very high laser power, but major bleeding is rarely seen if the selection of laser parameters is done properly. Retinal gliosis due to regressing new vessels following laser may lead to contraction and may give rise to complications, like retinal tear resulting in retinal detachment. The laser is not advised in the active inflammatory stage since there are chances of worsening macular edema or inflammation after the laser. After the inflammation has subsided with medications/ subtenon or intravitreal steroids, laser photocoagulation may be done.

**Surgery**

Pars plana vitrectomy is indicated in cases with persistent vitreous hemorrhage with/without retinal detachment(tractional/rhegmatogenous/combined).

However, with recent advances and the safety of vitreoretinal surgery, some surgeons may plan earlier interventions depending on the patient's visual demand. Early vitrectomy may be considered in cases of extensive vitreous membranes, epimacular membranes, or tractional retinal detachment. Vitreous surgery may be straightforward if a complete posterior vitreous detachment is present beforehand. Vitrectomy clears the vitreous opacities and allows the evaluation of the fundus. Laser photocoagulation may be done using an endolaser or by an indirect laser delivery system. Compared to proliferative diabetic retinopathy, vitrectomy in Eales disease is easier. Posterior vitreous detachment and clearing of subhyaloid blood are required. After vitrectomy, epimacular membranes may be peeled off. After vitrectomy in Eales disease, visual results are generally very good.

**Anterior retinal cryoablation (ARC)**Primary ARC can be done in neovascular glaucoma where the visual prognosis is poor and in cases with hazy ocular media, which may be due to cataracts, after cataracts or vitreous hemorrhage, and in cases with a small non-dilating pupil. With current advances, laser photocoagulation has almost replaced ARC in most cases.

# Differential Diagnosis

The stage of the disease determines the differential diagnosis of Eales disease and includes the following entities:

- Vascular: branch retinal vein occlusion, Bechet syndrome, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis)

- Infectious: syphilis, Lyme disease, cytomegalovirus retinitis

- Autoimmune: sarcoidosis, frosted branch angiitis.

- Idiopathic: Coats disease.

- Neoplastic: leukemia.

- Congenital: familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, sickle cell retinopathy

- Endocrine: diabetic retinopathy.

Branch retinal vein occlusion generally occurs in hypertensives, and the site of occlusion is invariably an arteriovenous junction; meanwhile, in Eale disease, the site of occlusion could be anywhere along the course of the vein. Branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) is usually seen in a single quadrant, while Eales disease affects multiple quadrants generally. Vasculitis in the Eales disease predominantly involves the veins.

Features of PCR-positive tubercular retinal vasculitis include:

- Age: 11 to 32 years

- Predominant male involvement (around 70% of patients)

- Bilaterality (54% of patients)

- Vitritis (100% eyes)

- vitreous snowballs (90% eyes)

- Retinal new vessels (around 60% of eyes)

- Retinal hemorrhages (53%)

- Neuroretinitis (53% eyes)

- Focal choroiditis (around 50%)

- Vitreous hemorrhage or preretinal hemorrhage (26%)

- Serous retinal detachment (16%)

# Prognosis

Eales disease carries a good prognosis with proper treatment.

# Complications

Complications of Eales disease include:

- Recurrent vitreous hemorrhage

- Neovascular glaucoma

- Retinal detachment

- Macular edema

- Epiretinal membrane

- Choroidal neovascularization

# Deterrence and Patient Education

There are no preventive measures for Eales disease. Patients are advised to report to a retina specialist on an urgent basis in case of complaints of floaters, flashes of light, or sudden diminution of vision.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of Eales disease are quite complex, and prompt diagnosis can help save the vision of the patient. Healthcare workers need to initiate immediate treatment of the patient when required. The goal is to cause the regression of neovascularization and save the vision of the patient.

Eales disease carries a good prognosis with proper treatment. Severe vision loss is rare, and blindness is usually caused by retinal detachment and neovascular glaucoma.