Management starts with correct identification of subtype with biopsy of the specific site for histopathological and immunophenotype analysis, calculation of the prognostic index, assessment of the extend of the disease by imaging, and performance status of the patient. If a specific subtype is suspected, then testing for EBV PCR, HTLV-1 PCR, and celiac disease should be done.

Computed tomography (CT) is used to assess and stage the disease as it is commonly available. FDG PET/CT scan is considered to have superior sensitivity because of the FDG avidity in some  T-cell lymphoma and helps in staging and treatment response assessment. MRI is used particularly in soft tissue involvement in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma and subcutaneous panniculitis T-cell lymphoma.

The treatment options available for CTCL is palliative, not curative. Therapy can be divided into skin directed for early-stage disease and systemic therapy for later-stage disease (advanced nodal or visceral disease) and disease refractory to localized treatments. Topical therapy includes UV A with psoralen (PUVA), UV B, external beam radiation, total skin radiation, topical chemotherapy, and topical retinoids. Systemic therapy is achieved by Interferon-alpha, oral retinoids, targeted therapies, single or combination chemotherapy, and stem cell transplant. Corticosteroids are also used as both targeted and systemic therapy.

Retinoids help through the antiproliferative and antiapoptotic properties. Commonly used topical regimens are bexarotene (FDA approved) and tazarotene. Severe hyperlipidemia and central hypothyroidism are side effects of bexarotene. Systemic retinoids include acitretin, isotretinoin, and bexarotene. Topical chemotherapy commonly used are mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard), which is an alkylating agent, and carmustine. Systemic chemotherapy commonly used is methotrexate, pralatrexate, chlorambucil, gemcitabine, pegylated doxorubicin, and antimetabolite like fludarabine phosphate, 2-deoxycoformycin. PUVA inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis, but it will affect both normal and neoplastic cells, and thus the side effect profile being secondary malignancies of the skin. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are the newer group of therapeutic options available for the treatment of CTCL, which have both transcription-dependent and independent mechanisms of action for the expression of tumor suppressor genes. Vorinostat and romidepsin are FDA approved with an overall response rate of almost 50% with a tolerable side effect profile, and the prominent one being cardiac arrhythmias from QTc prolongation. Targeted therapies include imiquimod (Toll-like receptor agonist), denileukin diftitox (recombinant fusion protein), alemtuzumab (a monoclonal antibody against CD52), and everolimus ( mTOR pathway target). Agents that are still undertrial are proteasome inhibitors like bortezomib. Allogenic stem cell transplant is used in advanced stages, usually appropriate for young patients with relapsing disease.

Because of the rarity of the disease and the lack of randomized trials, there are no optimal treatment options for PTCL, but it is dependent on the small trials. Standard chemotherapy is CHOP (cyclophosphamide, hydroxyduonorubicin, oncovin, prednisone) or a CHOP-like regimen( addition of etoposide). Etoposide based regimens are CHOEP and EPOCH. These are better tolerated by younger patients and people with higher performance status. Other chemotherapy regimens that have been tried include ACVBP(dose-intensified doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vindesine, bleomycin, prednisone) plus consolidation with autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) and hyper-CVAD (fractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone). Other treatment modalities have been made by improving CHOP by adding newly approved/under trial medications. These include the addition of anti-CD-52 antibody (alemtuzumab), denileukin diftitox (fusion protein between IL-2 and diphtheria toxin) to the CHOP/CHOP-like regimen; both are in phase II and had a significant side effect profile.

Treatment regimens now under phase III are  Brentuximab Vedotin (anti CD30 monoclonal antibody)

For the elderly more than 70yrs, CHOP is used. Interferon-alpha plus zidovudine for HTLV1 has proven to be effective in acute, chronic, and smoldering ATL, not in the lymphoma stage. ALCL Stem cell transplant is considered in the consolidation phase after achieving first remission, complete or partial. Transplant in second or third remission is less studied. In the case of ALCL with a low prognostic score, we should hold off on the stem cell transplant because of their good response to chemotherapy.

Relapsed or refractory PTCL is managed with ASCT if the patient is a candidate for the same. No chemotherapy has been proven superior over the other. The decision should be made about transplants before starting the treatment. Multiagent chemotherapy includes ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide or dexamethasone, cytarabine, and cisplatinum, which induces remission but cannot be continued for long because of the side effect profile and thus useful pre-transplant. If the patient is transplant-ineligible, chemotherapy regimens like romidepsin and pralatrexate are more tolerable.