Patient participation is a core component of high-quality healthcare and is associated with improvement of self-care, functioning, and satisfaction. A literature review considers patients as experts on their bodies, symptoms, and situations. As experts, patients’ experiential knowledge is now considered to be complementary to the medical professionals’ knowledge and essential for successful treatment and improving the quality of care.

Participation becomes particularly crucial during spinal cord injury rehabilitation process were the health care staff is composed of a broad range of professionals including nurses, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, social workers, and physicians. Patients need to be encouraged to engage in the management plan as a team member. A level V evidence study performed in Sweden found that information that is adapted to the individual and delivered promptly is indispensable for enabling patients to actively and meaningfully participate in decisions regarding their care and rehabilitation.

Recovery from spinal cord injury relies on the care received at each point along this recovery timeline. A systematic review analyzed the treatment literature on SCI to facilitate the practice of evidence-based medicine and best clinical practice. Fehlings and co-workers summarized the most notable findings in the research and offered evidence-based care recommendations. Some of their most important proposals are as follows

- Patients should be placed on a cervical collar, head immobilizers, and a spinal board before being transported to a hospital

- MRI is a strong recommendation to have a prognosis of acute spinal cord injury

- Spinal cord injury patients are at significant risk of respiratory and cardiovascular problems so management should anticipate these potential complications

- Outcomes show more improvement by management in specialized centers with access to intensive care

Treatment of acute spinal cord injury is an interprofessional effort that begins shortly after the injury, continues during the acute care setting and in some cases will go on for the remainder of the patient's life. An interprofessional team approach that includes physicians, specialists, therapists, and specialty-trained nursing will bring about the most optimal care leading to the most satisfactory clinical outcome. [Level V]