The glenohumeral joint is a ball and socket joint located between the humerus and scapula, which serves as the major joint that connects the upper limb to the trunk. In terms of movement, like a ball and socket joint, the glenohumeral joint allows for extension, flexion, abduction, adduction, internal rotation, external rotation, and circumduction. This is one of the most mobile joints within the body, which is at the cost of joint stability.

The glenohumeral joint is formed by the articulation of the humeral head to the glenoid fossa of the scapula. As a synovial joint, hyaline cartilage covers the articular surfaces. Compared to the glenoid fossa, the head of the humerus is larger in size, which allows for a wide range of motion of the joint but leads to instability. Anatomically to reduce this disproportion of the articulating surfaces, the glenoid fossa has a fibrocartilage rim known as the glenoid labrum to deepen the surface. The joint capsule is a fibrous sheath and serves to enclose the joint structure. The capsule extends from the anatomic neck of the humerus to the border of the glenoid fossa. The joint capsule has laxity, allowing for greater mobility. Lining the inner surface of the joint capsule is the synovial membrane which produces the synovial fluid and reduces the friction between the articulating surfaces.

Synovial bursae are also present to reduce friction. A bursa is a sac filled with synovial fluid that cushions the tendons between the other joint structures. Clinically significant bursae include the subacromial and subscapular bursae. The subacromial bursa is located deep to the acromion and the deltoid. It is superficial to the joint capsule and the supraspinatus tendon. This bursa aids in reducing the friction below the deltoid, which promotes more free motion of the rotator cuff tendons. The subscapular bursa lies between the scapula and the subscapularis tendon. The bursa aids in reducing wear and tear to the tendons during the movement of the glenohumeral joint. Vascularly, the glenohumeral joint is supplied by both the anterior and poster circumflex humeral arteries. Both are branches off of the axillary artery. Branches off the suprascapular artery arising from the thyrocervical trunk also contribute to the vascular supply. Innervation is provided primarily by the suprascapular, axillary, and lateral pectoral nerves.

The origination of the musculotendinous rotator cuff is from the scapula with insertion onto the humeral tuberosities, which almost envelops the humeral head. The four muscles that comprise the rotator cuff are the supraspinatus superiorly, the subscapularis anteriorly, and both the infraspinatus and teres minor posteriorly. The four muscle tendons form a broad aponeurosis that fuses with most of the glenohumeral joint capsule. Within the intertubercular groove between the attachments of the subscapularis and supraspinatus lies the long tendon of the biceps. The long tendon of the biceps passes through the glenohumeral joint from a synovial sheath within the bicipital groove. It attaches to the superior margin of the rim of the glenoid.

Regarding the glenohumeral arthrogram, it is important to note the anatomy of the subcoracoid and subacromial bursa for interpretation purposes. The subcoracoid bursa lies anteriorly, whereas the subacromial bursa superiorly. These bursae tend to combine into one large bursa.

The static stabilizers of the shoulder include the osseous and joint anatomy. The clavicle is an S-shaped bone that articulates with the sternoclavicular joint medially and the acromioclavicular joint laterally. They can have varying appearances, from flat to curved. The lateral half of the clavicular shaft has an irregular osseous ridge for insertion of the trapezoid and deltoid muscles.

The scapula is a triangular bone with three parts: the body, spine, and neck.

The pear-shaped morphology of the glenoid allows for the maintenance of shoulder stability. The presence of anterior bone loss is typically secondary to anterior shoulder dislocation, which results in an inverted pear-shaped appearance to the glenoid. The glenoid has hyaline cartilage on its articular surface that is thinner in the center but thicker on the periphery, with an average thickness measuring 1.8 mm.

In the coracoid process, there's an entire process of the scapula that arises from the anterolateral aspect. The morphology of the coracoid varies, but it serves as the origin of the pectoralis minor muscle and short head of the biceps. Orientation of the coracoid can impact the subcoracoid space and lead to subsequent subcoracoid impingement with tendinosis of the subscapularis muscle. The posterolateral extension of the scapular spine that articulates with the clavicle is the acromion. Acromion morphology varies, but Bigliani has classified its morphology on radiographs into three types. A type one acromion is flat, a type two is curved, and type three is hooked. A type three acromion is thought to be acquired, not congenital.

Normally, the articular surface of the humeral head is retroverted by approximately 30 degrees.

The acromioclavicular joint, AC joint, is a synovial joint between the medial surface of the acromion and the lateral surface of the clavicle. The stabilization of the AC joint depends on static structures like the ligaments and dynamic structures like the musculature. A small fibrocartilage disc exists between the two bones. Both the inferior and superior AC ligaments reinforce the AC capsule. The deltoid muscle attaches to the lateral border of the clavicle and the acromion anteriorly, whereas the trapezium attaches to the posterior and superior aspects. Both of these muscles provide dynamic stabilization for the AC joint. The primary stabilizer of this joint is the coracoclavicular ligament.

The coracoclavicular ligament consists of two parts: the conoid and the trapezoid ligaments, which form a V-shaped structure. These attach under the surface of the clavicle at the junction of the middle and outer thirds. The conoid is located more medially and prevents anterior and superior displacement and rotation. The trapezoid ligament is located laterally and prevents posterior displacement while limiting rotation. The coracoacromial ligament is triangular and attaches to the lateral, horizontal portion of the coracoid with insertion on the tip of the acromion in front of the acromioclavicular joint.

The glenoid labrum acts as a passive stabilizer to the joint and adds depth to the glenoid cavity by approximately 50%.****(MRA) is the preferred method.

The long head of the biceps tendon can originate from four structures, including the supraglenoid tuberosity, labrum, and coracoid process. This tendon makes an oblique intra-articular course, traverses through the rotator interval, and makes a 30 to 45° turn along the anterior aspect of the humerus before exiting the joint in the bicipital groove between the greater and lesser tuberosities.

The region where the tendon attaches to the superior labrum is known as the bicipital-labral complex or the biceps anchor. There are three different types of attachments of the long head of the biceps tendon to the supraglenoid tubercle. A type one is where the biceps has a firm attachment to the glenoid rim, and no free edge is present. A type two is where the attachment of the biceps to the glenoid is in a more medial position where a small sulcus is located between the labral free edge and the cartilage with the synovial lining. A type three attachment is where there is a deep recess and the superior labrum projects into the joint. The large synovial recess located within the undersurface of the bicipital labral junction is known as the sublabral recess or sulcus. This sulcus is located between the 11 and 1 o'clock positions. The type two and type three attachments are frequent anatomical variants.

The joint capsule for the glenohumeral joint is composed of three layers. These layers include the synovial lining and the articular surface, composed of a loosely packed collagen and overlayer and a thicker bursal surface layer made of dense collagen. Bands that consist of collagenous thickening within the capsule form the glenohumeral ligaments. These ligaments and the coracohumeral ligament reinforce the thin capsular tissue. They are also a part of the static stabilizers of the shoulder joint and are best visualized on computed tomography angiography (CTA) or MRA.

The superior glenohumeral ligament has a variable origination which includes the supraglenoid tubercle, long head of the biceps tendon, superior labrum, middle glenohumeral ligament, or a combination. This extends in a nearly perpendicular plane to the middle glenohumeral ligament and parallel to the coracoid process close to the biceps tendon. The insertion site is into the small depression above the lesser tuberosity of the humerus known as the fovea capitis, where this blends with the medial band of the coracohumeral ligament. This occurs within the rotator interval and helps form a sling around the long head of the biceps.

The middle glenohumeral ligament has a variable size and constancy. It can be absent in about 20 to 30% of shoulders.

There is a normal communication channel between the glenohumeral joint capsule with the subscapularis bursa. This communication is between the superior and middle glenohumeral ligament known as the foramen of Weitbrecht. Just below this is another communication channel between the middle and inferior glenohumeral ligament known as the Forman of Rouviere.

The inferior glenohumeral ligament consists of the axillary pouch and the anterior and posterior bands. The origination of the anterior band is along the inferior two-thirds of the anterior aspect of the glenoid labrum and is usually more prominent and thicker. The inferior glenohumeral ligament has an insertion onto the anatomical neck of the humerus.

The coracohumeral ligament is an extra-articular structure that extends in an anterolateral fashion from the base of the coracoid process with fanning out to insert onto the greater tuberosity and the bicipital sheath. The distal aspect of the ligament divides into two functional bands, including a smaller medial band and a larger lateral band.

The medial band blends with fibers of the superior glenohumeral ligament to form a ligamentous complex that surrounds both the medial and inferior aspect of the intra-articular portion of the long head of the biceps tendon before insertion onto the lesser tuberosity of the humerus as well as merges with the rotator interval capsule along the superior fibers of the subscapularis tendon. In contrast, the lateral band of the coracohumeral ligament surrounds the superior and lateral aspect of the long head of the biceps tendon intra-articularly before insertion onto the greater tuberosity of the humerus and also on the anterior aspect of the supraspinatus.

The rotator interval is a triangular anatomical space in the anterosuperior portion of the shoulder. This interval is defined by the coracoid process at the base, the anterior margin of the supraspinatus tendon superiorly, and the superior margin of the subscapularis tendon inferiorly. This interval allows the biceps tendon to become intra-articular as it courses to its insertion onto the superior aspect of the labrum. As the bicipital tendon enters into the space, it becomes covered by the biceps pulley. Both fibers from the supraspinatus and subscapularis cross over the interval and merge with the superior glenohumeral ligament and the coracohumeral ligament.

The active stabilizers to the glenohumeral joint include both the muscles and rotator cuff. The components of the rotator cuff include the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis muscles which originate from the scapula and are fused onto their respective attachment sites. The origin of the supraspinatus muscle is from the supraspinous fossa and superior aspect of the scapular spine. It runs laterally and inserts upon the highest impression of the greater tuberosity of the humerus. The supraspinatus tendon has two portions with an anterior half that is both thick and long and a posterior half that is thin and short.

The infraspinatus muscle originates from the inferior aspect of the spine of the scapula and the infraspinatus fossa. The infraspinatus runs in a superolateral position, occupying most of the greater tuberosity of the humerus. The infraspinatus tendon has a fan-like appearance, with its superior half being thick and long and the posterior half being thin and short.

The majority of the tendonous portion of the muscle inserts upon the lesser tuberosity of the humerus, but the superior aspect has tendon fibers that cross over the bicipital groove, which covers the biceps tendon and extend across to the greater tuberosity. There it blends with the supraspinatus tendon, which helps in creating the suspension pulley for the biceps tendon. The inferior third of the subscapularis muscle attaches to the inferior portion of the lesser tuberosity and the anterior aspect of the humeral shaft. The superior and inferior subscapularis muscular components have innervations by the upper and lower subscapular nerves. The coracohumeral interval is the space that lies between the humeral head and the coracoid process where insertion of the subscapularis muscle occurs.