ELISAs are performed in polystyrene plates, typically 96-well plates coated to bind protein strongly.

There are four main general steps to completing an ELISA immunoassay. These steps are:

- Coating (with either antigen or antibody)

- Blocking (typically with the addition of bovine serum albumin [BSA])

- Detection

- Final read

Detection is carried out by adding a substrate that can generate a color. There are many substrates available for use in ELISA detection. However, the substrates most commonly used are horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and alkaline phosphatase (AP).

Between each of the above four steps is a “wash” of the plate using a buffer, such as phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and a non-ionic detergent, to remove unbound material. The wells are washed two or more times during each wash step, depending on the specific protocol.

In a usual ELISA protocol, a serial dilution of concentrations is placed in the wells of the plate. After the results are measured, a standard curve from the serial dilutions data is plotted with a concentration on the x-axis using a log scale and absorbance on the y-axis using a linear scale.

There are four major types of ELISA:

- Direct ELISA (antigen-coated plate; screening antibody)

- Indirect ELISA (antigen-coated plate; screening antigen/antibody)

- Sandwich ELISA (antibody-coated plate; screening antigen)

- Competitive ELISA (screening antibody)

**Direct ELISA**

Both direct and indirect ELISAs begin with the coating of antigens to the ELISA plates.

In a direct ELISA, the primary detection antibody binds directly to the protein of interest.

**Indirect ELISA**

The steps of the indirect ELISA are identical to the direct ELISA, except for an additional wash step and the types of antibodies added after the buffer is removed.

The indirect ELISA has a higher sensitivity when compared to the direct ELISA.

**Sandwich ELISA**

Unlike direct and indirect ELISA, the sandwich ELISA begins with a capture antibody coated onto the wells of the plate.

The antigen of interest is added to the plates to bind to the capture antibody and incubated for 90 minutes at 37^oC. The plate is rewashed, and the primary detection antibody is added to the plate and incubated for another 1 to 2 hours at room temperature, followed by a buffer wash. Then the secondary enzyme-conjugated antibody is added and incubated for another 1 to 2 hours. The plate is rewashed, and the substrate is added to produce a color change.

**Competitive ELISA**

The competitive ELISA tests for the presence of an antibody specific for antigens in the test serum.