The authors have described several techniques to perform this procedure. The patient can be in a seated, lateral, or prone position. The sitting position offers more comfort for the awake patient.

The classical and conventional technique, which was the most commonly used and described by former practitioners, is based on the loss of resistance as published by Eason and Wyatt (1979).

This technique is much less practiced by centers specializing in regional anesthesia today because it represents a significant failure rate. The complications related to lesions of the parietal pleura can lead to pneumothorax, which has forced the authors to modify their technique and rely on an ultrasound-guided approach to verify the correct location of the needle in the paravertebral space.

In 2009 Luyet et al. described in a study based on cadaveric imaging a catheter placement in the paravertebral space under ultrasound guidance. Since then, many studies have demonstrated an interest in ultrasound guidance in the use of TPVB.

After aseptic disinfection, which should include the cervicothoracic para-vertebral areas up to the lower edge of the scapula, the regional anesthesiologist performs a T2 to T6 ultrasound location of the paravertebral region at the surgical site. A 50 mm 15-6 MHz linear probe is used.

The spinous process T1 to T8 is identified based on the C1 vertebra or from the lower edge of the scapula, which corresponds to T7, and the ultrasound probe is positioned on the spinous process in relation to the surgical site to be covered, the examiner visualizes the transverse process by lateral movement of the probe, and performing an oblique movement of the probe, three important anatomical structures are visualized: the typical double layer of the internal intercostal membrane, the transverse process and the respiratory movements of the parietal pleura. After skin anesthesia with 2% lidocaine (1 ml), the needle-guided out of the plane is positioned 1 cm caudal from the ultrasound probe. When the needle reaches the space between the internal intercostal membrane and the pleura, a local anesthetic is then administered over a period of 30 seconds.