Despite over a century of interest in this phenomenon, no single unifying theory has been comforted; however, postulations suggesting psychological, neurobiological, cognitive, and emotional etiologies have been offered.

**Psychodynamic**Theory****

No discussion of abstract psychological phenomena would be satisfactory without at least an allusion to Freud. Always in character, Freud suggests that delusions are manifestations of unresolved conflicts between an individual's psychological agencies - the superego, ego, and id. This imbroglio is none other than the repression of homosexual impulses emanating from the id. In an attempt to expiate unending denigration from the superego, the ego implements immature defenses, following the sequence of denial, reaction
formation, and finally, projection. The phenomenology of this sequence precipitates as the patient, initially, denies his homosexual impulses, and instead emphasizes his disgust for homosexuals. His repressed impulses are then projected externally, as he accuses others of harboring lascivious intentions. Thus, the inchoate psychic conflict, ultimately, manifests in the delusion that other men are trying to engage in lewd acts with him, inciting paranoia and distress.

**Anthropological Theory**

Roberts (1992) proposes a model with three stages.

- Pre-Psychotic: In this phase, much like the stress-diathesis model, a person with an innate vulnerability or predisposition to a psychotic type illness is exposed to a stressor, which serves as the antecedent.

- Acute phase: the person begins to experience unusual or idiosyncratic feelings, which become the seeds of delusions. If personal meaning is attributed to these ideas and sensations, 'simple delusions' are formed.

- Elaboration: 'simple delusions' - Further form is given to these ideas, which are expanded upon and elaborated. This personalized meaning and associated ideas become incorporated into current thinking, increasing the complexity and rigidity and further reinforcing any perceptual distortions and attribution of meaning.

**Neurobiological Theory**

Experts suggest that elevated dopaminergic transmission can increase 'signal to noise' differences in the neural network. Consequently, this hyperactive dopamine activity manifests as the tendency to ascribe unrelated external events with personal significance.

**Perceptual-Cognitive Theories**

This includes the 'salience' theory in which delusions are the result of imbalanced attention, where more attention is paid to certain idiosyncratic aspects of a situation, to the exclusion of more relevant information. This leads to a skewed decision-making process.

These faulty perceptual-cognitive processes may also be associated with a 'jumping to conclusions' tendency. People with this tendency spend less time reviewing the information before making decisions, are more likely to miss or misinterpret details, and feel more certain of their choices. These ideas become fixed, and perception becomes influenced by the faulty logic, which supports the idiosyncratic meaning attached to people, places, and situations. This impacts the accuracy of the patient's overall perceptions and conclusions, which subsequently impacts information integration and understanding, increasing the likelihood of mistaken interpretations of stimuli.

Brain network theory proposes that disconnections between essential parts of the default mode and semantic networks lead to perceptual-cognitive-affective integration difficulties and ineffective application of cognitive resources.

**Biographical Theory**

Trauma has been implicated as a risk factor for the development of psychosis and delusions, most particularly trauma involving violence of an interpersonal nature. Early childhood trauma has been linked with changes in the developing brain, including a shrinking of the hippocampus, hyperarousal of the amygdala, alterations in neurotransmitters e.g., dopamine, GABA, glutamate - and the subsequently increased diathesis towards delusional manifestations.

**Integrative Theory**

Van Der Gaag (2006) proposed an integrative neuropsychiatric 4-factor model by synthesizing several theoretical perspectives, suggesting that the onset of a delusion is multifactorial.

- A Biological Component - this leads to aberrant perceptions and salience of stimuli.

- A Cognitive Component - the aberrant perceptions are interpreted based on the person's history and integrated into their overall schemas.

- A Psychological Integrative Component - as perceptions become integrated into the person's overall worldview, they become reinforced by faulty logic, and further delusions precipitate.

- A Psychological Maintenance Component - as delusions become integrated into overall percepts, the delusions are maintained, further impacting perceptions.