Overall, treatment and management of children with acute gastroenteritis involve rehydration (oral or IV), diet selection, zinc supplementation, and additional therapies like probiotics.

IV rehydration is needed in babies under 6 months, patients with chronic illness, prematurity, fever above 38 C (100.4 F) if younger than 3 months, or between 3 months and 36 months if the patient has more than 39 C (102.2 F). Persistent emesis, bloody diarrhea, altered mental status (consciousness), sunken eyes, and decreased urine output are also red flags that may lead the clinician to consider giving the patient  IV fluids.

The treatment of choice is a low-osmolarity fluid, with 75 mEq of Na, 64 mEq of Cl, 20 mEq of K, and 75 mmol of glucose per liter; the total osmolarity should be 245 mOsm/L. In mild to moderate emesis, give ondansetron (4 mg for children 4 to 11 years, and double the doses for older children) is often considered for better oral rehydration. IV rehydration is done with a lactated Ringer's solution or normal saline at 20 mL/Kg body weight.

Antibiotics are considered in certain situations. They may reduce severity and duration, even the prevention of some complications like the spread infection. Among the most used antibiotics are ciprofloxacin, TMP-SMX, erythromycin, and metronidazole. However, antibiotics should be avoided when the following causative agents are known: Bacillus cereus, Clostridium, and some Salmonella species.

The use of probiotics has not yet been scientifically proven to assist in the recovery or the symptomatology; studies have been inconclusive. It is believed that when the illness is caused by C. difficile, probiotics might prevent diarrhea. In the case of rotavirus, antibiotics could cause a reduction in the diarrheal duration. Antispasmodic agents like loperamide are contraindicated in children presenting dysentery.