Coordination of care among all team members, including nurses, internists, nutritionists, surgeons, endocrinologists, nephrologists and, infectious disease specialists, is an essential factor in the management of pre-existing diabetes or NODAT in transplant patients. Adequate blood glucose control, as well as treatment of comorbidities, is the backbone in the management of NODAT as it increases patient survival and decreases the risk of graft rejection. Selecting the right immunosuppressants with the appropriate dose is one of the steps to prevent NODAT, but the risk of developing diabetes after transplantation should be weighed against the risk of transplant rejection. At the time of discharge, each caring team's responsibility is to explain the above to the patient. Also, education coordination by the nurses and clinicians of the patient and the family about the medical therapies and their side effects is critical as it can impact the patient survival.

Diagnosis and management of NODAT require an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) will typically be the ones to diagnose the condition and order the lab tests. They will also place the initial orders for therapeutic management, which nursing will administer. Nursing will also be responsible for monitoring patient response and serum glucose, documenting and reporting back to the prescribing clinician. Pharmacists can make medication recommendations based on the patient's current drug profile, comorbid conditions, verify dosing, and report recommendations to the nurses or prescribers. [Level 5]