The current methods to treat amblyopia and anisometropia are optical correction and penalization of the better eye with patching or topical atropine 1%. A certain degree of natural iso-emmetropization has also been observed to intervene to prevent amblyopia; nevertheless, evidence exists that anisometropia and amblyopia tend not to resolve without treatment.

Optical correction is effective in preventing amblyopia only if it is done when the visual cortex synapses are still plastic. A lower amount of anisometropia and a better visual acuity in the amblyopic eye at baseline increase the probability of resolving amblyopia and anisometropia.

Treatment compliance plays a prominent role in achieving functional results, with the best visual acuity being reached after 150 to 250 cumulative hours of therapy and 3 to 5 months for the amblyopia to be treated or stabilized.

Medical and parental monitoring is essential to optimize the response. The patient's age is also a key factor. Several studies have reported a minimal effect of age on treatment efficacy between 3 and 7 years of age and a reduced response after this age.

Alternative refractive treatments have also been reported to be safe and effective when spectacles and contact lenses are not well tolerated by the patient. Spectacles can cause prismatic aberrations (especially in peripheral gaze), reduced visual field, aniseikonia with impeded binocular vision, and social discomfort. Contact lenses tend to provide better contrast sensitivity and vision quality. However, drawbacks include intolerance to prolonged wear, risk of infection, economical cost, and inability to insert, remove and preserve the contact lenses correctly.

Surgical refractive treatments of the cornea can be considered in some cases. Radial keratotomy has been described to treat anisometropic teenagers.

Corneal interventions can correct refractive errors within + 5 and - 10 D due to the high incidence of corneal haze and refractive regression out of this range of defect.

Several intraocular surgeries have also been proposed. Epikeratophakia consists of clear crystalline lens removal followed by corneal lens application. This approach has been updated to include the implant of an intraocular lens (IOL). This procedure is similar to cataract surgery (but in this case, the individual's lens is clear and does not have cataract opacities), which provides minimally invasive surgery to the cornea, is safe and relatively predictable, but is associated with considerable risk of retina detachment and glaucoma, especially in myopic eyes.

Another approach, sparing the clear lens and saving the advantages of IOL implantation, is the implantation of phakic IOLs, in front of the clear lens, either fixated to the iris or placed in the posterior chamber.