For muscles to contract, the body must hydrolyze adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to yield energy. The ways muscles maintain ATP levels is contingent upon the conditions of the body.

Muscles can utilize glucose or glycogen in both aerobic or anaerobic manners. The glycolytic energy system tends to lead to lactate accumulation and subsequent pH decrease in muscle tissue, especially in the anaerobic setting.

Aerobic metabolism is typically utilized in exercises such as walking, while anaerobic metabolism participates in a high-intensity activity such as weightlifting.

The major source of ATP for cells is through the oxidative phosphorylation pathway; this is part of the aerobic pathway that occurs on the inner mitochondrial membrane and produces much more ATP than other metabolic pathways.

- Complex I: Receives electrons from NADH.

- Complex II: Receives electrons from succinate; the electrons from NADH and succinate are transferred by coenzyme Q10 to complex III

- Complex III: The electrons from here are transferred by cytochrome C to complex IV

- Complex IV: Electrons at this subunit are accepted by oxygen, which yields water.

- Complex V: ATP is created when the protons move back down the electron gradient.

During high-intensity exercises such as HIIT (high-intensity interval training), or intense weight training, muscles cycle through ATP rather quickly, resulting in a pool of ADP as a result. Phosphocreatine can donate a phosphate group to ADP to regenerate additional ATP, which affords muscle energy. Creatine kinase catalyzes this reaction.

During rest and low-intensity exercise, muscles can utilize fatty acids as substrates for energy production. Medium-chain fatty acids undergo beta-oxidation in the mitochondrial matrix. Long-chain fatty acids need to be transported from the cytosol into the mitochondria with the help of carnitine.

When a motor unit receives an excitation signal, the axon terminal releases acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter, onto receptors of the sarcolemma. This signal opens voltage-gated channels and creates an action potential which will pass along the T-tubules to conduct a coordinated signal deep into the muscle. When that depolarization reaches the sarcoplasmic reticulum, it will cause a release of its stored calcium ions.

When these calcium ions are released, they bind to troponin C in the sarcoplasm, which initiates unblocking of the actin-binding site on myosin due to tropomyosin. Essentially, calcium binds to troponin, which causes tropomyosin to unbind from the actin-myosin binding site exposing the site, which now allows the binding of actin and myosin together, which will create a contractile force and shortening of the sarcomere unit. ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP and phosphate when the myosin head causes this contraction. To relax from the contracted state, ATP must bind to myosin, which causes a release of the actin site and the return to the high energy state of myosin. This shortening and lengthening model is explainable by the sliding filament theory in which actin and myosin filaments slide past each other to shorten the length of the sarcomere. There are a few different types of muscle contractions.

Isometric contraction: The muscle is actively contracting, but there is no change in length due to equal and opposite forces in opposite directions.

- Holding a plank position, or carrying in groceries with the arm halfway flexed and held in position.

Concentric contraction: The muscle is actively contracting and decreasing its length due to greater muscle force relative to its opposing force, which approximates its attachment and origin.

- Dumbbell bicep curl, bench press, squats

Eccentric contraction = the muscle is actively contracting yet still increasing its length; the muscle contracts with less force than its opposing force.

- The “negative” portion of the exercise mentioned above

- The lowering portion of the bicep curl (from arm flexion->arm extension), the lowering portion of the bench press (from arm extension and pectoral flexion to arm flexion and pectoral extension), and the lowering portion of a squat from standing to a squat position