With the increased strain on the medical system worldwide and since Six Sigma is a successful management method in manufacturing, the use of Six Sigma may be beneficial to address the growing issues in healthcare. Evidence-based medicine (EBM) has been the basis for many quality improvement projects, including those executed with Six Sigma.

An increase in patient wait times and a decrease in patient satisfaction have occurred in multiple medical settings.

Since Six Sigma focuses on reducing errors and service variability, contributing to process efficiency, its use has improved hospital and outpatient organizational effectiveness.

Studies in the literature utilizing Six Sigma have shown to reduce inpatient length of stay and improve patient satisfaction.

Using Six Sigma in hip fracture surgery resulted in improved timely surgical care, better detection of complications, and reduced resource consumption with shorter lengths of stay and lower hospital costs.

The use of Six Sigma techniques in an ophthalmology outpatient setting demonstrated a reduction in the duration and variability of time spent by patients at the clinic. The clinic’s service capacity was also increased.

Six Sigma has also been shown to increase the rate patients receive primary care preventative services; in 2 clinics studied, one had a rate of 16.3% versus 100% in the Six Sigma method clinic.

Overall, the Six Sigma method can be a powerful tool in reducing medical errors and medical costs while enhancing patient safety.