The electrophysiologic study consists of a systematic analysis of dysrhythmias by recording and measuring a variety of electrophysiologic events with the patient in the basal state and by evaluating the patient's response to programmed electrical stimulation. To perform and interpret the study correctly, we have to understand certain concepts and methods, including the different types of electrogram recordings, measurement of atrioventricular (A-V) conduction intervals, activation mapping, and response to programmed electrical stimulation. Knowledge of the significance of the various responses, particularly to aggressive stimulation protocols, is mandatory before employing such responses to make clinical judgments.

**Catheter Positioning**

This depends on the type of ablation procedure.

- AVNRT/AVRT

- HRA catheter: quadripolar fixed curve catheter in the right atrium near the SAN.

- His catheter: quadripolar catheter fixed curve at the His region, it passes from the IVC and just passes the tricuspid valve to be straddling both the low RA and the RV, and it should have three recordings (A-H-V) catheters.

- RV catheter: quadripolar fixed curve catheter at the RV apex, and can move the RVOT.

- Decapolar fixed or steerable catheter into the coronary sinus.

- Atrial flutter: The same basic catheters, plus the Halo catheter, it’s a duo Decapolar catheter, which occupies the whole RA to determine the activation sequence in case of atrial flutter.

- Atrial fibrillation: It involves the basic catheters; the Lasso catheter is introduced, in addition to the ablation catheter to map the pulmonary veins and test for exit block.

- VT ablation: The catheter used in VT ablation may include, RVA and the C.S catheter, together with the steerable deflectable ablation catheter.

**Electrogram Recordings**

Electrograms can be recorded as unfiltered or filtered unipolar signals or bipolar signals.

- Unipolar signals provide precise activation and give directional information. Unfiltered shows significant far-field activity is recorded that can make it difficult to see small local unipolar signals without increasing the size of the signal so much it swamps the amplifier. Respiratory drift is another problem. Filtering the unipolar signal gives precise localization and removes far-field activity but often results in a very small signal, particularly in infarcted tissue.

- Bipolar signal approximates the timing recorded by the filtered unipolar signal, particularly with narrow interelectrode distances (less than or equal to 2 mm) and removes far-field signals, but does not give the directional information of the unfiltered unipolar signal. For ablation, particularly for the WPW syndrome and idiopathic PVCs/VT, it is important to record both simultaneously to assure the earliest components of the bipolar signal are derived from the distal pole, which is used for ablation, and not the proximal pole.

**Mapping System**

Cardiac mapping is the process by which arrhythmias are characterized and localized. Conventional mapping involves acquiring electrogram data from fixed and moving catheters and creating mental activation maps with two-dimensional fluoroscopic images.

Three-dimensional anatomic localization of the catheter assists in mapping and ablation. These technologies involve the acquisition of multiple electrogram locations to provide a high-resolution activation, voltage, or propagation map. In addition to correlating local electrograms to three-dimensional cardiac structures, these newer mapping techniques reduce radiation exposure to the patient and physician. The most widely used electroanatomic mapping system localizes the mapping and ablation catheter through a magnetic field. Three coils located beneath the patient generate ultra-low magnetic fields that temporally and spatially code the area within the patient. With a magnetic field sensor in its tip that is referenced to an externally located patch on the patient, the catheter can be displayed and recorded in three dimensions with intracardiac electrograms.

Another technology offers electroanatomic mapping by creating electrical fields between opposing pairs of patch electrodes located on the patient’s chest. Six patches are placed on the body to create three orthogonal axes with the heart located centrally. A transthoracic electrical field is created through each pair of opposing patch electrodes, and the mapping catheter delivers this signal for processing.

Magnetic navigational systems are more frequently being utilized for mapping and ablation of various arrhythmias as well as for guidance in the placement of left ventricular leads. This system uses large external magnets that sit closely on each side of the patient allowing for magnetic navigation of percutaneous devices. The catheters or guide-wires have small magnetic tips that respond to changes in magnetic field vectors that are programmed by the physician remotely. Advantages of this approach include a softer catheter tip which likely reduces the trauma that can occur with stiffer ablation catheters as well as decreasing physician exposure to radiation. Other robotic navigation systems are also in development.

**Measurements of the Basic Intervals**

- P-A interval: 25 ms to 55 ms, measured from the earliest P wave activity on the surface ECG to the earliest a, recorded on the HBE, representing the conduction between the SAN and the AVN to the His.

- A-H interval: 55 ms to 125 ms, measured from the earliest reproducible A wave on the HBE to the H onset of the His deflection on HBE., representing the conduction from the Low RA to the AVN and then to the His.

- H-V interval: 35 ms to 55 ms, measured from the most reproducible His deflection on the HBE to the earliest V on the surface ECG, representing the time of conduction from the His to the ventricular myocardium.

**Radiofrequency Ablation**

- Radiofrequency ablation uses alternating current delivered between the catheter tip and grounding source to deliver energy to tissue, resulting in necrosis.