There is no clear-cut diagnostic approach to fever of unknown origin (FUO). Thorough history with a focus on the most probable etiology based on the patient’s symptoms is the key to pinpoint the origin of FUO. Information about previous illnesses, localizing symptoms, alcohol intake, home medications, occupational exposures, pets, travel, and familial disorders should not be overlooked. Constellation of patient-reported symptoms should help providers narrow down the etiology of the etiologic category of fevers as each of these has clinical hallmarks. For example, if a patient presents with B-symptoms, early satiety, and significant weight loss, the provider should pursue a malignancy workup. On the other hand, if a patient presents with rigors, an infectious etiology should be considered, while joint involvement is a hallmark of rheumatologic disorders.

**Important Aspects of History**

- Family history

- Immunization history

- Dental history

- Occupational history

- Travel history

- Nutrition and weight history

- Drug history (over-the-counter medications, illicit substances)

- Sexual history

- Recreational habits

- Animal contacts

- Surgery, trauma, or procedures

**Fever Patterns**

Importantly, fevers should be verified in a clinical setting, and fever patterns should be analyzed. Fever pattern analysis can provide additional clues to specific infectious culprits.

- Tertian or quartan fever in prolonged malaria (occurring every third or fourth day)

- Undulant fever in brucellosis (fevers and sweats in the evening, resolving by morning)

- Tick-borne relapsing fever in borreliosis (week-long fevers with week-long remissions)

- Pel-Ebstein fever in Hodgkin disease (week-long high fevers with week-long remissions)

- Periodic fevers in cyclic neutropenia

- Double quotidian fever (two fever spikes a day) in adult Still disease, malaria, and typhoid

**Historical Clues and Physical Examination in Infectious Causes of FUO**

If an infectious etiology is likely, history of presenting illness should include prior invasive procedures/surgeries, dentition, TB exposure, pet contacts, mosquito/tick bites, rodent exposure, history of blood transfusions, and immunosuppressive drugs.

- In case of an intraabdominal abscess, perinephric abscess, psoas abscess there would be a previous history of abdominal surgery, trauma, or a history of peritonitis, endoscopy, urologic or gynecologic procedures.

- A history of exposure to unpasteurized dairy may suggest brucellosis, Q fever, Yersinia enterocolitica.

- Exposure to birds may suggest Chlamydia psittaci infection.

- Exposure to cats may suggest toxoplasmosis or cat scratch disease.

- Consider HIV, disseminated gonorrhea in travelers, and sexual encounters without barrier precautions.

- Acute Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection in day care centers as it spreads easily.

Important physical exam findings include a new heart murmur which could be suggestive of bacterial endocarditis, spinal tenderness indicating vertebral osteomyelitis, splenomegaly concerning for miliary TB, epstein-barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV) and epididymal nodule concerning for extrapulmonary TB.

**Historical Clues and Physical Examination in Malignant Causes of FUO**

When considering malignancy, it is important to inquire about unintentional weight loss, age-appropriate cancer screening, family history of cancer, smoking, and alcohol use. On physical exam, one could notice relative bradycardia suggestive of lymphoma/ central nervous system (CNS) malignancy, a new heart murmur pointing toward atrial myxoma, or sternal tenderness which could be concerning for a myeloproliferative disorder. Isolated hepatomegaly and FUO could be indicative of a hepatoma or liver metastases.

**Historical Clues and Physical Examination in non Infectious Causes of FUO**

Collagen vascular and autoimmune diseases can manifest as FUO if the fever precedes other, more specific manifestations such as arthritis, pneumonitis, or renal involvement. When considering rheumatologic disorder and FUO, ask about muscle and joint pain/stiffness, oral ulcers, and family history of autoimmune conditions. Rheumatologic etiology of FUO is less likely if a patient reports symptoms of rigors or chills. Fever distribution analysis could differentiate periarteritis nodosa (morning fevers) vs. adult Still disease (double quotidian). On physical exam, it is important to look for oral ulcers (Behcet disease, systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE]), unequal pulses (Takayasu arteritis), lymphadenopathy (SLE, RA, sarcoidosis), and rashes (sarcoidosis, SLE, adult Still disease). An epididymal nodule is a clue for periarteritis nodosa, SLE, and sarcoidosis whereas hepatomegaly without splenomegaly argues against rheumatologic disorders.

**Historical Clues and Physical Examination in Miscellaneous Causes of FUO**

Cirrhosis and Crohn disease are often overlooked as miscellaneous causes of FUO. If suspected, it is important to inquire about past medical history, history of alcohol intake, intravenous drug use, non-alcoholic hepatosteatosis (NASH), and hepatitis. On physical examination, splenomegaly is an important diagnostic clue for Crohn disease and liver cirrhosis.