Modafinil is available exclusively in the form of 100 mg and 200 mg oral tablets; the usual dose is 200mg once daily. It is classified as a control substance class IV drug.

**Adult Dosing**

The recommended dose of modafinil tablets in the treatment of narcolepsy or obstructive sleep apnea is  200 mg orally administered once a day in the morning.

For treatment of shift work disorder, modafinil 200 mg once a day is taken about one hour before the start of the work shift.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pediatric Use**: Effectiveness and safety in pediatric patients are not established. Modafinil is not FDA-approved for use in the pediatric population for any indication. Serious skin rashes, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and erythema multiforme major (EMM), have been reported with modafinil use in pediatric patients.

**Geriatric Use:**In elderly patients, modafinil and metabolite elimination might be reduced, so consider using lower doses and closely monitor patients.

**Pregnancy:**It is classified as pregnancy category C medicine by FDA. There is no evidence to suggest or exclude harm to the human fetus associated with modafinil. However, an increased risk of abortion and intrauterine growth restriction has been observed in some animal studies. The risks and benefits of therapy during pregnancy should be carefully considered.

**Lactating Women:**It is unknown if modafinil is excreted in breast milk. Use with caution, especially if the newborn infant is exclusively breastfed.

**Hepatic Impairment:**In patients with severe hepatic impairment, modafinil dose should be reduced by one-half of the usual dosage indicated for the patients. Dose reduction to a maximum of 100mg daily is recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment:**Modafinil should be used with caution in patients with severe renal impairment. However, no recommendations for renal dosing exist.