Patients presenting with radiographic evidence of pulmonary nodules, suspected or known diagnosis of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia or unexplained findings such as hypoxemia, dyspnea, hemoptysis, cyanosis, clubbing, or brain abscess should prompt further investigation.

**Shunt Fraction Measurement**

The normal fraction of cardiac output that shunts from right-to-left is less than 5%. In patients with pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs), this fraction is increased. Dines and colleagues found that out of 21 patients with PAVM who underwent shunt determination were found to have shunts between 9.5 and 42%.

**Chest Radiography**

Chest radiography is a simple, inexpensive, low radiation technique that should be used for the initial screening of a PAVM. Frontal and lateral views should be obtained. Typical PAVMs should appear as well-defined lesions with feeding vessels on radiography. This imaging modality, however, has a low sensitivity for detecting smaller sized PAVMs.

**Transthoracic Contrast Echocardiography (TTCE)**

The screening test of choice is transthoracic contrast echocardiography (TTCE), which has a sensitivity of 95%-100%.

**Radionuclide Perfusion Lung Scanning**

This test can be useful in situations where echocardiography or the 100 percent oxygen method is not readily available. It involves the peripheral injection of macro aggregated albumin labeled with technetium-99m (99mTc). In healthy individuals, the radiolabeled particles will be filtered by pulmonary capillaries. When a right-to-left shunt is present, such as a pulmonary arteriovenous malformation, the radiolabeled particles pass through the lungs and are subsequently filtered by capillary beds in other organs such as the brain and kidneys.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

CT is the imaging modality of choice for confirmation of PAVM and should be performed in patients with either high suspicion of PAVM or grade 2 or 3 shunts by TTCE. Contrast enhancement will show a PAVM sac with both feeding and draining vessels. Generally, if the CT scan shows one or more PAVM with a feeding artery diameter ≥ 2 to 3 mm, the patient should be referred for pulmonary angiography. If the feeding artery diameter is < 2 mm, pulmonary angiography can be deferred unless there are clinical features suggestive of symptomatic PAVM.

**Pulmonary Angiography**

Pulmonary angiography is the gold standard for diagnosis of PAVM and is utilized to define the vascular anatomy for cases that are suitable for embolization therapy. Contrast is directly introduced into the feeding artery to determine the vasculature of the lesion accurately. Contrast is also injected into the left and right main pulmonary arteries to detect additional lesions that are also amenable to embolization therapy.

**Other Diagnostic Tests**

Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is not currently used for screening of PAVM. This modality is accurate in the detection of PAVM; however, it is expensive, not routinely available, and requires specialized expertise in the interpretation of imaging.

**Screening for HHT**

In patients without a known diagnosis of HHT with high suspicion of a PAVM, it is vital to perform a thorough history and physical exam for supporting evidence of the diagnosis. Family members of patients with HHT should also be routinely screened, as there is a high incidence of unsuspected pulmonary and cerebral AVM in family members of patients with HHT.

If available, routine genetic screening is preferred in all family members. In patients found to have HHT genotype, further investigation would include chest radiography and shunt fraction measurement. In those instances where genetic testing is not available, screening protocols can be used as described by Haitjema and colleagues.