Addison disease usually has an insidious and gradual onset of non-specific symptoms, often resulting in delayed diagnosis. In many cases, the diagnosis is made only after the patient is presented with an acute adrenal crisis (hypotension, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hypoglycemia) precipitated by a stressful illness or triggering factors such as infection, trauma, surgery, vomiting, and diarrhea.

Addison disease can occur at any age but most often presents during the second to third decade of life. Symptoms may be quite non-specific and include fatigue, generalized weakness, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dizziness, tachycardia, and/or postural hypotension. Hyperpigmentation of skin and mucous membranes can be diffuse and most prominent in sun-exposed areas, often seen later in the course of the disease. This hyperpigmentation is due to elevated ACTH (as both ACTH and melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) derived from the same precursor POMC) levels. Due to its variable presentation, a high index of suspicion for Addison disease is necessary when evaluating a conglomeration of non-specific symptoms, including unexplained fatigue, poor appetite, chronic abdominal pain, or weight loss, hyponatremia with or without hyperkalemia, and/or hypotension can be seen in Addisons disease. Addisonian crisis manifests with severe dehydration, refractory hypotension, and shock.

Addisonian crisis should be suspected in:

- Patients receiving corticosteroids

- Hemodynamically unstable patients despite aggressive fluid therapy

- Septic shock