Most of the brachial plexus branches pass through the arm; the following nerves pass through the upper arm

**Musculocutaneous nerve:**which innervates the biceps, coracobrachialis, and brachialis muscles. Plus, it gives a sensory branch to the lateral forearm and articular branch to the elbow. Its origin is the lateral cord of the brachial plexus (C5,6,7). The nerve runs downward and laterally piercing the coracobrachialis muscle then runs between the biceps and brachialis muscles. It terminates as the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm.

**Median nerve:**originates from the medial and lateral cord of the brachial plexus. It runs downward and lateral to the brachial artery in the upper arm halfway its course crosses the artery to reside on its medial side. The median nerve gives no branches to the arm except for small vasomotor branches to the brachial artery.

**Ulnar nerve:**this nerve gives no branches in the arm, mainly innervates the hand. The origin of the ulnar nerve is from the eighth cervical and first thoracic roots of the brachial plexus. The ulnar nerve runs downward at the medial side of the brachial artery. At the level of the insertion of the coracobrachialis, it pierces the medial fascial septum to enter the posterior compartment then the nerve runs posteriorly to the medial epicondyle of the humerus.

**Radial nerve:**originates from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus. The nerve rotates around the humerus in the spinal groove accompanied by the profunda artery, and it lies directly in contact with the humerus shaft. It goes through the lateral fascial septum downward and in front of the cubital fossa between the brachialis and brachioradialis. It gives cutaneous branches as the posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm, inferior lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm and posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm. And muscular branches to triceps brachii, anconeus, brachioradialis, and extensor carpi radialis longus.