Poisoning with clonidine classically presents with somnolence, respiratory depression, hypotension, bradycardia, and miosis. Alteration in the level of consciousness usually presents within the first one and a half hours, preceding any cardiovascular effects, which usually present within 4 hours. Of note, patients who ingest large amounts may initially have early hypertension, which then progresses to hypotension. This is poorly described in the literature, but it is likely related to peak serum concentrations and baseline sympathetic tone prior to clonidine administration. Hypothermia is also observed, which can help differentiate from opioid toxicity as this is not observed in those cases.

Many sources report dose-dependent and age-dependent responses, although neither is well established. It is suggested that cardiovascular and respiratory effects are limited to ingestions of greater than 0.01 mg/kg to 0.02 mg/kg, while other sources document toxicity after ingestion of only 0.2 mg. One study done on adults showed the severity of bradycardia to be consistently dose-dependent, while hypotension was much more variable in severity, time of onset, and duration. Age affects the sensitivity of presynaptic A-2 receptors and decreases the reuptake of NE so that elderly patients will have an overall increase in NE concentration at baseline compared to younger patients. This can attenuate the effects of clonidine and the doses required to cause toxicity. A study done on pediatric overdoses shows the highest incidence of clinical effects in the 0 to 4 years age group compared to five to eight-year and nine to 12 year age groups.

Respiratory depression is most common in children and may require mechanical ventilation. Respiratory failure often occurs within a few hours of a toxic ingestion.