# Continuing Education Activity

Pulmonary barotrauma related to self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA) diving is due to lung overexpansion when a diver returns to the surface without exhaling or when the air becomes trapped in the lung. This activity reviews the diagnosis, management, and treatment of pulmonary barotrauma related to SCUBA diving highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of diving pulmonary barotrauma.
- Review the evaluation of diving pulmonary barotrauma.
- Explain the treatment and management options available for diving pulmonary barotrauma.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication when dealing with diving, pulmonary barotrauma, and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Diving in open waters is popular. It is enjoyed by novices and professionals alike. Many people dive for recreation, competitive sport, commercial employment, and military training. Diving as a profession can be dated back to more than 5000 years, yet diving-related diseases were not described until Paul Bert wrote about caisson disease in 1878. Symptoms of caisson disease were observed among bridge workers after finishing their shifts underwater and coming back to the surface. These symptoms included dizzy spells, difficulty breathing, and sharp pain in the abdomen or joints. The caisson workers often said that they felt well while working. This was due to their being rested at the start of the shift compared to being exhausted when the workday was through. The workers would often have intense back pain that left them bent over, which is how caisson disease earned the nickname "the bends."

Pulmonary barotrauma is a potential diving injury. Pulmonary barotrauma can occur during self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA) diving or free diving. It can happen during descent (negative pulmonary barotrauma or lung squeeze) or during ascent (positive pulmonary barotrauma is also known as pulmonary overinflation syndrome (POIS).

# Etiology

According to Boyle’s law, which states that at a constant temperature, a volume of a gas varies inversely with the pressure to which it is subjected, P1V1= P2V2.

Transpulmonary pressures of more than 60 to 70 mmHg can cause an alveolar rupture.

According to Henry's law, the solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the pressure exerted on the gas and liquid. Thus when the cap of a soda pop bottle is removed, soda begins to bubble as gas is released from the liquid. As such, when nitrogen in a diver’s tank dissolves in the diver’s fatty tissues or synovial fluid at depth, nitrogen will move out from those tissues as the diver ascends to the surface (a lower pressure environment). This happens slowly and gradually if the diver ascends progressively and slowly, and the nitrogen from the bloodstream enters the lungs and is exhaled out. However, if the diver ascends rapidly, nitrogen exits tissues quickly and forms bubbles. When bubbles are formed, they can affect tissues in many ways. They can constrict blood vessels causing ischemic injury. This can be deleterious when occurring in critical areas in the brain. The bubbles can also form a surface to which proteins in the bloodstream can cling, unravel, and begin a clotting or inflammatory cascade. This cascade can lead to endothelial breakdown and permanent tissue damage.

# Epidemiology

There are 9 million divers worldwide, with three million located in the United States. The median age is 30 years old, and 60% are male, while 40% are female.

# Pathophysiology

The alveoli are the smallest lung units where oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange take place. Under decreasing pressure and expanding volume, the alveoli will rupture along with their surrounding blood vessels. The alveoli will be flooded with blood and debris and will collapse. Alveoli are located centrally and peripherally. Depending on the location of the ruptured collapsed alveoli, air will leak out. Generally, air travels to five areas in the body.

# History and Physical

Physical signs and symptoms of pulmonary barotrauma related to SCUBA diving can be subtle with pneumomediastinum or subcutaneous emphysema.

Subcutaneous emphysema in the cervical region can lead to voice changes, difficulty swallowing, choking, or foreign body sensation. Crepitus or a crackling sensation can be felt under the skin as air travels through the subcutaneous tissues. Air can track down the esophagus and cause pneumoperitoneum.

Air emboli are formed when air is forced into the capillaries, pulmonary veins, and central circulation. These bubbles collect in the heart or brain and obstruct blood flow. The damaged epithelial and endothelial cells release inflammatory mediators. This damage to the cells leads to leaky vessels causing swelling and edema. In the brain, this manifests as cerebral edema. The initial presentation of arterial gas embolism is the loss of consciousness, seizure, and cardiac arrest due to lack of blood flow in the large vessels or air gas emboli in the brainstem.

An inquiry should be made regarding previous decompression injuries, pulmonary blobs, Marfan syndrome, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pregnancy, and any prior pulmonary injuries or surgeries.

# Evaluation

A diver with suspected pulmonary barotrauma needs prompt medical evaluation and treatment. Upon arrival at the medical facility, a history, physical exam, basic labs, electrocardiogram (EKG), and chest roentgenogram are required.

Chest radiograph most commonly will reveal pneumomediastinum, but pneumothorax can be present. Edema or infiltrates may also be present.

A complete blood count can help determine if an infection is present, and if hematocrit is more than 48%, the chance of neurologic sequelae one month after the injury is high. Rising serum creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) indicates tissue damage due to microemboli. EKG can reveal tachycardia, arrhythmias, or myocardial infarction. Pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas can indicate hypoxia. Then, the need for recompression and hyperbaric oxygen therapy needs to be efficiently and accurately assessed for the patient.

# Treatment / Management

The diver should be stabilized with basic and advanced cardiac life support. Intravenous access should be obtained along with the application of supplemental oxygen. Administration of crystalloid intravenous fluid for hydration is recommended. Perform intubation in patients who have an unstable airway or have persistent hypoxia despite breathing 100% oxygen.

No specific treatment is required for mild cases of pneumomediastinum as air will reabsorb on its own.

Treatment for arterial gas embolism related to pulmonary barotrauma should ideally be completed within the first two hours. This provides the most benefit and best chance of complete resolution of symptoms. Any delays in recompression and hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) of more than six hours are associated with worse outcomes.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of pulmonary barotrauma related to SCUBA diving includes:

- Drowning

- Near drowning

- Myocardial infarction

- Pulmonary embolism

- Cerebral vascular accident

- Carotid artery dissection

- Immersion pulmonary edema

- Asthma exacerbation

- Laryngospasm

- Marine envenomation

- Contaminated gas toxicities

# Prognosis

The prognosis for pulmonary barotrauma related to SCUBA diving depends on the severity of and type of pulmonary barotrauma suffered. Mild cases of pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax resolve with little or no treatment. Complete resolution occurs in most cases.

# Complications

Complications of pulmonary barotrauma due to lung overexpansion while surfacing from SCUBA diving include pneumomediastinum, pneumopericardium, pneumoperitoneum, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, tension pneumothorax, and air gas embolism. Cerebral air gas embolism is the most devastating and feared complication.

Aspiration pneumonitis, pneumonia, pleural effusions, empyema, pyopneumothorax, scarring, fibrosis, and decreased lung function have been documented in patients after pulmonary barotrauma injuries.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Divers with preexisting or prior lung disease are at increased risk of pulmonary barotrauma while diving.

Following a pre-diving checklist, assessing equipment for proper functioning before each dive, and adhering to safe diving practices with appropriate education and training is paramount to saving lives and preventing future injury.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

More and more individuals from all age groups are learning and continuing to dive. Barotrauma is the most commonly reported diving-related injury, with arterial gas embolism-related pulmonary barotrauma being the second most common diving-related cause of death. Divers that suffer any form of pulmonary barotrauma need to be medically evaluated before returning to diving. Health care providers need to be aware of the recommendations for fitness to dive.