Blepharospasm is a disease that results in an increased rate of bilateral eyelid closure, mainly attributed to the involuntary contraction of the orbicularis oculi muscles.

The role of environmental factors in BEB is supported by studies showing the association of underlying eye disease and the antecedent of a traumatic stressor as triggers of the disease.

Structural and functional mechanisms are thought to occur together as the condition is thought to be due to a structural defect that leads to neurotransmitter dysregulation.

**Blink Reflex**

Patients with BEB have an increased blinking rate and an increased response in the R2 phase of the trigeminal blinking reflex (TBR). TBR is a physiologic response that consists of two phases: phase R1 begins with corneal stimulation and consists of an afferent pathway that travels through the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve to reach the trigeminal nucleus in the brainstem. This phase is unilateral. After reaching the trigeminal nucleus, signals are sent to the facial nucleus bilaterally, which results in the R2 phase of the TBR.

The R2 phase is the efferent phase of the reflex, and it is carried by the zygomatic, buccal, and temporal branches of the facial nerve to reach the muscles of facial expression and result in their contraction bilaterally. As previously mentioned, patients with BEB exhibit a more intense R2 phase of the TBR as compared to healthy subjects.

Specific changes in brain structures have been reported by many authors. In one study performed by Etgen et al., it was found that patients with BEB exhibit gray matter increase bilaterally at the level of the putamen independent of the duration of the blepharospasm and a gray matter decrease in parietal lobes that appear to correlate with BEB duration. This finding is also supported by the fact that there is an increased glucose metabolism in the thalamus, as was evidenced by Suzuki et al.

Functional magnetic resonance imaging has also been used to evaluate patients with BEB. When compared with healthy subjects, it was found that the anterior visual cortex, the thalamus, anterior cingulate cortex, primary motor cortex, and superior cerebellum exhibit a greater activation with voluntary and involuntary blinking.

**Anterior Segment Disease**

As there is an association between prior anterior segment diseases of the eye and an increased risk of developing blepharospasm it is thought that in people who are predisposed to blepharospasm, because of either genetic abnormalities or abnormalities in neurological signaling, there is a failure to regulate the blinking reflex leading to the development of trigeminal hyperexcitability and involuntary eyelid closure.