The obturator nerve arises from the second through fourth lumbar plexus nerve roots. These roots form the obturator nerve, which travels along the iliopectineal line and descends through the muscle fibers of the psoas major muscle. The nerve emerges from the medial border of the psoas major near the pelvic brim. Then, the obturator nerve runs posterior to the common iliac arteries and continues on the lateral side of the internal iliac artery and distal segment of the ureter as it descends towards the obturator canal. In the lower pelvis, it courses anterior to the obturator vessels. The nerve exits the pelvis en route to the medial thigh by passing through the obturator canal. Near the obturator canal, it divides into the anterior and posterior divisions. The anterior branch of the obturator nerve continues its course between the adductor longus and adductor brevis and eventually terminates as the cutaneous branch of the obturator nerve. The posterior branch travels between the adductor brevis and the adductor magnus.

The obturator nerve provides sensory innervation to the skin of the medial region of the upper thigh via the terminal branch of the anterior division. It also provides motor innervation to the adductor muscles of the lower leg: the adductor longus, external obturator, adductor magnus, adductor brevis, and gracilis. Specifically, the anterior branch of the obturator nerve innervates the adductor brevis, adductor longus, gracilis, and in rare circumstances, the pectineus. The posterior branch of the obturator nerve provides innervation to the adductor magnus, adductor brevis, and occasionally the adductor longus and obturator externus. Furthermore, the obturator nerve provides articular branches to the hip and knee joints. In terms of cutaneous innervation, the anterior branch of the obturator nerve supplies the medial thigh, and just above the medial knee.