In acute sickle cell hepatic crisis, serum alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) are 1-3 times above normal. They can go up to the thousands, with a rapid downward trend once the crisis is resolved. Serum bilirubin with higher conjugated bilirubin can be up to 15 mg/dL, but rarely above. There is no synthetic liver failure in this crisis, and this would be characterized by a prolonged international normalized ratio (INR) above 1.5.

In acute hepatic sequestration, an acute drop in hemoglobin is noted, along with significant reticulocytosis. Bilirubin can also be significantly elevated up to 24 mg/dL, with fractionated bilirubin being in the conjugated form. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is also elevated as high as 650 IU/L, with normal transaminases.

Acute sickle intrahepatic cholestasis causes extremely high elevation of bilirubin, reports in the 200s are noted, AST and ALT levels are above 1000 mg/dL, ALP can be normal or as high as 1000 IU/L. Bleeding diathesis is reflected in the elevated prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), INR, and hypofibrinogenemia. Renal function panel can be significant for elevated creatinine as this condition is associated with acute renal failure.

In overt liver failure, workup reveals extremely high PT, serum bilirubin, and mildly elevated transaminases.

Acute viral hepatitis can be diagnosed in those patients with SCD. They have very high transaminases up to 1000 IU/mL, and bilirubin averages around 45 mg/dL, which is higher than patients without SCD. Patients with chronic viral hepatitis usually have persistently elevated transaminases, prompting further workup for hepatitis serologies.

In patients with transfusion iron overload, serum ferritin levels can be used to estimate iron levels. However, these should be obtained when patients are not in an acute vaso-occlusive crisis. However, the gold standard of iron store assessment is the hepatic iron concentration (HIC), which can be determined by liver biopsy and atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The HIC in liver fibrosis is >15 mg/g (normal 0.4 to 2.2 mg/g). Other imaging modalities such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can also be utilized.

In patients with acute cholecystitis, there can be leukocytosis and mild elevation in transaminases. In contrast, in choledocholithiasis, there is also an elevation in bilirubin and ALP levels secondary to biliary obstruction. Different imaging modalities, including ultrasound and hepatobiliary radionuclide scans, can be used to diagnose these patients if etiology is unclear.

In sickle cell cholangiopathy, laboratory values are significant for elevated direct bilirubin, ALP, and transaminases.