**Common Complications**

- Urinary retention

- Chronic retention

- Urinary tract infection (due to incomplete emptying)

- Haematuria

- Bladder calculi

Other complications may arise as a result of catheterization for management of LUTS in BPH and include:

- Failed trial without catheter

- Long-term catheter complications (blocked catheters, retention, haematuria, urinary tract infection)

**Urinary Retention**

International studies have demonstrated that BPH accounts for over two-thirds of cases of acute urinary retention.

Men with BPH can also develop chronic retention. This is usually chronic high-pressure retention due to high voiding detrusor pressures in the bladder as a result of outflow obstruction.

**Urinary Tract Infections**

This occurs due to incomplete bladder emptying resulting in incomplete bladder emptying and stagnant urine. Recurrent infections may indicate a need for treatment or long-term antibiotics to prevent associated co-morbidity (admissions with urosepsis).

**Haematuria**

This is a common complication in BPH and a common cause for referral for further investigation. Due to the increased vascularity of larger prostate vessels may be disrupted, causing bleeding.

**High-pressure Chronic Retention**

Chronic retention is commonly referred to as either high or low-pressure retention. High-pressure chronic retention commonly occurs in bladder outflow obstruction as a result of high detrusor pressures required to overcome the obstruction (BPH). Persistence of this high-pressure causes reflux and subsequent hydronephrosis.

Management consists of catheterization to relieve the bladder pressure and definitive management to prevent retention and further renal dysfunction. Management options include TURP or long-term catheter/intermittent self-catheter. Following catheterization, the patient may undergo post-obstructive diuresis. This is characterized by increased urine output in the following 24 to 72 hours and may require IV fluid supplementation if exceeding >200 ml per hour. There is no evidence to suggest any benefit in gradual vs. rapid decompression, and so patients should be left on free drainage following catheterization for HPCR.