Case management is defined as a health care process in which a professional helps a patient or client develop a plan that coordinates and integrates the support services that the patient/client needs to optimize the healthcare and psychosocial possible goals and outcomes.

Case management is often a part of other healthcare activities embodied in terms such as care management, care coordination, and disease management. All these terms have overlapping definitions and identities. Case management is a fundamental element of these other activities. Care management, frequently used in the payer context, is somewhat of an umbrella term and describes a program composed of a broad set of activities and tasks that include the healthcare-related aspects of case management but also extends to a wide array of services, supports, benefits, and entitlements spanning many domains to which the patient/client may have access, including healthy lifestyle programs, recreational activities, and social enrichment programs within a benefit plan.

Care coordination also encompasses the activities and tasks included in case management but is seen in a broader programmatic context and frequently is discussed in the population health context as a means for an organization or institution pursuing population health strategies to manage the many needs of a population of patients, often by determining specific sub-groups who should receive case management services.

Since health care is often likened to a journey, other metaphors like travel companion, travel agent, and travel guide are used that attempt to capture not only the centrality of case management to the health care journey but also the need for navigational assistance in helping to shape the itinerary of the health care journey for the patient/client.

The components of case management are many. Hudon et al. summarize several descriptions of case management including those from the Case Management Society of America and the National Case Management Network of Canada and describe six core elements which include patient identification and eligibility determination, assessment, care planning along with goal setting, plan implementation, plan monitoring, and transition and discharge.

In a literature review, Lukersmith et al. identified 79 articles that identified 22 definitions of case management, described five models, and delineated 17 key components to case management comprising 69 activities and tasks that include and build upon the six core elements.

Since case management is so encompassing as a concept and a set of activities and tasks in health care, there are many perspectives from which to understand and view case management. Case management may be used by health insurers/payers, hospitals, health systems, physician practices, and community health organizations. Also, case management may be directed at broad populations of patients in primary care with various chronic conditions or a more narrowly defined population of patients affected by a specific clinical circumstance or disease, such as patients with brain injury. Case management goes from the identification and engagement of patients/clients through the assessment and care planning steps and culminating in monitoring the care described in the care plan and ultimately achieving the targeted outcomes in a measurable manner. The fundamental ingredient to case management is the planning of care, which results in a care plan that essentially is the roadmap for a given patient/client to navigate through.