Synthetic melatonin is a dietary supplement. The FDA does not regulate supplements. Therefore, melatonin is not officially FDA-approved for any indication. However, various melatonin receptor agonists are on the market, such as ramelteon and tasimelteon, which are FDA-approved for the treatment of insomnia.

**Non-FDA Approved Indications for Melatonin**

**Insomnia**

Despite the lack of FDA approval, melatonin is considered the first-line pharmacologic therapy for the treatment of insomnia by the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP). It is relatively safe with a low risk of side effects. Studies on the efficacy of melatonin supplementation for the treatment of insomnia have varied. Still, one metanalysis by Ferracioli-Oda showed that subjects taking melatonin fell asleep an average of 7 minutes faster, stayed asleep about 8 minutes longer, and reported better sleep quality than subjects receiving a placebo. Doses used, results, and study quality varied considerably between trials.

Melatonin has been studied and recommended primarily for the treatment of the following:

- Primary insomnia (insomnia not due to some secondary cause)

- Age-related insomnia

- Jet lag disorder

- shift work sleep disorder

- Post-traumatic brain injury

- Neurodegenerative disorders

**Ongoing Research**

Although there are no formal recommendations currently, clinical research is ongoing on the role of melatonin treatment for other conditions, such as:

- Cancer

- Metabolic disorders

- Cardiovascular disorders

- Gastrointestinal (GI) conditions

- Neurodegenerative disorders

- Mental disorders

- Pain syndromes

- Reproductive dysfunctions