A minimally invasive surgical approach to the mitral valve requires longer cardiopulmonary bypass timing than a conventional sternotomy approach due to the increased technical demand. Only a few under-powered randomized comparisons of traditional and minimally invasive techniques to valve surgery concerning clinical outcomes and postoperative complications. The increased cardiopulmonary bypass time with the retrograde flow in the aorta has been reported to have a similar risk of stroke than the traditional surgical approach.

The risk of mortality, renal failure, wound infection, reoperation for bleeding, aortic dissection, myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation, and readmission at 30 days has been reported as not statistically different when comparing minimally invasive surgical approaches to conventional surgical methods, when surgically appropriate indications exist and with proper patient selection. A feared complication of cardiopulmonary bypass is stroke, and rates for minimally invasive surgical mitral valve repair complicated by stroke have been reported as occurring in 1% and 2.6% of patients. Peripheral cannulation can lead to soft tissue infections occurring in between 1% and 7% of patients.

The percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair device is relatively safe, as shown by the Endovascular Valve Edge-to-Edge Repair Study (EVEREST) trial.

Procedural complications can lead to dislocation of an existing pacemaker during transseptal puncture, which can be avoided by double-checking location with fluoroscopy and echocardiogram during the procedure. A transseptal puncture does not require closure as the risk of pericardial tamponade post-operatively is low. The most common device implantation complication is single-leaflet device detachment seen between 0% and 4.8% of cases. Other rare complications include clip embolization requiring surgical retrieval, thrombus formation on the clip, and direct leaflet damage. Mitral stenosis can result from the percutaneous clip placement but is considered an acceptable complication based on the interventional team’s judgment. It may be acceptable to accept a higher trans-mitral valve gradient to achieve an adequate reduction of mitral regurgitation, and the trade-off results in better long-term outcomes.