Obtaining a complete history and physical, focused on questions directed towards PALM-COEIN etiologies will allow the provider to narrow the likely etiologies. It is important for the clinician to gain a complete understanding of the current bleeding episode, a history of her menstrual cycles, gynecological and obstetrical histories, medical and surgical history, current medications, sexual history, and family history. Women who report changing pads/tampons every 3 hours and report clots are likely to have a blood loss of at least 80mL.

To evaluate the history of bleeding disorders, there is an already established clinical screening tool to assist the provider in determining if the patient will benefit from further coagulopathy testing. A positive screening,

- Heavy menstrual bleeding since menarche

- One of the following conditions:

- Postpartum hemorrhage
- Surgery-related bleeding
- Bleeding associated with dental work

- Two or more of the following

- Bruising 2x per month
- Epistaxis, 1-2 times per month
- Frequent gum bleeding
- A family history of bleeding symptoms

The physical exam should initially be aimed at assessing life-threatening conditions caused by acute blood loss, anemia, and hypovolemia. It is also essential to confirm the cause of acute uterine bleeding. A speculum exam should be performed to thoroughly investigate the genital tract to rule out trauma or other etiologies of bleeding. A bimanual exam will also be essential to evaluate for uterine abnormalities and enlargement caused by leiomyomas, or cervical abnormalities caused by polyps or cervical cancer.