For qualitative and quantitative hemoglobin analysis, there are various procedures available. The most widely used among them are electrophoresis and high-performance liquid chromatography.

**High-performance Liquid Chromatography**

HPLC is used increasingly as the diagnostic procedure for hemoglobinopathies. Its working principle lies behind the interaction between the charges on the ion exchange material and that of the hemoglobin molecule. It has a column packed with silica gel, whose surface is modified by carboxyl charges to give it a weak cationic charge, which permits hemoglobin separation with different charges following the ion exchange phenomena.

The resulting chromatograms are separated by retention time (RT). Retention time and percentages of variant hemoglobin give important clues for differentiating various hemoglobins eluting in the same window. Most importantly, it can quantify the number of various hemoglobins, which help in diagnosis. This method can give false negative results in newborns.

**Cellulose Acetate Electrophoresis**

This is a simple, reliable, and rapid process where the hemoglobin undergoes electrophoresis at pH 8.4-8.6 using a cellulose acetate membrane. Its principle is that hemoglobin is a negatively charged protein at alkaline pH, and on electrophoresis, it migrates to the anode. The structural variants having a charge on the surface will separate from HbA on electrophoresis.

**Microcolumn Chromatography**

Microcolumn chromatography depends on the exchange of charged groups between the charged group of the hemoglobin molecule and charged groups on ion exchange cellulose. If a mixture of hemoglobins is adsorbed on the cellulose, particular hemoglobin would be separated from the column using a developer(buffer) at a specific pH or ionic strength. To elute other components, one must change the ionic strength or pH of the developer. The separation of the hemoglobin components is determined by the pH and ionic strength of the developer used, the type of cellulose, the column size, the sample volume, the gradient, temperature, and flow rates.

**Molecular Genetic Testing**

There is a prevalence of particular mutations in each population. Therefore the origin of individuals plays an important role. The methods for genetic testing are variable and complex. For screening, less expensive multiplex methods are options, like gap PCR, reverse dot blot hybridization, and amplification refractory mutation systems [ARMS].

More complex and exhaustive methods are used for more specific testing, like multiplex ligation probe amplification to detect deletions and Sanger sequencing to look for all possible mutations in an individual. These two methods are capable of revealing unknown mutations.

**Supplemental Tests**

Some additional tests are necessary for thalassemia patients, which can be classified as iron-related and non-iron-related. Iron metabolism monitoring is essential in these patients as they may have iron overload either due to ineffective erythropoiesis or repeated blood transfusions. Increased iron may get deposited in organs causing endocrine dysfunction and growth retardation.

Therefore routine iron studies are necessary. In addition, Thalassemia patients are susceptible to thrombotic events and hypercoagulability. Therefore tests like PT, aPTT, d-dimer, protein C, coagulation factors, platelet count, and D-dimer should be done. Due to repetitive blood transfusions, they are at increased risk of transfusion-transmitted infective hepatitis, which should be screened in supplement to liver function tests.