Examination of the tympanic membrane and middle ear by otoscopic examination can help providers diagnose a wide variety of conditions, including acute otitis media, traumatic perforation of the tympanic membrane, and cholesteatoma. Delayed diagnosis of various pathologies of the ear can facilitate progression to more serious conditions, highlighting the importance of otoscopy. For example, untreated acute otitis media can advance to feared complications such as mastoiditis, brain abscesses, or meningitis.

Before beginning the otoscopic examination, the provider can ask the patient to demonstrate the strength of their facial muscles by smiling, frowning, elevating the eyebrows, closing the eyes and keeping the eyes closed against resistance, and puffing out the cheeks. Successful completion of these movements demonstrates the integrity of cranial nerve VII, the facial nerve. The facial nerve travels through the middle ear and can be affected by ear pathologies such as acute otitis media.

Next, the provider can begin the otoscopic exam. There are often multiple speculum sizes for attachment to the otoscope. The provider should select the largest speculum that the patient’s external auditory canal can accommodate, as this will provide maximum lighting for optimal visualization of the ear anatomy. Providers may have their own preferences regarding how to grasp the otoscope. However, it is generally advisable to hold the otoscope like a pen in between the first and second fingers. The otoscope is usually held in the right hand when evaluating the patient’s right ear and the left hand when assessing the patient’s left ear. The provider should place their free fifth finger of the hand, holding the otoscope against the patient’s cheek to support and brace the hand during the examination.

With the hand that is not holding the otoscope, the provider should grasp and gently pull the patient’s pinna to help straighten the patient’s external auditory canal. This step will facilitate visualization of the tympanic membrane. In a child, the examiner should pull the pinna posteriorly and inferiorly. In an adult, the examiner should pull the pinna posteriorly and superiorly. Next, the provider can gently insert the speculum into the patient’s external auditory canal. The provider should inspect the health of the external auditory canal and evaluate factors such as the presence of inflammation, discharge, cerumen, and infection.

The provider should then slowly progress the speculum into the canal until the tympanic membrane becomes visible. The provider should evaluate the health of the tympanic membrane and observe factors such as color, presence of perforation, and a bulging appearance.

Otoscopic examination is an important part of the diagnosis of several pathologies of the ear. There are multiple factors; however, that can make successful otoscopic examination difficult. For example, factors such as poor lighting of the ear canal, suboptimal positioning of the otoscope, cerumen blockage, insufficient training in otoscopic technique, and lack of confidence in performing the otoscopic examination can hinder the successful completion of the procedure.

To alleviate some of these difficulties in performing a successful otoscopic examination, video-otoscopes have been introduced in recent years and studied for their efficacy in diagnosing ear conditions. Video otoscopes allow the provider to introduce a small camera into the patient’s external auditory canal to visualize the tympanic membrane. Research into the effectiveness of video-otoscopy suggests that this technique may be superior compared to conventional otoscopy in assessing pathological conditions of the tympanic membrane.

Another development in otoscopy involves telemedical otoscopic examination. Telemedicine, which refers to the remote care of patients by using telecommunication technologies, is becoming increasingly prominent in various fields of medicine. Several brands of video-otoscopes exist to remotely convey images of the tympanic membrane to providers for telemedical evaluation. These systems often function as smartphone attachments that allow for capturing and transmitting a patient’s otoscopic images to a provider remotely. Current research suggests that the quality of otoscopic images obtained for telemedicine seems to vary based on the video-otoscope system used.