In the spontaneous breathing patient, pressure support mode is often used to aid in ventilator liberation. Pressure support mode is shown to be comfortable for patients who are weaning and can be easily titrated to manage a patient's breathing. It may also be initiated on patients without the intention of ventilation liberation. Patient populations requiring long-term mechanical ventilation may benefit from pressure support mode. This population may include patients with small artificial airways, patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and chronic muscle weakness.

In some respect, pressures support ventilation is similar in application to intermittent positive-pressure breathing (IPPB). An IPPB support device, much like pressure support is utilized to encourage higher quality breaths by promoting lung expansion. The concept of lung expansion therapy is that by increasing the alveolar pressure (positive pressure increases the transpulmonary pressure gradient by raising the pressure inside the alveoli. This mechanism of action reduces the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood, as well as, decreasing the risk of pneumonia, and increases overall pulmonary function.

The concept of pressure support is straightforward and logical in that increasing the pressure support results in increased ventilation and decreased carbon dioxide levels in the blood. Lung compliance, airway resistance, and patient synchrony play a notable role in the success of pressure support ventilation. A rise in airway resistance or a decrease in lung compliance results in a less than the desired outcome in pressure support ventilation.

Contraindications

As previously noted, pressure support ventilation is strictly a spontaneous mode. Patients must initiate his or her breaths. Apneic patients are required to be in a controlled breath environment in which the ventilator may fully sustain the respiratory function. It is essential that a patient be hemodynamically stable and have sufficient respiratory effort to qualify for pressure support mode. A patient who have a major acid-base abnormality, higher PEEP requirement (8 and more), and on 50% or more FIO2 on controlled setting should not be considered for pressure support mode.