One of the most common complications with elbow injuries is loss of range of motion. In particular, extension loss is the most common and is usually related to the time of immobilization in a static splint. Greater than 25 days of immobilization can lead to a loss of 30 degrees in extension and nearly 20 degrees in flexion. Extrinsic causes may be due to flexion contracture of the anterior capsule, or contracture of the collateral ligaments and the surrounding musculature.

Ectopic bone formation is common, but is usually periarticular and does not block motion.

Elbow instability is another common complication. Due to the mechanism of injury, the laterality and involvement of ligaments can change and requires appropriate management. Lateral collateral ligament insufficiency is common, leading to valgus instability, and is treatable with the patient in a pronated position during splinting to allow soft tissue to heal.

Neurovascular injury from acute elbow dislocations is uncommon; however, ulnar nerve neuropraxia is the most commonly reported. Patients typically undergo observation, as these injuries generally resolve following closed reduction. Other neuropraxia such as median nerve and anterior interosseous nerve occur less frequently. Median nerve entrapment can occur, especially in the pediatric population, and is commonly associated with entrapment in the fracture site or posterior to a displaced medial epicondyle, which may be visible on radiographs as a widening of a medial condyle due to the median nerve displacing it, or neuropraxia may be apparent after closed reduction. Median nerve involvement after closed reduction requires open exploration. In patients that have an observed neuropraxia, electromyography is ordered only after three months of persistent symptoms. Lastly, brachial artery injury can occur. Initial assessment of pulse and perfusion is important, and if absent requires emergent reduction. Pulses often return following closed reduction. In patients without return of pulses or perfusion, the clinician should have a high suspicion of vascular injury.