As previously mentioned, the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is composed of a capillary basement membrane and three cellular elements: endothelial cells, pericytes, and astrocyte end-feet. The BBB is responsible for creating and maintaining homeostasis for neuronal functions, defending the system against toxic insults, regulating the communication between the periphery and the CNS, and providing the brain with nutrients. This is achieved via four main mechanisms: prevention of the paracellular diffusion of hydrophilic compounds, mediation of the active transport of nutrients to the brain, activation of efflux transport of hydrophobic molecules and drugs from the brain to the blood, and regulation of the transendothelial migration of circulating blood cells and pathogens.

**Tight Junctions (TJs)**

Located between cerebral endothelial cells, TJs form a highly-selective diffusion barrier prohibiting most blood-borne substances from entering the brain. TJs block the paracellular aqueous diffusional pathways between adjacent endothelial cells. Due to their adhesive function, they seal microvessels and impede the passive diffusion of proteins and polar solutes in and out of the CNS.

**Astrocyte End-Feet**

Astrocyte end-feet ensheath the vessel wall and play a critical role in the induction and maintenance of the TJ barrier. Astrocyte end-feet are not believed to have a barrier function within the mammalian brain.

**Endothelial Cells (ECs)**

The ECs of the BBB differ from those of the rest of the body. BBB ECs have no fenestrations, more extensive tight junctions, and sparse pinocytic vesicular transport. EC tight junctions limit the paracellular flux of hydrophilic molecules across the BBB.

**Pericytes (PCs)**

Embedded within the capillary basement membrane, PCs play a crucial role in angiogenesis, the structural integrity and differentiation of the microvessels, and the formation of endothelial tight junctions.

**Circumventricular Organs (CVOs)**

The blood-brain barrier is present in all regions of the brain except the circumventricular organs (CVOs), located around the third and fourth ventricles.

- pineal gland

- median eminence

- subcommisural organ

- neurohypophysis

- subfornical organ

- area postrema

- organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis