The practice of locoregional anesthesia requires a thorough knowledge of the potential complications of each procedure.

Complications include, as with any act of regional anesthesia: infections related to sterilization errors, bleeding with the appearance of hematomas at the puncture site, nerve damage, and local anesthetic toxicity. History of coagulopathy or anticoagulation should be reported before any regional anesthesia procedure. Thanks to the existence and progress of ultrasound devices, ultrasound-guided techniques seem to have less risk of nerve or vascular damage.

A paravertebral and intercostal block should preferably be practiced in the awake patient because of the risk of pneumothorax and intraneural injection for the intercostal block.

For certain nerve blocks, dissemination of the local anesthetic is possible from the injection site far from its target, leading to serious complications.

Total spinal block with subarachnoid spread has been reported after intercostal block for thoracotomy. Lekhak and colleagues described a total spinal block after inserting a paravertebral catheter.

Other authors have cited inadvertent vascular puncture (6.8%), hypotension (4%), and epidural or intrathecal spread.

Pulmonary hemorrhage has also been reported in patients who underwent thoracic surgery and paravertebral block.

Finally, Burlacu et al. (2005) and Crawley S M also reported an ipsilateral Horner syndrome after unilateral paravertebral anesthesia for breast cancer surgery by diffusion to the ipsilateral stellate ganglion.

These complications should raise the awareness of the anesthesiologist and emphasize the importance of understanding anatomy before any regional anesthesia act or procedure.