The method of postoperative rehabilitation is significantly influenced by the compliance of the patient, the nature of the wound, and the method/location of repair. Surgeons and hand therapists have to work side-by-side to optimize outcomes following tendon repair and to best facilitate compliance with therapeutic protocols. Clear communication is vital, so much so that often postoperative therapy scheduling is coordinated at the same time as operative boarding to permit a seamless initiation of rehabilitation without unnecessary delay. With the advent of WALANT, intraoperative therapist participation allows patient education to start intraoperatively; the patient will then meet a familiar face in the upcoming therapy sessions, and it further affords the therapist confidence in the repair to move the finger postoperatively. Before beginning therapy, it is essential that therapists receive information from the operative surgeon regarding the type of repair and whether other structures were found to be injured. At some institutions, hand therapists are involved pre- and even intra-operatively, thus permitting the patient to interact with the entire team and allowing them to meet a familiar face in their postoperative sessions. A total active movement examination, performed intraoperatively before skin closure, assists the therapist in gaining confidence to move the repaired finger early.

Individualized therapy regimens typically begin 1 to 5 days following surgical repair. Patient compliance, edema, suture size and configuration, wound complications, dressings, systemic conditions, and concomitant injuries are influential factors in the makings of aftercare protocols. Therapists are encouraged to optimize their postoperative programs by controlling the force applied to the repair site while promoting tendon excursion. It is believed that improvements in range of motion and overall patient outcomes are secondary to optimal tendon excursion.