# Continuing Education Activity

Ventriculitis is the inflammation of the ependymal lining of the cerebral ventricles, usually secondary to infection (for example meningitis, device-related or a complication of trauma). There is no clear definition for ventriculitis and no accepted diagnostic criteria, which makes the assessment of incidence difficult. Early diagnosis is essential for appropriate treatment; this requires a clinical history, CSF sample, and imaging. Antibiotics are the mainstay of treatment. This activity will review the causes of ventriculitis and the different microbes responsible. It will evaluate the different investigations required for diagnosis and review the treatment options available. It will briefly highlight some of the controversies and gaps in the literature and identifies the role of the interprofessional team in managing this condition. This activity describes the pathophysiology of ventriculitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of ventriculitis. 
- Describe the clinical presentation of ventriculitis.
- Explain the treatment and management options available for ventriculitis.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving the diagnosis and management of ventriculitis to improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Ventriculitis is the inflammation of the ependymal lining of the cerebral ventricles, usually secondary to infection. It has other names, such as ependymitis, ventricular empyema, pyocephalus, and pyogenic ventriculitis.

# Etiology

Ventriculitis can be secondary to

- Meningitis – bacterial and viral

- Cerebral abscess with intraventricular rupture

- Catheter-related – shunt or EVD related

- Trauma

- Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak

- Complication of neurosurgery

- Complications of intrathecal chemotherapy

# Epidemiology

There is no clear definition for ventricular infection and no accepted diagnostic criteria. It is unclear whether ventriculitis, catheter-related infections, and positive CSF cultures describe the same condition. True infection, contamination, colonization, or suspected ventriculostomy-related infection are hard to distinguish (Table 1).

Ventriculitis secondary to meningitis (commonly known as pyogenic ventriculitis) is more common in infants. Risk factors are related to low host immunity (cancer, HIV, diabetes, alcoholism, etc.) and higher virulence of the causative organism. Often, when meningitis fails to respond to antibiotics, or when it recurs, ventriculitis should be considered.

Typical organisms include gram-negative species followed by Staphylococcus species.

The incidence of ventricular catheter-related ventriculitis (or healthcare-associated ventriculitis) ranges from 0 to 45% depending on the insertion technique and management (commonly less than 10%).

Catheter-related ventriculitis is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, especially with gram-negative organisms (approaching 58% in some studies).Staphylococcus (most common), Corynebacterium, Bacillus, Micrococcus, or Propionibacterium species.Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii) and drug-resistant organisms has been attributed to the use of antibiotic prophylaxis targeting gram-positive bacteria and prolonged hospitalization.

In ventriculitis following head trauma, Streptococcus
pneumoniae and gram-negative rods are the most common pathogens.Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Streptococcus pyogenes) cause infections in patients with skull base fractures and persistent CSF leaks.

# Pathophysiology

Ventriculitis, either alone or in the setting of meningitis, had choroid plexitis, with an inflammatory response to the ependymal lining of the ventricles.

Risk factors for catheter-related ventriculitis can categorize into three groups; (1) patient characteristics and the underlying condition; (2) events that break the integrity of the closed system; (3) environmental influences.

Four mechanisms exist by which CSF shunts can become infected. Most commonly, colonization occurs at the time of surgery. Other mechanisms include; retrograde infection from the distal end of the shunt (e.g., bowel perforation), through the skin (e.g., after inserting a needle into the reservoir), and hematogenous seeding.

# History and Physical

Symptoms include fever and signs of meningism (nuchal rigidity, headache, photophobia, decreased mental status, seizures, or moribund).

With ventriculitis secondary to catheters, trauma, or neurosurgery, the onset is more subtle, and often there is a relative lack of fever and severe presenting symptoms, reflecting the predilection for immunocompromised patients.

Patients can present with features of obstructive hydrocephalus, particularly in infants with inflammatory aqueduct obstruction.

# Evaluation

Investigations for ventriculitis include CSF sampling and imaging.

The CSF sample can demonstrate an elevated protein count (greater than 50mg/dL). This can be related to a decrease in CSF production, as seen in rabbit models of E.Coli ventriculitis.Propionibacterium acnes which require at least ten days, however, treatment should not be delayed.

The presence of oligoclonal immunoglobulin G or M bands, CSF lactate, procalcitonin, and lysozymes help make an early diagnosis.

CSF cultures are the most important test for establishing the diagnosis of healthcare-associated ventriculitis.

Ultrasound, for neonates, can be performed using a high-frequency transducer through the anterior fontanelle in coronal and sagittal planes. Ventriculitis has increased thickness, irregularity and echogenicity of ependyma, with echogenic debris in the ventricle.

Non-contrast CT demonstrated non-specific findings, including dependent hyperdense ventricular debris, hydrocephalus, periventricular low density as well as features of the underlying abnormality (e.g. signs of meningitis – pial or dura/arachnoid signal abnormality or enhancement).

MRI shows the same features as CT, with ventricular debris hyperintense to CSF on T1-weighted images and hypointense to CSF on T2- weighted images.

Ventricular uptake in radionuclide brain scintigraphy using technetium-99 can be used.

# Treatment / Management

Antimicrobial therapy that can reach effective concentrations in the CSF is required. Immunocompromised patients need aggressive treatment. Initially, empirical therapy is used based on the patient’s age and etiology. For catheter-related ventriculitis, this is generally vancomycin and an anti-pseudomonal beta-lactam (cefepime, ceftazidime or meropenem).

Specific antibiotics are chosen based on in vitro susceptibility and penetration into CSF when meningeal inflammation is present.

Intraventricular antibiotics are an option if the ventriculitis is refractory to systemic therapy. Commonly used antibiotics include vancomycin (5 to 20mg/d) or gentamicin (1 to 8mg/d) but depend on local microbial policies.

Removing all components of the infected shunt or EVD, in combination with antimicrobial therapy, is recommended for catheter-related infection.

# Differential Diagnosis

Ependymal lining enhancement can present in primary CNS lymphoma, the ependymal spread of glioblastoma, metastases, or germinoma.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Antibiotics-impregnated (0.054% rifampicin and 0.15% clindamycin) and silver-impregnated ventriculostomy catheters have been developed to reduce infection rates with some conflicting results.P. aeruginosa after 72 hours, with almost complete inhibition of bioform formation for E.Coli, S. aureus, and C.albicans, and reached more than 50% for Enterococcus, coagulase-negative Staphylococci, and P. aeruginosa after 72 hours.

The British antibiotic and silver-impregnated catheters for ventriculoperitoneal shunts multi-center randomized controlled trial (BASICS) Trial is a 1200 patient, 17 center trial comparing silicone, antibiotic-coated or silver catheters.

Controversy exists about whether the regular exchange of EVDs can reduce infection. There is a body of literature reporting that infection rates increase after 4 to 5 days of catheter insertion.

# Prognosis

If untreated, ventriculitis could lead to poor neurology, hydrocephalus, and death.

# Complications

Due to the risk of recurrence and hydrocephalus, long-term follow up is recommended. The ventricles and choroid plexus can serve as a reservoir of infection, even when the lumbar puncture yields sterile cultures.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The literature is inconclusive about antibiotic prophylaxis for patients with ventriculostomies.candida and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).

Experience and the use of aseptic techniques reduce the risk of catheter-related ventriculitis, necessitating the need for education.

Antibiotics prophylaxis is ineffective in trauma patients with CSF fistula.

# Pearls and Other Issues

A need exists for an agreed set of definitions, and increased awareness of ventriculitis, to adequately assess incidence and risk factors in an attempt to reduce infection rates. Recommendations are currently based on expert opinion as rigorous clinical data are not yet available.

New tests and needed to rapidly and reliably detect the common causes of device-related ventriculitis, including those involving indolent bacteria such a P. acnes. Nucleic acid amplification tests may help accomplish this.

Care is necessary when sampling CSF as there is a risk of introducing infection, and it should be done based on clinical need only.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A systematic review highlights the need for a collaborative, interprofessional, and multi-pronged approach to reduce infections, including ventriculitis.

The nurse looking after patients with ventriculostomy must be vigilant about signs of infection and report any abnormality to the interprofessional team. The infectious disease nurse and consultant should be involved early in the care to help select the appropriate antibiotics and make recommendations regarding the catheter.  The pharmacist should ensure that the antibiotics selected are sensitive to the organism isolated and that the drugs are safe, reporting any concerns to the team. The wound care nurse should recommend appropriate cleaning solutions for the ventriculostomy site. Only through education and collaboration of the whole interprofessional team, can management and outcomes be improved.