The physiology and treatment of diabetes are complex and require a multitude of interventions for successful disease management. Diabetic education and patient engagement are critical in management. Patients have better outcomes if they can manage their diet (carbohydrate and overall caloric restriction), exercise regularly (over 150 minutes weekly), and independently monitor glucose.

Since T1DM is a disease primarily due to the absence of insulin, insulin administration through daily injections, or an insulin pump, is the mainstay of treatment. In T2DM, diet and exercise may be adequate treatments, especially initially. Other therapies may target insulin sensitivity or increase insulin secretion by the pancreas. Insulin administration may also be necessary for T2DM patients, especially those with inadequate glucose production or resistance in the advanced stages of the disease.

Long-term complications of diabetes include retinopathy with the potential for loss of vision; nephropathy leading to renal failure; peripheral neuropathy with risk of foot ulcers, amputations; and autonomic neuropathy causing gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and cardiovascular symptoms and sexual dysfunction.

Because of the increased risk of these complications, regular screenings are necessary to assist with the prevention, early identification of, and assist in the appropriate treatment for these complications. Regular diabetic retinal exams should be performed by qualified medical personnel to assess for diabetic retinopathy. Neurological sensation examination with monofilament testing to the feet can identify patients with neuropathy at risk for amputation. Clinicians can also recommend patients perform daily foot inspections to identify foot lesions that may go unnoticed due to neuropathy. The ADA also recommends regular blood pressure screening for diabetics, with the goal being 130 mmHg systolic blood pressure and 85 mmHg diastolic blood pressure.

If a patient experiences hypoglycemia (plasma glucose < 70 mg/dL) it is recommended they be given 15-20 grams of carbohydrates through an oral liquid, gel, or food. If a patient is unable to take anything orally due to dysphagia or mental status changes, the patient should be given glucagon intramuscular injection or dextrose intravenous injection depending on the practice setting. Glucose should be checked 15 minutes after carbohydrates are given. If continued hypoglycemia then treatment should be repeated. This incident should be discussed with the primary care provider in the outpatient setting, or the on-call provider in the inpatient setting as the patient may need adjustments made to their glucose-lowering medications to prevent further hypoglycemia episodes.