**Glucokinase Deficiency**: Both glucokinase and hexokinase perform the same function of phosphorylating glucose to glucose-6-phosphate and trapping it in the cell. The difference between the two lies in their location and affinity to glucose. Glucokinase is present in the liver and pancreatic beta cells. Hexokinase, its isomer form, is present in tissues other than liver and pancreatic beta cells. Glucokinase has a much lower affinity for glucose than hexokinase and will function only when the glucose levels are high. After a meal, when blood glucose levels rise, glucokinase directs it toward glycogen synthesis and storage in the liver. When the glucose levels are low, hexokinase with high affinity will get to the glucose first so as to provide the glucose to cells that need it the most. Additionally, glucokinase in pancreatic beta cells acts as a glucose sensor and regulates the rate of entry of glucose into cells and into glycolysis, and therefore helps maintain the proper glucose levels in the blood. Heterozygous inactivating mutations of glucokinase result in maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 2 (MODY2 or GCK-MODY)

**2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate**:  Human RBCs normally have low levels of 2,3-BPG. During decreased availability of oxygen, as in high altitudes, respiratory diseases such as asthma, or chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD), there is an increase in the conversion of the glycolytic intermediate 1,3-BPG to 2,3-BPG by the action of bisphosphoglycerate mutase. 2,3-BPG binds to deoxyhemoglobin with greater affinity than oxyhemoglobin and stabilizes it in its T-state. This allows the oxygen to unload from the deoxyhemoglobin, thus increasing the oxygen availability to the cells. This is seen as a shift of the oxygen dissociation curve to the right

**Pyruvate kinase deficiency:**Autosomal recessive disorder of pyruvate kinase deficiency occurs due to mutations in thePKLR gene. Pyruvate kinase catalyzes the final irreversible step towards the formation of pyruvate while producing ATP. Mature RBCs do not have mitochondria, and therefore, this enzyme deficiency can severely impact cells like RBCs, where glycolysis is the sole fuel source. ATP is a precious commodity for RBCs and is required for the functioning of the ATPase-dependent ion pumps to maintain membrane integrity. When compromised, it results in damage to membranes of RBCs and causes hemolysis. This results in a reduction of oxygen delivery to tissues manifesting symptoms such as fatigue and shortness of breath. Hemolysis releases the hemoglobin, whose breakdown ultimately results in increased levels of bilirubin. Damage to the cell membrane results in distortion and loss of smooth biconcave structure and is seen as thorny projections. These spiculated appearing RBCs are called echinocytes. A decrease in the number of RBCs prompts the appearance of immature RBCs or reticulocytes, a feature typically seen in pyruvate kinase deficiency.  However, deficiency of the isozyme form of pyruvate kinase in the hepatocytes does not show any effect, as the presence of mitochondria allows for the generation of ATP. The 2,3-BPG levels are subsequently elevated as a compensatory mechanism to increase oxygen delivery to the cells, although its synthesis does not produce ATP

**Role of Pyruvate kinase in Cancer:**

Pyruvate kinase has been shown to be upregulated in highly proliferating cells such as embryonic cells and cancer cells. The survival of cancer cells is dependent on their ability to reprogram the metabolic pathways to suit their needs. In normal cells, with mitochondria, under aerobic conditions (presence of oxygen), pyruvate produced from glycolysis enters the mitochondria to participate in the process of energy generation. Tumor cells are different in this regard as they are dependent on aerobic glycolysis, wherein the presence of oxygen and the availability of mitochondria, the pyruvate, is diverted to the formation of lactate. This metabolic switch was first identified by Warburg and is known as the Warburg effect, which helps the production of additional fuel for the cancer cells in the form of lactate. An M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase has been shown to be upregulated in cancer cells

So far, it is unclear as to why the cancer cells exhibit enhanced aerobic glycolysis. It is hypothesized that cancer cells are able to generate energy rapidly by diverting glucose to form lactate rather than letting glucose go through its aerobic route to the TCA cycle and electron transport chain. Other proposed mechanisms suggest the use of aerobic glycolysis by tumor cells increases signal transduction, increases the flux towards biosynthetic pathways, and, finally, the generation of lactate creates an acidic microenvironment more conducive to invasiveness and metastasis