Flucytosine (5-fluorocytosine) is an FDA-approved medication indicated for the treatment of severe candida and cryptococcus infections. Administering care to patients prescribed flucytosine requires excellent interaction between the patient and an interprofessional team of healthcare providers. These providers can include a primary care clinician, mid-level practitioners, an infectious disease specialist, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care physician and infectious disease specialist must establish exceptional patient rapport so that the patient thoroughly comprehends the significance of medication compliance and is educated on the treatment of flucytosine for the illness and its complications.

The patient should receive routine checkups to monitor if the flucytosine is in an optimal range and the patient is not experiencing any toxicities and harm to the liver, kidneys, or bone marrow. The primary care and specialist should be up to date with the latest management guidelines with flucytosine, its implications, and adverse effects. Recommendations are not to use flucytosine as monotherapy due to likely drug resistance and its frequent use with nephrotoxic medication amphotericin B. If toxicity and organ damage does pursue, it is vital to dialyze the patient as 85 to 95% of the medication is excreted through the urine. Joint decision-making between the interprofessional team is essential to improve patient-centered care and reach the coveted outcome. Nursing staff can provide additional counseling on proper administration and potential adverse effects, and the pharmacist can reinforce those points and check for medication interactions. This type of interprofessional interaction will lead to better patient outcomes with flucytosine therapy. [Level 5]