Mirtazapine is an FDA-approved novel antidepressant with a unique mechanism of action used to treat major depressive disorders. Healthcare providers should be aware of the indications, mechanism of action, adverse reactions, and toxicity due to the unique pharmacology and adverse reaction profile of mirtazapine.

Typically psychiatrists initiate mirtazapine therapy for appropriate indications and play a crucial role in overall disease management. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) ensure timely follow-up and assess the response to therapy(e.g., PHQ-9). Pharmacists should ensure medication reconciliation and ensure proper dosing. In addition, multiple drug-drug interactions are associated with mirtazapine use, including prescription drugs, vitamins, over-the-counter medicines, and herbal products. Therefore pharmacists should report to the clinician/psychiatrist in case of drug interactions. Specialty-trained nurses should observe the patients for worsening symptoms of depression. Psychiatrist consultation is essential in the intentional overdose of mirtazapine. Additionally, board-certified psychologists can provide cognitive-behavioral therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy, and psychodynamic therapies for patients suffering from depression(American Psychological Association, 2021).

Emergency department physicians play a vital role in mirtazapine toxicity and maintain circulation, airway, and breathing. Moreover, in an intentional overdose of mirtazapine or serotonin syndrome, psychiatrists and critical care physicians should work collaboratively to improve patient outcomes. In addition, clinicians should contact the poison control center if unknown ingestions are suspected, along with mirtazapine.

As illustrated above, multiple healthcare providers, including clinicians, specialists, pharmacists, and nurses, manage patients on mirtazapine therapy. Consequently, an interprofessional team approach that utilizes open communication between all team members and accurate record-keeping results in higher therapeutic success and better patient outcomes.