Assessment methods discriminate between pseudo-halitosis and halitophobia. Diagnostic tests include organoleptic measurement, gas chromatography, sulfide monitoring, the BANA test, quantifying β-galactosidase activity, salivary incubation test, ammonia monitoring, or ninhydrin method.

**Direct Methods of Screening**

**Organoleptic Method**

This is by far the commonest method used and the most effective in the clinical scenario. A plastic tube is placed in the patient’s mouth, and the clinician tests the odor from the other end of the tube as the patient exhales into one end of the tube, grading it between 0 and 5:

- Grade 0: No odor detectable

- Grade 1: Malodor is hardly detectable

- Grade 2: Odor slightly exceeding the threshold of malodor recognition

- Grade 3: Most certainly identifiable malodor

- Grade 4: Strong malodor

- Grade 5: Very strong malodor.

The test is easy, inexpensive, and does not require specialized tools but could get a little uncomfortable for the clinician.

**Gas Chromatography**

With gas chromatography (GC), a quantitative analysis of VSCs like dimethyl sulfide, methyl mercaptan, and hydrogen sulfide can be carried out even at minuscule concentrations from saliva, tongue debris, or any other oral fluid. It is a highly reliable test; the only drawbacks are expense, it is nontransportable, and requires specialized trained personnel for its usage. This test is only for academic and research purposes. Its inability to detect non-sulfur-containing odoriferous molecules is another disadvantage to its use.

**Portable Sulfide Monitor**

The portable sulfide monitor is a portable device. In this test, a single-use tube is inserted into the patient’s mouth, which is closed for 5 minutes, while the patient breathes through his nose. The device detects sulfur-containing molecules in the breath, and this is reflected in the readings. It cannot detect non-sulfur containing molecules.

**Indirect Methods of Screening**

****Benzoyl-DL-Arginine-Alpha-Naphthylamide (BANA)****

This user-friendly and quick test detects certain gram-negative proteolytic obligate anaerobes like Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema denticola, and Tannerella forsythia, which form a red complex when treated with BANA, a synthetic trypsin substrate. This provides proof for the presence of these bacteria, which are often present on the dorsum of the tongue and sublingual plaques and cause halitosis.

**Ammonia Monitoring**

This method uses a pump and disposable tube that measures the ammonia produced orally in a patient with halitosis and measures the reading quantitively.

**Ninhydrin Technique**

This technique is user-friendly. It requires the addition of isopropanol to the patient’s sample to detect amines and polyamines, which contribute to the malodor.

**Salivary Incubation Test**

This test is more sensitive than the organoleptic test but is more time-consuming. It involves incubation of the patient’s saliva at 37 C under anaerobic conditions for a few hours, after which the odor is detected.

**Darkfield/Phase Contrast Microscopy**

**Quantifying Beta-Galactosidase Activity**

The enzyme beta-galactosidase is directly associated with oral malodor and forms the basis for this test. The saliva is placed on a paper disc used for the test, which gives quantitative results in terms of color change.

**Polymerase Chain Reaction**

Today, many prefer polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which is sensitive, specific, and quick to detect VSCs from any sample taken from the oral cavity.