After chest radiographs, computed tomography (CT) is the most common thoracic imaging modality performed and perhaps the most useful. A conventional CT chest usually refers to a multidetector CT (MDCT) with the acquisition of multiple, thin slices covering the entire chest. Current MDCT techniques have rendered high-resolution CT (HRCT), which was earlier used for evaluating interstitial lung disease, obsolete.

Infections of the lung are very common and can present in different ways. These range from peribronchial nodules and ground-glass opacities to dense consolidation involving the entire lobe. Aspiration pneumonia usually appears in the dependent portions of the lungs. Air bronchograms in a consolidated segment of the lung favors pneumonia. Bronchopneumonia or bronchiolitis manifests as peribronchial nodules, especially in a tree-in-bud pattern. Viral, fungal, and atypical pneumonia may present as ground-glass opacities.

In recent times, infection with the COVID-19 virus has lead to a global pandemic, and CT chest has emerged as one of the most important diagnostic tools in these patients. Studies show the presence of peripheral ground-glass opacities in a subpleural distribution. In more severely affected patients, there are dependent airspace opacities along with the peripheral ground-glass densities.

Bronchiectasis and bronchial wall thickening can be seen in many infectious and inflammatory disorders, such as cystic fibrosis, bronchitis, and allergic conditions such as allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Bronchiectasis can be cylindrical, varicose, or cystic based on the morphology.

One of the most common reasons for patients to get a chest CT is for evaluation of lung masses (defined as more than 3 cm in diameter) or nodules (less than 3 cm in diameter). Low dose lung CT is offered to all patients between the ages of 55-80, with a smoking history of 30 pack-years or more. Lung-RADS is a nomenclature used for standardizing reporting and management of lung nodules seen on low dose screening CTs. This ranges from Lung Rads 1-where no nodule is seen, or there is a less than 1% chance of malignancy to Lung Rads 4- where there is a greater than 15% chance of malignancy in the nodule.

A nodule can have characteristics that favor it to be benign or malignant. Size is an important consideration when stratifying nodules, as is the density of the nodule i.e., solid or ground glass. Irregular non-spherical nodules with spiculated margins are more suspicious of malignancy than smooth nodules. Pleural based nodules are usually benign.

Interstitial lung disease (ILD) refers to a large group of heterogeneous disorders that affect the interstitium. The interstitium consists of the alveolar epithelium, pulmonary capillary endothelium, basement membrane, perivascular and perilymphatic tissues. These can be seen in a variety of pathologies like infections, connective tissue disease, autoimmune conditions, drug toxicities, environmental exposures like asbestos or various allergens, in smokers, or maybe idiopathic. Patterns and distribution help in characterizing ILD into one of many categories, including usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, etc.

Sarcoidosis, a systemic granulomatous disorder, has characteristic imaging findings of symmetric mediastinal lymphadenopathy, thickened bronchovascular septae, and nodules in a perilymphatic distribution. This is predominantly an upper lobe disease.

CT chest is more sensitive for evaluating pleural effusions as compared to plain radiographs. The density of the pleural fluid alludes to the content, such as a hemorrhagic pleural effusion or empyema. CT is also useful for assessing loculated effusions. Malignant pleural effusions are associated with thickened pleural and nodules.

CT chest is also very sensitive for evaluating pneumothorax. This is especially so in patients with underlying cystic or bullous changes. It should be considered prior to interventions like placing chest tubes in a patient with multiple bullae.

Lastly, CT is also more sensitive than radiographs for detecting rib fractures. Abnormalities in the chest wall and soft tissue should not be ignored. It is also important to evaluate lymph nodes, breast tissue, and the subcutaneous tissue for incidental findings, especially in patients with known or suspected malignancies.

CT is also an invaluable tool for planning and performing interventions like biopsies.