The side effects of orlistat include the following:

- **Gastrointestinal:**The most common side effect of orlistat use is steatorrhea, which occurs because of the impaired absorption of dietary fat. Other side effects include fecal spotting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and anal fissures. The gastrointestinal adverse effects decrease with ongoing orlistat therapy. These adverse effects can be minimized by following a hypocaloric and low-fat diet with less than 30% of the calories from fats.

- **Hepatotoxicity:**Cases of hepatotoxicity range from serum enzyme elevations to a few cases of fatal hepatic failure & the requirement for emergency liver transplantation. The proposed mechanism for hepatotoxicity is hypersensitivity, as only a small amount of orlistat is absorbed. However, clinical features of hypersensitivity are absent in orlistat-induced hepatotoxicity.

- **Renal:**Orlistat can increase the risk of acute kidney injury; this occurs because the unabsorbed fat binds with calcium in the intestinal lumen resulting in excessive oxalate, which is absorbed and deposited in the kidney leading to oxalate nephropathy and increased risk of renal stones.

- **Musculoskeletal:**Theoretically, orlistat can increase the risk of osteoporosis because of impaired absorption of calcium and vitamin D.

- **Oncology:**Animal studies have shown an increased risk of colorectal cancer with orlistat. However, in humans, no such association has been elucidated. Orlistat is known to inhibit the synthesis of fatty acid synthase (Fas) enzyme, which increases tumor growth. In addition, orlistat has been shown to have anti-neoplastic activity in ovarian cancer cells, breast cancer cells, and prostate cancer cells in various animal studies. Few case reports have illustrated the association of orlistat use with hypertension, diabetic ketoacidosis, depression, cutaneous vasculitis, lichenoid eruptions, and vaginitis. However, a causal relationship between orlistat and these adverse effects remains unproven.

**Drug Interactions**

- Antiepileptics: Orlistat can reduce the absorption of lipophilic antiepileptics like lamotrigine, valproate, vigabatrin, and gabapentin, resulting in a decrease in plasma concentration. In such cases, it is recommended to monitor antiepileptic medication levels.

- Amiodarone: Orlistat can reduce the absorption of amiodarone.

- Cyclosporine: Orlistat can also reduce the absorption of cyclosporine (immunosuppressant). Therefore, the recommendation is that the administration of these two medications should be at a gap of at least 2 hours. Also, the cyclosporine levels require monitoring in patients taking the medication along with orlistat.

- Levothyroxine: Orlistat can bind with levothyroxine in the gut and reduce its absorption, leading to decreased plasma concentration of levothyroxine and subsequent hypothyroidism. Thus, clinicians should advise patients to take levothyroxine and orlistat at least 4 hours apart.

- Warfarin: Using orlistat along with warfarin can result in prolonged prothrombin time and INR because orlistat reduces the absorption of vitamin K. Therefore, coagulation parameters require monitoring in patients taking these two medications together.

- Antiretroviral medications: Orlistat also reduces the absorption of antiretroviral drugs; monitoring of HIV viral load is necessary. If the HIV viral load increases, orlistat should be discontinued.