Managed care refers to a healthcare insurance approach that integrates the financing of health care and the delivery of care and related services to keep the costs to the purchaser at a minimum while delivering what is appropriate for a given patient or population of patients.

Common to most definitions of managed care are several features or components such as:

- A limited network of providers (professionals such as physicians and organizations such as hospitals, imaging centers, pharmacies, and laboratories) who are each credentialed and contracted

- Utilization management

- Quality management

- Financial incentives for the patient to use network providers

- Some level of financial incentives or risk-sharing by the provider for the care provided

Managed care financial arrangements vary widely and occur along a continuum from retrospective fee for service payments at one end, all the way to prospective, full financial risk-type pre-payments for each member, so-called capitation, paid monthly, as a per member per month (PMPM) capitation rate.

The types of managed care insurance or benefit management approaches have evolved as well. Initially, managed care was synonymous with a health maintenance organization or HMO approach.

Over time, some less traditional HMOs emerged where the PCP does not serve as the gatekeeper, and the patient may self-referral to a specialist. However, for the service to be covered and paid for by the managed care plan, the patient is still limited to only receiving care and service from network providers. The utilization and quality management programs in HMOs collect a great deal of data related to the care and services authorized and provided by the PCP and other providers. This data is communicated to the PCP and other network providers regularly as the financial incentives revolve around compliance with the managed care plan’s utilization and quality programs’ targets. For the patients, the financial incentive to them is that they receive insurance coverage only for services that occur within the network.

Not all managed care occurs via an HMO type arrangement.

Finally, in this vein of patients wanting more choices available to them, a point of service (POS) managed care arrangement has emerged, which may appeal to more discretionary income patients. In a POS plan, the patient may use this managed care plan like a PPO and remain to limit their choices to only in-network providers and thus maximize their coverage. However, in a POS, the patient may choose to see a provider outside of the network, but to do so, it incurs more cost-sharing on the patient’s part. Thus, in a POS arrangement, the patient may practically see any provider they chose, either in-network or out-of-network. Still, if they stay within the PPO network, they pay the least, but they will share a higher portion of the care cost and pay more if they go outside the network.