Eplerenone is classified as an aldosterone antagonist and has been available in the United States since 2002.  Eplerenone’s key advantage over its older and less expensive drug in its class, spironolactone, is its increased selectivity for the mineralocorticoid receptor relative to glucocorticoid, progesterone, and androgen receptors.

Eplerenone is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for:

- The improvement of survival of stable patients with left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction less than or equal to 40%) and congestive heart failure (CHF) after an acute myocardial infarction (MI)

- Hypertension, alone or combined with other agents.

Though the FDA specifies eplerenone’s use in heart failure specifically to those status-post myocardial infarctions (MI), it also has off-label use for general heart failure patients with an ejection fraction (EF) less than or equal to35%, especially when they have experienced an adverse effect to spironolactone. The use of eplerenone in these populations has support from the EPHESUS and EMPHASIS-HF randomized controlled trials, respectively.

Concerning its use in hypertension, eplerenone is not a recommended agent for the initial treatment of hypertension. However, eplerenone and spironolactone are preferred agents for patients with hypertension due to primary aldosteronism or resistant hypertension. Eplerenone has not been subject to prospective comparisons to spironolactone or other agents in head-to-head trials of resistant hypertension but may be used as an alternative to spironolactone, especially when a patient has experienced antiandrogen adverse effects from spironolactone.

As an aldosterone antagonist, it is also used off-label to treat primary aldosteronism and ischemic heart disease.