The healthcare professional examining patients must have a general background regarding the anatomy and functioning of the visual system, which will be briefly covered in this section. The ocular system is a special sense organ of sight. The ocular system has been designed to interface with rays of light, convert these rays forming images into chemical energy, and then transform these signals into electrical energy. The retinal signal is then transformed into neural information for vision, which is carried by the second-order neurons to the occipital cortex for interpretation.

The visual system comprises various tissues that function together to yield vision, composed of the ocular system (eyeball) and the neural system (retina, optic nerve, frontal eye field, midbrain, thalamus, and visual cortex).

The ocular system is housed in a paired, transversely oval, pear-shaped bony cavity known as the orbit.

The eyelids are moveable folds that shut and open to protect, lubricate and preserve the integrity of the anterior globe.

The inner contents of the eyeball are housed within the confines of the tough outer coat (cornea and sclera). The sclera is a strong, fibrous, opaque, relatively avascular coat of the eyeball. The cornea is a convex, transparent, absolute avascular ocular coat occupying the anterior one-sixth of the eyeball. It derives its nutrition from the tear film, limbal plexus, and aqueous humor. The iris (uvea) can be found posteriorly to the cornea, which acts as a diaphragm by controlling the pupillary aperture.

The intersection of the peripheral iris and cornea forms the anterior chamber angle (iridocorneal angle). The iridocorneal angle is of great interest in congenital mesodermal dysgenesis and glaucoma. The crystalline lens lies posterior to the iris, which is held in place at the equator by the zonular fibers from the ciliary muscle.

Just anterior to the equator, there is a 2 mm wide serrated structure known as the ora serrata. This marks the point of transition of the ciliary body to the retina. The ophthalmic artery provides blood supply. Venous drainage is via the vortex, pterygoid venous plexus veins. The superior and inferior ophthalmic veins also assist in this. Long and short postsynaptic sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves from the ciliary ganglion are carried along to the intrinsic muscles of the ciliary body and iris.