The following are important examples of conditions associated with granuloma formation.

**Tuberculosis**

Worldwide, tuberculosis accounts for the highest proportion of adult deaths from infectious diseases.Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is an obligate aerobe that can exist within macrophages. The bacterium initially enters through the lungs, where it triggers a granulomatous inflammatory response. The granuloma in pulmonary TB is known as a Ghon focus. The infection is usually contained by the granuloma, though latent infection is common. In the case of immunodeficiency, the primary infection may not be contained within the lungs. It may cause widespread disease, or in latent disease, residual bacteria may reactivate and spread to other areas of the body.

**Sarcoidosis**

Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disease characterized by the development of non-caseating epithelioid cell granulomas with no apparent cause. While the suspicion is that an infectious pathogen is a trigger for granuloma formation in sarcoidosis, a causative antigen remains unidentified despite extensive research. As sarcoid granulomas predominantly affect the lungs and intrathoracic lymph nodes, the suspicion is that the trigger is an inhaled pathogen that the host immune system cannot easily remove.

**Crohn Disease**

Crohn disease is a chronic inflammatory disorder affecting the gastrointestinal tract primarily. Non-necrotic granulomas are one of the histological hallmarks of Crohn disease, though they are not universally present. Their presence may help differentiate Crohn disease from other inflammatory disorders of the bowel, such as ulcerative colitis. The presence of granulomas has also demonstrated an association with a more severe Crohn disease phenotype.

**Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis**

GPA (formerly known as Wegener granulomatosis) is a granulomatous autoimmune vasculitis, primarily affecting small to medium-sized vessels in the kidneys and respiratory tract. Though granulomatous inflammation is one of the key features of GPA, according to the American College of Rheumatology, granulomas are not invariably present on biopsy. Secondary pathological features that may be helpful in diagnosis include the presence of multinucleated giant cells, interstitial collagen alteration, and the presence of a polymorphous inflammatory infiltrate.