An additional cusp called the cusp of Carabelli is sometimes located on the mesio-palatal surface of permanent maxillary first molars and is rarely present on the other permanent molars. Although less common, an accessory cusp can protrude from the cingulum of the primary or permanent anterior teeth, referred to as the talon cusp.

Dilaceration describes an unusually abrupt angle between tooth crown and root or within the root itself, resulting from trauma during the development of the tooth. Further anomalies of the dental hard tissues include gemination, where a single tooth forms two crowns. This is a consequence of the tooth bud's partial division, resulting in a bifid crown but retaining the normal number of expected teeth within the dental arch.

Hyperdontia is a condition characterized by additional teeth within the normal dentition, termed supernumerary teeth. Supernumerary teeth are frequently located in the anterior maxilla, between the central incisors, termed mesiodens.

Tooth agenesis may involve the primary or permanent dentition and is a developmental anomaly where at least one tooth is absent. It can be further classified as hypodontia, involving 1 to 5 absent teeth, and oligodontia involving six or more missing teeth. When excluding third molars (wisdom teeth), tooth agenesis has a prevalence between 3% and 10% in the permanent dentition. Third molars are the most commonly congenitally missing permanent teeth, with a reported prevalence of 23%. This is followed by mandibular second premolars, maxillary lateral incisors, and, less frequently, the maxillary second premolars.

It is argued that the use of fire to cook and soften food during human evolution resulted in a reduced dependency on teeth for survival, which has been linked to a decreased reliance on all tooth types, especially the third molars. This, combined with a decrease in mandibular size, is hypothesized to have increased the prevalence of agenesis and impaction of the third molars in human populations

Syndromes such as ectodermal dysplasia or cleft lip and palate are frequently associated with tooth agenesis and factors such as trauma, infection, or drugs. Congenitally missing teeth can also occur in isolation. Complications of tooth agenesis include malocclusion, poor aesthetics, reduced masticatory function, and speech difficulties.