In 2010 the World Health Organization adjusted their guidelines, creating an edict that all cases concerning malaria undergo testing before initiating treatment. Two main diagnostic modalities exist to test for malaria in the clinical setting: Light microscopy and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is also available, with more utility in the research setting, it can be used to confirm malaria species after establishing a diagnosis.

**Blood Smear**

Direct visualization of P. vivax parasites on Giemsa-stained blood smears by light microscopy is considered the diagnostic gold standard for the diagnosis of vivax malaria. Three sets of both thick and thin smears should be obtained. Thick smears are more sensitive and are used to detect parasitemia. Thin smears allow for more clear visualization of parasites which helps with speciation. Thin smears can also be used to calculate parasite density. Light microscopy has good sensitivity and is low cost. Limitations to microscopy include the necessity for trained and experienced laboratory technicians, access to a microscope and electricity.

Compared to P. falciparum, the number of parasites circulating in the blood of a person infected with P. vivax malaria is typically lower, making it more challenging to diagnose. Also, the dormant liver hypnozoite form is undetectable by current diagnostic tools.

**Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT)**

Since the 1990s rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) have become increasingly popular diagnostic tools, especially in the resource-limited setting.Plasmodium antigens in the blood. They offer the benefit of being fast, resulting in about 15 to 20 minutes and do not require a laboratory technician skilled at making and reading blood smears. RDTs are more sensitive at higher parasite loads and may be falsely negative at lower levels of parasitemia.

Most RDTs test for the histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP2) found on Plasmodium falciparum. The sensitivity of these tests is as high as 93-99 percent.

RDTs that can test for P. vivax may detect either the P. vivax-pLDH antigen specific to P. vivax or pan-pLDH or aldolase antigens common to all Plasmodium species.

In a 2014 Cochran Systematic Review of 47 studies enrolling 22,862 participants, looking at the use of rapid diagnostic tests for diagnosing uncomplicated non-falciparum or Plasmodium vivax malaria in endemic countries the authors found that RDTs that detect either pan-pLDH or aldolase had sensitivities for non-falciparum malaria that had a range in pooled analyses from 78% (Type 2) to 89%. They found better results for studies compared RDTs that detected a P. vivax specific antibody line to identify P. vivax.  Compared with microscopy, the RDTs had pooled sensitivity of 95% (95% CI 86% to 99%) and showed pooled specificity of 99% (95% CI 99% to 100%).

RDTs can remain positive one month after successful treatment of malaria.****