A number of epidemiological cues can aid in the diagnosis of viral pneumonia, including the following:

**Age**- Viral pneumonia is most common in the very young and in the elderly.  There is a steep decline in the incidence of viral pneumonia from adolescence through the fifth or sixth decade of life. Then an upsurge as age-related immunosuppression and age-related pathologies result in immunosuppression increase.

**Pregnancy**- Viral pneumonia continues to be quite concerning in pregnancy. Of particular concern is influenza-related pneumonia secondary to the ubiquitous nature of influenza from late fall to late spring; the last two major flu epidemics, 1918 and 1957, produced respective mortality rates of 50% and 10%. This increased mortality is a major factor in the CDC recommendation that all otherwise healthy women receive an inactivated influenza virus vaccine during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. An additional, though less common, cause of viral pneumonia in pregnant women is varicella. Limited data reflects a very substantial mortality rate, and current recommendations are for treatment with varicella-zoster immune globulin within 96 hours of exposure to varicella in a non-immune gravid female.

**Immune competence**- Decreased immune competence can be a result of the following:

- Chemotherapy (and/or) radiation therapy for neoplasm

- Treatment of chronic inflammatory illness with immunosuppressive therapy

- Organ transplantation requiring immunosuppressive medications

- Acquired immune incompetence secondary to HIV

- Inherited diseases of diminished immune competency

The aforementioned may result in increased susceptibility to viral pneumonia.

**Comorbid circumstances**- A number of comorbid circumstances can predispose patients to viral pneumonia including:

- Trauma

- Severe burns

- Uncontrolled diabetes

- Malnutrition

- Poverty

- Environmental exposure

- Group living