Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most commonly known heritable cardiac disorder.

Although asymptomatic at times, the disease is characterized by a gradual progression of shortness of breath on exertion and worsening quality of life in the setting of dynamic obstruction of the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT). Obstructive HCM ensues due to the myofibrillar disarray leading to septal hypertrophy and abnormal subvalvular mitral apparatus resulting in systolic anterior motion of one or both of the mitral leaflets.

Mavacamten is currently indicated for treating adults with symptomatic heart failure (New York Heart Association [NYHA] class II and III) secondary to obstructive HCM to improve functional capacity and symptoms. Mavacamten obtained approval from the Food and Drug Administration in 2022 after the release of phase III pivotal clinical study EXPLORER-HCM (Evaluate Mavacamten in Adults with Symptomatic Obstructive Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.)

In the EXPLORER trial, obstructive HCM was defined as an unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy with a left ventricular wall thickness of 15 mm or greater and a peak LVOT gradient of at least 50 mmHg at rest. Patients enrolled had a left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) of at least 55 % and were 18 years old or older.

Patients on dual therapy with a beta-blocker and calcium channel blocker were excluded, as well as patients on monotherapy with disopyramide or ranolazine. Patients with known infiltrative or storage diseases causing left ventricle hypertrophy were also excluded. After 62 weeks from randomization, mavacamten use was associated with decreased resting and post-exercise LVOT gradient, improvement in the NYHA heart failure symptom classification, and exercise performance.

In addition, a post-exercise LVOT gradient of less than 30 mmHg was achieved in 57 % of patients in the mavacamten group, which was 50 % greater than the placebo group. Compared to placebo, mavacamten use in patients with obstructive HCM, LVEF greater than 55 %, and symptomatic heart failure (NYHA class II or III) led to a 34 % greater reduction in functional class. Furthermore, the use of mavacamten in patients with obstructive HCM was also associated with significant improvement in quality of life by several health-related quality of life indexes, such as the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionary Overall Summary Score and the Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Symptom Questionnaire Short of Breath.

Subgroup analysis of patients undergoing cardiac magnetic resonance imaging has shown that mavacamten is associated with absolute reductions in the intracellular myocardial mass index without changes in myocardial contractile fraction or fibrosis after 30 weeks of therapy.

Statistical projections using a Markov model have analyzed the long-term net health benefits of mavacamten in patients with obstructive HCM.

Using mavacamten has also been proposed in patients with non-obstructive HCM. The MAVERICK-HCM trial (Mavacamten in Adults with Symptomatic Non-Obstructive Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy) explored the safety and efficacy of mavacamten in this subset of patients. In this phase II analysis, treatment with mavacamten was associated with significantly reducing myocardial wall stress markers, such as the cardiac troponin I and the N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide.

In patients with obstructive HCM with NYHA class IV symptoms who are eligible for septal reduction therapies, the use of mavacamten is being evaluated in the VALOR-HCM trial (Evaluation of Mavacamten in Adults With Symptomatic Obstructive Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy who are Eligible for Septal Reduction Therapy.)