Diagnosis of PUD requires history taking, physical examination, and invasive/non-invasive medical tests. A careful history should be obtained and noted for the presence of any complications. Patient reporting of epigastric abdominal pain, early satiety, and fullness following a meal raise suspicion of PUD. The pain of gastric ulcers increases 2 to 3 hours after a meal and may result in weight loss, whereas the pain of duodenal ulcers decreases with a meal which can result in weight gain. Any patient presenting with anemia, melena, hematemesis, or weight loss should be further investigated for complications of PUD, predominantly bleeding, perforation, or cancer. A physical exam may reveal epigastric abdominal tenderness and signs of anemia.

**Investigations**

- Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD): Gold standard and most accurate diagnostic test with sensitivity and specificity up to 90% in diagnosing gastric and duodenal ulcers. The American Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy has published guidelines on the role of endoscopy in patients presenting with upper abdominal pain or dyspeptic symptoms suggestive of PUD.

- Barium swallow: It is indicated when EGD is contraindicated.

- Complete blood work, liver function, and levels of amylase and lipase.

- Serum gastric is ordered if Zollinger Ellison syndrome is suspected.

- Helicobacter pylori testing:

- 
Serologic testing

- Urea breath test: High sensitivity and specificity. It may be used to confirm eradication after 4 to 6 weeks of stopping treatment. In the presence of urease, an enzyme produced by H.pylori, the radiolabeled carbon dioxide produced by the stomach is exhaled by the lungs.

- Antibodies to H.pylori can also be measured.

- 
Stool antigen test

- 
Urine-based ELISA and rapid urine test

- Endoscopic biopsy: Culture is not generally recommended as it is expensive, time-consuming, and invasive. It is indicated if eradication treatment fails or there is suspicion about antibiotic resistance. Biopsies from at least 4-6 sites are necessary to increase sensitivity. Gastric ulcers are commonly located on the lesser curvature between the antrum and fundus. The majority of duodenal ulcers are located in the first part of the duodenum.

6. Computerized tomography of the abdomen with contrast is of limited value in the diagnosis of PUD itself but is helpful in the diagnosis of its complications like perforation and gastric outlet obstruction.