# Introduction

The arteries of the forearm are muscular arteries that originate from the brachial artery at its bifurcation into the ulnar and radial arteries in the cubital fossa. The division occurs anterior to the radius and ulna at approximately the level of the radial neck or radial tuberosity.

# Structure and Function

For clarity, the structure and function of the arteries of the forearm will be discussed separately for each artery.

**Ulnar Artery**

The ulnar artery is the larger of the two branches of the brachial artery at the level of its bifurcation.

The ulnar artery and its branches are responsible for blood supply to the medial forearm, including the bones and muscles of the forearm and the ulnar and median nerves. It is also responsible for part of the blood supply to the carpal bones and the hands, specifically of the medial hand and the medial two digits. The proximal branches help supply structures of the elbow joint.

**Radial Artery**

The radial artery is the smaller of the two branches of the brachial artery at the level of its bifurcation. It branches off the brachial artery anteromedial to the biceps tendon, and courses inferolaterally along the forearm.

The radial artery mainly supplies blood to the wrist and hand, as it does not have many branches in the proximal forearm. It is the main blood supply of the lateral hand and lateral three digits. It forms part of the blood supply of several forearm muscles. It supplies the radial nerve and helps supply the elbow joint.

**Radial Recurrent Artery**

The radial recurrent artery branches laterally off the radial artery in the cubital fossa anterior to the biceps tendon.

**Anterior Ulnar Recurrent Artery**

The anterior ulnar recurrent artery is the first branch of the ulnar artery. It branches medially in the cubital fossa and travels superiorly up the arm between the brachialis and pronator teres.

**Posterior Ulnar Recurrent Artery**

The posterior ulnar recurrent artery branches laterally off the ulnar artery directly below the origin of the anterior ulnar recurrent artery.

**Common Interosseous Artery**

The common interosseous artery branches medially off the ulnar artery distal to the origin of the posterior ulnar recurrent artery.

**Anterior Interosseous Artery**

The anterior interosseous artery branches off the common interosseous artery and travels inferiorly down the arm anterior to the interosseous membrane.

**Posterior Interosseous Artery**

The posterior interosseous artery branches off the common interosseous artery and travels inferiorly down the arm shortly before piercing the interosseous membrane and giving off a branch called the recurrent interosseous artery at the level of the supinator.

**Recurrent Interosseous Artery**

The recurrent interosseous artery branches off the posterior interosseous artery at the level of the supinator muscle.

# Embryology

There is more than one theory on the embryologic development of the arteries of the arm. One theory suggests that the seventh intersegmental artery gives off a branch, the axis artery, which distally branches into the axillary, brachial, and interosseous arteries.

The basis of another theory is a gradually developing capillary network, which differentiates along with other structures in the fetal arm.

# Nerves

The nerves of the forearm include the median nerve, ulnar nerve, radial nerves, and their branches.

# Muscles

Several different arteries supply the various muscles of the forearm. Clinically, this allows for harvesting of the forearm arteries without causing permanent damage to the arm. The common interosseous and recurrent interosseous arteries are not known to supply any muscles. For clarity, the arterial supply to the forearm musculature is listed below, organized by the artery.

- Ulnar Artery: flexor digitorum profundus, flexor digitorum superficialis

- Radial Artery: extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor carpi radialis longus, flexor carpi radialis, flexor digitorum superficialis

- Radial Recurrent Artery: brachialis, brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor carpi radialis longus, supinator

- Anterior Ulnar Recurrent Artery: pronator teres

- Posterior Ulnar Recurrent Artery: flexor carpi ulnaris, palmaris longus

- Anterior Interosseous Artery: flexor digitorum profundus, flexor pollicis longus, pronator quadratus

- Posterior Interosseous Artery: abductor pollicis longus, extensor carpi ulnaris, extensor digiti minimi, extensor digitorum, extensor indicis, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor pollicis longus, supinator

# Physiologic Variants

There are many reported variants of the arteries of the forearm. Sometimes, patients undergoing procedures using radial artery access are found to have unusual arterial anatomy. One of the most common variations is a called the brachioradial artery, which is a radial artery that has an origin-proximal to the cubital fossa, higher on the brachial artery. Research reports the presence of a brachioradial artery in 13.8% of limbs.

# Surgical Considerations

The radial artery is a popular access site for endovascular procedures such as cardiac catheterization and uterine fibroid embolization. It also can serve as a flap in reconstructive surgery.

# Clinical Significance

**Pulse**

The most common place to evaluate a patient’s pulse is the radial artery at the wrist. Due to its superficial course near the lateral wrist, the radial artery is easily palpable. The ulnar artery is also palpable at the medial aspect of the wrist. Both arteries can be occluded with manual compression, which is done in the Allen test. The Allen test assesses the collateral circulation of the hand prior to performing any procedures that could involve the forearm arteries.

**Arterial Lines**

The radial artery is the primary site for the placement of arterial lines used for blood pressure monitoring. It is also the most common artery punctured to procure a sample for arterial blood gas analysis. When arterial catheters are left in for several days, complications such as infection, spasm, and occlusion can occur.

**Radial Artery Access**

The radial artery is commonly used as an access site for endovascular procedures. This is becoming more common as evidence suggests that there are fewer vascular access complications when using the radial artery compared to the femoral artery, without any negative effects on the success of the procedure.

**Dialysis Fistulas**

The most common arteriovenous fistula used for hemodialysis is a radiocephalic fistula, between the radial artery and the cephalic vein.

**Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting**

The radial artery can be harvested for use in coronary artery bypass grafting. Ischemia of the hand is prevented in most cases due to the extensive collateral circulation from the ulnar and interosseous arteries. Evidence suggests that radial artery grafting is superior to saphenous vein grafting, as data shows a lower incidence of occlusion and adverse cardiac events when using a radial artery graft.

**Forearm Flap Surgery**

Another area of clinical significance for the arteries of the forearm is in reconstructive surgery using forearm flaps. In these surgeries, tissue from the forearm is harvested along with its blood supply and then attached to the area of the body in need of the flap. Keeping the blood supply together with the tissue allows for healing in a damaged area that cannot supply blood to a skin graft. The most common forearm flaps are the radial forearm free flap and ulnar forearm free flap.

# Other Issues

Calciphylaxis or calcific uremic arteriolopathy is an arterial calcification, typically found in patients with long-term kidney disease. Radiography shows the process of arterial calcification, for example, in the forearm. The radial pulse may appear very strong; the causes remain unclear.

The adventitious cystic disease of the radial artery is a pathology that is difficult to find, but real. It appears as a painful mass in the forearm. It attaches with a stem at the intra-mural level of the artery. The approach is always surgical.