Following viral transmission, the rhabdovirus travels through the peripheral nervous system targeting the central nerves, which then leads to encephalomyelitis. In humans, the first symptoms seem like any other nonspecific viral syndrome (fever, malaise, headache). These benign symptoms may then progress to anxiety, then to agitation, and then to frank delirium. One very consistent symptom after a rabid bite is tingling at the bite site within the first few days. Interestingly enough, after the virus has spread from peripheral nerves to the central nervous system (CNS), it then travels back to the peripheral nervous system, particularly affecting highly innervated areas (e.g., salivary glands). The "frothing" as portrayed in the movies Cujo and Old Yeller, is due to hypersalivation, and victims can suffer from intense pharyngeal muscle spasm at the mere sight, taste, or sound of water. This is called "hydrophobia." Eventually, the virus progresses to complete failure of the entire nervous system which causes a quick death. While animals tend to die within ten days, the incubation period following inoculation can last two weeks to six years, averaging a few months. Determining factors for the time of onset include the viral load, location of exposure, and severity of the wound. The virus ultimately affects the central nervous system, usually affecting the brainstem more severely. The toxic effects occur through an inflammatory response, with functional changes not completely understood. Ultimately the virus is suspected to affect neurotransmission, and apoptosis may occur through virus-dependent and cell-dependent routes. Once clinical features are seen, rabies is universally fatal.