The collecting ducts can subdivide into three anatomical segments: cortical, outer medullary, and inner medullary. At each of these segments, collecting ducts connect with distal aspects of nephrons called collecting tubules. A lobule is comprised of a collecting duct and the group of nephrons that it drains.

Principal cells contain sodium (ENaC) and potassium channels on their apical surfaces. Aldosterone promotes the expression of each channel, increasing both sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) opposes these aldosterone-mediated effects. Also, principal cells may express apical aquaporin two channels in response to stimulation by antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Increased expression of aquaporin 2 promotes water reabsorption, which concentrates the tubular fluid. The basolateral surfaces of principal cells contain Na-K-ATPases that create gradients for promoting sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion.

Type A intercalated cells primarily function to secrete acid into the tubular fluid. This function takes place with apical H-ATPases and H/K-ATPases. Intracellular carbonic acid dissociates to form a hydrogen ion (conjugate acid) and bicarbonate (conjugate base). Bicarbonate enters the circulation via basolateral anion exchanger 1, while hydrogen ions get secreted through the aforementioned apical ATPases. Secreted hydrogen ions bind to ammonia and hydrogen phosphate to become substances that are generally not reabsorbed. Aldosterone can potentiate this process by increasing the expression of H-ATPase.

Type B intercalated cells can be thought of as the base-secreting equivalents of type A intercalated cells. Like in type A intercalated cells, carbonic acid dissociates into a hydrogen ion and bicarbonate. Bicarbonate is secreted utilizing an apical anion exchanger called pendrin. Hydrogen ions enter the circulation via basolateral H-ATPase pumps.

Cells of the inner medullary cortical duct segment can express urea channels. This capacity contributes to the overall concentrating effect ADH has on tubular fluid. In the presence of ADH, expression of apical urea transporter-A1 and basolateral urea transporter-A3 increases, which allows urea to enter the inner medullary interstitial space, increasing its concentration. This effect enhances water reabsorption by potentiating passive sodium and chloride reabsorption in the thin ascending limb of the loop of Henle.