# Continuing Education Activity

While conventional stress tests are exercise-based, in certain circumstances, there may be contraindications to exercise. In these cases, pharmacologically-based stress tests are an option. These tests typically involve the administration of a vasodilator to mimic the cardiac response to exercise. The most commonly used vasodilator is dipyridamole; less commonly used agents include adenosine and regadenoson. This activity describes dipyridamole stress testing and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients who undergo pharmacological stress testing.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the mechanism of action of dipyridamole.
- Outline the indications for dipyridamole stress tests.
- Summarize the contraindications to dipyridamole.
- Explain how collaboration between healthcare professionals performing exercise stress tests and dipyridamole stress tests can help reduce the healthcare burden.

# Introduction

A nuclear stress test is a relatively non-invasive diagnostic procedure that involves the injection of a small quantity of radioactive tracer into the bloodstream, administered in conjunction with myocardial perfusion imaging and a stress test, which challenges the functional capacity of the heart.

One of the most commonly performed stress tests, which accompanies nuclear-based perfusion imaging, is exercise-based.

**Mechanism of Action**

Dipyridamole is a phosphodiesterase enzyme inhibitor. It indirectly increases myocardial perfusion by inhibiting the degradation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and by blocking the cellular reuptake of endogenous adenosine. Subsequently, the concentration of circulating adenosine increases by 3- to 4-fold.

# Indications

The indications for (list 1) an exercise nuclear stress test and conditions (list 2) where pharmacologic stress test is the recommended approach according to the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology,

A - Detection of coronary artery disease: symptomatic

B - Detection of coronary artery disease/risk assessment without ischemic equivalent.

C - Risk assessment with prior test results and/or known chronic stable coronary artery disease

D - Risk assessment: preoperative evaluation for noncardiac surgery without active cardiac condition

E - Risk assessment: within 3 months of an acute coronary syndrome

F - Risk assessment: Post-revascularization (percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting surgery)

**AND**

**A.**The patient does not possess the capacity to perform the required exercise due to non-cardiac physical limitations (e.g., musculoskeletal injury) and/or cognitive conditions, or if the patient doesn’t want to exercise.

**B.**If the patient presents with abnormal baseline electrocardiographic measurements such as left bundle branch block, ventricular pre-excitation (Wolff-Parkinson White syndrome), and/or permanent ventricular pacing.

**C.**In the process of risk stratification for patients after acute myocardial infarction who are clinically stable at the time of presentation; and for patients who present to the emergency department with a suspected acute coronary syndrome, which has been excluded by serial clinical evaluation, electrocardiograms, and serum markers.

# Contraindications

The contraindications for a dipyridamole nuclear stress test, according to guidelines from the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology,

**(1)**If a patient has bronchospastic lung disease with ongoing wheezing or significant reactive airway disease.

**(2)**If a patient presents with systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg. (The risk of serious hypotension may be higher in patients with autonomic dysfunction, hypovolemia, stenotic valvular disease)

**(3)**If the patient has uncontrolled hypertension, defined by a systolic blood pressure greater than 200 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure of 110 mmHg.

**(4)**If the patient has consumed caffeinated foods, beverages, or drugs within 12 hours of the scheduled test.

**(5)**If the patient has a known hypersensitivity to dipyridamole.

**(6)**If the patient has unstable angina or acute coronary syndrome; or has had an acute myocardial infarction within 4 days of the scheduled test.

The relative contraindications for a dipyridamole nuclear stress test, according to guidelines American Society of Nuclear Cardiology,

**(1)**If the patient presents with sinus bradycardia (i.e., heart rate of fewer than 40 beats per minute.

**(2)**If the patient has a second-degree or third-degree atrioventricular block without a functioning pacemaker.

**(3)**If the patient has severe aortic stenosis.

**(4)**If the patient is prone to seizures.

# Equipment

In addition to an electrocardiogram and blood pressure monitor, as well as the obvious consumables (e.g., intravenous infusion equipment), a dipyridamole nuclear stress test requires the use of radioactive tracers, including but not limited to TI-201 and/or Tc-99m-labelled tracers.

# Personnel

A dipyridamole nuclear stress test should be performed under the supervision of a qualified health professional who is appropriately trained to administer stress tests and under the supervision of a nuclear cardiologist or radiologist qualified to administer the radioactive tracer.

# Preparation

According to guidelines from the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, patients should be instructed not to eat for at least 3 hours before the stress test.

# Technique or Treatment

The following protocol for a dipyridamole nuclear stress test is in the guidelines from the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology

**(1)**Blood pressure and 12-lead electrocardiogram monitoring should be performed every minute throughout the stress test, up to 3 to 5 minutes after the test or when the patient is stable.

**(2)**Dipyridamole is administered intravenously over 4 minutes at a standardized dose of 0.56 mg/kg, with the upper limit of the weight-based dose set at 250 lbs. or 125 kg.

**(3)**The radioactive tracer is then injected 3 to 5 minutes after complete infusion of the dipyridamole.

**(4)**Single-photon emission computed tomography or positron emission tomography is then performed 15 to 45 minutes after inducing the dipyridamole-mediated stress, producing images of the blood flow throughout the patient’s heart.

**(5)**The infusion of dipyridamole should cease and aminophylline administered (50 to 250 mg; at least 1 minute after [if] the radioactive tracer has been injected) if the patient experiences any of the following:

- Severe hypotension (systolic blood pressure of less than 80 mmHg)

- Symptomatic, persistent second-degree, or complete heart block

- Other significant cardiac arrhythmia

- Wheezing,

- Severe chest pain associated with an ST depression or signs of poor blood perfusion (e.g., cold skin, pallor, or cyanosis).

**(6)**Indeed, the stress test should always be stopped early at the patient’s request; and if there are technical problems with the imaging equipment.

Patients who are ambulatory may undergo low-level exercise combined with Dipyridamole infusion,  the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology guidelines stipulate the following protocol

**(1)**Blood pressure and 12-lead electrocardiogram monitoring should be performed throughout the stress test, up to 3 to 5 minutes after the test or when the patient is stable.

**(2)**Dipyridamole is administered intravenously over a period of 4 minutes at a standardized dose of 0.56 mg/kg, with the upper limit of the weight-based dose set at 250 lb or 125 kg.

**(3)**The patient then begins 4 to 6 minutes of submaximal exercise (e.g., 1.7 mph, 0% grade) soon after the dipyridamole has been infused, and the radioactive tracer is injected within this time, while the patient is exercising.

**(4)**The patient continues exercising for at least 2 minutes after the tracer is injected to allow its distribution throughout the myocardium.

# Complications

There are few risks associated with a nuclear stress test, but, in rare cases, some patients may have a treatable allergic reaction to the radioactive tracer.

# Clinical Significance

Acknowledging that dipyridamole administration mediates an appropriate increase in perfusion, similar to that of exercise, the clinical significance of a dipyridamole nuclear stress test is highly dependent on the diagnostic values of the devices that monitor myocardial perfusion. A systematic review reported that the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of single-photon emission computed tomography for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease was 82% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 76% to 88%), 76% (95%CI: 70% to 82%) and 83% (95%CI: 77% to 89%), respectively.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A routine collaboration between health professionals who are directing the exercise stress tests and those who are responsible for directing the dipyridamole stress tests has the potential to reduce the burden on health resources and the patient. In circumstances where a patient begins an exercise stress test and cannot achieve the intensity to ensure the diagnostic sensitivity of the cardiac assessment (i.e., greater than 85% of the patient’s age-predicted maximum heart rate), the data is often lost; and the patient will be required to return for a second stress test, most likely pharmacologically-based.

In summary, stress test administration, whether routine exercise or drug-induced, requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

If there are indications for stopping a dipyridamole nuclear stress test early, attending nurses may be charged with administering aminophylline to reverse any complications. Additionally, the nurse is capable of life-saving treatment in the rare case that a serious complication such as myocardial infarction occurs during the stress test.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Nurses play an essential role in monitoring the patient throughout the dipyridamole nuclear stress test, needing to quickly identify if the patient is impacted by any indications, as described above, for stopping the test early.