Modern imaging techniques do not replace history and physical examination. The physical examination is especially important to help distinguish between fractures that need acute surgical care and referral versus those for which simple observation is sufficient. Some patients present with extensive damage to other facial structures for which detailed assessment is mandatory. Some limitations may exist due to extensive soft tissue swelling or non-responsive patients.

Traumatized patients should be treated only after the initial assessment, according to advanced trauma life support criteria. Examination always has to include a full examination of the facial structures according to current guidelines published by the relevant authority.

The patient should be queried specifically about the trauma mechanism and if they have double vision, numbness to his face, and/or loss of visual acuity.

The following assessments are characteristic of orbital floor fractures and mandate further imaging:

- Diplopia (on upward gaze)

- Limitation of upward gaze

- Trigeminal function assessment: The infraorbital nerve runs along the floor of the orbit. Decreased sensation over the inferior orbital rim, extending to the edge of the nose and ipsilateral upper lip can occur.

- Tenderness, or step-offs at the infraorbital rim

- Subcutaneous emphysema (indicates a fracture of the maxillary sinus)

- Oculomotor function: Entrapment of the inferior rectus muscle; often occurs between fragments of the lower orbit and is the cause of diplopia

- Pupillary light reflex: An absent reflex can show damage to the afferent or efferent nerve system

- Gross visual acuity

- Position of the globe: A dislocated fracture can lead to enophthalmos and swelling behind the globe, to exophthalmos

- Chemosis and sub-conjunctival hemorrhage

- Edema and periorbital ecchymosis

Careful evaluation of the eye is important for visual acuity, hyphema, or retinal detachment, and of the nose for septal hematoma. In the presence of eye pain and decreased visual acuity, globe rupture should be suspected since it is associated with a high rate of concomitant orbital floor fracture.