To enhance patient health outcomes by the healthcare teams, medical education and dissemination of information regarding diabetes mellitus, its complications, and management options are crucial for patient care. All interprofessional healthcare team members (clinicians, pharmacists, nurses) must be mindful of the potential complications as well as how to manage hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, and other complications of insulin pharmacotherapy.

All interprofessional team members should assist in educating the patient and family about the importance of safe insulin dosing. Demonstrations and educational workshops would go a long way toward achieving these goals. It is also crucial to educate the patient to recognize the early signs of hypoglycemia and how to manage diabetes mellitus with insulin and other glycemic control medications. This approach allows the patient to become an integral member of the healthcare team, i.e., its number one focus, and to help in improving overall outcomes by close collaboration. Nursing should ensure proper administration, adherence, and verify monitoring. Pharmacists need to verify dosing, perform medication reconciliation, and instruct patients on administration and how to use their glucose monitor properly. If there are concerns, they should work with the clinician to improve the safe administration of the drug. Monitoring of the blood glucose concentrations, adjusting the dose of insulin as necessary, and lifestyle modifications to prevent chronic complications of diabetes mellitus are significant goals to enhance the patient health outcomes by the healthcare team. [Level 5]