**Idiopathic/Bell Palsy (70%)**

Most commonly, the cause for facial nerve palsy remains unknown and has the name ‘Bell palsy.' Bell palsy has an incidence of 10 to 40 per 100000.

It usually presents as a lower motor neuron lesion with total unilateral palsy. There is thought to be a viral prodromal period, and it can be recurrent in up to 10% of patients; however, the presence of a facial nerve palsy tends to present fully during the first 24 to 48 hours.

**Trauma (10 to 23%)**

Fractures involving the petrous part of the temporal bone and facial wounds transecting the branches of the facial nerve can cause facial nerve palsies. It takes an incredibly large force to fracture the temporal bone, and the clinician must look for signs such as hemotympanum, battles sign, and nystagmus. Temporal bone fractures usually occur unilaterally and are classified according to the plane of fracture along the petrous ridge (i.e., longitudinal vs. transverse.

**Infection**

- Viral (4.5 to 7%) - Herpes Zoster infection resulting in facial paralysis due to geniculate ganglionitis (also known as Ramsay Hunt syndrome (RHS). The virus remains dormant in the geniculate ganglion. The geniculate ganglion also receives innervation from the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX). Consequently, the active virus can produce a prodromal period of otalgia and vesicular eruptions within the external auditory canal as well as the soft palate (distribution of CN IX). Additionally, up to 40% of patients with RHS develop vertigo due to the involvement of cranial nerve VIII (vestibulocochlear nerve).

- Bacterial - Acute otitis media can cause dehiscence within the facial canal resulting in nerve paralysis. Additionally, cholesteatomas and necrotizing otitis externa can cause facial nerve palsies.  A rare cause of facial nerve palsy is Lyme disease, with symptoms such as a tick bite, fatigue, headache arthralgia, and erythema migrans occurring between 1 to 2 weeks after tick exposure. Cardiac involvement (myopericarditis)  and arthritis can also occur as part of the syndrome. IgM + IgG serology is vital in these patients from an investigative standpoint. Any patient presenting with a history of erythema migrans and foreign travel exposure requires immediate investigation for Lyme disease.

**Neoplasia (2.2 to 5%)**

A slowly progressing onset of facial palsy should raise the suspicion of malignancy and prompt a full and thorough head and neck examination. Malignancies resulting in facial nerve paralysis include (but are not exclusive to) parotid malignancies, facial and acoustic neuromas, meningioma, and arachnoid cysts. These will all present with varying degrees and manifestations of facial nerve palsy due to the relative location of the tumor.

**Facial Nerve Palsy in Children**

The causes of facial nerve palsy in children classify as either congenital or acquired. Acquired causes are the same as in adults as described above, and all of the above etiologies can occur in children.

Congenital causes include:

- Traumatic such as high birth weight, forceps delivery, prematurity, or birth by cesarean section.

- Syndromic cases include those with craniofacial abnormalities such as Moebius syndrome, Goldenhar syndrome syringobulbia, and Arnold Chiari malformations.

- Genetic causes such as hereditary myopathies (myasthenia and myotonic dystrophy. The chromosome loci 3q21-22 and 10q21.3-22.1 have been isolated as causes of hereditary forms of facial paralysis.

It is worth noting that surgical decompression of the facial nerve within the labyrinthine segment is not recommended for the pediatric population as research has failed to demonstrate beneficial outcomes, and there is a significant risk of sensorineural hearing loss with the procedure.

**Bilateral Facial Nerve Palsy**

Bilateral facial nerve paresis is an uncommon but essential branch of facial nerve palsy, occurring in between 0.3 to 2% of all facial nerve palsies.