It is essential to differentiate between non-synostotic (brachycephaly and/or plagiocephaly) and synostotic (bicoronal and/or bi-lambdoid synostosis) infant head shape abnormalities by taking a detailed history in combination with an astute physical examination. Important questions include:

- Family history of abnormal head shapes

- Prenatal exposure to teratogens

- When the abnormality was first observed

- History of intrauterine fetal head constraints

- Birth history

Physical examination should include measurement of the infant's head circumference, palpation of the sutures for evidence of ridging, and examining the fontanelles for assessment of elevated intracranial pressure. The infant's head should be assessed from the anterior view, posterior view, lateral view, and, importantly, from the vertex (top of the head). Anthropometric measurements using cranial calipers provide vital information on head length, width, and occipitofrontal transcranial diameters.

A complete neurological examination should also be performed. Indices such as the cephalic index (i.e., the ratio of maximum width to the maximum length of the skull) and the cranial vault asymmetry index (i.e., the percentage difference between the diagonal dimensions of the skull) may provide useful information on the degree of severity of an infant's head shape abnormality.

Positional brachycephaly is characterized by bilateral/symmetrical flattening of the occiput, widening of the posterior skull, bilateral temporal bossing, and a round face. There is usually evidence of sutural ridging (bi-coronal and/or bi-lambdoid craniosynostosis) with synostotic brachycephaly. In lambdoid craniosynostosis, there may be an associated sutural trough rather than an expected ridge. Bicoronal synostosis is often associated with turricephaly; the forehead appears somewhat towered with seemingly shallow orbits and a shortened nasal bone. Some infants with bicoronal synostosis resulting in brachycephaly may have peri-orbital findings, including Harlequin eye signs and exophthalmos.

The Harlequin eye sign is characterized by the affected side having a higher supra-orbital margin than the unaffected side. During the physical examination, it is important to determine whether or not other craniofacial or systemic abnormalities are present, including mid-face hypoplasia, abnormal facies, or limb abnormalities, which may indicate the presence of an associated syndrome.

**Positional Plagiocephaly**

Positional plagiocephaly produces a parallelogram head-shape deformity. There will be occipital flattening of the affected side and associated bossing of the ipsilateral frontal region and contralateral occipital region. The ear position will be pushed forward, and the mastoid will be of normal appearance.

**Posterior Plagiocephaly Secondary to Unilateral Lambdoid Craniosynostosis**

Posterior plagiocephaly produces a trapezoid head-shape deformity. Similar to positional plagiocephaly, there will be occipital flattening of the affected side. In contrast to positional plagiocephaly, there will be associated bossing of both the contralateral frontal and contralateral parietal regions. The ear position will be backward, and the mastoid will be bulging and downward.

**Bilateral Lambdoid Craniosynostosis**

The presentation of bilateral lambdoid suture craniosynostosis is that of brachycephaly, with both ears displaced inferiorly and anteriorly.

**Bicoronal Craniosynostosis**

The presentation of bicoronal craniosynostosis is turricephaly, with a towered forehead, seemingly shallow orbits, and a shortened nasal bone.

**Anterior Plagiocephaly**

Anterior plagiocephaly is secondary to unilateral coronal suture craniosynostosis with contralateral forehead bossing.