In patients with decompensated heart failure, both renal and hepatic clearance becomes reduced due to decreased renal plasma flow and hepatic congestion, respectively. As a result of reduced renal clearance, only a fraction of the given dose is delivered to the site of action in the kidney, causing less natriuresis in patients with heart failure than in normal subjects at any given dose.

A meta-analysis, including randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and observational studies, including heart failure patients, has shown that torsemide is associated with significant improvement in functional status and reduced cardiac mortality compared to furosemide. Findings also denote that there is no statistically significant difference in all-cause mortality or side effects experienced among the two diuretics.

- In chronic kidney disease, dose adjustment of diuretics inversely relates to GFR.

- In moderate chronic kidney disease (CKD) (estimated GFR >30 mL/min/1.73 m), the maximum effective dose of torsemide is approximately 20 to 50 mg.

- In severe CKD (estimated GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m), the maximum effective dose of torsemide is approximately 50 to 100 mg.

- In cases of acute kidney injury with oliguria, a higher dose is necessary for a diuretic response.

- It is important to note that torsemide does not get removed by hemodialysis, so no dosing adjustment is necessary for dialysis patients.

- In clinical practice, it is essential to note the oral dose equivalency of different loop diuretics, which is as follows: torsemide 20 mg = bumetanide 1 mg = furosemide 40 mg.

Torsemide therapy is best administered under the guidance of an interprofessional team approach, with clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, MDs), nurses, and pharmacists all contributing from their individual areas of expertise and engaging in open communication with other team members to monitor the patient's reaction to therapy. The pharmacist can also check for drug-drug interactions; nursing staff can counsel patients and serve as the initial contact point for the prescribing clinician. These are but a few examples of how interprofessional teamwork can improve outcomes with torsemide therapy when indicated and limit adverse events. [Level 5]