There are a number of clinical situations that bear relation to the RN and its function. First, as mentioned previously, there is considerable functional redundancy between the corticospinal tract and the rubrospinal tract. Therefore, in the case of corticospinal tract injury (such as stroke or spinal cord injury), neurologic compensation and response take place in the acute setting, by which the red nuclei undergo remodeling, and increases activity.

Another clinically relevant manifestation with regards to the RN can be seen in patients with substantial brain damage. Specifically, the involuntary posture that a patient demonstrates can help localize the lesion of interest. In decorticate rigidity, flexion of the upper extremities illustrates an intact RN (and rubrospinal tract). If the lesion reaches the RN (and therefore, the midbrain), the upper extremities demonstrate extended posture, which is referred to as decerebrate posturing.

The third (and much less common) clinical manifestation regarding direct damage to red nuclei involves hypertrophic olivary degeneration and ultimately palatal myoclonus (and dysphagia)

Fourth, lesions of the RN may lead to various third nerve palsies due to the intimate anatomical relationship between it and the oculomotor nerve. Specifically, fibers of Cranial Nerve III travel alongside the RN as it leaves the oculomotor nerve nucleus and passes ventrally through the midbrain.

Fifth, there is a rare autosomal recessive disorder known as Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome, characterized by hypogonadism, adolescent-onset diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and alopecia.

Lastly, there is consideration given towards the interplay between the RN and Parkinson disease.****Similarly, and as mentioned previously, the functional and expressive similarities between the RN and the subthalamic nuclei also present difficulties with regards to treating Parkinson's disease via deep brain stimulation, and also provide obstacles in better understanding this disease.