Early recognition and treatment of meningococcal infections are imperative in improving outcomes. The focus in treating meningococcal infection is antibiotics, isolation and contact precaution, infectious disease consultation, management in the intensive care unit, management of coagulopathies, and identifying those at risk who may have gotten infected.

Because meningococcal meningitis can present similarly to other bacterial meningitis, empiric treatment should start while awaiting culture results. This preemptive approach includes a third-generation cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone or cefotaxime. If culture identifies the organism as penicillin-susceptible, treatment can be switched to penicillin G, although continuing third-generation cephalosporin treatment is also an option. For patients who have significant allergies to penicillin and other beta-lactams, chloramphenicol may be an alternative. The duration of antibiotic therapy is usually five to seven days but can be up to twenty-one days, depending on the patient’s clinical response and culture sensitivity.

- Ceftriaxone dosing is 2 g (50 mg/kg in pediatric patients older than 1 month) intravenously (IV) every 12 hours, and cefotaxime dosing is 2 g (50 mg/kg in pediatric patients older than 1 month) every 6 hours.

- Third-generation cephalosporins are generally preferable due to high efficacy and easier dosing.

- Penicillin dosing is 300,000 units/kg per day IV or intramuscularly (IM) with a maximum dose of 24 million units per day. Penicillin is usually given as 4 million units every four hours IV in adults and pediatric patients older than 1 month.

- High-dose penicillin is recommended for cultures with a sensitivity of penicillin minimum inhibitory concentration 0.1 to 1.0 mcg/mL, although most clinicians will continue using third-generation cephalosporin instead.

- Chloramphenicol dosing is 100 mg/kg per day IV in divided doses every 6 hours with a maximum dose of 4 g per day. It is usually given in divided doses every 6 hours.

- Serum concentrations require monitoring due to chloramphenicol toxicity.
- Recommended therapeutic levels include a trough of 5 to 10 mcg/mL and a peak of 10 to 20 mcg/mL.

- Dexamethasone dosing is 0.15 mg/kg with a maximum dose of 10 mg every 6 hours.

- Has **no therapeutic benefit**in meningococcal meningitis and therefore should be discontinued once this diagnosis is established
- Ideally administered 4 hours prior to or concomitantly with antibiotics
- Not recommended if tuberculosis meningitis is suspected
- Not recommended if meningococcemia with shock is suspected

Patients with meningococcal infection should also be treated aggressively with supportive care, especially for sepsis or septic shock; this may include intravenous fluid resuscitation and vasopressors such as norepinephrine. Patients who show evidence of DIC may need aggressive hydration, blood transfusions, platelet replacement, and possibly even coagulation factor replacement. Researchers have proposed protein C as an adjuvant treatment, but its use is controversial and currently not commonly used.

**RoutineMeningococcal vaccination recommendations for healthy adolescents and young adults age 11 through 23 years in the United States:**

- 1 dose, at age 11 through 18 years

- preferred age: 11 through 12 years

- 1 dose at age ≥16 years; the minimum interval between doses is 8 weeks. If the first dose was given after age 16 years, then a booster is not needed unless the person is at higher risk for meningococcal disease.

- College students living in residence halls should receive ≥1 dose of MenACWY ≤5 years before college entry.

Preferred age: 16 through 18 years

- Either:

- MenB-4C: 2 doses, ≥1 month apart, **or**
- MenB-FHbp: 2 doses, ≥6 months apart

Not a routine practice unless the person becomes at risk (occupational/exposure)

* Although the ACIP recommends routine MenACWY vaccination only for ages 11 through 18 years, MenACWY may be given to ages 19 through 21 years if they haven't been vaccinated previously.

Moreover, it is mandatory to receive MenACWY vaccine for all pilgrims visiting Mecca for Hajj/Umrah.