Calcium dysregulation can be a sign of many diseases, just as much as dysregulation can cause many adverse effects. This section will highlight various areas throughout the body in which calcium is related to pathologies.

**Bone Health and Osteoporosis**

Osteoporosis is a disorder that influences bone composition, affecting both density and mineralization. The consequences can be dire as gradual bone loss can result in bone fragility and, ultimately, bone fracture. There are an estimated 1.5 million fractures each year due to osteoporosis, as this disorder affects more than 10 million U.S. adults, the vast majority of whom are women.

The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) association has approved a health claim suggesting that sufficient calcium and vitamin D intake, with consistent physical activity, might reduce the risk of osteoporosis later in life.

**Gastrointestinal Malignancy**

Calcium binds to bile acids and fatty acids to form insoluble complexes that protect the cell lining of the gastrointestinal tract from acids and their metabolites. Also, calcium is involved in improving signaling within the cells, which may reduce cell proliferation by promoting cells to undergo differentiation and or apoptosis.

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Low levels of PTH occur due to autoimmune or surgical destruction, abnormal congenital development, impaired PTH regulation, or muted PTH effect. The systemic effect is hypocalcemia, which can range from mild to severe symptoms.

Surgical destruction most often occurs during thyroid, parathyroid, or neck surgery. For example, it is the most common complication following a thyroidectomy, in which patients experience acute symptoms of seizures, laryngospasm, prolonged QT, or tetany.

Autoimmune destruction is another acquired cause and typically begins during childhood or adolescence. The destruction that happens in permanent hypoparathyroidism is a part of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1(APS 1) due to mutations of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene.

Abnormal parathyroid development in utero can be a cause of hypoparathyroidism identified in infants and children. An example of this is DiGeorge Syndrome which happens due to a 22q11 deletion resulting in defective development of the pharyngeal pouch and its derivatives. The effects are cardiac anomalies, hypocalcemia, hypoplastic thymus, and immunodeficiency.

**Peripartum Effects**

Professional organizations such as the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommend 1,500 mg to 2,000 mg of calcium to prevent the risk of preeclampsia in pregnant women with a baseline calcium intake of 600 mg or less. Similarly, the World Health Organization (WHO) also recommends the same dosage of 1,500 mg to 2,000 mg for pregnant women with low dietary calcium intake and a high risk of gestational hypertension.

Neonatal hypocalcemia can occur within the first few days of life. Prematurity is the most common factor predisposing a neonate to develop neonatal hypocalcemia. Other conditions that increase the risk include maternal diabetes, maternal hyperparathyroidism, and being small for gestational age.

**Chronic Kidney Disease**

During chronic kidney disease, the effect of PTH can be decreased due to poor renal response. As such, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism can occur.

Clinicians should consider the potential consequences of oral calcium intake among patients with chronic kidney disease. Increased oral calcium intake is associated with an increased risk of vascular calcification, especially among patients on dialysis receiving calcium-containing phosphate binders versus non-calcium-containing phosphate binders. According to research analysis, treatment with calcium phosphate binders increased the progression of coronary and aortic calcification in patients with chronic kidney disease concomitantly undergoing hemodialysis.

Conversely, the Dallas Heart Study examined the association between coronary artery calcification (CAC) in adults with end-stage kidney disease in the presence of diabetes. The study concluded that adults with comorbid diabetes and chronic kidney disease had an increased risk of coronary artery calcification as opposed to patients with chronic kidney disease alone.

**Calcium Nephrolithiasis**

Increased calcium excretion contributes to the development of renal stones, comprised of either calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate.