# Introduction

The fecal occult blood test (FOBT) is a diagnostic test to assess for hidden (occult) blood in the stool. This test is commonly used for colorectal cancer screening, especially in developed nations. Colon cancer is one of the most prevalent cancers in both men and women worldwide. Therefore, early detection is imperative. When used correctly for screening, this testing modality has established associations with decreased morbidity and mortality.

When blood enters the upper gastrointestinal tract, the globin part of the hemoglobin molecule is completely digested by the proteolytic enzymes; the heme is converted by bacterial action to porphyrins. Hemoglobin entering the lower part of the large intestine is largely undigested. In normal subjects, the volume of blood lost from the gastrointestinal tract is 0.5 to 1.5 mL per day. The fecal occult blood test does not usually detect this amount of blood.

Standard methods for detecting occult blood are based on detecting hemoglobin or its breakdown products.

# Specimen Collection

The fecal occult blood test (FOBT) can be performed in the inpatient or outpatient setting. In the inpatient setting, the stool may be obtained manually during a digital rectal examination and placed onto heme occult testing cards. In the outpatient setting, the patient typically obtains a stool sample at home and then submits it to a laboratory.

Feces should ideally be sampled before they come into contact with the toilet water since hemoglobin will leach out of the sample, and toilet sanitizers may affect the results. Because blood may not be uniformly distributed within the stools, and bleeding may be intermittent, it is important to collect samples from more than one area; collection should be repeated on three different days.

It is best not to expose the sample to extreme heat or humidity; dried samples can be stored at room temperature for 14 days.

In some immunological methods, collection devices with liquid preservatives are used, and samples from patients can be collected by smearing the stools onto the card provided.

# Procedures

Before stool collection and testing, it is imperative to ensure that the FOBT card and developer are not beyond their expiration dates. Tests commonly used in clinical laboratories are based on detecting hemoglobin, heme, or heme-derived porphyrins.

The most common method for detecting fecal occult blood is based on the detection of heme. In these methods, the pseudoperoxidase activity of heme liberates nascent oxygen from hydrogen peroxide.Guaiacum officinale.

These tests consist of a card containing a high-quality filter paper impregnated with guaiac. This is stable for long periods because the guaiac is not in solution.

The immunological methods are more specific and use antibodies against one of the components in blood, most commonly against the globin chain of the hemoglobin.

Many commercial kits have been developed for detecting blood by immunochemical methods, some of which are automated and therefore are more reproducible.

Immunochemical methods do not require dietary restriction. Immunochemical methods are also more sensitive; the detection limits are lower than the guaiac-based methods.

In one device, a combination of immunological and guaiac-based tests is used. Hemoglobin is immobilized by a monoclonal antibody, and the hemoglobin is then visualized by the guaiac-based reaction. Non-hemoglobin peroxidases will give a background blue color, which is discounted.

The heme-porphyrin test is based on the fact that the heme in the hemoglobin entering the gastrointestinal tract is converted to porphyrins, probably by gut bacteria. In this method, porphyrins in the feces are extracted and then quantitated by spectrofluorimetry.

Recently a method using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) has been described. In this method, the fecal sample is mixed with water, ultrasonicated, and after centrifugation, the supernatant is combined with a matrix solution and used for MALDI-TOF-MS.

# Indications

The most common indications for FOBT are anemia, concern for gastrointestinal bleeding, and colon cancer screening. It can also be used to help discriminate irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which is more likely to yield a positive test result.

# Potential Diagnosis

Occult fecal blood can be present secondary to several etiologies, some of which will be mentioned here. Neoplastic causes include adenocarcinoma, gastrointestinal metastasis, lymphoma, and leiomyosarcoma.Escherichia coli, shigellae, neisseriae, yersiniae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, campylobacterioses, and Strongyloides infections.

# Normal and Critical Findings

An FOBT card that does not turn blue is considered a negative test. If the card turns blue, this is positive and requires further gastroenterological workup.

Normal fecal blood loss can approach 1.5 mL of blood per day based on radio chromium (51Cr-labeled red cells) methods.

Peptic ulcers, hemorrhoids, and diverticula are also causes of fecal occult blood loss; bleeding from these conditions is highly variable. Of all the methods available, heme-porphyrin testing is more likely to detect small amounts of blood loss from the upper gastrointestinal tract, such as that seen due to aspirin.

FOBT is performed to detect gastrointestinal bleeding and is most often used as a screening test for colorectal cancer, one of the most common cancers in many parts of the world.

FOBT is also a critical investigation in patients with iron-deficiency anemia to rule out gastrointestinal bleeding as the cause of anemia. Since bleeding from any part of the gastrointestinal tract can cause iron deficiency, it is important to select the appropriate test.

# Interfering Factors

Fecal occult blood testing requires medication and dietary restrictions before testing. These restrictions decrease the risk of false-negative and false-positive results.

Avoiding certain foods for three days before FOBT should help prevent false test results.

Guaiac-based methods are prone to interference from many sources. One of these is plant peroxidases. Raw fruits and vegetables such as turnips, broccoli, horseradish, cauliflower, cantaloupe, parsnip, and red radish contain high concentrations of peroxidases.

Furthermore, gastric acid denatures peroxidase, so ingesting raw vegetables should not be problematic in patients with normal gastric acid secretion.

Ingestion of red meat can cause false-positive results due to the peroxidase activity of heme in the meat.

A data meta-analysis concluded that dietary restriction might not be necessary for guaiac-based fecal occult blood tests.

Using a povidone-iodine antiseptic solution is associated with false-positive results with guaiac-based assays.

Using such antiseptic solutions on the perianal area or during urinary catheterization should be avoided before FOBT using guaiac methods. Drugs such as aspirin, other anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen, naproxen, corticosteroids, or phenylbutazone, cancer chemotherapeutic agents, and alcohol in excess can all cause a positive reaction due to loss of blood from gastric irritation. Recent studies, however, suggest that low-dose aspirin does not affect the test.

# Complications

There are no known major complications of fecal occult blood testing.

# Patient Safety and Education

The fecal occult blood test results are primarily affected by how patients prepare for the test, so it is important to follow the instructions carefully. Because certain foods can alter the test results, a special diet is often recommended for 48 to 72 hours before the test. In addition, patients should avoid drugs like anticoagulants, aspirin, colchicine, nonsteroidal antiarthritics, iron preparations, and steroids for at least seven days before the test.

# Clinical Significance

Colorectal cancer is the third leading cause of cancer death for both genetic sexes. It occurs in all populations regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, or socioeconomic status.

When misused or administered incorrectly, FOBT has resulted in unnecessary testing, increased healthcare costs, and prolonged hospital stays. Therefore, it should only be performed when indicated. Many organizations focus on educating healthcare providers about these indications.

The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) concludes with high certainty that screening for colorectal cancer in adults aged 50 to 75 years has a substantial net benefit, and screening for colorectal cancer in adults aged 45 to 49 years has a moderate net benefit.

Colorectal cancer screening is now recommended for average-risk individuals starting at age 45, according to the American College of Gastroenterology guidelines.