**Microcytic anemia:**

Iron deficient anemia treatment is with iron supplementation for premenopausal women. Also, some women receive treatment with oral contraceptive pills to regulate the menstrual cycles and shorten their periods, or levothyroxine if secondary to hypothyroidism. Anemia of chronic disease: the underlying disease has to be treated commonly with anti-inflammatories, corticosteroids, and TNF-alpha inhibitors unless it is due to malignancy. In the case of malignancy, the malignancy requires its standard treatment protocol. Lead poisoning and is chelated with dimercaprol and EDTA and succimer for children. Copper deficiency requires copper supplementation. Patients taking isoniazid and vitamin B6 deficient patients should receive vitamin B6 supplementation and/or discontinue isoniazid. Chronic alcohol intake must cease immediately. Thalassemias are treated differently depending on their severity. Most thalassemias do not receive medication or transfusions; however, beta-thalassemia therapy includes chronic blood transfusions. Other types of thalassemia tend to be asymptomatic and do not require treatment. Iron supplementation is contraindicated, especially in patients with chronic transfusions due to the concern of acquired hemochromatosis. If Helicobacter pylori infection is suspected, a urea breath test is necessary. An upper endoscopy can also be obtained for a biopsy as well as assessing severity, mainly because this bacteria is pre-malignant.

**Macrocytic anemia:**

Macrocytic anemia treatments range from due to the etiologies. For vitamin B12 deficiency and folate deficiency, folate and vitamin B12 supplementation are the therapeutic response. Patients with chronic alcohol abuse are urged to cease alcohol intake and to have folate supplementation. Patients with orotic aciduria would be to supplement with uridine monophosphate to bypass the deficiency enzyme.

**Normocytic anemia:**

For patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, the treatment includes eculizumab, which can improve hemolysis and prevent portal hypertension secondary to venous thromboses.