**History**

A thorough history should be performed, as this should be sufficient to make a diagnosis of hyperesthesia.

- Past medical history (diabetes mellitus, stroke, fractures, irritable bowel syndrome)

- Psychiatric history (mood disorders)

- Medications (use of neurotoxic drugs)

- Surgery

- Family history

- Sexual history

- Substance use (alcohol or opioid)

- Functional history: A functional history that examines the effect of the patient’s symptoms on their ability to function should be performed. It should focus on any impairments to the patient’s activities of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living, ambulatory status (use of assistive devices), work, or sleep.

- History of presenting illness: The examiner should gather a thorough description of the patient’s pain symptoms. The description of the patient’s symptoms should include all of the following components.

- Location 
- Intensity (0-10 rating scale) 
- Quality (burning, cold, hot, or allodynia) Pain descriptors such as burning, tingling, or shooting are the most characteristic of neuropathic pain syndrome and have a high likelihood of being present along with hyperesthesia.
- Onset (did the symptoms occur after an inciting event)
- Temporal variation: At what time of the day is the pain worse? (neuropathic pain tends to be worse towards the end of the day) Has the pain progressively worsened over some time? 
- Radiation (does the pain have axial origin)
- Positional variation (i.e., is the pain worse in the lower back or the thigh)
- Aggravating/alleviating factors
- Attempted treatments (neuropathic pain symptoms are typically non-responsive to acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) 
- Frequency 
- Associated symptoms (loss of range of motion, skin or hair changes, muscle spasms, muscle weakness, changes in sensation, redness, or swelling)

**Physical Exam**

A complete neurological exam should be performed in addition to a general focused physical exam.

- Cranial nerve testing (CNS lesions may have cranial nerve involvement)

- Manual motor testing (weakness may be present in both peripheral and central etiologies, and any weakness should be differentiated as either real weakness or antalgic weakness)

- Deep tendon reflexes (may be brisk in central etiologies and diminished in peripheral etiologies)

- Sensory testing

- 
              
- Light touch (allodynia)
              
              
- Pinprick (hyperalgesia) 
              
              
- Vibration and  proprioception

- Temperature (ice and hot packs for possible thermal allodynia)

- Straight leg test or slump test (radiculopathy)

- Tinel’s sign (peripheral nerve entrapment)

- Myofascial trigger points

- For complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), a skin examination should be performed focusing on cutaneous temperature discrepancies, color changes, hidrosis, scars in a dermatomal distribution, and hair changes.