Pediatric populations are more likely to develop rectal prolapse due to several anatomic differences in early childhood. In children, the rectum follows a vertical course along the sacrum and coccyx and is also in a relatively lower position than the other pelvic organs. The rectum also has a rather redundant rectal mucosa which is attached to the underlying muscularis only loosely. Compared with adult populations, the sigmoid colon has more mobility, and the levator ani muscle offers relatively little support. Finally, Houston valves, which provide structural integrity in the rectum, have not yet fully developed in the majority of infants less than one year.

Rectal prolapse is also caused by increased bowel motility, increased abdominal pressure, and certain congenital conditions, to be outlined below. Increased bowel motility occurs most secondarily to infectious diarrhea caused by amebiasis, giardiasis, trichuriasis, Salmonella, Shigella, and Escherichia coli 0157:H7. Ulcerative colitis and laxative abuse may also cause increases in bowel motility. Next, increased abdominal pressure may commonly be caused by chronic constipation, protracted coughing, excessive vomiting, or straining at urination because of outlet obstruction. Finally, congenital conditions such as cystic fibrosis, myelomeningocele, Hirschsprung disease, spina bifida, congenital hypothyroidism are more likely to develop rectal prolapse. Other causes include malnutrition and anatomic defects such as mucosal polyps or tumors and imperforate anus post repair.