There is no cure for oral lichen planus. The primary aim of treatment is to reduce inflammation and provide symptomatic relief. Topical corticosteroids are the first-line treatment for OLP and can be applied as an adhesive gel or used as a mouth rinse. The use of topical agents is preferred as they are effective and are associated with fewer side effects compared to systemic agents. While triamcinolone acetonide gel is commonly used in treating patients with OLP, higher potency corticosteroids such as clobetasol propionate are more effective in providing symptomatic relief.

Patients applying the topical gel are instructed to dry the oral mucosa before application and avoid eating and drinking for 30 minutes after the application to provide sufficient contact time with the oral mucosa. Using mouth rinses such as dexamethasone is particularly beneficial for patients who demonstrate widespread oral lesions or when the lesions are not readily accessible for topical gel application.

Intralesional corticosteroid injections may also be administered to treat persistent erosive OLP.

Systemic corticosteroids are primarily used to treat recalcitrant OLP that is resistant to topical therapies, severe OLP with widespread ulceration and erythema, and lichen planus with extra-oral involvement affecting multiple sites.

Second-line therapies can be considered to manage recalcitrant OLP that does not respond to topical corticosteroids. These include calcineurin inhibitors (e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus), retinoids, steroid-sparing agents (e.g., azathioprine, hydroxychloroquine), or mycophenolate mofetil. The most common reported side effect from the use of retinoids and cyclosporine is a transient burning sensation, which may limit its use in patients with erosive OLP.

Newer calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus should be used with caution, given the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) black box warning regarding the reported increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma.