A stepwise approach is recommended in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with oliguria. Treatment depends mainly on the underlying etiology.

In post renal causes of oliguria, attention should be directed to underlying etiology. Sometimes only simple measures are required to manage those causes, for example, catheter irrigation in case of a clogged urinary catheter, or manipulation in case of a kinked catheter, etc. A bedside bladder ultrasound may be helpful to detect urinary retention and to guide if an indwelling urinary catheter is needed. A urology consultation might be helpful in cases of urinary retention due to BPH, tumors, or stones.

Hemodynamic Stabilization:

The first step is the hemodynamic stabilization of the patient. The amount of fluid is calculated on an individual basis.

Diuretic Therapy:

If fluid resuscitation fails to resolve the oliguria, diuretic therapy should be initiated utilizing a standardized approach. A furosemide stress test (FST) can be done in order to assess the patient’s response to diuresis. It should be noted that a diuretic challenge should only be given once the patient is euvolemic. Failure of resolution of oliguria with the above step(s) should raise suspicion for evaluation for acute kidney injury (AKI). FST is a standardized test to assess the functional integrity of the tubules and aids in the risk stratification as well as decision making. FST is said to be nonresponsive if 1.0-1.5 mg/kg of furosemide produces a urine output of  100 ml/h in the first two hours. Nonresponsive FST is associated with a higher stage of AKI. Some studies suggest using 100-200 mg of furosemide initially, and if there is no response, doubling the dose may be considered. If this fails to bring any significant improvement adding a thiazide diuretic can also be considered.

One of the most important prerequisites of FST is that the patient should not be hypovolemic, and the heart rate, as well as the blood pressure, should be closely monitored. A recent study has shown that 75% of the patients who are nonresponsive to FST require renal replacement therapy as compared to only 13.6% of patients who are FST responsive.

Renal Replacement Therapy:

In oliguric patients, secondary to renal etiology treatment is mainly focused on supportive care and potential renal replacement therapy to manage the fluid and electrolyte balance to avoid the development of complications.

Dietary Recommendations:

In addition to focusing on fluid and electrolyte management, adequate protein and caloric intake are necessary. High rates of protein catabolism (200–250 g/day) are observed in patients with ARF, sepsis, or rhabdomyolysis.

Pharmacological Modifications:

The treatment for oliguria should be continued keeping in view the guidelines of AKI treatment. All nephrotoxic drugs should be discontinued, and drugs excreted by the renal system should be carefully reviewed, and their doses should be adjusted.

It should be kept in mind that in the setting of oliguria, fluid resuscitation does put the patient at risk of fluid overload, which in turn leads to worsening AKI. As a result, overcompensation with fluid is associated with higher mortality when urine output is the determining factor for fluid replacement.