Ampicillin is a beta-lactam antimicrobial, and sulbactam is a beta-lactamase inhibitor.

**Mechanism of Ampicillin**

- Like any other beta-lactam antimicrobial, the mode of action of ampicillin on sensitive organisms can be considered a two-step process. In the first step, the drug binds to primary receptors called membrane-bound penicillin-binding proteins. These proteins perform vital roles in cell cycle-related morphogenetic formation of cell wall peptidoglycan. Therefore, the inactivation of penicillin-binding proteins by bound antimicrobials has immediate arresting actions on their function.

- The second stage comprises the physiological effects caused by this receptor-ligand interaction. Penicillin-binding proteins are involved in the late stages of peptidoglycan synthesis in the cell wall. Because peptidoglycan maintains the integrity of the cell wall, which resides in a hypotonic environment, its disruption causes lysis and cell death.

**Mechanism of Sulbactam**

- Beta-Lactamase production is of critical importance for the evolution of drug-resistant bacteria. Combinations of β-lactams with β-lactamase inhibitors, such as ampicillin/sulbactam, extend the spectrum of β-lactams by preventing the hydrolysis by β-lactamases.

**Mechanism of Resistance**

- A study demonstrated that in acinetobacter baumannii, the strains with pbp3(penicillin-binding protein-3) mutations demonstrated higher levels of resistance to sulbactam. Lower levels of resistance to sulbactam had mutations in cell wall metabolism or stress response genes.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: The peak serum concentrations of ampicillin and sulbactam are attained after a 15-minute intravenous infusion. The steady-state volumes of distribution ranged from 14.2 to 15.1 and 12.2 to 16.3 l for ampicillin and sulbactam. Penetration of ampicillin and sulbactam in CSF is augmented in the presence of inflamed meninges.

Distribution: Ampicillin and sulbactam have extensive distribution in the extracellular fluids and tissues. Ampicillin is approximately 28% reversibly bound to human serum protein, and sulbactam has approximately 38% plasma protein binding. The steady-state volumes of distribution ranged from 14.2 to 15.1 and 12.2 to 16.3 liters for ampicillin and sulbactam.

Metabolism: Ampicillin is metabolized by penicillinase to penicilloic acid and other metabolites.

Elimination: Ampicillin and sulbactam are primarily excreted in urine via glomerular filtration and tubular excretion. The half-life of ampicillin and sulbactam is approximately one hour in healthy subjects.