# Introduction

A significant function of the cardiovascular system is to deliver oxygen and nutrients to tissues via arteries and their branches. Subsequently, the venous system receives carbon dioxide and other waste products expelled by the tissues. A vital transition point exists between the arterioles and the venules known as the capillary, which is ultimately where the exchange occurs. In short, capillaries are thin-walled vessels that allow for the transportation of nutrients and metabolites from the vasculature and into the interstitium to be taken up by cells. Capillaries are ubiquitously organized throughout the human body and exert their function in every tissue. This article strives to illustrate the anatomical characteristics of the capillary and its function in meeting the metabolic demands of tissues and demonstrate features that are evident upon histological staining.

# Structure

Before exploring the anatomy of the capillary, it is first reasonable to better understand the anatomy of the arteriole and venule that directly surround it. Arterioles vary from 8 to 60 micrometers in diameter and may even further subdivide into meta-arterioles.

Upon arriving at a tissue, arterioles branch into capillary beds that provide the means of gas and nutrient exchange. Capillaries are thin-walled vessels composed of a single layer of simple squamous epithelium, a basement membrane known as tunica intima, and scattered connective tissue cells called pericytes. The bloodflow into the capillaries is primarily controlled by precapillary****sphincters (smooth muscle bands that wrap around metarterioles).

There are a few different structural types of capillaries that research has identified in the human body. One subtype is known as continuous non-fenestrated capillaries and is present in the skin, lungs, and blood-brain barrier. They are connected via cellular junctions, contain a basement membrane, and lack fenestrations (pores) in the plasma membrane. Continuous, fenestrated capillaries, found in intestinal villi and endocrine glands, have a similar structure however contain diaphragmed fenestra in the membrane. Discontinuous capillaries, found in the liver, have large gaps and an incomplete basement membrane.

# Function

As previously stated, the primary goal of the capillary is to allow for the exchange of fluid and metabolites between the capillary and tissue interstitium. The capillary will simultaneously provide nutrients from the arteriole and carry away waste products of cellular metabolism expelled by the tissues. However, anatomical considerations and intrinsic forces of the capillary govern the mechanism by which exchange occurs. In general, most organs in the human body, such as the heart, lungs, skeletal muscle, and GI tract, contain continuous, non-fenestrated capillaries. These allow water and solutes smaller than 3 nm to pass freely via simple diffusion. Conversely, molecules over 3 nm pass through selectively, often with the help of a transporter.

There are intra-capillary forces that also dictate molecular movement, known as Starling forces. The difference in hydrostatic and oncotic pressures between the capillary and the tissue interstitium is the primary determinant of these forces.

As arteriolar blood first enters the capillary, the hydrostatic pressure is higher than that of the interstitium, thus favoring flux of fluid into the interstitial space. Capillary blood has a high concentration of albumin, which cannot diffuse through the capillary membrane; this exerts a strong oncotic pressure favoring nutrient flux back into the capillary. However, the hydrostatic pressure is greater than the oncotic pressure, which causes fluid and nutrients to diffuse into the interstitial space. As blood moves along the capillary bed, capillary hydrostatic pressure starts to decrease since the fluid is leaving the vasculature, and oncotic pressure decreases slightly as proteins that are small enough may filter through the capillary. Ultimately, hydrostatic pressure drops more significantly, and the net oncotic pressure prevails, causing fluid and waste products to diffuse from the interstitium back into the capillary to be carried away by venules.

# Tissue Preparation

Tissue preparation for the capillaries requires several steps owing to the size of the capillaries. It requires several filtration steps needed to separate the capillaries, red blood cells, and cell debris. Starting with a 300 um mesh, which would filter the suspension. Capillaries pass through the mesh, while larger blood vessels can not. The mesh is then carefully washed with 50 mL of 1% BSA (Bovine serum albumin). Mesh should be discarded. Then a 30 um cell strain filter is used to separate the capillaries from the red blood cells. The filtrate from the last step should be distributed over five 30 um cell strain filters. This time the capillaries do not pass, whereas the red blood cells pass through the filter. The filters are washed with 25 mL 1% BSA. After this, pour all the filtrates over another filter. Wash each one with 50 mL of 1% BSA. The cell strain filters containing the capillaries should be kept. Finally, the filters are turned upside down and washed with 50 mL 1% BSA for each filter into 50 mL tubes. Pressure is applied gently with the pipet tip of a 5 ml pipettor and moved across the filter to wash off the capillaries. After the capillaries are collected, they are centrifuged and then seen under a microscope (100X magnification).

# Microscopy, Light

The capillary anatomy described above can be better appreciated with the assistance of histological staining and microscopic analysis. In review, the basic structure of a capillary a single layer of simple squamous epithelium, a basement membrane, and few pericytes. One method used to appreciate the features is with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) tissue staining and a light microscope. The Hematoxylin component binds nucleic acids found in the cell nucleus and reflects a basophilic color. On the other hand, the eosin component binds to proteins primarily present in the cytoplasm and extracellular matrix and reflects an eosinophilic color.

# Microscopy, Electron

Another mode of molecular analysis that takes a closer look at the capillary structure is known as transmission electron micrography (TEM). This functions by staining a particular tissue and passing a short wavelength electronic beam through the sample, which becomes absorbed and produces a contrast image appreciated with an electron microscope. In addition to the structures highlighted in the H&E stain, TEM can even detect small transcytosis vesicles in the capillary lumen that aid in transporting large molecules across the capillary endothelium.

# Pathophysiology

The capillary unit possesses a vital role in allowing the exchange of metabolites between the vascular system and tissues. Capillaries have a unique morphology, consisting of only a single layer of endothelium, enabling them to carry out their function in delivering needed nutrients to organs and tissues. Furthermore, despite the thin diameter of capillaries, they are the most numerous of the vessel types and thus possess the highest total surface area enhancing overall exchange.

# Clinical Significance

- Some diseases are related directly to the capillaries and can present with specific signs and symptoms. They can be either hereditary or nonhereditary.

- The hereditary diseases include (HHT) which also known as Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome. It is an autosomal dominant disorder with abnormal blood vessel formation in the mucous membranes, skin, and some organs, including the liver, lungs, and brain.

- Benign nevus or spider angioma are solitary or multiple benign vascular lesions present in 10 to 15% of healthy adults and children.

- Systemic capillary leak syndrome is a disease that causes leakage of fluid and proteins out of tiny blood vessels into surrounding tissues. It presents as hypotension, hypoalbuminemia, and hemoconcentration. Elevated white cell count may also be present.

- A capillary hemangioma is also known as a strawberry birthmark. It is a benign tumor showing abnormal overgrowth of tiny blood vessels. Capillary hemangiomas sometimes appear within the first six months of life and may not be present at the birth.

- A capillary angiosarcoma is a rare malignant tumor involving the capillaries. It is a cancer of the endothelial cells that line the walls of blood vessels. Only a few reports exist in the literature regarding angiosarcomas occurring on capillary malformations.