Anterior segment photograph helps document the disease, monitor the response to therapy, and counsel the patient. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) is helpful in the diagnosis of UGH Syndrome as it may be used to confirm the position of haptics and optics and their relationship with surrounding ocular structures.

It may also be used to visualize the malpositioned intraocular lenses and their proximity to uveal tissue. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography can also be used to visualize the anterior chamber angle structures as it is non-invasive. If the structures are not seen with (AS-OCT), then UBM can be done.

Cosmetic iris implants may lead to uveitis hyphema glaucoma syndrome, and corneal decompensation, so specular microscopy helps evaluate the corneal endothelial status by providing the endothelial counts and morphology of the cells.

Glaucoma evaluation can be performed by gonioscopy, central corneal thickness, perimetry, and optical coherence tomography of the optic nerve. All the other causes of uveitis need to be ruled out. An individualized approach should be used to investigate such cases. It may include complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Mantoux test, chest X-ray, X-ray of the spine, and lumbosacral joint both anterior-posterior and lateral views, and autoimmune antibody assays.

Optical coherence tomography of the macula can be used to detect cystoid macular edema in UGH cases. Fundus fluorescein angiography helps to rule out the other causes of vitreous hemorrhage or iris new vessels.