Intubation technique may vary slightly depending on the operator and equipment used, but the following overarching principles should apply to all situations. The “P’s” of airway control and intubation have long been taught to help providers effectively and safely perform the procedure.

- Plan—providers should plan for the procedure and evaluate the environment to ensure the safety of patients and providers.

- Preparation – the patient should be positioned as described above; all drugs, personal protective equipment, and instruments must be available.  All providers should understand and agree to the plan to intubate the patient and how to best care for the patient post-intubation. A Broselow Tape is beneficial when treating pediatric patients to ensure appropriately sized equipment and medication doses.

- Protect – the cervical spine should be protected in the setting of trauma with an additional provider holding in-line stabilization.

- Preoxygenation—patients are typically provided high flow oxygen via a non-rebreather mask or ventilatory support with a BVM and supplemental oxygenation to prevent potential decompensation during laryngoscopy.  These measures replace nitrogen in the airways with oxygen to create a reservoir for oxygen exchange during the procedure (Dunford).  Apneic oxygenation via high flow nasal cannula may also help maintain oxygen reserves during the peri-intubation period.

- Pretreatment—local protocols may call for the use of pretreatment medications to attenuate the physiologic response patients experience from intubation, such as lidocaine, to blunt the intracranial pressure response to laryngoscopy or atropine to offset bradycardia in pediatric patients.  Studies have shown mostly equivocal findings in the OR for premedication but no definitive evidence that it is beneficial in the prehospital setting.

- Local protocols set paralysis and Induction-indications and procedures to induce, sedate, or paralyze the patient and choice of medications available through the medical direction. In general, agents with rapid onset and short durations are best to mitigate problems arising from a failed airway.

- Placement with proof – Appropriate equipment and technique are utilized to place an endotracheal tube through the cords with direct visualization. ETCO2, chest rise, and auscultation should all be used to confirm placement.

- Postintubation management—Patients should be appropriately sedated after intubation to ensure comfort and safety per local protocols.  Care must be made to avoid hypoxia, hypoventilation, and hyperventilation, all of which can be detrimental to long-term outcomes and mortality.

Following this approach can mitigate potential problems and ensure a provider can respond to challenging situations if necessary. Proper preparation can also increase the likelihood of first-pass success.  First-pass success is critical to help prevent many of the complications described below.  Multiple attempts have been associated with an increased risk of intubation failure and complications.