Neck pain is a frequent complaint among the general population and may be attributed to improper posture, inadequate sleep positioning, an acute injury, among other causes. It has been reported that about half of all individuals will suffer from neck pain at some point in their life. While numerous treatment options exist for neck pain, only a handful of patients seek osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT).

OMT remains one of the staples of the osteopathic medical school curriculum and is widely used among practicing osteopathic physicians today for the treatment of neck pain and other musculoskeletal pain.****The technique has shown promise in patients who have failed to achieve relief of symptoms from other treatment methods.

Founded in 1955 by Lawrence H. Jones, D.O., the strain-counterstrain (SCS) model has been primarily utilized by osteopathic physicians as a procedure performed to aid in the diagnosis and indirect treatment of a patient's somatic dysfunction.

The basic steps required to perform strain-counterstrain (SCS) in any region of the body are as follows:

- Find a TP.

- Assess the tenderness using a pain scale.

- Passively and gently place the patient in a position-of-comfort that results in the greatest reduction of tenderness at the TP. Approximate the position first, then fine-tune through small arcs of movement. Aim to achieve at least 70% tenderness reduction, with the goal of 100%.

- Maintain the position for 90 seconds while continuing to monitor the patient's TP.

- Passively return the patient to a neutral position.

- Re-test for tenderness at the TP.