Ankle fracture treatment aims to restore and stabilize the ankle mortise, which could be achieved by conservative measures in stable ankle fractures and surgical fixation in unstable ankle fractures.

**Non-operative Treatment**

**Indications**

- Stable ankle fractures, e.g., isolated unimalleolar ankle fracture with no talar shift on weight-bearing ankle X-rays.

- Patient unfit for surgery or refusing surgery.

- Poor soft tissue conditions.

**Non-operative Treatment**

- Below knee cast

- Fracture reduction and application of a close contact cast under image guidance: could be a valid option for unstable ankle fracture in patients above 60 or who are unfit for surgery.

- Walking boot

- Proper analgesia

**Operative Treatment**

**Open Reduction and Internal Fixation (ORIF)**

Urgent open reduction of ankle fracture dislocation may be required if closed reduction attempts have failed or there is a neurovascular deficit. Ankle fractures ORIF is usually indicated for patients with unstable ankle mortise who are fit for surgery and have a good soft tissue condition. Surgical fixation is usually performed either in the first 24 hours or after few days to allow soft tissue swelling to subside reduce the risk of wound dehiscence. Ankle fracture ORIF is a suitable treatment for:

- Uni malleolar fractures with talar shift on weight-bearing ankle X-rays

- Bimalleolar ankle fractures

- Trimalleolar ankle fractures

- Pilon fracture

- Maisonneuve fracture

Fibula fractures can be fixed by plate and screws or fibular nails. Fibular nails are more suitable for comminuted fractures with poor bone quality. Transverse medial malleolus fracture can be fixed by partially threaded screws or tension band wiring to allow compression at the fracture site. Vertical medical malleolus fractures require buttressing fixation by an anti-glide plate. Posterior malleolus fracture can be fixed by a posteroanterior lag screw or by an anti-glide plate. The ankle syndesmosis should be assessed intraoperatively either by performing the Hook test (Cotton test) or by obtaining intraoperative stress external rotation views.****The Hook test can be performed by the lateral distraction of the fibula by using a bone hook under the image intensifier screen.  If there is >2mm displacement of the fibula, the hook test is positive.****If the hook test is positive and there is a syndesmosis diastasis, the syndesmosis should be reduced by applying a big reduction clamp to the medial and lateral malleoli then fixed either by syndesmotic screws or tight robes.

**Spanning External Fixator**

This is usually indicated as a temporary fixation method for unstable ankle fractures in case of severe soft tissue swelling or open fractures. Application of an external fixator will hold the ankle mortise in a safe position allowing the soft tissue to heal and settle. Then ankle fracture ORIF can be done in a second-stage surgery when the soft tissue is ready and can be closed safely. On application of the external fixation, the planning for surgical fixation should be considered, and pins should be inserted away from the site of the surgical approach for ankle ORIF.