The type of surgically placed fistula is dependent upon numerous factors. It is accepted practice to begin surgical planning as distally as feasibly possible. The adequate venous diameter may limit or preclude a distal AV access site. The ideal preferences for placement of fistula are the creation of AV fistula is radial-cephalic, brachial-cephalic, and then brachial-basilic transposition all which follow the National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (NKF-KDOQI) clinical practice guidelines. The technical perspective of using native vessel has been demonstrated to achieve greater patency rates with fewer complications. When unavailable, use of prosthetic grafts can be placed as an alternative.

The preferred distal AVF location is the radial-cephalic fistula, which is an anastomosis of the radial artery and the cephalic vein at the level of the wrist. This is commonly called a Cimino fistula based upon the original fistula created by Dr. James Cimino in 1966. The creation of a distal fistula is technically simple in creation. Distal patency rates at one year are approximately 50% to 80%. Consideration of lower blood flow rates achievable during dialysis at this distal site. The use of this distal access site preserves more proximal vessels for subsequent attempts at creating a fistula.

When an inadequate distal cephalic vein is present for the creation of a distal fistula, a proximal variant is planned for. Two such options exist. First is a brachial-cephalic fistula, which is an anastomosis between the brachial artery and the cephalic vein in the proximal forearm. The second is a brachial-basilic fistula, which is an anastomosis between the brachial artery and the basilic vein in the upper arm. At these locations, a prosthetic variation can be used to create the fistula. One-year patency rates of these proximal fistulas range from approximately 70% to 85%. There are some technical considerations. A brachial-basilic fistula is created a deeper depth based upon the native position of the vessels and often requires a second superficialization procedure to bring the fistula up to a depth of 6 mm from the skin. There is a one-staged brachio-basilic fistula which is proven to have similar patency and complication rates, however, is not the standard technique adopted universally. Proximal fistulas are associated with a higher rate of complications than distal fistula creations. These include inadequate maturation of the fistula, steal syndrome, stenosis, thrombosis, and alterations in cardiac output.

Multiple steps vary for the creation of different types of fistulas. The steps in creating any fistula involve preoperative evaluation of the vasculature, the possible harvest of a vessel for transposition or use of autogenous graft, the creation of an anastomosis, ligation of branch vessels and wound closure.

The anastomosis can be completed between artery and vein on one of two techniques. These techniques include side to side anastomosis or artery side to vein end anastomosis. Proximity and diameter of the vasculature are determinants in consideration of either technique used for anastomosis. An end to end anastomosis is no longer used. This is due to it requiring ligation of distal flow, normally the radial artery, and has a higher rate of complication.

Maturation of the fistula is defined by a commonly used Rule of 6s for fistula maturation. This includes:

- The flow of the greater the 600 mL per minute

- Greater than 6 mm diameter

- Less than 6 mm below the skin

- At least 6 cm of the vein for cannulation

- A thorough examination and expected maturation at six weeks