**Nonscarring alopecias**

The hair follicles are preserved in nonscarring alopecia; therefore, hair loss is potentially reversible, and hair regrowth is possible. Nonscarring alopecias include androgenetic alopecia, alopecia areata, telogen effluvium, anagen effluvium, traction alopecia, trichotillomania, and alopecia syphilitica, among others.

- Androgenetic alopecia is referred to as androgenic alopecia, hereditary alopecia, male balding, female pattern alopecia, and female pattern hair loss, to name a few. Due to an improved understanding of the condition, newer nomenclature is moving toward male pattern hair loss and female pattern hair loss.

- Alopecia areata is a chronic immune-mediated disease commonly presenting as acute onset patchy hair loss on the scalp, affecting both sexes and children, adolescents, and adults. Rarely do patients present with total scalp hair loss (alopecia areata totalis) or hair over the entire body (alopecia areata universalis). Patients may experience a single episode or a pattern of remission and recurrence.

- Telogen effluvium is a noninflammatory acute or chronic alopecia usually affecting the entire scalp in both sexes of children, adolescents, and adults. Disruption in the transition from the anagen phase to the telogen phase may be due to psychological stress, chronic illness, pregnancy or postpartum, malnutrition, severe infection, endocrine disorders, metabolic disturbances, surgery, and medications, such as anticonvulsants, antidepressants, anticoagulants, oral contraceptive pills, and retinoids.

**Scarring alopecias**

The hair follicles are irreversibly destroyed in scarring alopecia, leading to permanent hair loss. Scarring alopecias are classified as primary and secondary. The primary cicatricial alopecia classes are lymphocytic, neutrophilic, and mixed.

- FFA is characterized by a slowly progressive symmetric band of frontal hairline alopecia and primarily affects postmenopausal women. About 25% of patients report itching and pain in the affected area; otherwise, the condition is asymptomatic. FFA is often considered a variant of LPP based on histological similarities.

- LPP most commonly affects women and initially presents with perifollicular erythema and follicular hyperkeratosis, evolving to single or multifocal patches of irregular alopecia on the scalp vertex. Hair loss is usually limited to the scalp but may occasionally affect body hair. Patients may report itching, burning, or tenderness in the affected area(s).

Causes of secondary cicatricial alopecia include localized scleroderma, pemphigoid, neoplasm, radiation therapy, chemical or physical trauma, and bacterial or fungal infections.