Cardiac output is the product of heart rate (HR) and stroke volume (SV) and is measured in liters per minute. HR is most commonly defined as the number of times the heart beats in one minute. SV is the volume of blood ejected during ventricular contraction or for each stroke of the heart. Not all of the blood that fills the heart by the end of diastole (end-diastolic volume or EDV) can be ejected from the heart during systole. Thus the volume left in the heart at the end of systole is the end-systolic volume (ESV). Thus, the stroke volume is not equal to the end-diastolic volume but the EDV- ESV.  HR and VS are simultaneously affected by several factors. Cardiac output in humans is generally 5-6 L/min in an at-rest to more than 35 L/min in elite athletes during exercise.

HR is determined by signals from the sinoatrial node, which automatically depolarizes at an intrinsic rate of 60 to 100 times each minute. SV is the other major determinant of cardiac output and is also affected by several factors. The amount of blood ejected each beat depends on preload, contractility, and afterload. Preload represents all of the factors that contribute to passive muscle tension in the muscles at rest.

Cardiac output can be increased by a variety of signaling methods including enhancement of sympathetic tone, catecholamine secretion, and circulation of thyroid hormone. These mechanisms increase HR by exerting positive effects via chronotropy (timing), dromotropy (conduction speed), and lusitropy (myocardial relaxation rate). These influences also increase preload through increased venous return via receptor-mediated vasoconstriction. Additionally, contractility is improved through the Frank-Starling mechanism