Treatment strategies of rickets depend on the underlying etiology - nutritional vs. genetic rickets.

**Treatment of rickets due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin D:**

Treatment includes early intensive and late maintenance phase. There are several regimens utilized to treat rickets due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin D.

- **Single-dose therapy (stoss therapy):**Here, a single large dose of vitamin D is used, particularly in patients with low medication compliance.

- **Multiple doses of vitamin D:**Small daily doses of vitamin D are given in this regimen. The doses depend on the age of the patient. The daily dose for infants < 1 month, 1-12 months, > 12 months are 1000 IU, 1000 – 5000 IU, and 5000 IU, respectively, for 2-3 months.

In toddlers, bone pain improves within two weeks after treatment initiation.

Biochemically, serum calcium, and phosphate levels return to normal levels within six to ten days, whereas PTH normalizes in one to two months. ALP may normalize in three months or longer.

Once the treatment is started, careful monitoring of serum calcium, phosphate, ALP, and 25 hydroxyvitamin D is carried out.

**Prevention of rickets due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin D:**This is a preventable disease. The optimal way to prevent nutritional rickets is to educate the parents and pregnant women about the good dietary sources of calcium and vitamin D as well as about the importance of adequate sun exposure. However, the safe threshold limit for sunlight exposure for vitamin D synthesis without an increased risk for skin cancer is not known.

Additionally, rickets can be prevented by a universal oral vitamin D supplementation of 400 IU given daily to breastfed infants and infants who consume less than 500 mL of fortified formula per day in the first year of their life.

Vitamin D supplementation is an effective intervention in preventing vitamin D deficiency rickets. For example, a nationwide program in turkey was introduced in 2005 to propose a free vitamin D drops (400 IU/day) to children less than three years. The prevalence of rickets has dropped from 6% in 1998 to 0.1% in 2008.

**Treatments of rickets due to genetic causes:**

- The genetic conditions resulting in rickets are best treated by a pediatric endocrinologist and/or metabolic bone specialist.

- Both vitamin D-dependent rickets type I A (VDDR1A) and vitamin D-dependent rickets type I B (VDDR1B) are treated with calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D).

- Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II A (VDDR2A) and vitamin D-dependent rickets type II B (VDDR2B) are treated with high doses of calcitriol and calcium. The long term management includes a high dose of intravenous calcium administration.

- Familial hypophosphatemic rickets is treated with oral phosphate supplementation along with vitamin D as calcitriol or alfacalcidol (1α-hydroxycholecalciferol).