During a parotidectomy, there have been demonstrable improvements in outcomes with sparing of the posterior branch of the great auricular nerve, which runs with the posterior auricular nerve. This allows a higher likelihood for patients to retain the sensation of their lobule and antitragus, thus improving patient outcomes as demonstrated in a 2017 prospective controlled trial by Grosheva et al.

Additionally, a 2019 cadaveric study by Kikuta et al. proposed that utilizing the posterior auricular nerve as a nerve graft for in cases of facial nerve paralysis.  They found the nerve to have adequate length and diameter to be used for such a purpose.

The posterior auricular nerve may also serve as a suitable landmark to use to find the facial nerve trunk, as published by Blau et al. in a 2019 cadaveric dissection study.  The posterior auricular nerve was found to be a consistent anatomical landmark, which could be traced to the facial nerve trunk without the worry of compromise of the supplied structures, as the auricularis posterior is a vestigial structure.  Using this method, there is theoretically less risk of harming the facial nerve trunk. The authors also state that this method could be useful in revision operations as the normal anatomy will have changed, leading to a higher risk of iatrogenic facial nerve injury.

In a May 2019 study published in the Annals of Anatomy, by Leckenby et al., the authors demonstrated that the motor function of the interscutularis muscle could be reliably utilized to help determine outcomes of facial nerve surgery using a rodent model.  The authors noted that excision of the posterior auricular nerve during surgery led to no significant recovery of the interscutularis muscle compared with a crush injury and a sham group. In the crushed nerve group, recovery of the function of the interscutularis muscle typically occurred by post-operative day 30 compared with complete recovery by post-operative day 5 in the sham group.  The validity of these results pertinent to usage for measurements of outcome in human surgical patients is unlikely to be applied due to the somewhat vestigial nature of the interscutularis muscle.

The posterior branches of the great auricular nerve, which also contribute to the posterior auricular nerve, are potentially prone to damage during face and neck lift surgeries.  These posterior branches have been shown to be less at-risk during the procedure if the posterior auricular sulcus skin flap gets elevated above the auricularis posterior muscle.