The primary precautionary measure against infections for these patients is hygiene-focused, such as handwashing and avoidance of respiratory droplets. If possible, these patients should avoid the ingestion of untreated drinking water.

Replacement of IV immunoglobulins (IVIG) has altered the outcome & quality of life in patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Being the cornerstone of treatment, immunoglobulins are replaced every 3-4 weeks intravenously or every 1-2 weeks subcutaneously. Patients might require a loading dose (e.g., 1 dose of 1 g/kg body weight or divided into separate doses), followed by maintenance therapy (400 to 600 mg/kg/month). These doses and intervals are adjusted to maintain serum trough level at least above 500 mg/dl and may vary on a case by case basis. For instance, patients with chronic refractory sinusitis or chronic lung disease may require higher trough levels (>800 mg/dl).

Though IVIG is the main treatment option for these patients, it has its drawbacks such as;

- It protects against most of the pathogens, but protection against uncommon pathogens is limited if the donor pool has not been exposed to them.

- During treatment, only IgG is replaced while the rest of the immunoglobulins are not; these include IgA, and IgM, which have their unique functions, particularly protecting mucosal surfaces.

- Replacement IVIG therapy is very costly and not sustainable – especially in areas with limited resources.

Subcutaneous administration of IgG is an alternative to IVIG in case of difficult IV access or adverse reaction to IVIG. Just as safe as IVIG, with fewer systemic adverse effects, and smaller fluctuations in serum concentrations, the ability to self-administer IgG at home brings added convenience to this method. Overall this method will improve the patient’s quality of life. In very rare cases with subcutaneous IgG, local side effects like swelling, erythema, and tenderness may occur. These side effects tend to resolve within 24 hours.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is an alternate treatment for these patients. It is a tedious procedure with difficulty in matching suitable donors, making this treatment less popular. Additionally, there are heightened risks of allogeneic HSCT, including rejection and graft-versus-host disease. Often people in developing countries opt for HSCT because of lack of resources and high costs, making IVIG less suitable.

A potential therapy for XLA is stem cell gene therapy, which has the potential to cure XLA. However, this technology is still in its developing stages and is associated with severe complications because of the random integration of the vector into chromosomes; this can lead to an increased risk of cancer, and in some cases, even death. While adenovirus vectors have been under investigation as a method to repair the BTK gene, the long-term success of this treatment is still unknown.

In addition to IVIG, these patients will require aggressive antibiotic therapy for any suspected or documented infections. The prolonged use of antibiotic therapy may be indicated in some patients for ongoing pulmonary infections or chronic sinusitis. As prophylactic therapy, many antibiotics options exist, but with little reliable data available, the effectiveness of a specific regimen for patients with XLA is lacking. It is typically initiated with amoxicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or azithromycin. If these are deemed non-effective, others such as amoxicillin-clavulanate or clarithromycin may be used. Some practitioners opt between full therapeutic doses or half-doses, some rotate preventative antibiotics every 1 to 6 months, and others stick with one agent.

The goal of the regimen is to ensure coverage over the following organisms: Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus species, Streptococcus species, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and also some gram-negative bacteria like Escherichia coli, Hemophilus influenzae, Proteus mirabilis, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Patients that develop bronchiectasis may benefit from bronchopulmonary hygiene, regular macrolide, and inhaled corticosteroids. The need for short- and long-acting inhaled B2 agonists, in bronchiectasis, is debatable.