The presentation of an imperforate hymen is variable, depending on the patient’s age at presentation, the severity of the obstruction, and the clinical course. Additionally, the evaluation of the prepubescent child differs from the evaluation of the adolescent female. Abnormalities of the female genitalia may be difficult to discern on the newborn physical exam due to the excess hymenal tissue.

Hydronephrosis and pelvic masses can be detected as early as the 20-week prenatal ultrasound.

Infants with imperforate hymen may not even demonstrate a perineal bulge on a physical exam. The imperforate hymen may also be subtle, even if ultrasound demonstrates bilateral hydronephrosis with a bladder distended to the umbilicus.

During the interview of the mature adolescent, clarifying the menstrual and coital history is important, since patients may report regular menses with a microperforate hymen. Cyclic monthly pain is often reported due to the menstrual blood that expands the vaginal canal and uterus with resultant hematometra. Expansion can cause numerous pelvic symptoms, including pelvic and back pain, constipation, back pain, radiated pain secondary to sacral plexus irritation, and urinary retention.

The female genital exam starts with the identification of external structures to avoid overlooking anomalies prior to attempting a speculum exam. The physical examination of the adolescent may demonstrate a blue, bulging perineal mass that enlarges with the Credé maneuver. The Credé maneuver, application of manual pressure on the lower abdomen, exposes the imperforate hymen as a vaginal bulge.