Skull fractures can be identified on plain radiography, computed tomogram (CT), ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Although practice varies throughout the literature, current guidance discourages the use of a skull radiograph and advises the use of a CT scan as the first-line investigation of choice if a skull fracture is suspected. In a few cases, a well, asymptomatic child with a localized head injury that is suspicious for a fracture may be a candidate for a skull x-ray instead of CT. The risks associated with a CT scan in a child also should be considered. The younger the child, the greater the risk of malignancy later in life as a result of exposure to ionizing radiation. There also are associated risks with the sedation or anesthesia that may be required to perform a CT on a child.

Multiple clinical decision rules exist to guide clinicians when a child with a head injury requires CT; the PECARN  (Paediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network) head injury algorithm, the CATCH (Canadian Assessment for Tomography of Childhood Head Injury) rule, and the CHALICE (Children's Head Injury Algorithm for prediction of Clinically Important Events) rule. Signs of skull fracture that warrant investigation with CT include signs of basal skull fracture, a palpable fracture, a swelling, bruise or hematoma measuring greater than 5 millimeters, or suspicion of a depressed skull fracture.

Ultrasound can be used to identify skull fractures in younger patients although it is not widely used and further studies are needed to assess its efficacy. MRI could prove a useful investigation without radiation exposure, but its use is also limited, due to availability in the acute setting.

Repeat CT imaging for patients with isolated skull fractures is not deemed necessary unless worsening clinical indicators develop.

Some centers have safeguarding policies in place to guide the need for further investigation for non-accidental injury in younger children and infants with a skull fracture. Routine skeletal surveys in this population with isolated skull fracture may only yield results in the non-mobile infants (less than 6 months) unless there are other indications. In these children, a skull radiograph may be required in addition to a CT as it has a higher sensitivity for old fractures.