The diagnosis of PLD is made with imaging studies. Unfortunately, at this time, there are no unified radiologic diagnostic criteria. Most individuals are diagnosed in the fourth to fifth decades of life. Ultrasound imaging will show hyperechoic areas in the subcapsular portion of the liver. MRI and CT imaging is another alternative, and on non-contrast images, the cyst will appear hypodense and well circumscribed.

Reynolds criteria for PLD are typically used for diagnosis. This takes into account family history, age, and liver phenotype. An ultrasound to identify cysts in the liver and kidney is recommended as the initial test. ADPKD should be excluded before making the diagnosis of isolated PLD, and the unified Ravine criteria for ADPKD diagnosis can be used to make this exclusion. Unfortunately, up to one-third of patients with isolated PLD can have a few kidney cysts, making it difficult to distinguish between the two. In patients with renal cysts and kidney phenotype, the diagnosis of ADPKD is made for patients aged 15 to 39 years with the presence of three or more renal cysts, two or more renal cysts for patients aged 40 to 59 years, and four or more renal cysts for patients over the age of 60.

Some studies propose that sporadic cases of isolated PLD can be diagnosed when a patient has 15 to 20 cysts and no family history. However, based on Reynold’s criteria, patients need a positive family history and exclusion of ADPKD. If these two criteria are met, they are subdivided by age and liver phenotype. Patients under the age of 40 and with one or more hepatic cysts or patients over the age of 40 and with four or more hepatic cysts meet the criteria for isolated PLD.

A laboratory diagnostic test does not yet exist for pure isolated PLD. Most patients have normal synthetic liver function and, on occasion, can have mild elevations of gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) and alkaline phosphatase. On the other hand, patients with ADPKD have signs of renal dysfunction and variations in their creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and/or glomerular filtration rate (GFR) levels.