Tumor lysis syndrome is a clinical condition that can occur spontaneously or after the initiation of chemotherapy associated with the following metabolic disorders: hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and hyperuricemia leading to end-organ damage. It is most common in patients with solid tumors.

Tumor lysis syndrome is a metabolic and oncologic emergency frequently encountered in clinical practice. This condition is prevalent in both adult and pediatric oncology patients undergoing chemotherapy. Most of the symptoms seen in patients with tumor lysis syndrome are related to the release of intracellular chemical substances that cause impairment in the functions of target organs. This can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI), fatal arrhythmias, and even death.

Cancer is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States and the second leading cause of death. Cancer, as a disease entity, has a wide range of pathologies. Moreover, the primary origin of cancerous cells is different. This, coupled with the variability in the life cycle of cancerous cells, creates a profound derangement of the host's metabolic response.

Tumor lysis syndrome usually develops after the initiation of chemotherapy treatment. However, there are more cases of spontaneous development of tumor lysis syndrome with high-grade hematology-oncology malignancies. Because this condition is very lethal, it is imperative to identify patients at high risk for developing tumor lysis syndrome and start early preventative therapy. Quick and early recognition of the renal and metabolic derangement associated with tumor lysis syndrome and initiation of treatment can save a patient's life.