Despite OSHA training and interventions, workplace hazards are still widespread and result in roughly 5,000 deaths annually in the United States.

Many factors contribute to the total electrical energy encountered by a person, but one of the most important is the amount of current measured in amps (A). At stimulation levels of a single milliamp (mA), there is nearly no perception of the stimulus.

Of equal importance to the damage inflicted by electrical energy is resistance, which is measured in ohms (W). Every physical object has a baseline level of resistance. Low resistance materials are considered conductors because they allow electrical energy to flow freely through them; these include metals like copper. High-resistance materials are insulators because they do not allow electrical energy to flow well, including wood and rubber. The skin, which almost always is the first organ to come in contact with an electrical source, has a relatively high level of resistance of around 100,000 W. This level of resistance is protective against smaller levels of electrical energy, which is important considering the resistance of the body below the skin is as low as 300 W. The integrity of the skin is a factor in its level of resistance meaning that breaks in the skin like a wound or cut allow direct access to the low resistance bodily core, and thus tissue damage can occur at much lower levels of electrical energy than normal.

Based on Ohm’s law, the amount of current and resistance can be multiplied to know the voltage of an electrical impulse, which is measured in volts (V). Because voltage accounts for both the current and resistance of an electrical impulse, electrical injuries and burns are therefore commonly separated by the total voltage encountered with low voltage injuries induced by <1,000 V and high voltage injuries caused by >1,000 V. The extent of injury varies between these two designations with high voltage injuries including the subcutaneous fat, muscle, and potentially bones while low voltage injuries are far less extensive.

Based on the dangers of working with electricity, OSHA has established requirements for hospitals to follow to maximize electrical safety. The specific hazards that can contribute to electrically induced shocks, fires, arc flashes, and explosions laid out by OSHA include:

- Using equipment with damaged connectors like bent plug prongs.

- Unsafe practices like pulling equipment by the cord.

- Using electrical equipment with wet hands.

- Using faulty equipment such as frayed cords, damaged cords, old cords, damaged receptacles, and any damage resulting in insulation breaks, short-circuits, or exposed wires.

Additional OSHA electrical standards required by both hospitals and as part of the general electrical safety requirements include examining all equipment to ensure they are free of damage or anything that would signify compromised safety of the device like wire bending and disrupted insulation. Any compromised equipment must immediately be removed and cannot be used again until repairs have been made to prevent electrical injury. The equipment must also be assembled properly and have adequate labeling according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The area around the equipment must be safe, including having adequate space to operate the device safely, and devices are not near any water, or if they are properly grounded.

Finally, proper employee practices are crucial to the safety of the worker and those around them; the requirements to ensure this include not working with electrical equipment when wet, using correct safeguards and personal protective equipment, and following standard practices for the safe use of any electrical equipment. Standard safeguards include a ground-fault circuit interrupter, which is a standard electrical outlet circuit breaker so that the circuit breaker can quickly shut off power should there be a ground fault. The integrity of the breaker is compromised when there is damage to electrical equipment, such as exposed wires or insulation breaks, so ensuring the equipment is safe will also maintain the proper functioning of the circuit breaker.