It is important to differentiate CAR from the following:

**Retinitis Pigmentosa**- This entity is associated with family history and is inherited by various modes (autosomal dominant, X-linked, autosomal recessive, or sporadic).****The reason for eliciting similarity is sharing a common target in the form of S-antigen and interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein.

In retinitis pigmentosa, there is a predominant rod photoreceptor dysfunction with a later cone photoreceptor and retinal pigment epithelium dysfunction. The disease manifests during adolescence with the chief complaint of night blindness and mid-peripheral visual loss (due to rod cell damage) and development of tunnel vision at later stages.

**Non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy (npAIR)**- Description of npAIR was first done in 1997. The phenotype and electrophysiological tests seen in npAIR are similar to those in CAR. It is usually associated with an autoimmune family history, and hence, it needs a more intense immunosuppressive therapy. Non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy has a slower progression rate than CAR, the visual changes are more subtle, and the age of presentation is usually younger. npAIR can be associated with photopsia, dyschromatopsia, and nyctalopia. The presence of macular edema and chorioretinal atrophy also points towards non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy.

The anti-recoverin antibodies are usually found in the sera of patients with suspected npAIR. Other antiretinal antibodies associated with npAIR include anti-carbonic anhydrase II, anti-α-enolase, anti-recoverin, and anti-rod transducin-α antibodies. Adamus and colleagues, after analyzing 193 patients with retinopathy with or without neoplasia, reported that antibodies against recoverin are found in the serum of patients with cancer, whereas α-enolase antibodies were found in all the other patients. Systemic conditions associated with npAIR include hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, autoimmune hepatitis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, Myasthenia gravis, Graves disease, bullous pemphigoid.

**Melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR)**- CAR is most commonly associated with small cell carcinoma of the lung, whereas MAR is commonly associated with cutaneous melanoma. CAR usually precedes the diagnosis of neoplasm, whereas MAR usually presents after the diagnosis of melanoma. MAR typically has a normal fundus, but it can also present with vitelliform material and multiple serous retinal detachments.

Electroretinogram in MAR reveals reduced B-wave and preserved dark-adapted A wave (electronegative ERG) showing bipolar cell dysfunction. Circulating autoantibodies against TRPM1 (transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily M, member 1) and bestrophin-1 can be found in patients with MAR. Other antibodies associated with MAR include anti-aldolase A and C, anti-α-enolase, anti-interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein, anti-recoverin, anti-rhodopsin, and anti-transducin antibodies.

**Acute Zonal Outer Occult Retinopathy (AZOOR) and other White Dot Syndromes**- Although AZOOR can present with symptoms, electroretinogram findings, and visual fields showing an enlarged blind spot similar to CAR, AZOOR is typically a bilateral but asymmetric entity. Hypo-autofluorescence is observed in the majority of eyes with AZOOR. Patients with AZOOR show partial recovery or stabilization even without treatment. Multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS) shows unilateral retinopathy associated with optic nerve edema, afferent pupillary defect, and spontaneous recovery.

**Cone Dystrophy**- Here, the rods usually remain normal or are at least partly spared even during the late stages.

**Toxic Retinopathy or Toxic Optic Neuropathy**- Visual impairment occurs due to optic nerve damage caused by a toxin.

**Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON)**- It is a rare mitochondrial disorder affecting young males between 15 to 35 years of age. There occurs a sequential vision loss caused by optic neuropathy.

Red-green color vision abnormalities suggesting optic nerve dysfunction, reduced contrast sensitivity, and subnormal visual electrophysiological parameters can also be seen.

**Nutritional Optic Neuropathy**- There is a visual impairment resulting from the optic nerve damage occurring secondary to nutritional deficiency. It mainly occurs due to vitamin deficiency. Deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine), vitamin B2 (riboflavin), vitamin B3 (niacin), vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin), and/or folic acid is associated with nutritional optic neuropathy. The clinical features and pathophysiology involved are similar to toxic retinopathy. Nutritional Optic Neuropathy can present as a non-specific retrobulbar optic neuropathy.

**Bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation (BDUMP)**- It is a rare paraneoplastic disorder first described by Machemer R et al. in 1966.

The cardinal signs of BDUMP as described by Gass et al. include multiple, subtle, round, or oval, orange-red patches at the level of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE); multifocal early hyper fluorescence; multiple, focally elevated, pigmented, and non-pigmented uveal melanocytic tumors with diffuse uveal tract thickening; the presence of an exudative type of retinal detachment; and rapid cataract progression.

Treatment options available for BDUMP include radiation therapy, use of local and systemic corticosteroids, plasmapheresis, drainage of the subretinal fluid, and vitrectomy. However, it has a very poor visual prognosis and survival rate. Most of the patients become legally blind within one year or succumb to death within three years of initial presentation secondary to the systemic malignancy.

**Chronic Central Serous Chorioretinopathy (CSCR)**- Central Serous Chorioretinopathy is a retinal disorder seen in young males between the ages of 20 and 45 years.

Presenting complaints in acute CSCR include the presence of micropsia, blurring of vision, metamorphopsia, disturbances in color vision, relative scotoma, and temporary hyperopia. whereas chronic form is associated with a more severe or even permanent loss in visual acuity. The extent of visual damage depends on the damage to the photoreceptor outer segments and the external limiting membrane.

Patchy areas of hyper-fluorescence (areas of RPE atrophy) can be seen on Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA). OCT (optical coherence tomography) findings in chronic CSCR comprise elongation of photoreceptor outer segments, the presence of intraretinal cysts, and hyperreflective dots.

**Paraneoplastic Optic Neuropathy (PON)**- PON is a rare paraneoplastic entity affecting middle-aged patients with malignancy. It is characterized by bilateral, subacute, progressive, painless, and profound loss of visual acuity.

Other findings include an abnormal ERG, visual field defects (tubular vision, enlargement of blind spot, and an inferior scotoma), and visual evoked potential (VEP) changes (decreased amplitude and a delayed implicit period).

PON leads to irreversible optic nerve changes and, hence, the visual prognosis of PON remains poor as even immunosuppressive therapy and steroids have not been very effective in management. Prompt treatment of the underlying malignancy is the only way to halt the progression of the disease.

**Vitamin A Deficiency**- Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin required for vision, overall cellular development, immunity, metabolism, and reproductive functions.

Serum retinol concentrations of fewer than 20 micrograms/dL are regarded as vitamin A deficiency. Ocular symptoms of vitamin A deficiency develop when the serum retinol concentration drops below 10 micrograms/dL.

ERG shows undetectable or reduced rod response with reduced amplitudes and increased latency of cone response. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) may show hyperreflective elevated lesions just below the ellipsoid zone corresponding to the white dots.

Hence, to diagnose CAR, it is important to correlate the findings of the sera with the electroretinogram and clinical features with due help from other investigative modalities.