- The dose of methimazole is titrated based on the thyroid hormone level and clinical status of patients.

- Patients receiving MMI should be closely monitored and cautioned to immediately report any signs of illness, especially fever, sore throat, malaise, headache. If so, obtain total and differential cell counts and look for any evidence of agranulocytosis. Extra care is necessary for patients who receive additional drugs that could potentially cause agranulocytosis.

- MMI is known to cause hypoprothrombinemia and bleeding. Monitor prothrombin time for such patients, especially before surgery.

- Both propylthiouracil and methimazole appear in low concentrations in breast milk but do not influence the infant's thyroid function, and breastfeeding is permissible on moderate doses of these agents. Those with elevated antibody levels need assessment for fetal and neonatal thyroid dysfunction. On ultrasound, features of fetal thyroid dysfunction include growth restriction, advanced bone age, goiter, or cardiac failure. According to the American Thyroid Association (ATA), low to moderate doses of MMI (i.e., 20 to 30 mg/day) can and should be used during lactation since research has observed no significant adverse outcomes. It also recommends regular monitoring of the infant's thyroid function and that lactating mothers take their thyroid medication in divided doses, preferably immediately following a feeding.

- Thyroid function tests are necessary at regular intervals if any dosing adjustments are needed.

- Any patient who gets pregnant or intends to get pregnant while on any anti-thyroid medication should immediately report to their doctor for a change of therapy.