A laboratory's acquisition of blood samples includes provider order, identification, collection, transportation, and separation/preparation. This is only the preanalytical phase of a blood gas order, and numerous steps are liable to go awry. Using point-of-care testing (POCT) minimizes the number of teams involved. Depending on the situation, the person using POCT may also be the ordering practitioner, thereby closing the feedback loop. Depending on the technology, data may be immediately uploaded to the electronic medical record (EMR), allowing for efficient transmission. Although the process is simplified by eliminating the variable of multiple team members, there are common and potentially devastating errors that can still occur. One of the most impactful mistakes, regardless of the method of testing used, is the misidentification of the patient. This error may be avoided by standard practices akin to time out in the operating room, wherein the patient and correct test are identified prior to drawing the sample. An additional error pertinent to blood gas temperature correction is temperature recording. In order to accurately correct the readings for a patient's temperature, the correct temperature must be taken. The correct temperature method must be recorded at the time of the draw, and this information relayed to the laboratory. The sample should be transported and processed within 15 minutes to 30 minutes, depending on the desired data. The laboratory must have the equipment and availability to process the information. The medical center should have the infrastructure to be able to communicate the findings to the ordering practitioner in a timely manner. Each step of this cascade could be examined for effectiveness. Should any shortcomings be identified, the medical center could implement a plan to address those shortcomings.