**General Measures**

- **Patient Safety-**Making sure that the patient is safe after the traumatic event and knows where to seek help in case of an emergency (food and shelter).

- **Emotional Support-**Patients can receive emotional comfort from close friends or family. In the absence of those, healthcare providers can provide support by explaining the prognosis, course, and coping skills for ASD.

- **Practical Support-**The process after a traumatic process can be overwhelming. This is because the patient will probably need to help with the police report of the incident, finding a provider, work leave of absence, and health insurance. In case of disability due to an accident, the patient might need further multi-modal medical support as well.

- **Followups-**Regular visits (for six months) for all patients with a significant traumatic event are recommended.

- **Suicidality-**It is vital to evaluate patients for suicidality in each visit, especially in patients with risk factors for suicide or patients having comorbid psychiatric diseases (such as depression).

**Psychotherapy -**Treatment of choice for acute stress disorder (ASD) is a unique form of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) called trauma-focused CBT. CBT can reduce the risk of further developing PTSD.

**Pharmacotherapy -**Currently, there is no high-quality evidence for a pharmacotherapeutic agent for the treatment of ASD. Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) and propranolol were trialed to prevent or treat ASD but were showed little evidence of efficacy.

- **Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SRIs)-**SRIs include Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). SRIs are the most studied medications for the treatment of PTSD with favorable results.

- ****Second-Generation Antipsychotics (SGAs)-****Can be used either as monotherapy or augmentation with SRIs. Second-generation antipsychotics are not first-line and considered in patients who have limited response to SRIs and CBT, especially in the presence of associated anxiety and depression.

- **Benzodiazepines-**Benzodiazepines are not generally recommended for the treatment of PTSD. Benzodiazepines are ineffective in the prevention or treatment of PTSD. Benzodiazepine prescription is associated with significant adverse effects and worse outcomes and should be relatively contraindicated in PTSD patients.

- **Beta-Blockers-**Studies show that propranolol therapy after an acute stressor did not change PTSD incidence but reduced sympathetic symptoms (such as tachycardia and sweating).

**Other Treatments -**There is evidence that ECT is beneficial for PTSD patients with concurrent depression with the ability to reduce symptoms for both conditions.

**Symptom Specific Treatments**

- **Sleep Disturbance-**in the form of insomnia and nightmares are common in PTSD. Specific treatment of sleep disturbances might improve other symptoms of PTSD. Multiple studies have evaluated the efficacy of various pharmacotherapies. SRIs and benzodiazepines were not effective. Prazosin, which is an alpha-1 selective adrenergic blocker, has shown efficacy in the management of sleep disturbance in PTSD patients. Other adjuvant treatments, such as eszopiclone, olanzapine, and risperidone, have also been effective.