**Clinical Features**

Presenting features depend on the location of the lesion. Hemangiomas are classified into the following types:

- Superficial type

- Deep type

- Mixed type

**Superficial Lesions**

They appear as bright red, nodular masses typically involving the eyelids. Lesions below the dermis tend to have a deep blue to purple hue. These lesions can present as skin discoloration, a cosmetic blemish, or an eyelid mass. Capillary hemangiomas may cause mechanical ptosis obscuring the visual axis and producing astigmatism and amblyopia.

**Deep Lesions**

Deep orbital lesions are invisible to the naked eye. They present with gradually progressive proptosis, strabismus, or decreased visual acuity due to optic nerve compression.

**Mixed Lesions**

It consists of both superficial and deep components.

A characteristic clinical feature of capillary hemangiomas is an increase in size or change in color to dark blue when the child cries or strains which are often noted by the parents. This is due to the increased accumulation of deoxygenated blood. This situation, however, is not pathognomonic of capillary hemangiomas and can present in other vascular anomalies.

**Systemic Associations**

Cutaneous hemangiomas are sometimes associated with visceral lesions. The presence of four or more superficial lesions should raise suspicion of visceral hemangiomas. The most common site of visceral involvement is the liver.

**Kasabach – Merritt Syndrome**

Large hemangiomas can result in entrapment and consumption of platelets and other clotting factors resulting in life-threatening hemorrhagic thrombocytopenia.

**PHACES Syndrome**

First described in 1996, children presenting with large hemangiomas of the face, neck, and scalp can have associated defects involving the brain, blood vessels, eyes, heart, and chest. It is seen more commonly in females. The syndrome name is an acronym of the different anomalies it compromises. (PHACES – Posterior fossa anomalies, Hemangiomas, Arterial anomalies, Cardiac anomalies, and Eye anomalies)