# Continuing Education Activity

Venous leg ulcers are late manifestations of chronic venous insufficiency that can cause disability and serious complications. The elderly are more commonly affected. As the global population becomes older, the disease has shown a worldwide growing incidence. This activity reviews the diagnostic and therapeutic approach for venous stasis ulcers and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the risk factors associated with the development of venous leg ulcers.
- Explain the pathophysiology of chronic venous hypertension and venous leg ulceration.
- Describe the clinical features of venous leg ulcers.
- Outline some interprofessional team strategies to improve outcomes for patients with venous leg ulcers.

# Introduction

Venous leg ulcers (VLUs) are late indicators of chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) and venous hypertension.

VLUs are a costly medical problem with a high toll on worldwide healthcare systems.

# Etiology

Although CVI is a well-known precipitant for VLU development, ulceration occurs rarely (5.1%) for unclear reasons.

At a cellular level, mast cell degranulation, leukocyte recruitment, increased matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors and prostacyclin, the acquisition of a non-contractile secretory phenotype by smooth muscle cells, and fibroblast differentiation into myofibroblasts participate in vein wall remodeling and varix formation. The proinflammatory microenvironment is maintained by M1 macrophages, mainly through the release of IL-1α, IFN-γ, and TGF-β1. Ultimately, chronic inflammation and incompetent blood flow favor thrombus formation, causing further fibrosis and valvular destruction.

The majority of risk factors for the development of VLUs are non-modifiable, and patients often present more than one. These involve a family history of CVI, advanced age, female sex, previous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, multiparity, lipodermatosclerosis, musculoskeletal and joint disease.

Genetics traits may be an additional predisposing factor, apparently presenting as an autosomal dominant trait with variable penetrance.

Compared with healing VLUs, the gene expression profile of non-healing VLUs showed upregulation of secreted frizzled-related protein 4, branched-chain aminotransferase 1, dermatopontin, cytochrome P450, and 17 B hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase genes, which are involved in inflammation control, Wnt signaling, cell growth, extracellular matrix assembly, and steroidogenesis.

# Epidemiology

VLUs are the most common type of lower extremity chronic wounds.

The overall incidence is higher for females than males, although the exact number is hard to establish as it depends on the cohort and place of study.

# Histopathology

Unless another diagnosis is suspected, a biopsy is not warranted.

# History and Physical

Identification of risk factors on clinical history helps to distinguish VLUs from other causes of lower extremity non-healing wounds. Patients with CVI and VLUs often refer pruritus with or without a rash, aching pain in the gaiter area, evening pedal edema, and night cramps.

Early CVI physical findings must be identified on examination. The initial manifestations are telangiectases and reticular veins.

The clinical, etiological, anatomical, and pathophysiological (CEAP) classification is used to document these findings for therapeutic and research purposes.

# Evaluation

Clinical assessment should describe the ulcer area, depth, edges, wound base, signs of infection, and peripheral skin changes.

Table 1. Ankle-brachial pressure index

**Ankle-brachial pressure index**

**Arterial circulation**

**Compression treatment**

> 1-1.3

Normal

Apply compression

= 0.8-1.0

Mild peripheral disease

Apply compression with caution

≤ 0.8-0.6

Significant arterial disease

Use modified compression with caution and refer to a vascular specialist

< 0.5

Critical ischemia

Do not compress and urgently refer to a vascular specialist

Color-flow duplex ultrasound is another inexpensive, non-invasive, and highly informative diagnostic test, particularly useful for superficial vein assessment.

# Treatment / Management

The standard of care for VLUs relies on two strategies: compression therapy and direct wound management.

There are numerous conservative alternatives aimed at improving venous hypertension, such as medical compression, intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC), manual lymphatic drainage, and extracorporeal shockwave therapy. Compression therapy is the most practical, effective, and cost-conscious intervention for the treatment of VLUs.

IPC can be used in addition to compression therapy or in patients who are unable to tolerate the latter.

As an adjunct to compression therapy, treatment with pentoxifylline or micronized purified flavonoids is an effective ancillary measure.

Regarding direct ulcer interventions, these involve cleansing, debridement, infection control, application of dressings, and topical substances.

Although VLUs are often colonized, frank infections are less common. If infection is suspected in a new-onset painful ulcer with erythema, tenderness, warmth, and systemic signs (e.g. fever, chills), systemic antibiotic therapy should be considered. Tissue culture (as opposed to a swab) must be performed in fetid, purulent, or non-healing wounds to guide antimicrobial therapy.

Dressings maintain adequate moisture, offer physical protection, promote granulation and reepithelization. There are numerous absorptive (e. g. alginates), moisture-retaining (e. g. hydrocolloids), and antiseptic materials (e. g. silver) that can be applied to dry, exudative, and infected wounds, respectively.  Topical treatments are typically used as antiseptics (e. g. cadexomer-iodine), antimicrobials (e. g. silver sulfadiazine), and debriding agents (e. g. collagenase, hydrogels).

In a Cochrane meta-analysis, sucralfate and silver dressings were the most highly ranked treatments. Interestingly, the usage of silver dressings increased the probability of healing (RR 2.43, 95% CI 1.58 to 3.74) when compared with nonadherent dressings.

Adjunctive therapies are recommended for non-improving ulcers after 4 to 6 weeks of standard treatment.

Invasive management intends to obliterate or remove incompetent veins through various techniques, such as sclerotherapy, open vascular surgery, radiofrequency, and endovenous procedures. These are often reserved for advanced cases when standard therapies are insufficient.

# Differential Diagnosis

Other causes of lower extremity ulceration may be distinguished from VLUs based on the history and physical examination.

Non-vascular diagnoses should be particularly considered when ulcers show excessive granulation tissue, elevated borders, and failure to improve after standard treatment.

# Staging

There is not a specific staging instrument for VLUs, but the CEAP classification is often used in CVI patients.

**Clinical**



C0

No visible or palpable signs of venous disease

C1

Telangiectases or reticular veins

C2

Varicose veins

C3

Edema

C4a

Pigmentation or eczema

C4b

Lipodermatosclerosis or atrophie blanche

C5

Healed venous ulcer

C6

Active venous ulcer

**Etiological**



Ec

Congenital

Ep

Primary

Es

Secondary (post-thrombotic)

En

No venous cause is identified.

**Anatomical**



As

Superficial veins

Ap

Perforator veins

Ad

Deep veins

An

No venous location was identified.

**Pathophysiological**



Pr

Reflux

Po

Obstruction

Pr, o

Reflux and obstruction

Pn

No venous pathophysiology identifiable

# Prognosis

Based on a prognostic model, wound area and chronicity are raw determinants for healing.

A multicenter study found that VLUs with a ≥ 3% increase within the first month of treatment had a 68% healing failure probability by the sixth month.

Healed ulcers have high recurrence rates, which considerably decrease with sustained compression therapy and vascular surgery.

# Complications

As with any chronic wound, the most common complications of VLUs include infection and pain, both of which should be controlled to improve healing outcomes and patient adherence.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Individuals affected with VLUs can have an impaired quality of life, mainly related to disability.

Patients should be educated because VLUs are chronic processes that require lifelong evaluation and care, even after wound closure. Additionally, conformity to diet and lifestyle modifications may reduce the risk or recurrence, but evidence is lacking.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

VLUs remain an unmet clinical need. Numerous guidelines showcase that a consensus between different specialties from various countries has not been reached. Despite this, there have been some attempts at analyzing the quality and consistency of the published literature.

Patients with limb-threatening disease, severe infections, who are unable to care for themselves should be immediately admitted to the hospital for advanced management and vascular surgery consultation. Mild to moderate cases can be treated in ambulatory wound care facilities.

Finally, nutrition specialists can help malnourished and overweight patients with specific guidance on how to improve their overall health, although weight management outcomes remain unclear for VLUs healing.