# Introduction

The Red Nucleus (RN) is a primitive brainstem structure located in the ventral midbrain. Histologically, the RN consists of two distinct structures: a caudal parvocellular red nucleus (RNp) and a rostral magnocellular red nucleus (RNm).

# Structure and Function

As mentioned previously, the RN is subdivided into the RNp and the RNm. Both of these neurons are arranged in a somatotopic distribution, with the upper limb corresponding with the dorsomedial region, and the lower limb correlating with the ventrolateral portion.

It is important to distinguish the subsections of the red nuclei because each possesses a unique neuronal pathway, and therefore dictates a separate neurologic function. For example, among quadrupedal animals, the RNm closely mirrors the pyramidal tract when animals navigate through obstacles and perform various coordinated extremity movements.****As mentioned previously, the RNm is largely rudimentary in adult humans (and therefore bears a lesser neurologic role), most likely due to the development (and functional redundancy) of the corticospinal tract as well as the pyramidal system.

In contrast, the RNp provides an important connection between the motor and premotor cortices as well as the cerebellum, and inputs directly into the inferior olivary nucleus.

In summary, the parvocellular division of the RN is particularly prominent in the adult human brain and may play a role in cognitive-motor function, while the magnocellular RN only demonstrates functional relevance in early development through primitive movements, and becomes less functionally significant with aging.

# Embryology

To date, there are very few studies exploring the embryonic development of the red neuron.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The RN receives blood supply from the Posterior Cerebral Artery (PCA).

# Nerves

There is an increasing number of studies exploring the relationship between the magnocellular RN and pain modulation and allodynia,

# Surgical Considerations

Among the most common surgical interventions for Parkinson disease involves targeted deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus. This procedure, however, is subject to a high rate of error.

# Clinical Significance

There are a number of clinical situations that bear relation to the RN and its function. First, as mentioned previously, there is considerable functional redundancy between the corticospinal tract and the rubrospinal tract. Therefore, in the case of corticospinal tract injury (such as stroke or spinal cord injury), neurologic compensation and response take place in the acute setting, by which the red nuclei undergo remodeling, and increases activity.

Another clinically relevant manifestation with regards to the RN can be seen in patients with substantial brain damage. Specifically, the involuntary posture that a patient demonstrates can help localize the lesion of interest. In decorticate rigidity, flexion of the upper extremities illustrates an intact RN (and rubrospinal tract). If the lesion reaches the RN (and therefore, the midbrain), the upper extremities demonstrate extended posture, which is referred to as decerebrate posturing.

The third (and much less common) clinical manifestation regarding direct damage to red nuclei involves hypertrophic olivary degeneration and ultimately palatal myoclonus (and dysphagia)

Fourth, lesions of the RN may lead to various third nerve palsies due to the intimate anatomical relationship between it and the oculomotor nerve. Specifically, fibers of Cranial Nerve III travel alongside the RN as it leaves the oculomotor nerve nucleus and passes ventrally through the midbrain.

Fifth, there is a rare autosomal recessive disorder known as Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome, characterized by hypogonadism, adolescent-onset diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and alopecia.

Lastly, there is consideration given towards the interplay between the RN and Parkinson disease.****Similarly, and as mentioned previously, the functional and expressive similarities between the RN and the subthalamic nuclei also present difficulties with regards to treating Parkinson's disease via deep brain stimulation, and also provide obstacles in better understanding this disease.