Episcleritis is an ocular condition in which the majority of patients who are affected have complete resolution of the inflammation and do not require ongoing management or follow up care with a specialist. However, 26% to 36% of patients with acute episcleritis will ultimately be diagnosed with systemic autoimmune disease and will need a referral to a specialist. Around 30% or more of patients will have recurrent episcleritis, and these patients require continuity of care with their primary eye care provider.

Patients with an associated connective tissue disease or vasculitis should be referred to a rheumatologist specializing in their specific condition. The primary eye care provider is still included in the interprofessional care of the patient. Some patients with episcleritis will require topical steroids to manage their ocular inflammation, and if they are steroid responders, they may experience increased intraocular pressure. If the intraocular pressure cannot be managed appropriately by the primary eye care provider, then these patients will need to be referred to a glaucoma specialist for further intervention, possibly including surgery. Posterior sub-capsular cataracts can also occur in those patients with long-term topical corticosteroid use. This may require a referral to a cataract surgeon for cataract extraction and intraocular lens placement if cataracts become visually significant and affect the patient’s activities of daily living.

Although episcleritis is usually a benign condition with a good prognosis, there are some instances where there needs to be excellent interprofessional communication between the primary eye care provider and the rheumatologist, as well as between the primary eye care provider and the cataract surgeon or glaucoma specialist.