Misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis of episcleritis is not common. The differential diagnosis list includes conditions that may appear to be similar to episcleritis, but after a thorough history and eye exam, misdiagnosis is uncommon.

Contact lens-associated red eye (CLARE) is a condition that may have a similar presentation to episcleritis but has a history and disease characteristics that make it difficult to mistake it for another condition. The patient affected by CLARE will have recently slept in their contact lenses and will have symptoms of unilateral pain, photophobia, and epiphora with normal visual acuity. The conjunctiva and cornea will show signs of inflammation, including corneal infiltrate and corneal edema and iritis, if severe.

A second condition on the differential diagnosis list should be acute conjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis is a broad term to include viral, bacterial, allergic/atopic, and toxic etiologies. Conjunctivitis most likely presents with an acute red eye with discharge, photophobia, itching/burning, and edematous eyelids. Depending on the specific cause, the patient will also exhibit conjunctival follicles, papillae, or a combination.

Sectoral conjunctival erythema and edema occur with phlyctenular conjunctivitis as well. This condition is caused by a delayed hypersensitivity reaction to antigens in the tear film and is often associated with blepharitis.

A mechanical inflammation of pinguecula causes pingueculitis. This is common when pingueculae are larger or co-occur with dry eye. Distinguishing features are that the inflamed area is associated with a pinguecula.

Iritis is another condition that may initially present similar to episcleritis, but the specific exam findings of iritis make it easy to differentiate. Patients with iritis will also have an acute onset of pain, redness, photophobia, and tearing.  The conjunctival hyperemia is usually more concentrated in the circumlimbal area and is appropriately named ciliary flush. Distinguishing features of iritis are keratic precipitates on the corneal endothelium and cells and flare in the anterior chamber.

Scleritis is the most important condition to differentiate from episcleritis because the treatment of scleritis is more aggressive and can affect prognosis and complications. Patients with scleritis will complain of a more gradual onset of redness, pain, tearing, photophobia, and may have reduced visual acuity. These patients have deep, severe radiating pain from the affected eye, and their sclera will have a more red-purple hue. The hyperemia will not blanch with topical phenylephrine drops, and they may also have corneal involvement with peripheral stromal keratitis. More than 50% of patients with scleritis have a known systemic autoimmune connective tissue disease or vasculitis.