The dermatome map of the abdominal wall follows the distribution of the peripheral nerves. The nerves course from posterior to anterior obliquely similar to that of the ribs. Important dermatome landmarks for the abdominal wall are the umbilicus and inguinal fold, which are related to dermatomes T10 and L1, respectively.

The nerves of the posterior abdominal wall primarily originate from the lumbar plexus. The lumbar plexus forms by the ventral rami of the L1-L4 spinal nerves and sometimes includes T12. The plexus gives rise to the following nerves in descending order: iliohypogastric, ilioinguinal, genitofemoral, lateral femoral cutaneous, obturator, and femoral. These nerves and their specific features are discussed below.

**Iliohypogastric nerve**

- **Origin**: It is from the ventral primary rami of T12-L1 spinal nerves

- **Course**: The iliohypogastric nerve emerges from the psoas major and travels between the quadratus lumborum and kidneys to the iliac crest. It later pierces the transversus abdominis and then divides into two cutaneous branches, lateral and anterior.

- **Motor innervation**: It supplies the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles.

- **Sensory innervation**: Sensations come from the lateral gluteal region and suprapubic region.

**Ilioinguinal nerve**

- **Origin**: This nerve forms from ventral primary rami of L1

- **Course**: Similar to the iliohypogastric nerve, the ilioinguinal nerve emerges from the psoas major and courses to the iliac crest to pierce the transversus abdominis.  From there, it travels through the deep inguinal ring and into the**spermatic cord**.

- **Motor innervation**: It supplies the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles along with the iliohypogastric nerve.

- **Sensory innervation**: The cutaneous sensation is received from the anteromedial aspect of the thigh, and parts of external genitalia.

**Genitofemoral nerve**

The genitofemoral nerve is responsible for both sensory and motor components of the cremasteric reflex.

- **Origin**:  Ventral primary rami of L1-L2 spinal nerves

- **Course**:  Travels within the psoas major tissue and emerges on the anterior surface of the psoas, where it then divides into the genital and femoral branches. The genital branch travels within the spermatic cord, and the femoral branch travels to the area of the saphenous opening.

- **Motor innervation**: This nerve supplies only one muscle known as the cremaster muscle (by its genital branch).

- **Sensory innervation**: Cutaneous sensation comes from the superomedial aspect of the thigh (femoral branch), or femoral triangle.

**Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve**

- **Origin**: Dorsal primary rami of L2-L3 spinal nerves

- **Course**: Emerges from the lateral border of the psoas major and passes inferolateral across the iliacus muscle, under the inguinal ligament, and then across the sartorius muscle. It then divides into anterior and posterior branches.

- **Motor innervation**: This nerve has no motor innervation.

- **Sensory innervation**: The cutaneous sensations are brought from the anterolateral part of the thigh.

**Obturator nerve**

- **Origin**: Anterior division of the ventral primary rami of L2-L4 spinal nerves

- **Course**: Descends through the psoas major and emerges medially near the pelvic brim.  It then travels through the obturator canal and divides into anterior and posterior branches.

- **Motor innervation**: Obturator externus, adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, and pectineus.

- **Sensory innervation**: The cutaneous sensations are brought from the medial part of the thigh by the cutaneous branch of the subsartorial plexus.

- **Joints:**It supplies both the knee and hip joints.

**Femoral nerve**

- **Origin**: Posterior division of ventral rami of L2-L4 spinal nerves. It is the biggest branch of the lumbar plexus

- **Course**: Travels through the psoas major, adjacent to the iliacus, then below the inguinal ligament.  It then courses lateral to the femoral vessels within the femoral triangle and then branches into anterior and posterior divisions.

- **Motor innervation**: It supplies many muscles, including iliacus, pectineus, sartorius, rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, and vastus intermedius.

- **Sensory innervation**: It gives rise to the medial cutaneous nerve and intermediate cutaneous nerve of the thigh, which supply the anterior and medial aspect of the thigh. It also gives rise to a very long cutaneous nerve, the saphenous nerve.

- **Joints:**It supplies both the hip joint and knee joints. This is clinically important as the hip joint pains are usually referred to as knee joint leading to misdiagnosis by orthopedic surgeons.