**Initial Evaluation**

- Pulse oximetry

- Peak flow

- Spirometry-generally if the measured FEV1(forced expiratory volume in one second) improves more than 12% and increases by 200 milliliters following bronchodilator it is supportive of the diagnosis

- Chest x-ray if indicated

- Flu swab/RSV can be performed if concerned about a virus triggering asthma

- ABG may be warranted depending on the severity of symptoms

For any patient with a new onset of asthma, occupational asthma should be considered the following tests can be ordered to verify this:

- Measure peak flow

- Obtain spirometry and also  peak expiratory flow rate that can be monitored inside work and outside of work

- Skin prick tests can also be performed to test for allergies

- Methacholine challenge can be performed

- Specific inhalation challenges can also be completed

Biomarkers of inflammation are being evaluated for their usefulness in the diagnosis of asthma. Biomarkers include total and differential cell count and mediator assays in sputum, blood, urine, and exhaled air.

The National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel guidelines for asthma recommend that patients who require daily asthma medications have allergy testing for perennial indoor allergens.  When the triggers are found, exposure to allergens should be controlled by various measures as discussed below. For patients whose symptoms are not controlled should be referred to an allergist for immunotherapy

Asthma severity is classified as intermittent, persistent-mild, persistent-moderate, and persistent. Several validated questionnaires have also been used to assess asthma control in patients; these include the Asthma Assessment questionnaire, the Asthma Control Questionnaire, and the Asthma Control Test. During the initial visit, asthma, severity, and control should be assessed to initiate treatment. Then asthma control should be evaluated to determine a treatment plan.