Cenegermin is supplied as an ophthalmic solution containing 0.002% (20 mcg/mL) cenegermin as a clear, colorless solution in a multiple-dose vial. Contact lenses should be removed before application and reinserted after 15 minutes. One drop of cenegermin is instilled in the affected eye(s) six times a day at 2-hour intervals for eight weeks. (Each mL contains active: 20 mcg of cenegermin (0.002% w/v).

Cenegermin is supplied weekly in an insulated pack with dry ice containing seven multi-dose vials. Cenegermin weekly cartons should be stored in the refrigerator promptly after receiving them. The carton should be kept between 36 degrees F to 46 degrees F for no longer than 14 days. Before application, a vial should thaw for 30 minutes at room temperature. Shaking the vial is not advised.

Proper administration requires strict adherence to a specific stepwise regimen. Instructions for administration as per product labeling are as follows.

- Attach the vial adapter to the vial.

- Clean the surface of the valve connector.

- Wait approximately one minute, allowing the valve to dry.

- Screw pipette clockwise into the connector.

- Ensure that the plunger is pushed all the way down.

- Invert the vial and gently draw the pipette plunger allowing the pipette to fill with the solution.

- After filling the pipette, unscrew the pipette counterclockwise from the connector.

- Retract the lower eyelid and instill drops into the conjunctival fornix.

- Make sure not to touch the eye with the tip of the pipette.

- Blink a few times after administration to allow even spreading across the surface of the eye.

Completion of the full 8-week course is critical for treatment success. If a dose is missed, resume treatment as normal at the next scheduled administration. If multiple topical ophthalmic drops are being used, administer the drops at least 15 minutes apart to avoid dilution.