# Continuing Education Activity

Duodenal trauma is a rare and potentially life-threatening injury. It is most commonly caused by a penetrating mechanism. The duodenum is the first and smallest portion of the small bowel. These injuries, however, are challenged by complex anatomic and physiologic relationships. As a result, the diagnosis and subsequent management may be delayed. This delay is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Treatment, as well, is difficult given these relationships and the surgical approach is often complex. This activity will review the pathophysiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of duodenal trauma. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the typical etiologies of duodenal trauma.
- Describe the pathophysiology of duodenal trauma.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with duodenal trauma.
- Describe the treatment considerations for patients with duodenal trauma.

# Introduction

Duodenal trauma is a rare and potentially life-threatening injury. Both the diagnosis and management can be particularly difficult. These injuries are often found in a late stage and can be associated with increased morbidity and mortality.

The duodenum is the first and smallest segment of the small bowel. The entire length only measures about 20 to 30 cm.duodeni, meaning “twelve each,” in reference to its approximately 12-fingerbreadth length.

The duodenum is composed of four distinct portions.

The duodenum is unique in that it is both a peritoneal and retroperitoneal organ. D1 is primarily intraperitoneal. The distal aspect of D1, D2, and D3 are then retroperitoneal. D4 returns to the peritoneum.

Functionally, the duodenum is the site for mixing the pancreatic and biliary fluids with gastric efflux.

# Etiology

As with any trauma, injuries are generally categorized as blunt or penetrating. The majority of duodenal trauma is caused by penetrating mechanisms. Only 22.3% of injuries are due to blunt mechanisms, while 77.7% are due to the penetrating mechanism.

Among penetrating injuries, 81% are caused by gunshot wounds, and 19% are caused by stabbings. Most blunt injuries are due to motor vehicle collisions (85%).

# Epidemiology

In the United States, trauma is the fourth most common cause of death. Trauma is the leading cause of death between ages 1 and 44.

General risk factors associated with increased morbidity and mortality include low socioeconomic status, non-Caucasian race, medical comorbidities, and living in a trauma “desert” with no nearby level I or II trauma centers.

The trauma of the duodenum is rare and accounts for only 3.7 to 5% of all patients with an abdominal injury.

# Pathophysiology

Penetrating trauma generally causes injury by three mechanisms: direct injury, cavitation, and the resulting shock wave.

Energy from the projectile causes a radial stretching that forms a temporary cavity with increased damage. The higher the energy mechanism, the larger the temporary cavity, and the greater the damage. Finally, a shock wave is created by rapid changes in pressure and temperature from the projectile.

Blunt trauma can cause bowel injury by either a crushing force, shearing force, or bursting force.

The most common site of duodenal injury is the second portion (36%). This is followed by the third portion (18%), the fourth portion (15%), and the first portion (13%).

Due to the proximity of other critical structures, duodenal injury rarely occurs in isolation. The most common associated injury is to the liver (17%), followed by the colon (13%), pancreas (12%), other small bowel (11%), and stomach (9%).

# History and Physical

The history and physical examination of a patient with duodenal injury are generally nonspecific. The trauma evaluation will always start with an effective primary survey, including airway, breathing, circulation, disability, and exposure. At this point, a secondary survey will be performed to include a head-to-toe injury inventory and examination. This secondary survey will also involve obtaining an “AMPLE” history, including allergies, medications, past medical history, last oral intake, and events leading to the presentation.

Physical examination in relation to possible duodenal trauma is primarily related to the abdomen. This abdominal examination starts with an inspection to evaluate for distention, seat-belt signs, ecchymosis, lacerations, penetrating wounds, and possible evisceration. With penetrating wounds, the number and location of wounds should be noted. Although the classic abdominal examination then proceeds into auscultation, this step has less benefit in the setting of acute abdominal trauma and is often not performed.

The next steps in examining the abdomen are percussion and palpation to evaluate for tympany and peritoneal signs.

History largely relates to the events around the trauma, such as the mechanism of injury. Symptoms such as abdominal pain, pain radiating to the back, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, or hematemesis could all be related to injury of the duodenum.

# Evaluation

As with any trauma, evaluation should begin with an efficient primary and secondary survey, concentrating on the airway, breathing, and circulation. The definitive diagnosis of duodenal trauma will require a particularly high level of suspicion. Given the retroperitoneal location, the physical exam is further limited in detecting these injuries.

After abdominal trauma, any patient with peritonitis or evisceration should be immediately taken for an exploratory laparotomy.

Diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) is an option but has been replaced mainly by the advent of FAST. A stable patient can be evaluated by computerized tomography (CT).

# Treatment / Management

The retroperitoneal location of the duodenum within the “surgical soul” can make access and adequate visualization particularly difficult. The majority of the duodenum, including D1, D2, and the proximal portion of D3, can be visualized by a Kocher maneuver.

The Kocher maneuver is performed by incising the posterolateral peritoneal attachments of the duodenum and then retracting the duodenum and pancreatic head medially.

The management of duodenal trauma largely depends on the extent of injury and involvement of other associated structures. The majority of simple duodenal hematomas seen on CT can be managed non-operatively.

An upper GI contrast study can be considered every 5 to 7 days to evaluate progression. Surgical evacuation may be necessary if the obstruction fails to resolve after 2 or 3 weeks.

If a duodenal hematoma is identified intraoperatively, a Kocher maneuver should be performed, and the duodenum should be thoroughly inspected for signs of perforation. Without any signs of perforation, these hematomas are mainly managed conservatively. Evacuation of the hematoma found intraoperatively is indicated if there is a high suspicion of full-thickness injury or if there is > 50% luminal narrowing.

Traumatic duodenal laceration or perforation requires surgical intervention. The preferred treatment for the majority of duodenal lacerations is through a primary repair.

Primary repair may even be considered in some cases of complete transection with simple duodenal duodenostomy, as opposed to other areas of the small bowel that would be managed by larger resection. A primary repair requires minimal tissue loss with no tension or involvement of the ampulla. The use of a nasogastric tube to allow temporary protection of the repair can also be considered. Extraluminal drainage is a topic of debate with no level I evidence to guide practice.

After primary repair, if the duodenal injury is severe (grade III-IV) or there is concomitant pancreatic injury, a pyloric exclusion should be considered to protect the repair.

If there is significant tissue loss putting the repair under tension, or if the injury involves the ampulla, a roux-en-Y duodenal-jejunostomy should be considered. For massive injuries involving the head of the pancreas, the patient may require a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure).

There are other historical options to mention that have generally fallen out of favor. These include duodenal diverticularization and triple-ostomy repair. Duodenal diverticularization involves performing an antrectomy and gastrojejunostomy to permanently bypass the primary repair.

A triple-ostomy repair involves a primary repair followed by gastrostomy, duodenostomy, and jejunostomy.

# Differential Diagnosis

The presentation of duodenal trauma is nonspecific, with many other etiologies presenting similarly.

- Esophageal trauma

- Stomach trauma

- Small bowel (jejunum or ileum) trauma

- Colorectal trauma

- Mesenteric trauma

- Mesenteric hematoma

- Intraabdominal vascular trauma

- Pancreas trauma

- Liver trauma

- Spleen trauma

- Kidney trauma

- Bladder trauma

# Prognosis

Duodenal trauma is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. An overall morbidity rate of 22 to 27% is seen. A mortality rate of 5 to 30% is reported but varies by grade and timing.

Mortality is reported to be 8.3% for grade I, 18.7% for grade II, 27.6% for grade III, 30.8% for grade IV, and 58.8% for grade V. Early deaths are generally due to exsanguination while late deaths are due to fistula, sepsis, and organ failure. One of the most consequential factors in predicting mortality is a delay in diagnosis. A delay in diagnosis by over 24 hours nearly quadruples the mortality rate.

# Complications

- Missed injury

- Intraabdominal abscess

- Duodenal fistula

- Duodenal obstruction

- Recurrent pancreatitis

- Bleeding

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Duodenal trauma can be the result of a variety of mechanisms. As the majority are due to the penetrating mechanism, prevention would be primarily directed at general violence prevention by gunshot wounds and stabbings. This could include collaboration with community organizations to promote safe weapon use and storage.

Similarly, community-based education to prevent motor vehicle collisions should also be recommended; this includes wearing seatbelts, avoiding distracted driving, and general safe driving practices.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Duodenal trauma is primarily a surgical disease managed by surgeons and trauma physicians. Care, however, is complex and best handled by a robust interprofessional team. This includes emergency medical technicians, nurses, emergency room physicians, radiologists, anesthesiologists, operating room staff, and pharmacy support. Many studies have shown that a multidisciplinary team approach improves patient outcomes.

Demetriades et al. have demonstrated that level I trauma centers have better outcomes than lower-level trauma centers.