Ureteroscopy is a powerful tool at the urologist’s disposal for both diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. It is the endoscopic key to the upper urinary tract. As with many great discoveries, its origin was an accident: in 1912, during a pediatric procedure for correction of congenital posterior urethral valves, Hugh Hampton Young inadvertently passed a rigid pediatric cystoscope into the patient's dilated ureter.

Karl Storz introduced the first rigid ureteroscope in 1980. It was 12 French in size with dual working channels, 50 cm long and awkward to use, but it worked. In the 1980s, Olympus adapted a pediatric bronchoscope to produce one of the first deflectable, practical, flexible ureteroscopes, allowing for greater ease of access to the renal pelvis and calyces.

With advances in ureteroscope and camera miniaturization, improved optical systems, digital video capability, laser lithotripsy, smaller ureteral stone baskets and dual working channels allowing for continuous pressurized irrigation for enhanced visualization, ureteroscopy has achieved the necessary imaging capability, versatility, precision, reliability, and safety to become a standard part of modern urological practice.

Ureteroscopy is commonly used to diagnose and treat kidney and ureteral stones, ureteral strictures, and urothelial cancers. Importantly, its evolution was associated with the parallel development of holmium laser technology, which can be used in rigid, semi-rigid, and flexible ureteroscopes. Urological lasers achieve efficient fragmentation of all stone types and can treat urothelial tumors with vaporization or ablation.