**Otoscopic Examination**

The most common finding on physical examination is a pulsatile red middle ear mass behind an intact tympanic membrane.

**Audiologic Testing**

Pure tone and speech audiometry should be performed.

Head computed tomographic scan with fine-cuts at the temporal bone demonstrate bone destruction. Bone erosion is sometimes called a moth-eaten appearance.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI with intravenous contrast-enhancement shows an enhancing lesion usually extending from the jugular bulb to the middle ear. Posterior fossa and cervical extension are common in untreated tumors. Vascular flow voids are described with the characteristic “salt-and-pepper” appearance on T1 and T2 weighted images. The MRI depicts the tumor vascularity, extension along neural foramina and multicentricity, and should be the first imaging study when evaluating a patient with a suspected glomus jugulare. On T1 weighted images without intravenous contrast, paragangliomas can appear hypointense with a speckled appearance; however, on intravenous gadolinium-enhanced contrast sequences, pronounced enhancement is seen secondary to the hypervascular nature of the glomus jugulare.

**Angiography**

Angiography helps differentiate paragangliomas from other pathologies but also can help to demonstrate the tumor blush and the feeding vessels, which can then be embolized. The principal feeding artery is the ascending pharyngeal artery, although the occipital artery can also contribute; both branches of the external carotid artery.

**Tumor Classifications**

Those described by Fisch and by Glasscock-Jackson are the most commonly used, which are based on the location and extension of the tumor.