Chest X-ray and CT chest occasionally can show tracheal bronchus. However, most cases are incidental findings on bronchoscopy. Multi-detector CT (MDCT) with 3D image reconstruction is the gold-standard test in detecting congenital tracheobronchial anomalies. MDCT allows the making of a direct diagnosis of tracheal bronchus non-invasively. Faster acquisition time, increased anatomic coverage, and decreased sedation requirement in comparison to bronchoscopy make 3D reconstruction imaging an ideal modality for detecting tracheobronchial anomalies. Also, 3D-CT is a powerful tool in diagnosing the relationship between tracheal and arterial tree, which would be ideal if the patient were to undergo surgical intervention. Reconstruction images have overcome the limitations of axial CT images, which included failure to identify subtle tracheal stenosis, a craniocaudal extension of the airway disease, and disease limited to airways obliquely located to axial planes. Findings seen on imaging in symptomatic patients include bronchiectasis, focal emphysema, and focal cystic malformations.

A retrospective cross-sectional analysis on 20 individuals of different tracheobronchial anomalies (stenosis, tracheomalacia, tracheal bronchus, agenesis) compared the diagnostic benefit of MRI, MDCT, and 3D with confirmation by bronchoscopy or surgery. The study found that MDCT was superior to MRI in diagnosing anomalies. In 12 patients who underwent both MDCT and 3D, researchers determined that 3D added specific information in seven cases; in three cases, it played a crucial role in attempting surgical interventions, while in another four cases, it added specific information regarding surgical planning.

FDG PET scan has a limited role in differentiating inflammatory versus malignant lesion of the tracheal bronchus; hence, after definitive surgery, specimens are sent for histopathologic evaluation.