The patient will receive moderate sedation and local anesthesia before arterial access.

**Arterial Access**

- **Common femoral artery access:**
- Under fluoroscopic and ultrasound guidance, obtain common femoral artery access with an 18 G large or 25 guide arch needle.
- Once blood flow pulsatility conformed, advance 0.35 in J-wire or 0.14 in microwire through the needle into the common femoral artery and iliac arteries under fluoroscopy guidance. Remove the needle
- Introduce 5 French or 6 French access sheaths over the wire into the common femoral artery in a retrograde fashion. Connect the access sheath side port to the IV pressure flush line.
- Inject 50: 50 through the side port into the sheet and perform a femoral artery angiogram.
- Flush the sheath frequently

- **Radial or Ulnar artery access:**
- Under ultrasound guidance, obtain radial /ulnar artery access with  25 gueuze microneedle.
- Once blood flow Pulsatility conformed, advance  0.14 in microwire through the needle into the radial/ulnar artery and remove the needle.
- Introducing 5 French or 6 French access sheath over the wire into the radial/ulnar artery in a retrograde fashion. Connect the access sheath side port to the IV pressure flush line.
- Inject radial cocktail ( nitroglycerin, nicardipine, or verapamil) and IV heparin through the side port.
- Flush the sheath frequently.

**Left main coronary artery cannulation:**

- Advance diagnostic catheters ( JL, AL, Jacky, or Tiger) over the wire under fluoroscopy guidance. Once a catheter tip is in the left coronary sinus, remove  0.35 in support wire. Obtain aortic pressure and waveform for baseline measurements. Engage the left main coronary artery with a slow, steady clock, counter clock, and push and pull maneuver. Left anterior oblique view preferred to engage the left main coronary artery. Obtain angiogram pictures by injecting IV contrast into the left main with steady pressure. It is crucial to review pressure tracing an EKG before the injection. Avoid injecting contrast if pressure is dampened.   Obtain angiogram pictures in the right anterior oblique caudal, right anterior oblique cranial, left anterior oblique cranial, and left anterior oblique caudal. Exchange the catheter over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance. (Media Item 2)

**Right coronary artery cannulation:**

-  Advance diagnostic catheters (JR, AR, Jacky, or Tiger) over the wire under fluoroscopy guidance. Once a catheter tip is in the right coronary sinus, remove  0.35 in support wire. Obtain aortic pressure and waveform for baseline measurements. Engage the right coronary artery with slow and steady clock, counter clock, and push and pull movements. Left anterior oblique view preferred to engage the right coronary artery. Obtain angiogram pictures by injecting IV contrast into the right coronary artery with steady pressure. It is vital to review pressure tracing and EKG before the injection. Avoid injecting contrast if the pressure is dampened. Obtain angiogram pictures in the right anterior oblique,  left anterior oblique, and left anterior oblique cranial views. Exchange the catheter over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance. (Media Item 3)

**Saphenous venous bypass graft (SVG) cannulation:**

-  Advance diagnostic catheters over the wire under fluoroscopy guidance.    Preferably JR, AR, and AL  catheters are for SVG to left-sided grafts and multipurpose catheters for SVG to RCA grafts. Once a catheter tip is in the SVG ostium or near the radiopaque marker, remove  0.35 in support wire. Obtain aortic pressure and waveform for baseline measurements. Engage SVG with slow and steady clock, counter clock, and push and pull movements.    The right anterior oblique view is preferred to engage left-sided SVG grafts, and the Left anterior oblique is preferred to engage right-sided grafts. Obtain angiogram pictures by injecting IV contrast into the SVG  with steady pressure. It is crucial to review pressure tracing an EKG before the injection. Avoid injecting contrast if the pressure is dampened.   Obtain angiogram pictures in the right anterior oblique,  left anterior oblique, and left anterior oblique cranial or caudal views. Exchange the catheter over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance.

**Internal mammary artery (IMA) cannulation:**

- Advance diagnostic catheters ( AR or IMA catheters) over the wire under fluoroscopy guidance. Once a catheter tip is in the IMA  ostium, remove 0.35 in support wire. Obtain aortic pressure and waveform for baseline measurements. Engage IMA with slow and steady clock, counter clock, and push and pull movements.     Anteroposterior or Right anterior oblique view is preferred to engage LIMA and Left anterior oblique is preferred to engage RIMA. Obtain angiogram pictures by injecting IV contrast into the IMA  with steady pressure. It is essential to review pressure tracing an EKG before the injection. Avoid injecting contrast if the pressure is dampened.   Obtain angiogram pictures in right anterior oblique cranial and left anterior oblique cranial views. Exchange the catheter over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance.   Left radial access is preferred if the left internal mammary artery is present. Before engaging the internal mammary artery, one should engage the subclavian artery in the femoral access approach.

**Post-angiogram steps:**

-  Review angiogram pictures once it is completed.

-  Remove catheters over the wire under fluoroscopic guidance.

-  Consider a closure device if the access site is optimal at the common femoral artery.

-  Apply TR band for radial or ulnar access site.

-  Transfer the patient to the postprocedure recovery area.

-  Watch for blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and rhythm changes carefully.

-  Once the patient recovers from sedation and vital signs are within normal limits, consider discharging the patient if inpatient care is unnecessary.

-  Discussed the angiogram results with the patient and family in detail.

-  Arrange outpatient follow-up.

-  Review the medications before discharge.