Graft Detachment

The most common early post-op complication in DSAEK and DMEK is graft detachment. DSEK graft detachments often resolve spontaneously, and rebubbling is reserved for complete detachments. Strategies to prevent DSEK detachment include ensuring the recipient site as larger or greater than graft size, counseling patients to avoid eye rubbing, using a long-acting gas (20% sulfur hexafluoride) bubble tamponade, and using intraoperative OCT to appreciate fluid in the graft-host interface that may be massaged out or drained via venting incisions.

The incidence of DMEK detachment varies, but some reports rate it as high as 74%. DMEK detachment is less likely to resolve spontaneously due to the graft's tendency to roll up. Detachments of the central cornea or involving more than one-third of the graft may require rebubbling, which is often successful but may result in a decreased endothelial cell density. If there is total detachment or the graft has rolled up, the patient may need regrafting.

Primary Graft Failure

Primary graft failure is defined as the lack of improvement of corneal edema requiring regrafting. Primary graft failure may be attributed, in part, to the quality of donor tissue; however, the complexity of these techniques and potential for graft trauma may mean a surgeon's skill is a significant factor. The difference in surgeon familiarity and skill with these procedures may cause a "center effect" seen when comparing graft failure rates by low volume surgeons in the midst of a learning curve versus those performed at high-volume transplant centers.

Pupillary Block and Increasing IOP

Pupillary block by air may lead to serious glaucomatous damage to the eye. This risk is highest in DMEK as more air is used, and the associated risk is greater still with DMEK triple procedures. It should be suspected if there is increasing intraocular pressure (IOP), obscured iridotomy, or presence of pain or loss of vision. Prevention of pupillary block includes peripheral iridotomy and removal of some air to avoid complete filling of the anterior chamber after graft adhesion.

Rejection

The presentation of immune rejection in DSEK is more subtle than after PK and often diagnosed incidentally. A study by Price et al. found that 35% of diagnosed patients were asymptomatic. Signs include diffuse or focal precipitates on slit-lamp examination, corneal edema, anterior chamber cells, and rarely Khodadoust Line. The risk of rejection is higher for African Americans, preexisting glaucoma, and steroid responders. A retrospective analysis by Price et al. found in 1312 DSEK cases for FECD, there was a 5-year rejection rate of 7.9%. DSEK rejection is typically treated with tapering doses of topical steroids.

DMEK rejection is diagnosed by the presence of retrocorneal precipitates on the graft on the slit-lamp examination. A retrospective analysis of 905 eyes found a very low rejection incidence of 2.4% over four years. Local steroid therapy resolves most cases, and some authors recommend prophylactic topical steroid therapy for the first 1-2 years postoperatively.

Intraoperative Hyphema

Intraoperative hyphema may occur with DMEK, and this risk was shown to be higher in cases with combined cataract surgery. However, hyphema was not shown to significantly affect endothelium cell loss, visual acuity outcomes, or rebubbling rates.