According to the practice guidelines for chronic pain management by the American Society of Anesthesiologists, lumbar sympathetic blocks are indicated for the treatment of a multitude of sympathetic-mediated pain disorders.

- Complex regional pain syndrome, formerly referred to as reflex sympathetic dystrophy, is characterized by dysregulation of the central and autonomic nervous system causing unregulated pain and temperature control on the affected extremity.

- Lower limb painful ischemia - The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence states that approximately 20% of the patients with painful ischemia of the lower limbs secondary to vascular disease are not candidates for surgical intervention due to either the pattern of their disease or medical co-morbidities. In these patients, lumbar sympathetic blocks may be utilized to reduce pain, improve wound healing, and potentially delay or avoid limb amputation. In these cases, the lumbar sympathetic block serves to disrupt the sympathetic innervation to the vascular supply of the lower extremity, thus causing vasodilation and subsequently improved blood flow to the limb.

- Phantom limb pain - A phenomenon in which pain is perceived from a limb that is no longer present. Although the mechanism is poorly understood, studies report an incidence of phantom limb pain in amputee patients between 42% to 78%. Case studies have found lumbar sympathetic blocks to be safe and effective for the alleviation of phantom limb pain.

- Neuropathic pain - sustained pain relief in a patient with intractable diabetic neuropathy.

- Postherpetic neuralgia secondary to zoster. There is improvement in pain, function, and quality of life after lumbar sympathetic block in patients with postherpetic neuralgia secondary to zoster (Shingles).

- Hyperhidrosis

- Raynaud disease

- Cancer pain