**Baseline Assessment and Monitoring**

Preexisting conditions that should be assessed for and treated when starting glucocorticoids include:

- Diabetes mellitus

- Poorly controlled hypertension

- Heart failure and peripheral edema

- Cataract or glaucoma

- Peptic ulcer disease

- Presence of infection

- Low bone density or osteoporosis

- Psychiatric illness

Before initiating long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy, the clinician should perform a thorough history and physical examination to assess for risk factors or preexisting conditions that may potentially be exacerbated by glucocorticoid therapy, such as above.

Baseline measures of body weight, height, blood pressure, BMD (bone mineral density) via DEXA scan, and ophthalmological examination should be obtained along with laboratory assessments that include a complete blood count (CBC), blood glucose values (Fasting blood sugar, 2-hour OGTT, Hb1Ac), and lipid profile (LDL-C, HDL-C, TC, non-HDL-C, TG)**.**In children, the clinician should also examine nutritional and pubertal status.

**Subsequent Monitoring**

**Assessment of Bone Health**

American College of Rheumatology has published specific guidelines addressing this issue to help prevent and manage GiOp.

- All adults receiving prednisone 2.5 mg or more daily for more than three months shall be encouraged to optimize calcium and vitamin D intake, and shall be counseled to quit smoking, have a balanced diet and be engaged in regular weight-bearing exercises, and limit alcohol intake to 1 to 2 alcoholic beverages in a day.

- Clinical fracture risk reassessment shall be performed at baseline and every 12 months in patients receiving long-term glucocorticoids.

- Bone mineral density (BMD) measurement via DEXA scan shall be performed ideally before or within six months after the initiation of glucocorticoid therapy in all adults 40 years of age or more, and in adults younger than 40 years of age if there is a history of osteoporotic fractures or other risk factors for osteoporosis.

- In adults 40 years of age or more, the 10-year fracture risk assessment is necessary using the FRAX tool (a diagnostic tool that incorporates clinical factors and bone mineral density at the femoral neck).

- Based on the above data, in addition to the dose and duration of glucocorticoid therapy, patients fall into three fracture risk categories: low risk, moderate risk, and high risk. Their fracture risk category shall dictate further management.

- Bisphosphonates, teriparatide, or denosumab shall be recommended in patients less than 40 years of age but in the moderate or high fracture risk category.

- Bisphosphonates, teriparatide, denosumab, or raloxifene shall be recommended in patients 40 years of age or more in the moderate or high fracture risk category.

- Oral bisphosphonates are preferred in all these patients.

- Lateral spine X-ray shall be considered in adults 65 years of age or older to evaluate for vertebral fractures.

- Consider referral to endocrinologist/rheumatologist if fracture risk is high and/or BMD is declining.

**Assessment of Hypothalamic: Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Function**

The HPA axis should undergo assessment if the patient has received systemic corticosteroids for more than two consecutive weeks or more than three cumulative weeks in the last six months or if the patient has persistent symptoms of adrenal suppression. Screening is by measuring early morning salivary cortisol after tapering off the dose of cortisol. If morning cortisol is normal, but the patient has symptoms of adrenal suppression, perform a low-dose ACTH stimulation test to confirm the diagnosis. Consider endocrinology referral for confirmation of diagnosis.

**Assessment of Growth (Children and Adolescents)**

Growth in children and adolescents on chronic glucocorticoid therapy shall be monitored every six months and plotted on a growth curve.

**Assessment of Dyslipidemia and Cardiovascular Risk (Adults)**

Lipid profile shall be monitored one month after glucocorticoid initiation and then every 6 to 12 months. Glycemic control requires assessment via screening for classic symptoms at every visit: polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss. Monitor glucose parameters for at least 48 hours after glucocorticoids initiation, then every 3 to 6 months for the first year and annually afterward. In children, an annual oral glucose tolerance test merits consideration if the child is obese or has risk factors for diabetes.

**Assessment of Ophthalmological Complications**

An annual ophthalmological examination shall be considered, especially for those with symptoms of cataracts, and early referral for intraocular pressure assessment should occur if there is a personal or family history of open-angle glaucoma, diabetes mellitus, or high myopia.

**Prevention of Adverse Effects**

Although some adverse effects of glucocorticoids are unavoidable, some can be prevented by:

- Use of the lowest dose of glucocorticoids for the shortest period needed to achieve the treatment goals

- Management of preexisting comorbid conditions

- Monitoring of patients under treatment for adverse effects

Patients who also require concomitant treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or anticoagulants shall receive therapy with proton pump inhibitors (PPI). There is no consensus on PPI treatment of patients on glucocorticoids alone without NSAIDs and no other risk factors for peptic complications.

Patients who require an extended course of glucocorticoids, especially high doses, shall receive appropriate immunizations before the institution of therapy. Prophylaxis for opportunistic infection with Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) is also recommended in patients receiving prednisone at a dose of 20 mg or more for more than two weeks. The prophylaxis can stop once the dose of prednisone is below 20 mg daily dose. Symptoms of and/or exposure to serious infections should also be assessed as corticosteroids are relatively contraindicated in patients with untreated systemic infections. Concomitant use of other medications also merits attention before initiating therapy as significant drug interactions exist between glucocorticoids and several drug classes.

**Withdrawal of Glucocorticoid Therapy**

Abrupt cessation of chronic glucocorticoid therapy can be dangerous as there is a risk of HPA axis suppression. Withdrawal of glucocorticoid therapy needs tapering over the period. In general, patients who are given acute corticosteroid therapy for less than 14 to 21 days do not develop HPA axis suppression, and treatment can stop with no need for any tapering regime in them. If the therapy has been ongoing for greater than three weeks, tapering is needed (e.g., over two months), but there is no universally accepted optimal regimen.