It is important to remember that clavi are the result of trauma to the epidermis and not a disease of the epidermis. Treatment of clavi can be performed in the family medicine office and does not require specialist referral unless there are refractory skin lesions.

There are three principal points to address when treating a clavus:

1) Provide symptomatic relief to the patient. This is possible by the physician paring down the lesion with a 15 blade scalpel and removing the central core of the clavus. The patient almost instantly experiences relief to the affected area. Patients can also be instructed to reduce the size of the clavus at home by soaking the affected foot in warm water and using a pumice stone or emery board to remove the hyperkeratotic material. Topical keratolytics, such as 10 to 15% salicylic acid, can be applied to the clavus with some benefit. However, improper application or over-application of the keratolytic increases the chance of chemical burns and damage to the surrounding epidermis. Therefore, most recommend against the use of topical over-the-counter products such as salicylic acid.

2) Address the mechanical etiology causing the hyperkeratosis and formulate a treatment plan that includes padding and properly fitting footwear. This is among the most critical aspects of the treatment plan. The clavus is a result of repeated friction or pressure to the affected area. Therefore, the physician needs to investigate the causes of the skin lesion to prevent a recurrence. The padding of the toes and sole is crucial to reduce the amount of mechanical stress to the afflicted area. Adhesive pads, silicone sleeves, and foam toe spacers can all function in this capacity. Patients require education on the necessity for properly fitted footwear. They should have their feet measured for proper sizing and buy shoes with low heels, a soft upper portion, and a roomy toe box. Finally, when treating soft clavi, the patient must be educated on ways to minimize excess moisture of the feet.

3) Consider surgical consultation with an orthopedic surgeon or podiatrist if conservative management fails. Surgical correction of foot deformities and bony prominences should be performed by a surgeon to realign the foot, minimize mechanical stress, and prevent painful lesions.