The most common symptom associated with spinal stenosis is neurogenic (or pseudo) claudication.

This presentation is attributable to the sequence of Porter concept of two-level stenosis, vascular compromise due to central stenosis and the compression of a nerve root due to degenerative pathology due to lateral stenosis.

A key feature of neurogenic claudication is its relationship to the patient’s posture where lumbar extension increases, and flexion decreases pain, thereby attributing a specific “simian stance” seen among these subsets of patients. The same phenomenon is accountable for better tolerance to climbing uphill compared to downhill walking.

Additional symptoms of spinal stenosis, generally as a result of spinal nerve root involvement within the lumbar spinal canal, may include general discomfort, weakness in the legs, numbness, or paresthesias. Most patients typically experience bilateral symptoms, though in some cases the symptoms may be asymmetric in their complaint. Either case usually involves the entire leg rather than just one portion.

Although most patients often have a normal neurological exam, and some may have neurological signs or symptoms reflecting multiple lumbosacral radiculopathies in addition to the more typical symptoms of spinal stenosis. There may be evidence of focal weakness, absent deep tendon reflexes, or sensory loss.

Bilateral extensor digitorum brevis wasting is a reliable clinical bedside marker while assessing for underlying lumbar canal stenosis.

The five repetitive sit to stand test (5R-STS) wherein a patient with the ability to perform the test in around 10 seconds does not rate as having a significant functional impairment.