**Dosage Forms**

Glucagon can be administered intravenously as a bolus or infusion, intramuscularly, subcutaneously, and intranasally. Glucagon is available as a dehydrated powder termed a "Glucagon Emergency Kit," which is reconstituted with supplied sterile water or as a purpose formulated intranasal spray. Like epinephrine auto-injectors, a pre-filled glucagon injector has received approval, injecting glucagon into the patient's thigh. Healthcare providers will most often encounter the emergency kit formulation necessitating reconstitution before injecting the medication, but the intranasal spray may be encountered with increasing frequency in hypoglycemia kits for layperson use. The intranasal powder requires no preparation, and administration is via a spray into the patient's nose while holding the other nare closed.

It is available in market in injection 1 mg glucagon, subcutaneous injection solution 1 mg / 0.2 mL; subcutaneous autoinjector solution 0.5 mg / 0.1 mL, 1 mg / 0.2 ml; subcutaneous solution in prefilled syringe 0.5 mg / 0.1 mL, 1 mg / 0.2 ml; reconstituted solution for injection 1 mg / mL and nasal powder 3 mg / dose in single dose and two dose pack.

**Adult Dose**

**Hypoglycemia:**Administer 1 mg glucagon intramuscularly, subcutaneously, or intravenously; repeat in 15 minutes if required or administer 3 mg (one dose) intranasally into a single nostril; if no adequate response, can repeat the dose. Unconscious patients should be placed in a lateral recumbent position to prevent choking. When treating a patient for hypoglycemia, administer oral carbohydrates to a patient as soon as possible if the patient is conscious and responds to glucagon.

Radiologic examinations as a diagnostic aid for relaxation of the colon: Administer 2 mg IM 10 minutes before the planned procedure.

Radiologic examinations as a diagnostic aid for the stomach, duodenum, duodenal bulb, or small bowl: Administer dose ranging between 0.25 mg to 2 mg IV over 1 minute or 1 mg-2 mg IM as indicated.

**Special Patient Population**

**Pregnancy:**Glucagon can be administered to treat hypoglycemia in pregnant patients with diabetes.

**Breastfeeding Implications:**There is no information about using glucagon in breastfeeding women. Because of high molecular weight, it is secreted in low amounts in breastmilk and can be destroyed by an infant's gastrointestinal tract. Glucagon has a good safety profile when administered directly to infants by injection, so no special precautions are needed.

**Patients with Renal Impairment or Hepatic Impairment:**No information is provided on the manufacturer's label.