# Continuing Education Activity

Oxaliplatin is a medication used to manage and treat metastatic colorectal cancer. It is a member of the platinum-based chemotherapeutic class of drugs and is indicated in the adjunctive treatment of stage III colorectal cancer after resection of the primary tumor and for the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. It is FDA-approved in combination with infusional 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin. This activity reviews the indications, actions, and contraindications for oxaliplatin as a valuable agent in treating colorectal cancer and will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interaction) pertinent for members of the healthcare team in the treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of oxaliplatin.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of oxaliplatin.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients receiving therapy with oxaliplatin.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance oxaliplatin and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Oxaliplatin is an FDA-approved platinum-based antineoplastic medication.

In the pediatric population, oxaliplatin is used for treating refractory or relapsed solid tumors in combination with etoposide or ifosfamide or gemcitabine or irinotecan or fluorouracil, and leucovorin.

The following are the off-label indications for oxaliplatin:

- Advanced biliary adenocarcinoma in combination with capecitabine (a regimen known as CAPOX) or gemcitabine.

- Fludarabine refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia in combination with fludarabine, cytarabine, and rituximab.

- Esophageal and gastric cancers in combination with epirubicin or capecitabine or docetaxel, leucovorin, and fluorouracil.

- Refractory neuroendocrine tumors in combination with capecitabine.

- Refractory or relapsed non-Hodgkin lymphoma in combination with gemcitabine and rituximab.

- Advanced ovarian cancer.

- Advanced pancreatic cancer in combination with capecitabine or fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan.

- Refractory testicular cancer in combination with gemcitabine and paclitaxel.

# Mechanism of Action

Oxaliplatin is an alkylating agent and has non-cell cycle-specific cytotoxicity.

The pharmacokinetics of unbound platinum in plasma following oxaliplatin administration were triphasic, demonstrating a short initial distribution phase followed by a prolonged terminal elimination phase. Oxaliplatin is subject to rapid and extensive nonenzymatic biotransformation and is not metabolized by the CYP450 enzyme system.

As monotherapy, oxaliplatin only demonstrates modest antineoplastic activity against advanced colorectal cancer, but it is effective in combination therapy.

# Administration

Oxaliplatin administration is via intravenous infusion (IV) over two hours.

Before administration, ensure proper needle and catheter placement to prevent extravasation and flush the infusion line with D5W.

Adult administration regimens are as follows: (consult facility protocols and manufacturer's package insert for dosing, pre-medications, and toxicity-based dose adjustments)

- As an adjuvant in stage III colon cancer: 85 mg/m^2 IV for a single dose on day one of a 14-day cycle, used with 5-FU and leucovorin. Administer 12 cycles.

- Advanced colorectal cancer: 85 mg/m^2 IV for a single dose on day one of a 14-day cycle, used with 5-FU and leucovorin.

There is no pediatric indication for oxaliplatin.

Dosing in patients with renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance less than 30): Start 65 mg/m^2 for one dose on day one of a 14-day cycle. Hepatic dosing is undefined.

# Adverse Effects

The most common adverse drug effects reported with oxaliplatin monotherapy are:

- Systemic: fever, fatigue, nausea, emesis, weakness

- Nervous system: peripheral sensory neuropathy, pain, headache, insomnia

- Gastrointestinal system: diarrhea, abdominal pain, constipation, anorexia, stomatitis

- Hepatic: elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), total bilirubin

- Hematologic and oncologic: anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia

- Musculoskeletal: back pain

- Respiratory system: dyspnea, cough

# Contraindications

Oxaliplatin is contraindicated in patients who have/are:

- Platinum hypersensitivity anaphylaxis

- Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome

- Grade 3 or 4 peripheral sensory neuropathy

- Severe renal impairment

- Chronic lung disease

- Rhabdomyolysis

- Sepsis

- Pregnant or intending to get pregnant

- Breastfeeding

Use in the first trimester should be avoided due to high teratogenicity and embryo or fetal death. Females of reproductive potential should have a pregnancy test prior to initiating therapy and must use appropriate contraception during treatment and for nine months following discontinuation of oxaliplatin. Male patients should continue contraception for six months following treatment cessation.

# Monitoring

Patients on oxaliplatin therapy must periodically have blood and urine work up to assess complete blood count with differential, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, renal function tests, and electrocardiogram (ECG) for QT prolongation.

Oxaliplatin has a narrow therapeutic index, which most commonly affects the hematopoietic and nervous systems and has gastrointestinal side effects.

Drug interactions: Oxaliplatin requires close monitoring when administered with other drugs as it can enhance the adverse/toxic effects or diminish the therapeutic effects. The following drug interactions are important to consider:

- Baricitinib

- Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs)

- Chloramphenicol

- Cladribine

- Clozapine

- Deferiprone

- Denosumab

- Dipyrone

- Echinacea

- Erdafitinib

- Fingolimod

- Fosphenytoin-phenytoin

- Haloperidol

- Leflunomide

- Lenograstim

- Lipegfilgrastim

- Mesalamine

- Natalizumab

- Nivolumab

- Ocrelizumab

- Palifermin

- Pidotimod

- Pimecrolimus

- Promazine

- QT-prolonging agents

- Roflumilast

- Siponimod

- Sipuleucel-T

- Tacrolimus

- Tafenoquine

- Taxane derivatives

- Tertomotide

- Tofacitinib

- Topotecan

- Upadacitinib

- Vaccines

# Toxicity

No known antidote exists for oxaliplatin overdose. Oxaliplatin has dose-dependent toxicity on the hematopoietic system. It causes myelosuppression, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.

Oxaliplatin has dose-limiting toxicity on the nervous system.

Repeated oxaliplatin treatment can result in chronic peripheral neuropathy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional treatment teams consisting of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), oncology specialists, nurses, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and clinicians in different specialties need to be knowledgeable regarding the use and potential adverse events of oxaliplatin. This interprofessional team approach ensures proper administration, management, monitoring, and limitation of the adverse effects. When a patient is on a chemotherapeutic regimen, it is strongly advised to utilize a board-certified oncology specialty pharmacist who can examine the treatment regimen (including pre and post medication), communicate possible drug interactions, and the recommended therapeutic dosage to the clinician.

The assigned nursing staff must monitor the IV site, be cognizant of the adverse effects of the drug, and relay them to the clinician and/or pharmacist. As with pharmacy, having oncology-certified nurses involved in the pre-and post-administration care, in addition to performing administration, can optimize patient outcomes. These nurses will report to the ordering clinician any issues or concerns they see so remedial action (dose adjustments, additional medication, etc.) can be implemented.

Lastly, the clinician must have enough information to determine if the patient is a candidate to receive a drug like oxaliplatin depending on the patient's medical history; here again, consulting with an oncology pharmacist can prove invaluable.

The interpersonal healthcare team is responsible for the following:

- Complete blood count, liver function tests, renal function tests, pregnancy test

- Proper administration of the drug and monitoring of the IV site

- Monitoring toxicity

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of CINV, peripheral sensory neuropathy, infection, GI disturbances

- Consult with the pharmacist and toxicologist regarding dosing

- Consult with the radiologist, pathologist, and surgeon regarding the spread of cancer

The prevention and management of oxaliplatin-induced neurotoxicity start with the patient limiting exposure to cold environments, ensuring proper protection, and staying away from cold food and beverages.

WIth an interprofessional team approach to oxaliplatin therapy, patients stand to achieve the best possible outcomes with this drug while minimizing potential adverse effects. [Level 5]