# Continuing Education Activity

Amoxapine is an FDA-approved drug belonging to the class of second-generation tricyclic dibenzoxazepine antidepressants. Generally, it is reserved for resistant or persistent depression. The goal of this activity is to familiarize practitioners with the proper usage of this drug and recognize the adverse effects of this medication. This activity also explores the roles of a cohesive interprofessional team in treating patients using amoxapine to treat their depression.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the indications of amoxapine in a patient suffering from depression or anxiety.
- Identify the mechanism of action of amoxapine and its active metabolites.
- Explain the correct methods for monitoring toxicity with amoxapine.
- Summarize the importance of antidepressant stewardship and how it affects refractory depression related to improving care coordination among the interprofessional team when initiating therapy.

# Indications

Amoxapine is FDA approved drug belonging to the class of second-generation tricyclic dibenzoxazepine antidepressants.

Indications for this medication also include use in cases of depression with other psychiatric issues, such as anxiety, agitation, psychosis as well as neurotic or recurrent depression.HTR-6, 5-HT-6) receptor.

# Mechanism of Action

Amoxapine is a second-generation tricyclic dibenzoxazepine antidepressant; therefore, it works primarily by inhibiting the reuptake of norephedrine in the neuronal synapses.HTR-6, 5-HT-6).

Amoxapine is primarily metabolized into two active metabolites by the liver through aromatic hydroxylation. The active metabolites are 7-hydroxyamoxapine and 8-hydroxyamoxapine, which reduce the incidence of diarrhea in patients after administering irinotecan chemotherapy.

# Administration

Amoxapine is administered orally, starting at 100 mg, with the potential to titrate the dosage up to 300 mg.

# Adverse Effects

The most common side effects of amoxapine therapy include but are not limited to insomnia, palpitations, tachycardia, hypotension, and constipation.

Also, since amoxapine imparts, although minimal, effects on the histamine H1 receptor, antihistamine side effects must be taken into account, especially in the elderly population consisting of patients above the age of 65. These effects include sedation, insomnia, dry mouth, delirium, and Parkinsonism symptoms.

# Contraindications

The primary mechanism of action of amoxapine is through inhibition of presynaptic reuptake of norepinephrine; patients should not take it alongside other antidepressants or drugs which impart similar effects, such as MAO inhibitors. Patients should not take the drug within 14 days of other antidepressants, allowing time for the previous antidepressant to leave the system entirely before initiating amoxapine or any other TCA.

Furthermore, due to the QTc prolongation effect of the drug, patients with increased QTc intervals or acute myocardial infarction should not be prescribed this medication to avoid exacerbating their symptoms.

Amoxapine carries an FDA black box warning regarding suicidality risk in patients under 24 years of age and patients 65 and older.

# Monitoring

Patients taking amoxapine should be monitored for resolution or reduction of symptoms, withdrawal symptoms from abrupt discontinuation, weight and BMI, blood pressure, blood glucose, worsening of depression, suicidality, or unusual behavior at the initiation of therapy, or when changing the dose. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is also necessary for older adults and patients with preexisting cardiac disease or hyperthyroidism. There is an increased risk of hyponatremia in the elderly population; therefore, electrolytes require monitoring in patients above 65 years of age.

# Toxicity

The primary concern for TCA toxicity is serotonin syndrome, especially if combining the medication with another antidepressant, such as an SSRI or SNRI. The characteristics of serotonin syndrome are hyperthermia, hypertension, muscle rigidity, and delirium.

There is no specific antidote for TCA, and by extension, amoxapine overdose. The primary concern in cases of TCA overdose is to secure respiration and provide cardiovascular support. research has shown sodium bicarbonate to decrease the incidence of QRS widening in some cases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As TCAs are third-line drugs for depression, patients' demographics either receiving amoxapine or are under consideration for commencing the drugs are generally presenting with recurring or reactive depression; this means that other forms of medication and treatment have failed to control the symptoms. As such, these patients are at a higher risk of self-harming and suicidal behavior. Therefore, they must have a cohesive interprofessional team involved in their treatment, including frequent coordination between their primary physician, their psychiatrist, and/or counselors to ensure proper compliance with medication regimen and response to treatment. During every office visit, they must undergo evaluation for suicidal ideations, plans, or inclinations. Overdose and proper precautions should commence in case patients are at any risk to themselves or others.

Therapy with amoxapine and other antidepressant medications is best with an interprofessional healthcare team that oversees all aspects of the patient's case. This team includes physicians, who will prescribe and make other decisions regarding the regimen, specialists, who will dig more deeply and specialize in the condition treated, specialty-trained nursing staff, who can monitor care, verify patient adherence, and assist with monitoring, and pharmacists, who will perform medication reconciliation and verify dosing. All the interprofessional team members need to collaborate and have open communication to ensure optimal care and outcomes. [Level 5]