Groin hernias are categorized into 2 main categories: inguinal and femoral. Inguinal hernias are further subdivided into direct and indirect. An indirect hernia occurs when abdominal contents protrude through the internal inguinal ring and into the inguinal canal. This occurs lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels. The hernia contents may extend into the scrotum. A direct inguinal hernia is protrusion of abdominal contents through the transversalis fascia within Hesselbach’s triangle. The borders of Hesselbach’s triangle are the inferior epigastric vessels superolaterally, the rectus sheath medially, and inguinal ligament inferiorly. A femoral hernia is a protrusion into the femoral ring. The borders of the femoral ring are the femoral vein laterally, Cooper’s ligament posteriorly, the iliopubic tract/inguinal ligament anteriorly and lacunar ligament medially.

**Classification**

There are several classifications for inguinal hernias. Currently, there is no universal classification system for inguinal hernias. One simple and widely used classification is the Nyhus classification which categories hernia defects by size, location, and type.

**Nyhus Classification System**

Type I

- An indirect hernia; normal size internal ring; typically in infants, children and small adults

Type II

- An indirect hernia; enlarged internal ring without impingement on the floor of the inguinal canal; does not extend to the scrotum

Type IIIA

- A direct hernia; size not taken into account

Type IIIB

- An indirect hernia that has grown enough to infringe upon the posterior inguinal wall; indirect sliding or scrotal hernias are regularly assigned to this category because they are often associated with the extension to direct space. This type also includes pantaloon hernias

TYPE IIIC

- A femoral hernia

Type IV

- A recurrent hernia; modifiers A to D are sometimes added that correspond with direct, indirect, femoral or mixed respectively