Various routes of administration utilize different preparations of lidocaine.

- Very dilute concentrations, in the order of 0.05 to 0.1%, can be infiltrated subcutaneously in large volumes to provide tumescent local anesthesia, resulting in swelling and firmness of the site, which may be beneficial for certain surgical procedures.

- Dilute solutions of 0.25 to 0.5% are used for intravenous regional anesthesia (Bier's block) or infiltration into subcutaneous tissue.

- 1 to 2% solutions are used for regional nerve blocks, including epidural anesthesia, and are also available in intravenous preparations for antiarrhythmic use.

- 1 to 2% aqueous gels, typically including an antiseptic such as chlorhexidine, are used to topicalize and lubricate the urethra prior to procedures like Foley catheterization.

- 4% solution is used for topical anesthesia of the mucous membranes of the airway, including the mouth, pharynx, and respiratory tract, either by gargling, spraying, or using an atomizer.

- 5% ointment, typically mixed with hydrocortisone, is employed topically on other mucous membranes such as the skin or in the rectum.

- 10% solution is also used topically for airway anesthesia, typically by spraying from a metered-dose atomizer.

The aqueous preparations from 0.5 to 2% are available in either plain forms or with 1 per 200000 epinephrine (dentistry sometimes uses versions with 1 per 100000 epinephrine or more) and are available with or without preservatives. Other products include medicated plasters impregnated with lidocaine, intended to treat chronic postherpetic neuralgia. Lidocaine and prilocaine are available premixed in a eutectic 5% cream (containing 2.5%) which is often used to anesthetize small areas of skin prior to procedures.

Doses used for infiltrative or regional anesthesia will depend on the specific block. When lidocaine is used to obtund airway reflexes, the dose is 1 to 2 mg/kg given 2 to 5 minutes before intubation. For cardiac dysrhythmias, the initial dose is 1 to 1.5 mg/kg given intravenously, optionally followed with an infusion. As an adjuvant intravenous treatment for acute pain, a 2020 consensus statement suggested a loading dose of no more than 1.5mg/kg over 10 minutes, followed by an infusion of no more than 1.5mg/kg/h for no longer than 24 hours (with close monitoring for clinical response and signs of toxicity).