Varenicline is prescribed only to patients 18 years or older. Varenicline is taken as a tablet and comes in 0.5 mg and 1 mg strength oral tablets. After eating, patients should take the medication with a full glass of water to decrease gastric upset.

- Starting Week: Varenicline is to be taken 0.5 mg orally once daily on days 1 to 3 and is increased to 0.5 mg twice daily on days 4 through 7. It should start one week before the target quit date.

- Continuing Weeks: 1 mg twice daily after day 8 for 11 weeks.

- Additional Therapy: Treatment duration can be up to 6 months and even longer in certain patients. Further trials are needed to determine efficacy and outcomes in those using varenicline beyond 12 months.

- Usually, start administering varenicline one week prior to the date set by the patient to quit smoking. Alternatively, the person can start varenicline administration and stop smoking between days 8 to 35 of therapy.

**Special Population**

**Renal Impairment:**In patients with renal impairment (CrCL less than 30), a maximum dose of 0.5 mg twice daily is recommended. In end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients on hemodialysis, a maximum dose of 0.5 mg once daily is recommended.

**Hepatic Impairment:**According to the product labeling, varenicline pharmacokinetics should be unaffected in patients with hepatic impairment due to the lack of significant hepatic metabolism.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Smoking during pregnancy can cause an increased risk of orofacial clefts, premature rupture of membranes, placenta previa, placental abruption, fetal growth restriction, low birth weight, stillbirth, preterm delivery, shortened gestation, reduction of lung function in infants, neonatal death, and sudden infant death syndrome. Clinicians should screen all pregnant patients for nicotine use, and smoking cessation is recommended. The benefit of tobacco smoking cessation for pregnant patients is well established. Hence, behavioral interventions are effective and recommended. However, knowledge related to pharmacotherapy interventions in pregnancy is limited and insufficient to make specific recommendations.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Varenicline is a partial nicotine agonist used to assist smoking cessation. However,  based on animal data on nicotine, varenicline may interfere with infant lung development; hence use is not recommended in nursing mothers. As no facts are available on using varenicline during breastfeeding, other smoking cessation modalities may be preferred. If a mother chooses to breastfeed while using varenicline, clinicians should monitor her infant for seizures and excessive vomiting.