A renal infarction should be suspected whenever a patient presents with acute flank pain and hematuria without evidence of a UTI. The initial non-contrast CT scan is negative for hydronephrosis or urinary calculi.

An immediate contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen should be done as this is usually sufficient to make the diagnosis and can be done quickly. Otherwise, the diagnosis of a renal infarction is likely to be missed, along with the opportunity for effective revascularization.

A significantly elevated LDH is the only initial clinical or laboratory sign indicating a renal infarction at the time of initial presentation.

- Renal infarctions are frequently misdiagnosed on initial presentation.

- Patients with a history of atrial fibrillation, older age (especially with no prior history of nephrolithiasis), and recent vascular instrumentation are at higher risk.

- A CT angiogram is the definitive test to confirm the diagnosis.

- Laboratory work for patients diagnosed with a renal infarction should include a urinalysis, serum aminotransferases, creatinine, and LDH levels, as well as an EKG and coagulation studies.

- Rapid diagnosis allows for possible immediate catheter-directed thrombolysis therapy, which is the optimal recommended treatment if it can be initiated within 6 hours of the infarction.

- If catheter-directed thrombolysis therapy is unavailable, systemic thrombolytic therapy should be considered.

- Patients with renal infarction should be in regular follow-ups for the development of recurrent infarcts and chronic kidney injury or renal failure.

- Some patients may develop deterioration of renal function over time, eventually requiring hemodialysis.

- Follow-up CT or MR angiography may be needed six months after the acute event to assess the status of any vascular lesions leading to renal infarction and to ensure that no further infarcts have occurred.

- Patients may also require secondary prevention in the form of antiplatelet therapy, and most, if not all, should be on some permanent anticoagulation.

- In a patient with renal infarction, there has been controversy regarding the time until catheter-directed thrombolysis can be administered, but there are anecdotal reports of a benefit even after the usually recommended time limits.

- More prospective studies and randomized controlled trials are warranted to arrive at a clear guideline and consensus because the current literature is mostly retrospective studies and case reports.