Gardasil is a vaccine used to protect against human papillomavirus types 6, 11, 16, and 18. Types 16 and 18 cause an estimated 70% of cervical cancers, and 6 and 11 cause an estimated 90% of genital warts. The vaccine prevents the disease but is not therapeutic. The vaccine must be given before exposure to the virus type to be effective. The vaccine was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2006 for use in children as early as nine years of age, primarily for its prophylactic activity against cervical cancer. Gardasil 9 was FDA approved in 2014 to protect against the four HPV strains covered by the first generation of Gardasil as well as five other HPV strains responsible for 20% of cervical cancers (HPV-31, HPV-33, HPV-45, HPV-52, and HPV-58).

Vaccines are preventative and should not be considered therapeutic. Quadrivalent or 9-valent vaccines are recommended and generally preferred over bivalent vaccines.

According to the Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices (ACIP), routine HPV vaccination is recommended for women 9 to 26 years of age, but it has shown high efficacy up to age 45. The CDC advises that unvaccinated adults above 26 years to age 45 may be given the vaccine after discussion with their provider.

The ACIP recommends routine male HPV quadrivalent vaccinations at age 11-12.  If not previously given or incomplete (the vaccines are a three-dose series), the vaccine should be given up to age 21.  From ages 22 to 26, the vaccine is considered optional.  In other words, the optimal age for male HPV vaccination is 11 to 12 years, but it may be given up to age 45 years.

It remains to be seen if the more extensive use of vaccines can reduce the prevalence and penetration of HPV exposure, infections, and complications.