**Blood Supply**

The maxillary artery, which is the terminal branch of the external carotid artery, supplies blood to both the maxillary and mandibular teeth—the maxillary artery branches into the inferior alveolar artery, which supplies blood to the mandibular arch. The inferior alveolar artery enters the mandibular foramen and proceeds along the inferior alveolar canal, supplying nutrient branches to mandibular molars. At the mental foramen, the inferior alveolar artery branches into the mental and incisive arteries. The incisive artery travels along the incisive canal to supply nutrients to the mandibular premolars, canines, and incisor teeth and exits the mandible in the midline through the lingual foramen to anastomose with the lingual artery of the tongue. The inferior alveolar vein is responsible for collecting blood throughout the mandible and exits the mandibular foramen to drain into the pterygoid venous plexus.

The maxillary artery supplies blood to the maxillary arch with the posterior superior alveolar artery, the middle superior alveolar artery, and the anterior superior alveolar artery. The posterior superior alveolar artery arises from the maxillary artery before entering the pterygopalatine fossa and supplies blood to the maxillary sinus, molars, and premolars. The infraorbital artery arises directly from the maxillary artery and gives the middle superior alveolar artery and anterior superior alveolar artery. The middle superior alveolar artery supplies blood to the maxillary sinus and premolars. The anterior superior alveolar artery supplies the maxillary sinus and anterior maxillary teeth - canines and incisors. The posterior, middle, and anterior superior alveolar arteries collect blood from the maxilla and drain into the pterygoid venous plexus.

**Lymphatics**

There are few and controversial data regarding the existence of a lymphatic drainage system in the human dental pulp. Based on the data of Geri et al. obtained in a morphological study, their results suggest that human dental pulp does not contain lymphatic vessels under normal conditions. However, lymphatic vessels may appear following inflammation.