A lobular capillary hemangioma typically starts as a small, red papule. It then undergoes a variable, sometimes rapid, exophytic growth phase over weeks to months, eventually stabilizing in size. The color may vary from red to reddish-brown or purple. The diameter varies from a few millimeters for small lesions to several centimeters for larger lesions. Lesions are typically solitary, but satellite lesions may develop in proximity, and sometimes disseminated lesions may be noted. Mature lesions are polypoid or pedunculated and have a "collarette" of scale at the base of the lesion. This epidermal collarette may help identify the lesion, but it is not unique to this entity and may be seen in other conditions that show lesions erupting rapidly through the epidermis. Sessile lesions are rare. The surface is often friable, and the lesion can show profuse bleeding with even minor trauma. Bleeding is recurrent due to unavoidable trauma and may become difficult to control. Patients present to the clinic with band-aids applied over the lesions, an attempt to prevent trauma and bleeding from the lesion – colloquially termed the "band-aid sign."

A lobular capillary hemangioma can occur on any normal cutaneous or mucosal site. Cutaneous lesions occur more frequently than mucosal lesions.

There is conflicting data regarding the most common site of involvement for cutaneous and mucosal PG. In adults, cutaneous PG appears to occur more frequently on the trunk and extremities (where it is more common on the upper than the lower extremities), followed by head and neck lesions, as opposed to children, in whom the lesions have a predilection for the head and neck region, followed by the trunk and extremities.

A unique entity within cutaneous PG is subungual or periungual PG, which usually presents at the proximal or lateral nail fold and may even erupt on multiple digits.

For mucosal PG, common locations include lips and gingival mucosa. Some studies cite the tongue as the most common site, followed by the gingivae, nasal mucosa, conjunctiva, cervix, and vagina.

Multiple lesions can occur in one of two distinct clinical variations: satellite lesions around a primary lesion or a disseminated form. Satellite forms favor the trunk, involving perilesional skin near the initial lesion following treatment or trauma.

Occasionally, lobular capillary hemangiomas are found in subcutaneous or intravascular locations. Subcutaneous pyogenic granulomas typically occur in females and present as a well-circumscribed subcutaneous nodule.

Rarely lobular capillary hemangioma develops in the gastrointestinal tract, where it mimics polyps.

A summary of certain clinical variants of lobular capillary hemangioma is described below:

- Digital or periungual pyogenic granulomas, which may be solitary or multiple:

- A solitary periungual pyogenic granuloma may mimic other periungual lesions, such as acute paronychia, and occur secondary to acute or chronic local trauma and/or infection.
- Multiple periungual pyogenic granulomas occur most frequently in association with medications (reports suggest up to 30% of these are associated with medications) but are also seen in association with other chronic dermatoses such as atopic dermatitis and psoriasis.

- Satellite pyogenic granulomas that arise in an eruptive fashion around the initial sessional area are extremely rare. Reported cases classically occur after trauma to the primary lesion, typically after treatment by excision.

- Disseminated pyogenic granulomas, although rare, have been documented to occur either spontaneously or after trauma, such as burns.

- Intraoral pyogenic granuloma appears to have a predilection for immunosuppressed patients, most often after a hematopoietic stem cell transplant.