**Ocular Investigations**

Focal posterior retinitis can be autoimmune or infective in origin. Organisms implicated include Toxoplasma gondii, Rickettsia (Indian tick typhus- Rickettsia conorii; epidemic typhus- Rickettsia prowazekii), Orientia tsutsugamushi (scrub typhus), Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Bartonella henselae, West Nile virus, dengue virus, chikungunya virus, Rift valley fever virus, herpetic viruses, and measles virus (subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)) besides metastatic endophthalmitis. It is essential to find the etiology of posterior focal retinitis as it is vision-threatening, and early treatment is imperative. Various serological tests and molecular assays are required to arrive at the correct diagnosis. Clinical judgment, based on fundus findings and information obtained from investigations such as optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), may play a crucial role in the management of such patients.

CMV retinitis and toxoplasma retinitis are essentially clinical diagnoses. In doubtful cases, PCR analysis of ocular fluids for CMV, HSV, VZV, and toxoplasma can be done. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) shows abnormal hyperreflectivity of all retinal layers at sites of active Toxoplasma infection, while fluorescein angiography demonstrates early blockage with subsequent leakage of the lesion.

American Uveitis Society in 1994 defined ARN on the basis of the following clinical characteristics: 1 or more foci of retinal necrosis with discrete borders located in the peripheral retina, a rapid progression in the absence of antiviral therapy, circumferential spread, evidence of occlusive vasculopathy with arterial involvement, and a prominent inflammatory reaction in the vitreous and anterior chamber.

For ocular Behcet disease, fundus fluorescein angiography is essentially the gold standard in the evaluation of the activity and extent of retinal vasculitis. A fern-like pattern of leakage due to diffuse capillaritis in mid-phase of the angiogram is classical of Behcet disease.

In short, ocular investigations in cases with retinitis include

- FFA

- OCT

- Slit-lamp photograph

- Ultrasound- to rule out retinal detachment and to document the severity of vitreous inflammation when the media is very hazy.

- Culture sensitivity (bacterial and fungal) and staining (KOH and Gram staining) of the aqueous or vitreous in suspected cases of endophthalmitis

- PCR for bacteria, fungi, Toxoplasma, HSV, HZV, CMV of aqueous and vitreous humor depending on the clinical presentation

- Retinal or chorioretinal biopsy or fine-needle aspiration biopsy

- Visual fields may show an absolute defect with a breakout to the periphery especially if the retinitis lesions are within 1 disc diameter of the optic disc in toxoplasmosis.

**Systemic Investigations**

Depending upon the clinical presentation and ocular imaging, an appropriate case-based approach to order relevant systemic investigations needs to be undertaken.

The systemic investigations include a combination of:

- IgM and IgG for herpetic viruses (herpes simplex, Varicella zoster, and cytomegalovirus)

- IgG and IgM levels for Borrelia

- Weil–Felix test (WFT) (OX 2, OX K, and OX 19) for Rickettsia

- IgM and IgG for chikungunya and dengue

- Bartonella serology

- HIV

- CD4 count

- Toxoplasma IgG and IgM

- Hemogram with erythrocyte sedimentation rate,

- Liver function tests,

- Kidney function tests,

- Blood and urine culture,

- Chest X-ray/HRCT (high resolution computed tomogram) of chest

- Random/fasting/postprandial blood sugar, HbA1c

- Imaging for finding foci of infection in metastatic endophthalmitis

- Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA)/ VDRL for syphilis

- Mantoux (tuberculin skin test),

- Interferon-gamma release assay

- ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme)

- HLA B51 and pathergy test for Behcet disease

- CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) for VDRL

- CSF for antimeasles antibody and EEG (electroencephalogram) for SSPE

- Specific investigations for other causes

- Investigations for connective tissue disorders

- Blood pressure (malignant hypertensive retinopathy may be misdiagnosed as retinitis)