More than 600 million people worldwide suffer from allergic rhinitis (AR), a chronic inflammatory disease. The symptoms include sneezing, itching, rhinorrhea, and nasal congestion. The pathophysiology of AR involves an immediate and late-phase response involving the nasal mucosa. The immediate response is IgE-mediated, whereas the late response is carried out by activated eosinophils and T cells that contribute to the chronic inflammatory process. Mast cells and T cells release cytokines (IL-4 and IL-13), which assist with the synthesis of IgE by B cells. The IgE synthesized in the local mucosa and IL-4 help augment the Fc epsilon RI expression in the mast cells and basophils. Fc epsilon RI presence can, in turn, bind a greater number of IgE-Ag complexes. f IgE-Ag complexes increase mast cell sensitivity to the allergen, further enhancing the presence of cytokines and chemical mediators.

Asthma affects approximately 300 million people worldwide and is caused by chronic inflammation, hyperactivity, and reversible airway obstruction. It presents with shortness of breath, cough, and wheezing. Non-allergic asthma, not associated with atopy, presents with negative skin tests to typical aeroallergens and tends to present with a later onset in life. Allergic asthma, accounting for two-thirds of all asthma cases, is illustrated by increased IgE levels and sensitization to allergens which happens when there is a cross-linking of antigens to the Fc epsilon RI-bound IgE on the surface of mast cells, basophils, and dendritic cells triggers their activation.

Anaphylaxis is a potentially fatal systemic hypersensitivity reaction. Anaphylaxis carried out by an immunologic mechanism is referred to as allergic anaphylaxis. In allergic anaphylaxis, Fc epsilon RI binds IgE and activates mast cells and basophils. The activation of these effector cells, in turn, leads to the release of inflammatory mediators, which are responsible for the pathophysiology of anaphylaxis, such as vasodilation, increased vascular, bronchoconstriction, and pulmonary and coronary vasoconstriction.

Atopic dermatitis, also known as eczema, is an inflammatory skin disorder that presents with dry and pruritic lesions on the flexure surfaces of extremities and head and neck areas. Like the other immediate hypersensitivity reactions, Fc epsilon RI-activated mast cells release pro-inflammatory mediators, leading to an inflammatory response in the skin forming eczematous lesions.

The IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction most commonly triggers food allergy. It presents with local or systemic symptoms that begin minutes or hours after ingesting the offending food. The proposed pathogenesis involves IgE production against normal food constituents, such as glycoproteins. IgE binds Fc epsilon RI and triggers the downstream signaling cascade, leading to increased levels of inflammatory mediators. These mediators, in turn, cause an inflammatory response and lead to symptoms involving the skin, gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts, eyes, and the heart, ranging from mild to severe fatal anaphylactic response.

Preclinical research suggests that IgE may have therapeutic potential for treating solid tumors. IgE can augment Fc-mediated effector functions by engaging receptors on immune cells like monocytes, neutrophils, macrophages, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells. IgE can also engage antigen-presenting cells to enhance antigen uptake and presentation. Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and degranulation result in the release of toxic and pro-inflammatory mediators; these mediators, along with antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis (ADCP), enhance anti-tumor activity. IgE can also engage antigen-presenting cells to improve antigen uptake and presentation. IgE impacts cancer cells, like anti-cancer IgG antibodies, decreasing cancer cell growth signaling.

Preclinical research suggests that IgE may have therapeutic potential for many treatments of solid tumors. Mouse/human chimeric IgE (MOv18) is specific for the ovarian cancer antigen, folate receptor alpha (FRα)-mediated ADCC, and ADCP of ovarian cancer cells by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In light of this study's findings, a phase 1 clinical trial has been conducted on MOv18 IgE for advanced solid tumors. Evidence of anti-tumor activity was seen in a patient with ovarian cancer at a total MOv18 IgE dose of 0.7mg. Shrinkage of peritoneal metastases was evident. These results support the safety of IgE as a treatment for cancer for the first time and provide primary evidence for its anti-tumor efficacy. One patient experienced anaphylaxis with tryptase elevation. The most common adverse drug reaction was manageable urticaria without systemic manifestations. However, substantial research is needed to validate these results and integrate the use of IgE in patients with cancer in clinical practice.