The exact etiopathogenesis is still a topic of debate. The most commonly accepted theories are:

- **Theory of "trophoneurosis":**The earliest understanding was a dysfunction of the trophic fibers of the trigeminal and other peripheral nerves—the complaints of chronic facial pain and trigeminal neuralgia support this theory. Confocal microscopy shows a reduction in the corneal nerve endings, supplied by the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, supporting this theory.

- **Immune-mediated process**: The widely accepted theory is PRS being an autoimmune disorder.

- **Neuro-vasculitis theory:**The histopathology of the cerebral lesions reveals a lymphocytic vasculitis similar to Rasmussen encephalitis.

- **Neural crest cell disorder:**The presence of cerebral vascular malformations and aneurysms, along with soft tissue tumors, suggests a possible dysregulation of neural crest cell migration.

- **Sympathetic dysfunction:**The superior cervical sympathetic plexus inflammation or dysfunction causes ipsilateral facial atrophy, enophthalmos, and bone atrophy - similar to PRS. Ipsilateral sympathectomy shows a halt of the disease progression.

- **Hereditary mechanism:**Wartenberg described PRS as a heredo-degenerative disorder, with only a few familial cases noted to date. No specific inheritance pattern or gene has been isolated.

- **Trauma-induced:**Online surveys of PRS patients have established a debatable association of head injury in early childhood to the onset of symptoms.

- **Infectious causes:**Preceding infections with Varicella zoster virus, Herpes simplex virus, andBorrelia burgorferi have been described as risk factors.