Unless the patient provides a clear history of plant exposure, the diagnosis may prove elusive. When skin findings are present, the medical provider should consider a differential diagnosis for irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) from well-known sources, including acids, bases, solvents, cosmetics, and metals, in addition to plants. Allergic contact dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, cutaneous drug eruptions, and infectious etiologies should also be considered. Dermatophyte infections including tinea corporis and tinea manuum may mimic ICD findings. Scabies commonly affects the intertriginous areas on the hands and causes intense pruritis, although careful history and inspection will likely distinguish scabies from the phytodermatitis caused by Euphorbia latex.

Many plants outside of the Euphorbiaceae family are known to cause irritant contact dermatitis. The stinging nettle (Urtica dioica) causes an urticaria-like reaction after contact with its tiny, stinging hairs that contain irritating chemicals. Common household plants such as Philodendron and Dieffenbachia contain calcium oxalate crystals, as do some flower bulbs, including tulips, hyacinths, and daffodils.

Calcium oxalate crystals cause local irritation and edema when contacted, mainly when moist surface, such as the oral mucosa. Poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac (Toxicodendron spp.) cause allergic contact dermatitis that presents as a classic, delayed type IV hypersensitivity reaction. Plants containing furocoumarins, including citrus plants, celery, parsley, and parsnips, cause phytophotodermatitis that may appear similar to other dermatoses. Skin findings isolated to sun-exposed surfaces may suggest a photosensitivity reaction.

Given that ocular symptoms start immediately after contact with the Euphorbia latex, the medical provider will often narrow down the etiology to a plant substance. The differential diagnosis includes chemical exposure from acids, bases, solvents, or other cytotoxic agents, but fortunately, the treatment remains essentially the same regardless of substance.