Recurrent UTIs often have a typical presentation of dysuria, urinary frequency or urgency, and suprapubic pain with/without fever, chills, flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, and nausea/vomiting. The diagnosis is often not in question. But, according to the literature, there exists a gap in the perception of the symptom severity between the clinician and the patient, which may be attributed to misinformation, misconceptions, or miscommunication.

Recurrent UTIs require management from an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), nurses, and pharmacists, all coordinating their efforts and sharing case information to achieve optimal outcomes with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5] The primary care clinician is often the point of first medical contact in the care of a patient with a UTI. A proper history and physical exam should be conducted in a patient with recurrent UTIs. In several situations, it may be imperative to involve the nephrologist, as deemed necessary, according to the severity or the persistent nature of the disease. In cases of suspected urinary tract obstruction, the radiologist has an important role in helping to determine the cause using the necessary imaging. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with the education of the patient and family.

The American Urological Association (AUA) Guidelines are evidence-based guidelines for recurrent UTIs reviewed by an interprofessional expert committee. The current guidelines, published in 2019, have been developed after an exhaustive review of current medical literature from peer-reviewed journals.