# Introduction

Astrocytes are a subtype of glial cells that make up the majority of cells in the human central nervous system (CNS). They perform metabolic, structural, homeostatic, and neuroprotective tasks such as clearing excess neurotransmitters, stabilizing and regulating the blood-brain barrier, and promoting synapse formation.

# Issues of Concern

The broad and extensive involvement of astrocytes in many aspects of CNS development and function suggests that they carry implications in an array of different nervous system disorders. Specifically, any condition or stimulus that would impair the ability of astrocytes to function would effectively disturb the blood-brain barrier, synapse formation and stabilization, signaling efficiency, energy metabolism, and fluid-ion homeostasis in the CNS.

# Structure

Astrocytes derive their name from their radially-arranged foot processes that give them a star-like appearance. These foot processes, which are marked by a protein known as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), allow astrocytes to communicate with and affect surrounding neural vasculature. Astrocytes also couple with each other through gap junctions, forming a network that coordinates their responses to stress and other stimuli.

Interlaminar astrocytes, which are unique to humans and other primates, possess radial tangential fibers and vertical “cable-like” processes.

Protoplasmic astrocytes make up the majority of astrocytes. They are large astrocytes with a high density of tortuous, bulbous GFAP-positive processes that branch into smaller, finer processes.

In contrast to the protoplasmic astroglia, fibrous astroglia reside around white matter tracts.

The last major astrocyte phenotype in the human CNS is the varicose projection astroglia. These astrocytes occupy cortical layers V and VI and, like interlaminar astrocytes, have long foot processes that may connect with cells in other cortical layers.

# Function

Although research has yet to determine specific tasks unique to each astrocyte type, scientists widely accept that astrocytes play a pivotal role in structural support, metabolic regulation, neuroprotection, growth, and homeostatic maintenance of the central nervous system.

Using these tools, astrocytes perform a number of specific functions: neurotransmitter uptake and recycling, promotion of neuronal survival and synapse formation, regeneration of CNS damage, propagation of signal transmission between neurons via calcium signaling, potassium ion buffering, maintenance of pH and fluid levels in the brain, removal of free radicals in the CNS, regulation of the blood-brain barrier, coordination of cerebral blood flow based on regional neuronal needs, and secretion of trophic factors to guide axons and to promote development of neurons.

Metabolically, astrocytes coordinate cerebral blood flow based on regional neuronal needs. They synthesize glycogen, provide glycolytic components for neurons during periods of high demand, and remove free radicals from the CNS.

Astrocytes maintain CNS homeostasis by regulating pH and fluid levels in the brain, buffering potassium ion concentration in the extracellular fluid, taking up and recycling excess neurotransmitters, and detoxifying ammonia.

Astrocytes also specialize in neuroprotection, neural repair mechanisms, and axonal growth promotion. Although astrocytes already defend the CNS by way of metabolic and homeostatic regulation, they also satisfy an immune function in the brain. Astrocytes can release and respond to both pro- and anti-inflammatory signals, such as cytokines and chemokines. Specifically, astrocytes release substances such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tissue necrosis factors (TNF) alpha and beta to promote immune responses in the brain. Astrocytes can also respond to inflammatory signals by undergoing a process known as astrogliosis.

# Tissue Preparation

To view astrocytes, histologists have traditionally stained neural tissue samples with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or Holzer stains. Newer stains are now available for neural tissue preparation and visualization of astrocytes.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is the most popular histochemical and cytochemical marker used to identify astrocytes in neural tissue samples.

# Microscopy, Light

When viewed under a light microscope, astrocytes appear as large nuclei with minimal surrounding cytoplasm, and some sharp protrusions representing primary foot processes whose radial arrangement around the large, circular nucleus gives astrocytes the star-like appearance from whence they derive their name. Holzer staining shows the foot processes better than H&E staining. The best results for light microscopy, however, come from using fluorescent immunocytochemical markers such as GFAP, GLAST/EAAT1, and GLT-1/EAAT2.

In modern practice, conventional light microscopy has fallen out of favor for viewing astrocytes because finer astrocytic foot processes are not readily distinguishable from other fine branching structures such as dendrites or extracellular matrix.

# Microscopy, Electron

With its higher-resolution images, electron microscopy has become the preferred method for viewing astrocytes and their finer processes.

The current limitations of electron microscopy for viewing astrocytes stem from the fact that electron microscopy requires a large time investment and is unusable on live tissue.in vivo astrocyte imaging.

# Pathophysiology

Astrocyte pathologies tend to manifest in two main forms: astrocytopathy and astrogliosis.

The category of astrogliosis is understood to be a neuroimmunological malfunction. Reactive astrogliosis is a complex process in which signals from microglia, synapses, neurons, and sites of injury cause astrocytes to undergo rapid remodeling.

# Clinical Significance

Because astrocytes fulfill many essential functions, their dysfunction has implicated them in several neurological disorders. Examples include Alzheimer disease (AD),

In Alzheimer disease, increasing cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta and gamma secretases (instead of alpha-secretase, which normally cleaves APP into a nontoxic form that the body can clear) cause abnormal beta-amyloid plaques to form.

Astrocytes affect epilepsy and Huntington disease by regulating homeostatic conditions in the CNS. Mutations in the Kir4.1, aquaporin-4 (AQP4), GLT-1, or GLAST genes contribute to epilepsy by impairing astrocytes’ ability to regulate potassium, water, and glutamate levels in the extracellular fluid within the CNS.

Astrocytes also initiate neuronal death in parkinsonism and can trigger demyelinating disease. In idiopathic Parkinson disease, neurons die in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra when alpha-synuclein deposits accumulate. These alpha-synuclein deposits form a histological marker useful in diagnosing parkinsonism.

Alexander disease and inherited forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are examples of diseases that stem from errors in astrocyte genetics. Alexander disease is a genetic astrogliopathy in which glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) mutations disrupt astrocytes' formation of intermediate filaments, causing symmetrical white matter lesions in the frontal lobe and sometimes elsewhere in the brain.

As the traditional "neuron-centric" view of the brain gives way to a more comprehensive understanding that includes the complex contributions of astrocytes and other non-neuronal cells, future research is turning to the astrocyte's role in new therapeutic approaches. As investigators learn more about how astrocytes function malfunction, new insights may enable treatment strategies that would not have been possible in decades past.

**Disclaimer:**This scholarly activity was supported (in whole or in part) by HCA and/or an HCA-affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA or any of its affiliated entities.