**T****he child under evaluation undergoes a series of biochemical and radiological tests:**

**Biochemical Tests**

- Complete blood count for hematological diseases like anemia.

- Sweat chloride test for cystic fibrosis. Patients usually have a history of meconium ileus and pulmonary symptoms.

- Serum thyrotropin (TSH) levels and free thyroxine levels (T4) to test for hypothyroidism.

- Wintrobe sedimentation rate for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)

- Antibody testing for celiac sprue includes anti-endomysial immunoglobulin A (IgA), immunoglobulin G (IgG), and anti-gliadin IgG titers. Antiendomysial IgA titers are more sensitive, and IgG titers are more specific.

- Serum pre-albumin and transferrin- These values are low in undernutrition.

**Imaging**

- **Anteroposterior X-ray of the left hand and wrist**: It is used to predict the bone age. The radiologist uses the Greulich and Pyle or Tanner-Goldstein-Whitehouse method to calculate the bone age and forecast adult height. While the prior is a more straightforward method, the latter is more reliable.

- **MRI**can provide evidence of any intracranial masses (craniopharyngiomas)or developmental anomalies of the pituitary. Before the GH therapy is initiated, an MRI scan should be ordered to rule out any organic lesions.

- **Karyotyping:**It can detect genetic disorders like Down syndrome, Turner syndrome, and others.
            **Provocative tests:**These tests are used to measure the GH reserve, but their utility is limited. They are not reproducible and do not determine the physiological secretory pattern of GH. These include- insulin tolerance test, Levodopa-propanol HCL test, Arginine HCL test, Glucagon test. Other physiological stimuli that can be used are strenuous exercise, deep sleep, and fasting. The levels of growth hormone fluctuate throughout the day, and peaks after meals, after strenuous exercise, and in a deep sleep. This property makes it an unreliable biomarker for detecting growth hormone deficiency (GHD); however, stimulated GH values of more than 10mg/dl can essentially rule out the deficit. Therefore, more predictive markers are serum IGF-1 levels (somatomedin C) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) levels. IGFBP-3 has more specificity than IGF-1. In patients in the pubertal phase, with CNS neoplasms, and poor nutrition, these markers can be abnormally high even in the presence of GHD and are unreliable.