Historical clues for mpox infection, such as recent travel to endemic areas, interaction with wild animals imported from endemic areas, and providing care to an infected animal or human, help build a differential diagnosis, but clinical features are critical.

Initial symptoms include fever, headache, myalgia, fatigue, and lymphadenopathy, a key differentiating feature of mpox from smallpox. After 1 to 2 days, mucosal lesions develop in the mouth, closely followed by skin lesions of the face and extremities (including palms and soles), and are centrifugally concentrated. The rash may or may not spread to the rest of the body, and the total number of lesions may vary from a small amount to thousands.

Over the following 2 to 4 weeks, the lesions evolve in 1 to 2-day increments through macular, papular, vesicular, and pustular phases. Lesions change synchronously and are characterized as a firm, deep-seated, and 2 to 10 mm in size. Lesions remain in the pustular phase for 5 to 7 days before crusts begin to form. Crusts form and desquamate over the subsequent 7 to 14 days, and the condition resolves around 3 to 4 weeks after symptom onset in most cases. Patients are no longer considered infectious after all crusts fall off.

Different reports have suggested that the MSM population is at particular risk in the present outbreak. The predominant clinical features include vesicular, umbilicated, and pseudo-pustular lesions on the skin, fever, weakness, tiredness, headache, and regional lymphadenopathy. The genital or perianal area is commonly involved and has lesion clustering, which is thought to be due to the sexual nature of transmission.