Pediatric TTEs typically resemble Adult TTEs in regards to cardiac structure morphology and to obtaining the basic views. However, one can imagine the added anatomical difficulty of interpreting a pediatric TTE in a patient with a complex CHD malformation. Such atypical anatomical appearances place significance on identifying morphological characteristics, especially in pediatric populations. For this same reason, pediatric TTEs require further in-depth evaluation of the suprasternal notch, right parasternal, and subxiphoid views. Views that are of less significance compared to adult TTEs.

Here is provided a list of distinct morphological characteristics, along with a figure of each view, as well as its anatomical and physiological significance.

**Distinct Morphological Characteristics**

- Atria – Right atrium (RA) has a wide triangular appendage, is anteriorly located; left atrium (LA) has a thin, long appendage, is posteriorly located.

- Atrial Septum – Right has a Eustachian Valve; left has a foramen ovale flap.

- Ventricles – Right ventricle (RV) has coarse trabeculations, tri-leaflet valve, moderator band presence; left ventricle (LV) has thin trabeculations bi-leaflet valve, absence of a moderator band.

- The tricuspid valve – associated with the RV, has three leaflets, is located toward the apex.

- Mitral valve – associated with the LV, has two leaflets, is attached to the lateral wall by papillary muscles.

- Aorta – will disperse into the coronaries.

- Pulmonary artery – will branch to the right and left.

**Anatomical and Physiological Significance by View**

Parasternal Long Axis: (figure)

- LV outflow tract (LVOT)

- RV outflow tract (RVOT)

- Flow across mitral and aortic valves

- Tricuspid and Pulmonic valves

Parasternal Short Axis: (figure)

- Aortic and pulmonary valve architecture

- Aortic valve coronary cusps as well as the RCA and LCA caliber

- Atrial septum

- Main pulmonary artery branches

- RV and LV function and wall size

Apical: (figure)

- Assesses all chambers' size and function

- Assess tricuspid and mitral valve function

- LVOT across the aortic valve

- RVOT across the pulmonic valve

- LV Ejection Fraction

Subcostal Short Axis: (figure)

- Stomach, spleen, abdominal aorta, IVC, SVC

- RV outflow across the pulmonic valve

Subcostal Long Axis: (figure)

- LVOT

- Aortic root

- Atrial septum

- Coronary cusps

Suprasternal Notch: (figure)

- Brachiocephalic trunk

- Aortic trunk

- Pulmonary veins draining into the left atrium

- Innominate vein connection to SVC

- IVC