SD is a difficult condition to manage in the adult, and its management is best by an interprofessional team.

- Consider the impact of SD on psychosocial functioning and quality-of-life and remember that SD may accompany neurological or psychiatric disease.

- The dermatologist and pharmacist can help to promote the appropriate use of topical corticosteroids and employ steroid-sparing alternatives.

- New evidence suggests diet may play a role in SD, with a high fruit intake associated with a 25% lower risk of SD, whereas a “Western” diet was associated with a 47% increased risk of SD.

- Atopic dermatitis and ISD frequently coexist, whereas psoriasis often occurs in adults with SD, but there is usually no history of atopic dermatitis

- Review the diagnosis in recalcitrant cases of SD and consider immunodeficiency in sudden, severe cases

- Topical antifungals have an anti-inflammatory effect which contributes significantly to their efficacy and is a convenient steroid-sparing strategy

Even though primary clinicians manage the condition, it is best to refer the complex patient to the dermatologist for guidance. Dermatology specialty-trained nurses can also help by counseling the patient, providing direction on medical management, and monitoring and charting treatment progress. A pharmacist should also be on the case, with assistance in selecting the most appropriate agents, verifying dosing, offering patient education, and performing medication reconciliation, informing the prescriber of any issues encountered. Close communication between interprofessional team members is vital to improving outcomes.