Atenolol is available in 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg tablets for oral administration or 0.5 mg/mL for intravenous injection. The dosage and route of administration vary depending on the indication.

**Hypertension**

The initial adult dose of atenolol is 50 mg daily, given either as a single table or in conjunction with diuretic therapy. In the absence of an adequate therapeutic response after a few weeks, the dosage may be increased to a single 100 mg tablet once a day. Daily doses higher than this are unlikely to produce further benefits.

For renal-impaired or elderly patients, a lower dose of 25 mg daily may be used if they have a creatinine clearance of under 15 ml/min. Careful monitoring of their blood pressure before administering a new dose is necessary.

**Angina Pectoris**

For non-vasospastic angina, the initial adult dose is 50 mg once daily. If, after a week, the patient has not reached the optimal response, the dose should be increased to one 100 mg tablet daily. Some patients may need 200 mg daily for an optimal therapeutic response. However, withdrawal should be achieved gradually with the patient monitored and advised to limit physical activity during this time.

**Acute Myocardial Infarction**

Intravenous injection should occur as soon as possible after the patient arrives in the hospital within 12 hours of the myocardial infarction. For example, the FDA recommends the IV administration of 5 mg of atenolol for an adult over 5 minutes, followed by another 5 mg IV injection after 10 minutes. A 50 mg oral dose should follow 12 hours later. After that, oral dosing can be either 50 mg twice a day or 100 mg once a day for 6 to 9 days or until discharged from the hospital.

**Migraine Prophylaxis**

The initial adult daily dose is  25 mg once daily; titrated every 1-2 weeks to 100 mg once daily.

**Supraventricular Tachycardia**

According to ACC and AHA guidelines, the initial adult dose of atenolol is 25- 50 mg per day which is titrated based on tolerability and response to 100 mg once daily.

**Myocardial Infarction**

beta-blocker should be started within the first 24 hours of myocardial infarction for most patients and continue for secondary prophylaxis titrating gradually up to 50 mg twice daily based on BP, heart rate, and adverse events.

**Thyrotoxicosis**

The initial daily dose is 25-50 mg once daily, titrated as needed to control tachycardia, palpitations, and tremulousness up to a maximum of 100mg twice-daily regimen.

**Use in the Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dosage adjustments are provided in the manufacturer's labeling. In addition, atenolol undergoes minimal hepatic metabolism, as discussed above.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Patients with impaired renal function should be monitored, and the dose needs to be adjusted based on creatinine clearance.

- Creatinine clearance >30 mL/minute:  no dose adjustment is needed.

- Creatinine clearance 10-30 mL/minute: maximum dose up to 50 mg daily.

- Creatinine clearance <10  mL/minute: maximum dose up to 25 mg daily.

- Patients on hemodialysis:****Atenolol is considerably cleared by hemodialysis; administer atenolol post-dialysis.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Atenolol is a former FDA pregnancy category D.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**The excretion of beta blockers in breast milk predominantly depends on plasma protein binding (PPB). Drugs with low plasma protein binding, like atenolol(10% PPB), are extensively excreted into breast milk. The accumulation of drugs in the infant is also associated with the fraction of the drug excreted in the urine. With 85% renal excretion, atenolol has a high risk for accumulation in infants, especially neonates. Use caution in breastfeeding women. The use of other beta-blockers may be preferred while nursing newborn and preterm infants.