Many inherited diseases that present with manifestations of low HDL level and peripheral neuropathy should be put into consideration:

- **Familial HDL deficiency**is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with very low serum HDL concentrations and premature CHD but none of the systemic findings that present in Tangier disease exist in it.

- **Abetalipoproteinemia**is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that is characterized by defective assembly and secretion of apolipoprotein B (Apo B) and apo B containing lipoproteins. A spectrum of clinical manifestations can be seen include failure to thrive and fat malabsorptions. Later clinical outcomes include retinitis pigmentosa, peripheral neuropathy, and ataxia.

- **Niemann-Pick disease**is an autosomal recessive lysosome storage disease that occurs due to the accumulation of abnormal metabolic products. Usually has far greater hepatosplenomegaly than in Tangier disease, progressive neurodegeneration, and cherry-red spots on the macula.

- **LCAT deficiency**is an autosomal recessive due to Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency. presents with annular corneal opacity, and progressive renal disease with proteinuria.

- **Fish-Eye disease**is an autosomal recessive due to a partial deficiency of LCAT. It manifests with corneal opacity with normal renal function.

- **Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease**is an autosomal recessive disease presented with peripheral neuropathy and different types of foot deformities.

- **Other causes**that make a low HDL including taking Drugs such as beta-blockers, benzodiazepines, and anabolic steroids. Also,Acute infection(HIV) , inflammation, or gammopathies( multiple myeloma).