Antibiotic therapy is the mainstay of treatment. The treatment has been complicated by multidrug resistance strains developed in many endemic areas, especially in India and south-east Asia. The modality of treatment depends upon the severity of the disease, duration, dissemination, and complications.

**Antibiotic therapy**: Prompt administration of the relevant antibiotic therapy protects from severe complications of typhoid fever. Initial drug therapy of choice depends upon the susceptibility of the strains. In most areas, fluoroquinolones are the most effective drug of choice. In severe conditions that necessitate prompt treatment, fluoroquinolones can be administered empirically on clinical suspicion before the result of the diagnostic culture test. Fluoroquinolones cure about 98% of cases with relapse and fecal carriage rates of less than 2%. Ciprofloxacin (500 mg orally twice daily for 5-7 days) is the most effective fluoroquinolone. Amoxicillin (750mg orally 4 times daily for about 2 weeks), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg twice daily for 2 weeks), and outside of the United States, chloramphenicol (500mg 4 times daily for 2-3 weeks) are all alternative treatments for adults in fully susceptible cases, but they are increasingly met with resistance. Uncomplicated cases can be managed at home with oral antibiotics and antipyretics. Patients with significant complications, including vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal distension, should be hospitalized. Additional supportive therapy and parenteral antibiotics such as third-generation cephalosporins (guided by culture sensitivities) should be continued until 5 days after recovery. Multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extremely drug-resistant (XDR) strains have developed in endemic areas. The intracellular nature of bacteria safeguards against the extracellular antibiotics.

**Vaccination prophylaxis:**Typhoid burden has been reduced since the invention ofSalmonella typhi vaccination. The vaccine is recommended for those traveling to areas with risk of exposure. In the United States, there are two types of licensed, unconjugated vaccines.Salmonella paratyphi B. Both vaccines have similar efficacy at 50% to 80%, and travelers must practice avoidance measures in addition to the vaccine.

The World Health Organization Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization first recommended the use of typhoid conjugate vaccines (TCVs) in typhoid-endemic countries in 2017.

**Miscellaneous treatment:**Symptomatic and supportive care is essential. Maintaining adequate hydration during diarrhea, as well as appropriate ventilation and oxygenation for pulmonary complications, should be provided along with analgesics and antipyretics as supportive care for metastatic complications. Corticosteroids have been suggested for severe cases with encephalitis.

**Surgery:**When gallstones accompany a carrier state, cholecystectomy can be curative.

**Prevention through sanitation**: Epidemiological data reveals that typhoid is more prevalent in low and middle-income countries, in areas with poor drinking water, and lack of sanitation. Safe drinking water, sanitation, and avoidance of overcrowding contribute remarkably to the reduction in the number of cases.