Upon diagnosing mesenteric artery thrombosis, prompt, definitive treatment is essential. Aggressive fluid resuscitation is imperative to correct hypotension and metabolic derangement. If there is no absolute contraindication, anticoagulation with heparin sodium administered intravenously should be promptly initiated. Other intravenous medications such as glucagon and papaverine may help manage vasospasm which frequently accompanies the thrombotic event.  If peritoneal signs are present, bowel infarction should be presumed, and emergency laparotomy are necessary. If the occlusive source is embolic, a simple surgical embolectomy may be performed. If in-situ thrombosis is present, the underlying vessel is frequently too diseased to salvage. In these cases, a mesenteric bypass should be performed, ideally with an autologous vein to minimize the risk of contamination, particularly in cases with bowel perforation. Bowel resection should additionally be performed, as needed, at this time. Occasionally, second look surgery may be necessary to reassess the integrity of the small bowel.

Patients with documented mesenteric thrombosis who have not developed peritoneal signs may be considered for minimally invasive treatment alternatives such as catheter-directed thrombolytic infusion. This approach involves the intra-arterial placement of an infusion catheter into the thrombosed segment of superior mesenteric artery followed by infusion of tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). Studies have shown TPA  to be very effective in dissolving acute superior mesenteric artery clot.