Histological features of diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis are described on the basis of light microscopic, electron microscopic, and immunofluorescence findings of renal biopsy. Light microscopy shows increased cellular proliferation of either the endo-capillary or the mesangium along with inflammatory cell infiltration. Based on these findings, DPGN is categorized as either (1) diffuse endocapillary or (2) diffuse mesangial PGN. A comparison of the two shows that there are increased sub-epithelial depositions with a worse prognosis seen in the former. In a more severe form of the disease, sclerosis, fibrosis, as well as atrophy, is visible along with the involvement of the interstitium.

The characteristic wire-looping pattern of capillary walls is also noted. Electron microscopy shows the precise location of these electron-dense deposits. These deposits can be present in the subepithelial, subendothelial, or intramembranous spaces. In some cases, there is the involvement of the tuboreticular spaces. Immunofluorescence findings are indicative of the etiology of DPGN as in anti-GBM disease, it shows linear deposits along the basement membrane, while in others it shows granular deposits of immune-complex. Staining also shows the presence of immunoglobulins, fibrin, or complements or the absence of these, as seen in pauci-immune ANCA-related DPGN. It can also show which immunoglobulin is present as in IgA immunoglobulins seen in IgA nephropathy or IgG4 or IgG1 seen more commonly in DPGN associated with lupus nephritis or IgG, IgM, C3, and C1q seen in others. A renal biopsy finding also tells about the chronicity, severity, and extent of renal damage depending on the presence of crescents, necrosis, or exudative lesions.