The epidemiology of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis has been studied in Scotland, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan. In contrast, there is very little data reporting the incidence of EPS in the United States. Most research available in the US has been conducted at single-center institutions. In a single center in New Haven, Connecticut, a retrospective observational cohort analysis of patients on peritoneal dialysis for five years or greater revealed the incidence of EPS as 18.4%. In this study, only 76 patients met the inclusion criteria, with 11 patients meeting the International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis criteria for the diagnosis of EPS.

At another US single-center institution, a retrospective study examined a peritoneal dialysis registry, in existence for 30 years, for the incidence of EPS. In this study, 676 patients met the inclusion criteria, and the incidence of EPS was 1.2%. The study also found that the incidence of EPS rose to 15% after six years and 38% after nine years of peritoneal dialysis.

Both US studies reveal not only how understudied EPS is, but the incidence of EPS increases for patients on peritoneal dialysis for at least five years or more. This finding is consistent with work in other countries like Scotland. 1238 adult patients who started peritoneal dialysis between 2000 and 2007 were identified by the Scottish Renal Registry. The incidence of EPS was 1.1% by one year, 3.4% by three years, 8.8% at four years, 9.4% at five years, and 22.2% by seven years of staying on peritoneal dialysis.

In a study over 13 years of 7618 patients in Australia and New Zealand, the incidence rate was 1.8% per 1000 patients. Respective cumulative incidences of EPS were 0.3% at three years, 0.8% at five years, and 3.9% at eight years of dialysis. A Japanese study revealed the incidence (and mortality rates) for EPS were 0% (0%) at 3 years, 0.7% (0%) at five years, 2.1% (8.3%) at eight years, 5.9% (28.6%) at 10 years, 5.8% (61.5%) at 15 years, and 17.2% (100%) with 15 years or greater of peritoneal dialysis.

Studies from other counties reveal the prevalence of EPS varies between 0.4 to 8.9% but can reach as high as 22.2% after seven years or more of peritoneal dialysis, as highlighted by the Scottish study.