The primary cause of posterior vitreous detachment is the old age. Normally in a young, healthy individual, the vitreous is adherent to the internal limiting membrane of the retina. The adherence of the vitreous is strongest at the vitreous base.

As the person ages, the gel-like consistency of vitreous degenerates and undergoes the phenomenon of synchysis and syneresis. Vitreous degeneration begins with the stage of vitreous liquefaction, which is called synchysis.

The process of a posterior vitreous detachment is spontaneous, but it can be brought about by events such as cataract surgery, trauma, uveitis, panretinal photocoagulation, and laser capsulotomy. About 8%-22% of patients with acute symptomatic PVD have retinal tears at the initial examination.

The risk of retinal tears is more in PVD associated with vitreous hemorrhage than in PVD without vitreous hemorrhage.

The most important risk factors for PVD include:

- Old age: The incidence of posterior vitreous detachment after 50 years of age is 53%, and between ages 66 to 86 years is 66%.

- Female gender: The progression of a posterior vitreous detachment is faster in women than in men at age 60 or more. This implies that the macular pathologies linked with posterior vitreous detachment occur at a younger age in females.

- Myopia: The incidence of posterior vitreous detachment depends on the axial length of the eyeball. The eyes with axial length more than 30 mm have a greater chance of developing posterior vitreous detachment than eyes with axial length less than 29 mm.

- Underlying diseases like retinitis pigmentosa and sticklers syndrome.

- Menopause: Post-menopausal female patients may be more prone to develop posterior vitreous detachment because of a lack of estrogen. Estrogen may have a protective effect against PVD in premenopausal females.

- Vitamin B6: Vitamin B6 has an anti-estrogen effect. A higher intake of vitamin B6 may increase the incidence of posterior vitreous detachment in females.

- Inflammation: Long-standing inflammation involves cellular proliferation and, eventually, fibrosis. Fibrosis of the vitreous cause traction over the retina resulting in posterior vitreous detachments or retinal breaks.

- Trauma: Posterior vitreous detachment occurs as a consequence of penetrating injury to the eye. It was noted as separation at the level of the internal limiting membrane or as a cleavage within the vitreous in a study.

- Ocular surgery:****Various vitreous modifications occur during ocular surgeries, including cataract extraction and intraocular lens placement, LASIK (laser in situ keratomileusis), and others. These modifications may be involved in the development of postoperative posterior vitreous detachment.

- Retinal laser

- Retinal cryo

- The vitreous gel contains various angiogenic factors. These factors are responsible for neovascularization by endothelial cell proliferation. The posterior hyaloid face acts as a scaffold for the growth of the retinal or optic disc new vessels. So the presence of a complete PVD may prevent the process of neovascularization and protects the eye from the progression of proliferative diabetic retinopathy.