The main targets for the management of GSD I are the prevention of acute metabolic derangement, prevention of acute and long-term complications, attainment of normal psychological development, and good quality of life. Diet and lifestyle changes are made to prevent the primary concern of the disease, hypoglycemia. Monitoring of blood glucose along with the laboratory parameters should continue as with increasing growth, the child’s nutritional needs change. Fasting should be avoided, and frequent small feeds rich in complex carbohydrates along with fiber is recommended. Carbohydrates should make up for 60% to 70% calories.

Initially, infants are fed soy-based, sugar-free formula on demand every 2 to 3 hours. With the increase in the infant’s sleep duration (longer than than 3 to 4 hours), it is important to avoid hypoglycemia during the overnight fast. Awakening the infant every 3 to 4 hours to monitor blood glucose and giving feeds is difficult. Therefore, it is important for the parents to be trained in inserting a nasogastric (NG) tube or a G-tube should be placed surgically. This allows the parents to administer feeds especially when the child is sick or refuses to eat.

In patients with GSD I, cornstarch has been used for the treatment of hypoglycemia as its slow digestion provides a steady release of glucose. This maintains the glucose levels for longer periods of time. In young children, 1.6 gm of cornstarch per kg body weight every 3 to 4 hours is recommended. While older children, adolescents, and adults, are given 1.7 to 2.5 gm of cornstarch per kilogram body weight.

All patients with GSD I should wear a medical alert bracelet. Along with blood glucose monitoring, a lactate meter can be a good tool to alert the parents especially in times of emergency. Hypoglycemia should be treated immediately with a fast-acting glucose source such as cornstarch or commercially prepared glucose polymers or over-the-counter diabetic glucose tablets.

Patients with GSD Ib have an increased risk of infections at the surgical site for G-tube due to neutropenia. Therefore granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is administered before placing a G-tube. The patients that receive G-CSF need a complete blood count (CBC) evaluation monthly along with the measurement of their spleen.

To avoid pump failures and occluded or disconnected tubing, bed-wetting devices that detects formula spilling onto the bed, infusion pump alarms, safety adapters, connectors, and tape for tubing is recommended as safety precautions. Limiting foods rich in lactose and sucrose such as fruits, juice, and dairy puts a child at risk for nutritional deficiency. The child should be carefully assessed, and diet should be supplemented with adequate micronutrients.

Oral citrate or bicarbonate is used to treat patients with persistent lactic acidosis. These agents alkalinize the urine and reduce the risk of urolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis. Allopurinol reduces uric acid levels preventing recurrent attacks of gout. However, during an acute attack, Colchicine is preferred.

Hyperlipidemia has only shown a partial response to medical intervention with statins, niacin, fibrates, and fish oil along with dietary interventions such as consuming medium-chain triglyceride milk. Its resolution has been reported with liver transplantation.

Starting from infancy, systemic blood pressure measurement should be checked on every office visit while serum creatinine is evaluated every 3 to 6 months to monitor renal function. Patients with persistent microalbuminuria should be treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor to prevent worsening of renal function.

Patients with GSD I have hepatomegaly universally due to fat and glycogen deposition in the liver. The common liver lesions seen in patients with GSD Ia include focal fatty infiltration, focal fatty sparing, focal nodular hyperplasia, peliosis hepatis, hepatocellular adenoma (HCA), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Therefore, a liver function test should be repeated every 6 to 12 months. Liver transplantation is an option for patients with multifocal growing lesions that do not respond to primary treatment.

As per guidelines for the management of GSD I published by the collaborative European study

- Preprandial blood glucose greater than 3.5 to 4.0 mmol/L (63 to 72 mg/dL)

- Urine lactate/creatinine ratio less than 0.06 mmol/mmol

- Serum uric acid concentration in high normal range for age

- Venous blood base excess greater than - 5 mmol/L and venous blood bicarbonate greater than 20 mmol/L (20 meq/L)

- Serum triglyceride concentration less than 6 mmol/L (531 mg/dL)

- Normal fecal alpha-1 anti-trypsin concentration for GSD Ib

- Body mass index (BMI) between 0.0 and +2.0 standard deviations