# Continuing Education Activity

Stroke is one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity in the world. Pontine strokes, in particular, are catastrophic. Clinical presentation of a pontine infarction can vary, ranging from the classical crossed syndrome (ipsilateral cranial nerve palsy and contralateral motor and/or sensory impairment) to the less common pure motor hemiparesis or hemiplegia or pure sensory stroke. A majority of stroke events and their complications can be prevented with proper care. This activity outlines the presentation, evaluation, and management of infarction in the pons and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
-  Review the epidemiology of pontine infarction.
- Describe the common presentations in patients with pontine infarction.
- Outline treatment considerations for patients with pontine infarction.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination, collaboration, and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care and improve outcomes for patients receiving acute stroke care.

# Introduction

Pons is the largest component of the brainstem located distal to the midbrain and proximal to the medulla oblongata. Any obstruction of blood supply to the pons, whether acute or chronic, causes pontine infarction, a type of ischemic stroke. Clinical presentation of a pontine infarction can vary, ranging from the classical crossed syndrome (ipsilateral cranial nerve palsy and contralateral motor and/or sensory impairment) to the less common pure motor hemiparesis or hemiplegia or pure sensory stroke. Clinical presentation is primarily determined by the anatomical boundaries of the infarcted region within the pons and the blood vessels involved.

# Etiology

The most common causes of pontine infarction include small artery disease, large artery atherosclerosis, and cardiogenic emboli, with the latter two being less frequent causes.

# Epidemiology

Epidemiological studies investigating particularly pontine infarctions are lacking. While pontine infarctions are relatively common, they generally occur as a part of larger posterior circulation stroke. Within pons, presentation further varies depending on the arterial territory involved:

- The anteromedial and anterolateral region supplied by the basilar artery is the most commonly affected

- Lateral region supplied by the basilar artery and anterior inferior cerebellar artery

- Posterior/dorsal region supplied by the superior cerebellar region.

Ischemic stroke incidence overall is higher among men than women and Black and Hispanic adults compared to their White counterparts, with some geographic variability.

# History and Physical

Ischemic stroke risk increases with age, and hence a typical presentation of a pontine infarction would be an elderly individual with a history of chronic conditions like hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, or history of heart disease. However, pontine infarction can also occur in younger individuals with vascular disorders like CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy), hypercoagulable states, vertebral artery dissections et cetera.

- Ventro-caudal pontine infarction is caused due to decreased blood flow in the paramedian perforating arteries arising from the basilar artery. Affected individuals have contralateral motor hemiparesis or hemiplegia due to the large infarcts of the unilateral corticospinal tract. Ipsilateral abducens and/or facial nerve palsy can occur secondary to the involvement of the nerve fibers and nucleus, respectively. Lateral spinothalamic tract infarction leads to decreased pain and temperature sensation on the opposite side of the body. Clinically, the presenting symptoms can be grouped into Millard-Gubler syndrome (contralateral hemiparesis, ipsilateral abducens, and facial nerve palsy), Foville syndrome (conjugate gaze palsy in addition to the features of Millard-Gubler syndrome), and Raymond syndrome (contralateral body hemiparesis, ipsilateral abducens palsy without facial nerve palsy).

- Mid-pontine base infarction is also due to decreased blood flow in the paramedian arteries or the short circumferential arteries arising from the basilar artery. Presenting symptoms depend on the extent of involvement of various structures within the pons. For instance, ipsilateral ataxia is due to the infarction of pontine nuclei; sensorimotor weakness of the ipsilateral face is due to the trigeminal nerve fibers' involvement and contralateral hemiparesis due to the corticospinal tract. Various combination of these symptoms results in distinct syndromes like pure motor hemiparesis (lacunar infarcts of the corticospinal tract), ataxic hemiparesis (lacunar infarcts of the pontine nuclei), dysarthria-clumsy hand syndrome (dysarthria, dysphagia, impaired dexterity and weakness of hand), and rare presentations like dysarthria-dysmetria and dysarthria-facial paresis.

- Tegmental pontine syndrome can affect various structures, including cranial nerve (trigeminal, abducens, facial, and vestibulocochlear) nuclei, medial lemniscus, medial longitudinal fasciculus, respiratory centers, and the pontine reticular formation. Obstruction of blood flow in the anterior inferior or superior cerebellar arteries causes the rostral pontine syndrome. Symptoms of this syndrome include ipsilateral facial sensory disturbance and masticator paralysis (trigeminal nuclei), impaired blinking (tectospinal tract); contralateral hemisensory loss (lateral spinothalamic tract and medial lemniscus); and ipsilateral hemiataxia (superior cerebellar peduncle). The caudal pontine syndrome is caused due to decreased blood flow in the short circumferential or the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. Clinically, they can present with ipsilateral conjugate gaze palsy and nystagmus (medial longitudinal fasciculus), ipsilateral impaired eye abduction (abducens nucleus), ipsilateral hemiataxia (middle cerebellar peduncle), and contralateral hemisensory loss (lateral spinothalamic tract and medial lemniscus).

- Multiple pontine infarcts primarily affecting the perforating arteries' territories result in pseudobulbar palsy due to the involvement of the corticobulbar fibers. A pseudobulbar palsy presentation includes severe dysphagia and dysarthria. Some individuals may present with pathological crying or laughing.

- Bilateral pontine infarcts happen secondary to impeded blood flow in the larger basilar artery. Being bilateral, both left and right, upper, and lower limbs can be involved (tetraplegia) and also impair the consciousness. Large infarcts affecting the corticospinal, corticobulbar, and corticopontine tracts result in the locked-in syndrome. Locked-in syndrome presents with tetraplegia, bilateral facial paralysis, pharyngeal, and horizontal gaze palsy with retained consciousness and cognitive abilities. Recurrent stereotypical episodes of dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia, motor, or sensory disturbances are more recently referred to as the "pontine warning syndrome." It is hypothesized that this syndrome can progress into a bilateral pontine infarct.

Few distinguishing features that can be used to identify the anatomical location of the pontine infarction include:

- Contralateral hemiparesis, internuclear ophthalmoplegia, and conjugate horizontal gaze paresis for medial infarction.

- Contralateral hemisensory loss and ataxia for lateral infarction.

- Ipsilateral lower motor neuron palsy of the facial nerve, abducens palsy, sensorineural hearing loss, and vertigo for caudal infarction.

# Evaluation

Initial assessment of an individual presenting with stroke symptoms should include blood pressure and heart rate measurement along with respiratory function assessment (respiratory rate and pulse oximetry). As pons houses the respiratory centers, large pontine infarctions can compromise respiratory function and may warrant intubation and mechanical ventilation. If hemodynamically stable, a complete neurological examination in addition to routine history taking and physical examination is conducted. While the neurological exam assists in localizing the anatomical region affected and the type of stroke (ischemic vs. hemorrhagic), relevant history and vitals can point to the predisposing conditions (e.g., hypertension). After proper stabilization, a complete neurological examination including an assessment of consciousness, cognition, gait, coordination, reflexes, cranial nerve examination, and sensory and motor system should be performed. Followed by physical examination, neuroimaging is urgently indicated in all suspected stroke cases, and the timing of the imaging determines the treatment modality and its success. Computed tomography (CT) scan due to its availability and ability to detect hemorrhages is used to triage a stroke patient. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) remains the mainstay of diagnosis for ischemic strokes due to its ability to detect acute ischemia within minutes of onset (diffusion-weighted MRI).

# Treatment / Management

Pontine infarction treatment is akin to other types of ischemic stroke with some variability considering the lack of strong clinical evidence in posterior circulation stroke treatment compared to anterior circulation. This is especially true in patients with a large vessel occlusion, causing a pontine stroke. In general, as with any patient with ischemic stroke, immediately after identifying the subtype of stroke, treatment should be targeted to:

- Reverse the extent of ischemic penumbra tissue adjacent to the infarcted region

- Prevent complications

- Facilitate early improvement in functional status

However, this comes secondary to the initial stabilization of the airway, breathing, and circulation. Intravenous alteplase is the thrombolytic of choice for those presenting within 4.5 hours of symptom onset and without any absolute contraindications to thrombolytic therapy. Mechanical thrombectomy is the procedure of choice for those with large artery occlusion presenting within 24 hours of symptoms onset.

# Differential Diagnosis

Isolated pontine infarction is a less frequent occurrence than a larger brainstem infarction.

A few of the many predisposing conditions are hypertension, diabetes, basilar artery atherosclerosis, and vertebrobasilar insufficiency. Clinical presentation may include many signs and symptoms due to the underlying condition making it even more essential to rule out a multitude of diseases like:

- Todd paralysis

- Intracranial hemorrhage

- Intracranial mass (tumor or abscess)

- Spinal cord compression

- Hypoglycemia

- Wernicke encephalopathy

- Conversion disorder

- Complex migraine

Initial neuroimaging would aid in evaluating any other intracranial pathologies. CT imaging delineates hemorrhagic lesions well, while MRI imaging is better suited for mass lesions, abscesses, infectious issues, and other etiologies. High index suspicion should be used for the less common differential diagnoses.

# Prognosis

The overall prognosis of those with unilateral pontine infarction is good.

# Complications

The common medical complications of pontine infarction include:

- Aspiration pneumonia secondary to pseudobulbar palsy or locked-in syndrome is the most severe one.

- Dysphagia warranting tube feeding

- Urinary incontinence requiring catheterization which in turn increases the risk of urinary tract infections.

- Remnant motor weakness resulting in falls

- Post-stroke depression

- Complications due to prolonged immobilization (e.g., pressure ulcers, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism).

- Long-term disability is also common following pontine infarction and is assessed using various scales like the Barthel Index, the Glasgow Outcome Scale, and the modified Rankin Scale (mRS).

- Neurological complications of pontine infarction include cerebral edema, hemorrhagic transformation of the infarcted region, palatal myoclonus, and neurological deterioration despite treatment.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Rehabilitation for pontine infarction can include sensory reeducation, physical therapy, speech therapy, and occupational therapy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Primary prevention of stroke calls for aggressive risk factor control in individuals with high risk. The most important modifiable risk factors are high blood pressure (not necessarily a diagnosis of hypertension), diabetes, dyslipidemia, and smoking. However, non-modifiable risk factors like age, race, sex, and family history of stroke should also be considered in the prevention efforts. The most recent American Heart Association/American Stroke Association guidelines for primary prevention of stroke suggested for the general population includes:

- Blood pressure control (regular screening, pharmacological treatment with a goal of 140/90 mmHg, self-monitoring of blood pressure)

- Dyslipidemia treatment (lifestyle modification and statins for those with elevated stroke risk)

- Among those with diabetes, statin initiation and blood pressure below 140/90 mmHg

- Smoking cessation (counseling and pharmacological interventions, if needed)

- Dietary modifications (DASH diet, a diet low in sodium, or a Mediterranean diet)

- Regular exercise (moderate to severe exercise for 40 mins/day for 3 to 4 days/week)

- Weigh reduction for those who are obese or overweight

- Prophylactic anticoagulants (aspirin or warfarin) for individuals with atrial fibrillation

Educational programs about stroke, its traditional risk factors, and behavioral modifications to reduce stroke risk, have shown to be effective in increasing the knowledge and risk perception among individuals receiving them.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Proper identification of stroke symptoms by the patients themselves or by individuals witnessing the patient’s symptoms is vital for timely initiation of the emergency medical system (EMS). Stroke education campaigns targeting communities could influence the timely recognition of symptom onset. Once the EMS is triggered, healthcare professionals managing the patient should be well trained to identify stroke and manage accordingly. Stroke care, when strategically organized, can decrease the stroke burden considerably.