Schedule I medications have very high misuse potential and are considered to have no FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved medical use. These medications are prohibited from being prescribed or distributed. Examples of schedule I drugs are heroin, ecstasy (MDMA), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), and marijuana.

Schedule II drugs have a high misuse potential with or without known dependence to develop, yet these medications have accepted clinician use. Examples of schedule II drugs are cocaine, morphine, codeine, hydromorphone, methadone, and fentanyl.

Schedule III pharmaceuticals are considered to have an intermediate level of misuse potential. Drugs in this classification include anabolic steroids and ketamine.

Schedule IV medications are considered to have some misuse potential but are less of a risk than Schedule III drugs. Examples of such are clonazepam, diazepam, midazolam, phenobarbital, and tramadol.

Schedule V drugs have the lowest potential for misuse and development of use disorder; examples of such are pregabalin, diphenoxylate/atropine, and promethazine.

Only registered practitioners with the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) are permitted to prescribe controlled substances. All prescriptions for schedule II medications must be given to the pharmacist in a written form or transmitted by an approved computer system for EPCS (electronic prescribing of controlled substances). In fact, a number of states now require EPCS systems to be used for controlled substance prescribing. A prescription for a schedule II medication may be called in by a registered practitioner in an emergency situation; however, a written prescription must follow up within 7 days.