Since it has the potential risk of abuse, monitor patients for signs of dependence and or abuse while on therapy.

A complete blood count with differential should be obtained periodically for those on methylphenidate.

The main vitals to note at each visit are blood pressure and heart rate, especially in patients with underlying hypertension, heart failure, a recent MI, or ventricular arrhythmia, as slight elevations can occur with methylphenidate use. In addition, if a patient complains of cardiac symptoms, such as chest pain, that worsens with exertion or has a near-syncope episode, then a full cardiac workup should be performed.

In children, it is essential to evaluate their growth curve for a stable progression in height, and weight since methylphenidate has demonstrated growth suppression when used daily, long-term. The medication should either be readjusted or discontinued if children are not in a healthy percentile on their growth curve.

Clinicians should screen for symptoms of depression, agitation, aggressiveness, new-onset or pre-existing psychosis or mania, and suicidality as these can be worsened when initially starting methylphenidate. Physicians should also monitor for signs of intravenous abuse as frank psychotic episodes can develop.

On physical exam, look for peripheral vasculitis (digital ulceration).

Controversial evidence exists regarding the potential for methylphenidate to affect seizure threshold. If seizures develop while being treated with methylphenidate, the prescribing clinician should immediately stop the drug.

In adults, patients should limit their alcohol use while taking methylphenidate as its stimulant action can mask the actual sedative effect caused by alcohol intoxication, possibly inducing severe respiratory depression.

Additionally, a patient who is concurrently on warfarin, phenytoin, tricyclic antidepressants, or SSRIs should have their drug levels monitored and adjust doses as needed to achieve a therapeutic effect.