**Hypertension**is the most common cause of hemorrhagic stroke.

- Longstanding hypertension produces degeneration of media, breakage of the elastic lamina, and fragmentation of smooth muscles of arteries.

- Lipohyalinosis, fibrinoid necrosis of the subendothelium, microaneurysms, and focal dilatations are seen in the arterioles. The microaneurysms are named as Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms.

- The common sites of hypertension-induced intracerebral hemorrhage are the small penetrating arteries originating from basilar arteries or the anterior, middle, or posterior cerebral arteries.

- Small artery branches of 50 to 700 μm in diameter often have multiple sites of rupture associated with layers of platelet and fibrin aggregates.

- Hypertensive change causes non-lobar intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). As seen in eclampsia, acute hypertension can also cause ICH, known as postpartum ICH.

**Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)**is an important cause of primary lobar intracerebral bleeding in older adults.

- It is characterized by the deposition of the amyloid-β peptide in the capillaries, arterioles, and small- and medium-sized arteries in the cerebral cortex, leptomeninges, and cerebellum.

- This causes ICH in older adults, commonly associated with variations in the gene encoding apolipoprotein E.

- A familial syndrome can occur in young patients, typically associated with mutations in the gene encoding amyloid precursor protein.

- The incidence of CAA increases with age to the extent that around 50% of those aged more than 70years have CAA. Recurrent hemorrhages can occur due to CAA.

**Other Important Risk Factors**

- Cigarette smoking and moderate or heavy alcohol consumption, and chronic alcoholism are significant risk factors.

- Chronic liver disease also increases the chance of ICH due to coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia.

- Decreased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and low triglycerides are also risk factors.

- Dual antiplatelet therapy has an increased risk of ICH than monotherapy.

- Sympathomimetics such as cocaine, heroin, amphetamine, ephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine carry an increased risk of a cerebral hemorrhage.

- Cerebral microbleeds (CMBs) associated with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cigarette smoking increase the risk of ICH.

- Old age and male sex. The incidence of ICH increases after 55 years of age. The relative risk after 70 years is 7.

- The tumors which are more prone to bleed are glioblastoma, lymphoma, metastasis, meningioma, pituitary adenoma, and hemangioblastoma.

The usual causes of spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) are ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, vasculitis, cerebral artery dissection, dural sinus thrombosis, and pituitary apoplexy. The risk factors are hypertension, oral contraceptive pills, substance abuse, and pregnancy.

Intracranial hemorrhage of pregnancy (ICHOP-intracerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage) occurs with eclampsia. It is due to the loss of cerebrovascular autoregulation.