Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) could be caused by either HSV-1 or HSV-2. Among herpes simplex encephalitis, the vast majority of the encephalitis is caused by HSV-1, with HSV-2 being the etiology in less than 10% of the cases. HSV-1 causes encephalitis in adults and children beyond the neonatal period. It is the most common cause of life-threatening sporadic encephalitis across the globe. HSV-2 causes encephalitis and is predominant in neonates and immunocompromised patients. Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) has significant morbidity and mortality, even with early diagnosis and treatment.

Immunocompromised patients or patients at extremes of age might present with subtle or atypical symptoms or signs. Behavioral, cognitive, or personality changes could easily be misdiagnosed as a psychiatric disorders. Radiology, CSF profile, and HSV PCR of CSF could be normal in the initial phase of the disease. Immunocompromised patients and immunocompetent adults may not show evidence of CSF pleocytosis in the early part of the illness. CSF must be repeated for HSV PCR if the initial PCR test is negative in a patient with a high index of suspicion, especially if it was done within 72 hours after the onset of symptoms.

HSE is a neurologic emergency. A high index of suspicion among attending physicians, rapid diagnostic workup, and early diagnosis will result in early initiation of IV acyclovir in all suspected or diagnosed cases, which could further decrease morbidity and mortality. All patients with suspected HSE based on radiology, CSF profile, or EEG features, as well as the confirmed cases, must be rapidly initiated on intravenous acyclovir.