Cefepime is a common antibiotic prescribed in the hospital setting. It is often prescribed empirically to septic patients before a pathogen is known, as it covers a broad spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Therefore, all members of the health care team must monitor each patient for immediate hypersensitivity reactions after initial administration.

Clinicians need to bear in mind that the drug's pharmacokinetics can undergo alteration in patients with sepsis, renal dysfunction, or the older person leading to undesired peaks and troughs and potentially serious adverse effects. For example, if a patient exhibits a change in mental status or develops neurological signs such as seizure activity, the offending agent might be cefepime, and discontinuation or dose adjustment may be necessary. These changes are more likely to occur in patients with sepsis or renal dysfunction and the aging adult. However, cefepime can be overlooked as a possible source as it is a common medication given that is usually well tolerated.

The clinician will decide to treat the patient with cefepime, but a consult with a pharmacist, particularly one with board certification in infectious disease, might be in order. Pharmacists can review the antibiogram and verify dosing and duration. Nursing can counsel the patient on taking the medication, answering any questions, monitoring patient compliance and therapeutic effectiveness, and reporting any concerns to the prescriber. Cefepime therapy requires the collaborative effort of an interprofessional healthcare team to include physicians, specialty-trained nurses, pharmacists, and potentially infectious disease specialists, all working together to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]