Patients with acute, lymphomatous, or unfavorable chronic type adult T cell leukemia carry a poor prognosis and have a median overall survival (OS) measured in months. Treatment is tailored according to clinical subtype and patients characteristics. Chemotherapy or antiviral regimen is generally the first-line treatment for aggressive type (acute, lymphoma, and chronic with unfavorable features). Antiviral regimen or watchful waiting is a reasonable first-line for smoldering and favorable chronic subtypes. For skin lesions, ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) and psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) can be used.

**1. Antiviral therapy**

Patients with leukemic forms of ATL showed improved results with first-line antiviral therapy (zidovudine and interferon), whereas patients with lymphoma type showed a better outcome with chemotherapy. The clinical use of AZT-IFN was first reported by Gill et al. in 1995 for 19 patients with acute-lymphomatous forms of ATL.

**2. Chemotherapy**

Different chemotherapy regimens have been studied for ATL patients. Most frequently used chemotherapies are VCAP-AMP-VECP (vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone-doxorubicin, ranimustine, and prednisone-vindesine, etoposide, carboplatin, prednisone), modified EPOCH (etoposide, prednisolone, vincristine, carboplatin, and doxorubicin; carboplatin is substituted for cyclophosphamide), hyper-CVAD (hyperfractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone), CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), CHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, vincristine, and prednisone).

The Japanese Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG) has initiated a number of clinical trials to evaluate different chemotherapies in Japan. A phase III study from JCOG compared the VCAP-AMP-VECP regimen (known as LSG-15) to biweekly CHOP in untreated acute, lymphoma, or unfavorable chronic ATL patients. The 3-year OS was 24% versus 13% in the VCAP-AMP-VECP arm and CHOP arm, respectively. CR rate (40% versus 25%) and the median OS (13 months versus 11 months) were also superior in VCAP-AMP-VECP arm as compared to CHOP arm. In this study, patients were also administered G-CSF and CNS prophylaxis with cytarabine and intrathecal methotrexate and prednisone.

**3. Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation**

The role of stem cell transplantation (SCT) has been investigated in aggressive ATL, given the poor outcomes with standard treatment modalities. Few studies have been reported autologous SCT, and it has been shown to be associated with poor clinical outcomes, including high transplantation-related mortality.

Retrospective studies showed no significant difference in overall survival between myeloablative conditioning (MAC) and reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC), although a mild trend for overall survival was observed in favor of RIC-received older patients.

**4. Monoclonal Antibody Therapy**

- 
**Brentuximab Vedotin**

Brentuximab vedotin (BV) is a CD30-directed monoclonal antibody. The efficacy and safety were studied in clinical trials for ATL patients. A phase I study evaluated the combination of frontline BV and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone (CHP) in CD30 positive peripheral T-cell lymphoma with all patients, including ATL, achieving CR.

****2.**Mogamulizumab**

Mogamulizumab is a humanized anti-CCR4 monoclonal antibody that is approved for relapsed or resistant ATL in Japan. The single-agent activity was demonstrated in a phase II study with the ORR of 50%, OS of 14 months, and progression-free survival of 5.3 months, months in relapsed ATL patients.

A phase II trial that was done outside Japan comparing Mogamulizumab with chemotherapy in 71 relapsed/refractory ATL patients showed the single-agent activity with ORR of 11% versus 0%. Several retrospective studies also reported severe acute graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) with the use of Mogamulizumab, especially prior to allo-HSCT.

3. **Alemtuzumab**

Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against CD52 that has demonstrated clinical activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL), and peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL).  ATL cells express CD52 more frequently than other peripheral T cell lymphoma. Alemtuzumab, in combination with cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone (CHOP) regimen, was evaluated in 24 patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) between 2003 and 2005. A total of 17 patients (71%) achieved complete remission, and the overall median duration of response was 11 months.

4. **Daclizumab**

Daclizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to CD25 (interleukin-2 receptor alpha chain) that is over-expressed on ATL cells. Its manufacturing was stopped in 2009 due to its side effects, including hepatic toxicity. In 2016, a new form (daclizumab high-yield process) was approved by the FDA for relapsing multiple sclerosis. In phase I/II trial of daclizumab monotherapy (8 mg/kg) for 34 patients with ATL, no response was found in 18 patients with aggressive ATL.

**5. Other novel approaches******

Several new treatment strategies are being studied to increase survival. A phase II study assessing the efficacy of immunomodulatory agent Lenalidomide for aggressive ATL reported encouraging results. The ORR, OS, and median PFS were 42%, 20.3 months, 3.8 months, respectively.