**Radiographs**

Recommended imaging includes a complete radiographic trauma series consisting of a true anteroposterior (AP) image of the glenohumeral joint (i.e., the “Grashey” view). The true AP image is taken with the patient rotated between 30 and 45 degrees offset from the cassette in the coronal plane. Alternatively, the beam can be rotated while the patient remains neutral in the coronal plane. In addition to AP imaging, an axillary lateral radiograph should be obtained. This view may be difficult to accomplish in the acute traumatic setting. However, the importance of obtaining a complete radiographic series with adequate orthogonal imaging cannot be overemphasized. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to miss shoulder dislocations, especially posterior dislocations, when an incomplete radiographic evaluation is the only available option.

**Pertinent Findings**

The axillary lateral view provides essential information about the position of the humeral head relative to the glenoid. Additionally, the presence and degree of anterior (or posterior) glenoid erosion or glenoid dysplasia, as well as any potential humeral head defects, can be appreciated with this view as well. Anterior glenoid rim fractures or glenoid avulsion injuries may also be present. The presence of medial neck scalloping or a possible avulsion injury is visible on AP imaging in the presence of an associated humeral avulsion of glenohumeral ligaments (HAGL).

**Advanced Imaging Modalities**

Magnetic resonance imaging is the preferred imaging modality to visualize the presence of associated labral injuries. The addition of intra-articular contrast (i.e., MR arthrography) increases the sensitivity and specificity for identifying associated injuries. MRI imaging can provide clinicians with an accurate assessment of potential osseous glenohumeral defects or glenohumeral avulsions (off the glenoid or humeral sides).

CT imaging is the preferred imaging modality when attempting to quantify the bone loss. Although many quantification techniques exist, three-dimensional reconstruction techniques are superior to two-dimensional assessments. The latter relies on the proper sagittal orientation along the long axis of the glenoid to accurately characterize glenoid bone loss.

Three-dimensional en-face reconstructions of the glenoid with humeral subtraction have become the gold standard for glenoid assessment, given their ability to provide easily reproducible quantification of glenoid morphology.