Exocrine glands are comprised of an acinus and a duct with different cell types, respectively. These glands are found in many organs within the body and demonstrate a large variety in the function of their secretions.  As such, a wide range of cell types exists in exocrine glands.

While the duct functions primarily to transport glandular secretions, the acinus is responsible for the production of glandular secretions, and as such, shows more variety in cellular composition. Typical cell types within the acinus include serous, mucinous, or sebaceous.

- Serous cells secrete an isotonic fluid that contains proteins such as enzymes. Salivary glands are made up of serous cells to a large extent

- Mucinous glands secrete mucus, a typical example being Brunner glands in the duodenum.

- Sebaceous glands secrete sebum, an oily compound. Sebaceous glands are most prevalent in the face, scalp, groin, and armpits. Cell types can be differentiated histologically as well.  Mucous cells typically stain lighter than their serous counterparts when stained with hematoxylin and eosin.

As ducts move from the acinus toward the final target, secretions initially enter the intralobular duct. Intralobular ducts have a simple cuboidal epithelium commonly surrounded by parenchyma. Intralobular ducts drain into interlobular ducts, which are a simple columnar epithelium. The final ductal unit is the interlobar duct recognized by a stratified columnar epithelium. Connective tissue surrounds both interlobular and interlobar ducts.