Galantamine, a cholinomimetic agent, is used to treat patients with dementia, mainly dementia associated with Alzheimer disease. Galantamine is prescribed by primary care physicians, neurologists, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners, but proper management of patients on galantamine therapy requires collaboration and open communication among interprofessional healthcare team members.

It is crucial to counsel the patient and family that galantamine is symptomatic treatment and, therefore, will not modify the underlying disease process and progression of the disease. It alleviates the symptoms of dementia by improving cognition, global functioning, activity of daily life, and behavior.

Clinicians should regularly follow up with the patient to gradually titrate the dosage, assessing the efficacy and safety of the dose to the patient. Patients and caregivers should be advised to stop the medication immediately upon appearance of skin rash or other manifestations of hypersensitivity and seek professional assistance immediately. Polypharmacy and drugs causing clouding of the mind should be avoided when possible.

Consultation with the pharmacist is beneficial in verifying the dosage and schedule of galantamine, checking for drug-to-drug interaction, and performing medication reconciliation. If the pharmacist detects any issue, it should be reported back to the prescribers. Nurses should be familiar with the adverse event profile of the galantamine as they are the health professionals who encounter the patients first in follow-up visits and assisted living facilities because most patients with Alzheimer disease end up in the assisted living facilities.

Nurses educate the patient and family regarding the importance of adequate fluid intake and taking medication with meals. The emergency room staff, and all clinicians, including primary care and specialists, should be trained to manage the toxicity due to overdosage and other life-threatening adverse effects.

Patients, families, and caregivers should understand the progressive nature of the condition and have realistic expectations from the treatment. They should be familiar with unpleasant effects and have easy access to important information such as poison control centers. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach is essential in galantamine therapy to achieve the optimum outcome.