In recent years, the number of modalities for the evaluation of CAD has rapidly expanded. Non-invasive testing now includes perfusion echocardiography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging.

The clinician must determine the pre-test probability for CAD prior to selecting the diagnostic test. Patients with intermediate probability for CAD are most likely to benefit from additional cardiovascular testing.

Pharmacologic stress testing with myocardial perfusion imaging is indicated when exercise stress testing cannot be performed due to an abnormal EKG or the patient's inability to exercise.

Scenarios in which a nuclear stress test may be used for evaluation include:

- Patients with suspected coronary artery disease

- Typically, patients who have chest pain suggestive of angina and intermediate to a high probability of acute coronary syndrome (ACS). However, it should not be performed in patients with ongoing or unstable conditions prior to the relief of symptoms.

- Patients with prior history of CAD with new or worsening symptoms

- Patients who have new-onset left bundle branch block (LBBB) or ventricular pacing in the EKG

- Patients with a recent ACS who were treated conservatively or partially revascularized within the past 3 months for evaluation of risk assessment

- Patients with a prior history of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) of more than 5 years or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of more than 2 years and are asymptomatic, one-time testing cardiac stress testing is appropriate.

- Patients with dyspnea and suspected cardiac origin

- Patients with newly diagnosed congestive heart failure to evaluate reversible causes such as CAD