As the population continues to age, there will likely be an increasing prevalence of antiplatelet drug use. Most exposures will not have severe symptoms and not require a lot of healthcare resources. Others can have devastating complications requiring interprofessional care. Additionally, the healthcare team should ascertain whether the exposure was intentional or unintentional, which may lead to involvement in mental health services.

The majority of patients will present with bleeding ranging from mild to severe, and clinicians in the emergency department need to be aware that there is no specific antidote to any of these agents. Thus, supportive care is necessary. The clinician should consult with a hematologist and poison control on the management of patients with moderate to severe bleeding. Some patients may need to be admitted and managed with transfusion of blood products. The pharmacist should thoroughly educate patients about the adverse effect profile and when to seek medical help. Prevention of and early intervention in cases of antiplatelet agent toxicity are crucial. The pharmacist can play a critical role by monitoring doses and verifying that there are no drug-drug interactions that can enhance antiplatelet activity beyond the therapeutic level. Nursing will help assess therapy effectiveness and watch for adverse events; they may be the first to have the opportunity to notice something is amiss. Specialty trained nurses in emergency medicine and critical care will be responsible for monitoring patients. Cardiovascular specialty nurses play a role in patient education of the patient and family. In both instances, immediate consultation with the managing clinician is important to make necessary changes to the treatment regimen or initiate other interventions.

The interprofessional team should communicate with other members if there is a dose change/frequency of use of the antiplatelet medication. Only through open communication can the morbidity of these agents be reduced. [Level 5]