Before the procedure, the patient should be advised on the risks and benefits of the imaging test and the intended purpose of the exam in their clinical condition. Clear instructions for the day of the procedure should be provided to the patient before arrival to avoid potential complications and delays. A brief interval history should be taken the day of the procedure to include any history of trauma, surgery, arthritis, pregnancy, cancer, bone disease, current medical conditions, prior imaging results, and any recent nuclear medicine therapy or imaging.

**Bone Scintigraphy**

The patient should be well hydrated and should void immediately before the exam. The radiopharmaceutical is then prepared with sodium pertechnetate per manufacturer instructions and kept at the appropriate temperature. The radiopharmaceutical should not be exposed to air and should be injected within 6 hours of preparation. The tracer is administered intravenously.

The most commonly used protocol in bone scintigraphy is the three-phase bone scan. This begins with the injection of the tracer as described above, with the typical dose being 10 to 30 millicuries (mCi) for adults and 0.2 to 0.3 mCi per Kg for pediatric patients.

**Labeled Leukocyte Imaging**

Labeled leukocyte imaging requires special preparation of the leukocytes in a sterile field. The patient’s blood is collected and mixed in a vial with a citrate-dextrose anticoagulant. The blood is then centrifuged at 2000 g for 10 min. After separation of the pellet and blood-free plasma, the pellet is mixed with 10% HES and the erythrocytes are allowed to sediment. The remaining leukocyte-rich plasma is removed and re-centrifuged and the pellet is placed into the blood-free plasma obtained in an earlier step. In-oxine or 99mTc-HMPAO is then added to this mixture for labeling. The labeled leukocytes should be reinjected into the patient within 3 hours of labeling.

Dosing is variable, but a common dose of 111In-labeled leukocytes is 300 to 500 μCi, and a common dose of 99mTc-HMPAO–labeled leukocytes is 5 to 10 mCi.

**FDG-PET**

Patients should consume no food by mouth for at least 6 hours before the exam. Patients scheduled for morning exams should be instructed to remain NPO after midnight before the exam. Patients scheduled for afternoon tests should eat a light breakfast but should have no oral intake after 8 AM. Patients should arrive well hydrated having consumed at least 1 liter of water in the two hours before the exam. Blood glucose levels should be less than 120 mg/dl before administration of FDG. After injection, the patient should remain seated and still until the exam to minimize muscle activity. The patient should void 5 minutes before the start of the exam. The typical interval between FDG injection and image acquisition is 60 minutes. In combined systems, the PET and CT images are obtained concurrently. Reconstruction and processing are completed after the exam, and the images are evaluated using software to correlate areas of increased uptake with CT anatomy.