Management of hospital-acquired infections follows standard goal-directed therapy if sepsis, antibiotics, fluid resuscitation, and close monitoring for organ dysfunction. Fluid resuscitation should be followed by serial assessments of the clinical and hemodynamic responses. The selection and timing of initiation of antibiotics are critical. Empiric antibiotics should be selected based on risk factors for MDR pathogens and clinical stability of the patient. Antibiotics should be started early within an hour if possible, and if central line-associated bloodstream infection is suspected, two sets of blood cultures, one from a peripheral venous site and the other from the central venous catheter site, should be obtained before initiation of antibiotic therapy. In case of hypotension, hypoperfusion, or organ dysfunction, the catheter must be removed without delay, and the tip should be sent for culture.

When suspecting catheter-associated urinary tract infections, the old catheter must be removed, and a urine sample from the newly placed catheter must be obtained, preferably before initiating antibiotics. These measures have been shown to enhance the yield of microbiological specimens. As part of the stand precautions, all catheters (including central lines and urinary catheters) should be removed if they are no longer indicated.

The usual duration of the antibiotic regimen in HAP or VAP is seven days unless a longer duration is clinically indicated.

CLABSI incidence has decreased in the US over the years due to increasing awareness and implementation of evidence-based preventive strategies such as aseptic precautions at the time of insertion, removal of unnecessary catheters, chlorhexidine baths, antimicrobial dressings, and catheter lock solutions.

For Clostridium difficile infections, oral vancomycin is usually the drug of choice and sometimes might need altering the underlying antibiotics regimen for primary infection. Metronidazole is an alternative medication. Newer medications include fidaxomicin.

Proper hand hygiene and appropriate infection prevention strategies need to be followed while caring for surgical sites postoperatively. Also, antibiotic prophylaxis and skin decontamination are important factors in the prevention of SSI. ****

Universal standard (infection control) measures, such as handwashing with soap and water or using alcohol-based disinfectant before and after each patient visit, are vital in reducing rates of transmission of MDR pathogens. In a study, the use of gloves and gowns did not prevent contamination and conclusively did not seem enough to prevent the spread of infections.