There are many abnormalities associated with head and facial development that can be due to genetic, environmental, and other causes.  Any facial abnormality should prompt clinicians to search for other defects as they often occur as a part of syndromes. Therefore, a full exam, including the heart, lungs, rectal, ophthalmologic, and skin exam, should be done.

**Cleft Lip/Palate:**

Clinically, one of the most common abnormalities seen is an oral cleft, in the form of a cleft lip, cleft palate, or a combination of both. According to the world health organization, an oral cleft abnormality occurs in about one in every 700 live births worldwide. It is the second most common congenital disability in the United States, affecting one in 940 births and 4437 cases every year (cleft lip with or with cleft palate). The diagnosis is made clinically upon birth, but can also be done via ultrasonography in utero at an OB/GYN office. Complications of orofacial clefts can include feeding difficulties, speech, and cognition depending on the severity. Although the kind of treatment depends on the type and severity of the condition, the definitive treatment is surgery.

**Choanal Atresia:**

During fetal development, the oro-nasal membrane (choana) normally recanalizes. Failure of this process can result in blockage of the nasal passage by abnormal tissue. This anomaly may be seen associated with other defects remembered by the mnemonic CHARGE (coloboma, heart disease, atresia choanae, retarded growth and retarded development and/or CNS anomalies, genital hypoplasia, and ear anomalies).