No definitive treatment has been recognized for SOM. Most patients with SOM will present to the ophthalmologist because of the visual symptoms. The variable symptoms and periods of remission make definitive treatment assessment difficult. Furthermore, it is a rare condition, with less than 200 cases reported.

**Medications:**successful treatments have included topical beta-blockers, carbamazepine, baclofen, clonazepam, memantine, mirtazapine, and phenytoin. All these medications are thought to work because of their membrane-stabilizing effects)

- Carbamazepine administered in a dose of 200 mg two to four times a day has been shown to give a substantial improvement or complete resolution of symptoms in SOM in 80% of patients. Side-effects of carbamazepine may limit the use of the drug. Side effects include rash, anemia, hyponatremia, and elevated liver enzymes.

- White et al. found that 80% of 20 patients with SOM successfully responded to systemic medical treatment, including carbamazepine, propranolol, phenytoin, and baclofen.

- Topical beta-blockers such as timolol, levobunolol, and betaxolol, as well as systemic propranolol, have been shown to be successful. Oral propranolol at a dose of 10 mg daily was found to be useful for a patient with SOM. It is thought that beta-blockers reduce the blood pressure amplitude, thereby reducing the pulsatile compression of the trochlear nerve. Beta-blockers may also reduce ephaptic transmission by reducing neuronal sensitivity. Zand et al. found that intermittent use of topical levobunolol 0.5% controlled SOM symptoms in two cases with as little as one drop of levobunolol every three weeks: this reduced the intensity of the myokymia but did not eliminate the movements. They succeeded in treating one patient who had had symptoms for 60 years and could discontinue the topical beta-blockers without recurrence. Their other patient had the symptoms controlled with only one to two drops a day every one to two months. This patient had had symptoms several times a day for 13 years.

As the topical and systemic medications have minimal side effects and as most of these patients initially present to ophthalmologists, these medications are usually the first line of treatment.

**Botulinum toxin injection:**under myographic control, it is possible to inject the superior oblique muscle with botulinum toxin. However, it is difficult to do this without affecting the adjacent muscles and causing a superior oblique weakness with resultant double vision. While involved in the care of 3 patients with Mr. John Lee at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London with SOM, we observed limited success with botulinum toxin injections with persistent vertical diplopia for several months in each patient and involvement of the medial rectus in two. As a result, the use of botulinum toxin for SOM has largely been abandoned.

**Surgery:**Surgery may be considered when patients fail to respond to medical treatments or get a recurrence of intractable symptoms.

**Superior oblique muscle surgery:**Hoyt performed a superior oblique tenotomy and ipsilateral recession of the inferior oblique muscle with a resolution of the symptoms described in his first report. Subsequently, procedures have included superior oblique tenotomy, superior oblique myectomy, superior oblique myectomy with trochlectomy, and ipsilateral inferior oblique muscle weakening to overcome the inevitable superior oblique weakness created by these procedures. Some patients have required a contralateral inferior rectus muscle procedure because of the diplopia created by the superior oblique muscle weakening procedure.

Currently, the procedure of choice combines a superior oblique tenotomy with ipsilateral inferior oblique myectomy, as first performed and described for this condition by Hoyt in 1970. Agarwal and Kushner found that more than a third of these patients undergoing surgery had residual vertical double vision requiring prisms or further surgery. Superior oblique myokymia may persist even after superior oblique tenotomy because of tendon remnants or fascial or sheath connections, which may heal after surgery.

Parks has observed that complete elimination of the function of the superior oblique muscle may not occur even after tenectomy. Because of this, Ruttum and Harris recommended the removal of the trochlea as well as a 10 mm segment of the superior oblique muscle via an anterior orbitotomy approach. Diplopia occurs in downgaze in nearly half the patients undergoing superior oblique tenectomy, although most patients do not develop hypertropia in the primary gaze, which is surprising. This may be because most of these patients underwent inferior oblique myectomy at the same time as the superior oblique tenectomy.

Law et al. successfully performed an ipsilateral superior rectus recession in a case with persistent myokymia after tenectomy and needed resection of residual fibers. The patient had hypertropia following an initial surgery that resolved with the superior rectus recession, which is an unconventional approach to hypertropia, normally treated with a contralateral inferior rectus recession.

**Partial superior oblique tendon weakening:**this has been termed the reverse 'Harada-Ito" procedure, where the anterior fibers of the superior oblique tendon are weakened, preserving the remaining superior oblique tendon fibers, thereby preserving some of the superior oblique function. Komorsky et al. treated one patient in this manner by nasally transposing the anterior fibers of the superior oblique tendon. Partial anterior tenectomy may also eliminate symptoms, but this procedure has not been reported to date.

With any procedure that preserved part of the superior oblique tendon insertion, some symptoms may persist, albeit being less troublesome. Conversely, any tenectomy or complete tenotomy procedure is likely to lead to some degree of double vision and would require further surgery to the ipsilateral inferior oblique muscle and sometimes the contralateral inferior rectus muscle. When proposing superior oblique muscle and tendon surgery, these details need to be discussed with the patient.

**Microvascular decompression:**Samii et al. described the first case of surgical decompression of the trochlear nerve in 1998. A Goretex or Teflon graft is inserted between the offending artery and the trochlear nerve. The arterial loop usually arises from the superior cerebellar artery and affects the nerve at the root entry zone, causing axonal compression. Intraoperative electromyography showed the erratic axonal discharge causing SOM, which stopped following the placement of a Teflon graft.

There have subsequently been a total of six cases described in the literature using different neurosurgical approaches. Half the patients had postoperative trochlear nerve palsy that lasted from weeks to months but recovered. The procedures were curative of the symptoms of SOM. The commonest surgical approach has been the retrosigmoidal approach. Kawasaki et al. have suggested that the lateral superior cerebellar approach gives a better operative view allowing fine manipulation of the vessel and the nerve for decompression. In the retrosigmoidal approach, there is no retraction of the cerebellum, and this may limit the operative view.

Neurosurgical microvascular decompression of the trochlear nerve root is reserved for patients with intractable symptoms not alleviated with medial treatments or focal superior oblique tendon and muscle surgery. Such patients should always undergo neuroimaging to look for vascular anomalies in the vicinity of the origin of the trochlear nerve and also to exclude brainstem tumors.

**History of the neurovascular compression theory:**The neurovascular compression theory was proposed by Peter Jannetta when he was a neurosurgery resident at the University of California. In 1965, while performing cranial nerve microdissections for dental students, Jannetta identified the trigeminal portio intermedia. He proposed that preserving these sensory fibers may avoid the facial numbness that was common after surgery for trigeminal neuralgia. He and Robert Rand developed a subtemporal transtentorial approach to achieve selective rhizotomy for trigeminal neuralgia.

As such surgery would be forbidden for a resident to perform at the University of California hospital, he operated on a patient with John Alksne at the Harbor General Hospital. On seeing the trigeminal nerve compression by the superior cerebellar artery at surgery, he said, "that's the cause of the tic." He proposed that alleviating the compression of the nerve may be curative.

Some months later, when examining a patient with hemifacial spasm, it occurred to Jannetta that a similar microvascular compression could cause this condition. He went on to perform the first Jannetta microvascular decompression procedure on this patient with success. The neurosurgical cognoscenti of the time were not inclined to accept such radical theories from a resident.

Over decades, the refinement of his surgical technique and presenting his results led to the acceptance of microvascular decompression surgery for trigeminal neuralgia and hemifacial spasm. It is considered one of the great advances in neurosurgeries, and the approach is now applied to other conditions such as SOM and glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Interestingly, the concept of compression of nerve roots by normal vessels was introduced by Dandy and Gardner. Indeed, Dandy had been able to identify compression of the trigeminal nerve root by the superior cerebellar artery loop in 30.7% and compression by a branch of the petrosal vein in 14% of the 215 cases he presented in 1934. This was prior to the use of microscopes.

Interestingly, he did not consider separating the compressing vessels from the nerve. Gardner, in 1962 reported placing a gel foam pad between a compressing artery and nerve in cases of trigeminal neuralgia and hemifacial spasm.

**Management algorithm:**Based on a review of the cases described in the literature and the results of medical and surgical interventions, the logical management of SOM would be as follows:

- A patient diagnosed with SOM but is asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic: no treatment prescribed and watchful waiting.

- A patient diagnosed with SOM and who is symptomatic: trial of topical beta-blockers like timolol, betaxolol, levobunolol. A gradual reduction in the dose, even down to treatment every few weeks, is tried if the patient responds to treatment.

- A patient diagnosed with SOM is symptomatic and has not responded to topical beta-blockers: trial of medical treatments such as baclofen, gabapentin, carbamazepine, or memantine. These patients can be weaned off these drugs over time.

- A patient diagnosed with SOM is symptomatic and has not responded to topical beta-blockers or systemic medications: obtain neuroimaging prior to offering any surgery. The least invasive surgery with the fewest side effects should be undertaken. Consider partial weakening of the superior oblique tendon. The patient may need ipsilateral inferior oblique myectomy, depending upon the degree of superior oblique muscle weakening.

- A patient diagnosed with SOM is symptomatic and has intractable symptoms with failure of the above treatments; obtain proper neuroimaging looking for vascular compromise of the trochlear nerve. Consider neurosurgical neurovascular decompression.