**Short-Acting Beta Agonists (SABA)**

American Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines from 2013 provide a strong recommendation with high-quality evidence for short-acting beta 2 agonists (SABA) use 5 to 20 minutes (optimally 15) minutes before exercise.

**Inhaled Corticosteroids (ICS)**

If symptoms are not well controlled with the SABA or patient is using SABA daily, additional medications can be added after medication adherence, and proper use has been confirmed. It is estimated that 15% to 20% of the patients will not respond to SABA treatment. ATS provides a strong recommendation with moderate-quality evidence for daily inhaled corticosteroids (ICS).

**Leukotriene Receptor Antagonists (LTRA)**

ATS provides a strong recommendation with moderate-quality evidence for daily leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) to address the inflammatory mediator release involved in EIB.

**Mast Cell Stabilizing Agents (MCSA)**

ATS also makes strong recommendations with high-quality evidence for adding mast cell stabilizer (MCSA) before exercise. Mast cell degranulation plays a key role in EIB pathology. There is no additional benefit when MCSA is combined with SABA, and MCSAs are less effective than SABA. MCSA is not widely available in the U.S.

**Short-acting Muscarinic Antagonists (SAMA)**

Inhaled anticholinergic agents are weakly recommended with low-quality evidence. Short-acting muscarinic antagonists (SAMA) are less effective than SABA; however, they can be used in combination when SABA tolerance develops.

**Antihistamine**

An antihistamine may be beneficial in patients with underlying allergies.

**Long-acting Beta Agonists (LABA)**

ATS strongly recommends against, with high-quality evidence, the daily use of long-acting beta 2 agonists (LABA) because the potential side effects do not outweigh the benefits.

**Non-pharmacologic Interventions**

Nonpharmacologic treatment approaches are strongly recommended with moderate-quality evidence.

Secondly, masks to promote warming and humidification of the air with exercise are weakly recommended with low-quality evidence and may be as effective as using a SABA.

Thirdly, wearing a mechanical barrier mask and/or avoiding exercise in environments high in pollen, allergens, ozone, exhaust, and high levels of chlorine can reduce EIB. Alternatives for pool disinfection are available.

Increasing general exercise tolerance and endurance and decreasing bodyweight if the patient is obese are helpful, and a Cochrane review found exercise to improve EIB severity, pulmonary function, and reduce airway inflammation in people with asthma and EIB.

Caffeine may offer protection against bronchoconstriction and decreased ventilatory dead space and decreases exercise-induced hypoxemia and respiratory muscle fatigue when used before exercise.

Low salt diet and supplementation with fish oil and vitamin C may be beneficial in some patients.

**Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV)**

Treatment with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) support has been shown to decrease airway reactivity in children with asthma and was evaluated in combination with respiratory physical therapy in one study for EIB in asthmatics with positive results in a Brazilian study. The benefit of NIPPV was postulated to involve the stretch mechanism in airways and with the resulting induction of an inhibitory pathway that stopped the cycle of inflammation and promoted bronchodilation. Participants completed 10 1-hr sessions twice a week. The first 20 minutes were spent completing respiratory exercises while sitting and supine, followed by either continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) at 8 cmH2O, inspiratory muscle training, or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) at 8/12 cm H2O. Results included exercise FEV1 measurements as outlined by ATS, FENO to measure airway inflammation, and a questionnaire for symptom measurement. PPV both bilevel and CPAP reduced EIB. Respiratory muscle training (RMT) was shown in the same study to reduce medication use and increase respiratory muscle strength.

**Treatment to reduce the perception of symptoms**

Another treatment approach involves reducing the perception of symptoms. Breathing control, including yoga, or supervised breathing training, has been shown in some small studies to decrease symptoms, reduce medication use, decrease anxiety and depression associated with EIB, and increase the quality of life. Further research and adaptation for use during EIB events are needed.