Edema is a buildup of interstitial fluid in the extracellular/interstitial space that is secondary to an imbalance of capillary filtration related to lymphatic drainage. There can be increased capillary hydrostatic pressure, decreased plasma oncotic pressure, increased capillary permeability, increased plasma volume, or, most notably, regarding lymphatics, a lymphatic obstruction.

During inflammatory, malignant, infectious, or autoimmune disease states, the lymph node can change in size or consistency, which is referred to as lymphadenopathy. Lymph nodes in the popliteal, iliac, or supraclavicular lymph nodes should be considered abnormal if they are greater than 5 mm. If lymph nodes become fixed, or immobile, and have a hardened texture, there is likely malignancy or infection present within the body.

During inflammatory states, the lymphatic pumping becomes reduced secondary to cytokines producing vasoactive substances and altering the contractile functioning of the vessel. Therefore, it is likely that during inflammatory disease processes, the associated edema can, in part, be secondary to decreased lymphatic pumping.

Lymphatic tissues play a significant role in cancer metastases and disease progression. Lymph node metastases can be a significant indicator of the prognosis and patient survival in many neoplasms. Research has found that lymph node metastasis is worsened further due to tumor lymphangiogenesis through inappropriate molecular signaling. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C overexpression can increase lymphatic flow, which in part increases tumor metastases.