Multiple studies have reported the existence of anatomical variations of the muscles of the thorax either in the case of supernumerary muscles or congenital anomalies. The sternalis muscle is a rare supernumerary muscle variant of the anterior thoracic wall found in 8% of the population that lies vertically between the superficial fascia and the pectoral fascia, parallel to the right sternal margin. It measures at approximately 7.0 cm in length and 2.9 cm in width.

Cases have never reported any clinical symptoms related to the sternalis muscle; however, its existence may present alterations in the electrocardiogram or cause misdiagnoses of breast masses (e.g., breast carcinoma or hematoma) on routine mammography due to its parasternal location and relative unfamiliarity among radiologists. It has the potential to interfere with and prolong breast and cardiothoracic surgeries if undetected preoperatively. If it is detected preoperatively, surgeons can use the sternalis muscle as a muscular flap in reconstructive surgeries of the anterior chest wall, head and neck, and breast.

Anatomical variations of the thorax muscles may also arise as a result of varying degrees of congenital anomalies. Poland syndrome is characterized by the absence of the sternocostal head of the pectoralis major muscle along with variations of hypoplasia or absence of the pectoralis minor muscle and even digital anomalies. Other anomalies described in Poland syndrome include the absence or hypoplasia of the ipsilateral breast, excavatum deformities, and rib aplasia. These defects are most commonly unilateral and typically found on the right side, although some studies have reported the rare existence of bilateral manifestations. Many variations of the syndrome have been described and range from cases of mild hypoplasia of the pectoralis major muscle to cases of severe hypoplasia of the thoracic wall.