Approach to a patient at the end of life for the management of pain involves a thorough evaluation of the primary diagnosis and the extent of involvement of organ systems. A comprehensive patient interview should be performed to outline the course of the disease—this aids in establishing a rapport between the caregiver and the patient and leads to better communication. The goals of care should be outlined early, and every effort should be made to ensure strict adherence to the patient’s wishes. After an initial evaluation, open-ended questions should help ascertain the patient’s expectations from care. The concept of total pain should guide the discussion, and the history should also focus on the physical and mental well-being.

Physical examination includes a head-to-toe assessment for factors that may contribute to pain. Physical signs of pain include facial grimacing, restlessness, tachypnea as well as tachycardia. Patients who have been in bed for prolonged periods of time can have skin breaks or pressure ulcers in the dependent portions of the body, including the back of the head, shoulder blades, back, sacrum, hips, ankles, and heels.

Dryness of the eyes can lead to painful keratitis as well as infections. Patients on long-term oxygen therapy may have skin breaks around the nares, dryness, and episodes of epistaxis, which can be distressing. Patients who have been using noninvasive modes of ventilation may have pressure ulcers at the nasal bridge and cheeks. In patients who are intubated and mechanically ventilated, pooling secretions and improper oral care can lead to oral ulcers and dental decay. Head positioning and lack of proper support can lead to painful spasms of the neck muscles.

Signs of malnutrition include temporal wasting, supra, infra-clavicular wasting, scaphoid abdomen, and skin dryness. Dehydration signs follow a similar pattern, including dryness of mucosal surfaces, loss of skin turgor, and dryness of the skin. Abdominal fullness points towards constipation or urinary retention, causing significant distress to the patient. Examination of the genitalia, especially in patients with chronic Foley catheters, can shed light on ulcers and signs of infection. All intravenous access sites require frequent evaluation for thrombophlebitis; infiltration of medications or fluids into the subcutaneous tissue can lead to pain, swelling, and infection. Lastly, a general assessment of hygiene and well-being focused on maintaining the patient's dignity at the end of life is essential.