Most patients with SANRT do not need medical intervention as a heart of 100 to 150 bpm rarely induces any symptoms. In rare cases, patients with frequent SANRT might develop symptoms and require medical management. These patients might also benefit from treatment to avoid long-term adverse effects such as tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.

Medical management of patients presenting with SANRT begins with an initial evaluation of their hemodynamically stability. Hemodynamically unstable patients present with tachycardia associated with hypotension, ischemic chest pain, altered mental status, respiratory failure, or shock, and these patients need their SANRT terminated electrically with an urgent electrical cardioversion. Hemodynamically stable patients should be treated first with a carotid massage or other such vagal maneuvers to cease the rhythm acutely. If such methods are ineffective or inappropriate, intravenous adenosine is the next best step in the absence of contraindications to adenosine.

Currently, there is a lack of large pharmacological studies in patients who present with SANRT due to the rarity of the rhythm and its less frequent complications. For chronic suppression of recurrent SANRT radiofrequency catheter ablation is recommended rather than suppressive medical therapy due to higher success rates of ablations together with short and long-term side effects of the medications. However, in patients who require prolonged suppressive medical therapy, verapamil, digoxin, or amiodarone can be used.