To ensure that a patient receives optimal treatment, staff must be aware of factors that affect the safety and accuracy of arterial monitoring. This starts with training providers on proper technique for placement of the arterial line, including sterile technique and proper dressing of the line to minimize infection. This also includes training on the correct use and care of the equipment to obtain accurate data. The clinical utility of the pressure monitoring system depends on the accuracy of the data it provides. This accuracy is affected by several factors, which are covered below.

To accurately measure arterial blood pressure, the system must be correctly set up. For patients who are lying down, the transducer is usually positioned at the level of the right atrium or the midaxillary line. For patients who are sitting, the cerebral pressure is less than at the level of the heart, so the transducer should be placed at the level of the brain.

The weight of the column of fluid within the tubing exerts hydrostatic pressure on the transducer, which can affect the blood pressure reading. Proper leveling of the transducer minimizes the effect of hydrostatic pressure on the transducer and ensures the accuracy of the measurement. For every 2.5 cm, the transducer is above or below the catheter level, the pressure in the system changes by 1.877 mm. If the transducer is positioned too low relative to the catheter, the fluid within the tubing above the transducer exerts greater pressure on the transducer and produces an abnormally high-pressure value. If the transducer is positioned too high relative to the catheter, the fluid within the tubing above the transducer exerts less pressure on the transducer and produces an abnormally low-pressure value.

Thus, if the transducer is positioned too high, the readings will be lowered, and vice versa for a transducer that is positioned too low. This can be dangerous if healthcare providers are recording inaccurate measurements and making treatment decisions based on inaccurate data. Therefore correct positioning of the transducer is crucial for accurate blood pressure monitoring and patient care. The position of the transducer should be checked every time the OR or patient bed is repositioned.

The measuring system must also be zeroed to obtain accurate data. Zeroing the system provides a reference point of pressure. Most commonly, this is atmospheric pressure. To zero the transducer, the stopcock is opened to the atmosphere. The "zero" button is pressed to indicated on the monitor that this is the zero reference pressure.

Another factor that affects the accuracy of data is the damping of the system. This is the amount of resonance in the system and will affect the systolic and diastolic pressure while maintaining the correct mean arterial pressure. If the system has inadequate damping, there will be an excess of resonance, which will result in an overestimation of the systolic pressure and an underestimation of the diastolic pressure. If the system is overdamped, there will be a falsely-low systolic pressure, but the diastolic pressure is usually accurate.  Overdamping can be due to a clot or buildup of fibrin in the catheter tip. A system that is not optimally damped will be apparent on waveform analysis. An overdamped trace will show less than 1 1/2 oscillations below the baseline with an unclear dicrotic notch. And overdamped tracing will show oscillations both below and above the baseline, known as "ringing." An easy way to test the damping is to flush the system and assess the dynamic response. This is done by quickly flushing the system via the snap or pull tab. When this is activated, the monitor will display a square waveform that rises suddenly, flattens, and sharply declines. This will be followed by one or two oscillations appearing above and below the baseline after the release of the flush tab. This indicates an optimal dynamic response. A dicrotic notch should also be clearly present.

The above steps will optimize the arterial pressure monitoring system to reflect the patient's actual arterial pressure accurately.