The following steps are generally required to complete the Seidel test

- Prepare the room and obtain all equipment.

- Prepare the slit lamp.

- Explain the procedure to the patient.

- Apply topical anesthetic.

- Moisten fluorescein dye strip with normal saline.

- Apply fluorescein above lesion or the superior conjunctival fornix.

- Ask the patient to blink to help spread the stain.

- Visualize the injured site under cobalt blue light.

**Interpretation**

Fluorescein, when concentrated, is an orange to red color. When it becomes diluted, it turns green under cobalt blue light. When instilled into the eye, the dye is taken up by defects in the cornea, such as abrasions or lacerations. Seidel test is positive when the fluorescein dilutes in the aqueous humor and causes it to fluoresce bright green and stream down the eye with gravity. The streaming is sometimes described as a waterfall by some with more brisk leaks. There may be just a focal area or dilution if the leak is not brisk. The fluorescent green color will be located above the lesion and along the sides of the aqueous that has leaked. The center of the waterfall will not have fluorescein present, as it will be just aqueous humor. A positive test indicates a full-thickness corneal or scleral injury.

**Possible false negatives:**

- A small defect that has self-sealed

- A large laceration that has plugged

- Retrobulbar rupture

If there is a strong suspicion for a globe rupture and the Seidel test is negative, the next set in evaluation is to obtain an orbital CT scan, which can evaluate for a flat anterior chamber and may demonstrate an intraocular foreign body.