The buccinator muscle plays an active role along with the orbicularis oris and superior constrictor muscle during swallowing, mastication, blowing, and sucking. It aids in mastication and blowing by compressing the cheek inwards. There are theories that the muscle thickens the cheek mucosa acting as a muscular hydrostat.

Its contraction also pulls the corner of the mouth laterally. While closing the mouth, the muscle contracts gradually, and during the opening movement, it relaxes; this maintains the required tension of the cheeks, thereby preventing injury of the buccal mucosa.

It also helps in the retention and stabilization of the complete denture. Research also shows it plays a role in patients with a habit of thumb/finger sucking.

There are different phases of swallowing. Buccinator tends to act during two of the phases of swallowing. i.e., oral and pharyngeal phases  Buccinator, along with the orbicularis oris muscle, begins the swallowing movement in the oral phase by generating a peristaltic wave-like contraction.

Apart from this, the buccinator muscle gets activated during some mandibular movements like protrusion and retrusion. This activation does not cause the actions directly but aids in the expression of an effort to perform them.

Also, there are reports that some small fibers originate from this muscle and insert into the parotid duct (distal portion.)  These fibers play an active role in regulating the physiological secretion of saliva from the parotid duct.