**Involvement of Patient and Family**

The patient and family can assist in making informed decision-making regarding continuing or discontinuing opioid therapy. Family members are often aware of when a patient is depressed and less functional. Questions to ask the family include:

- Is the patient's day focused on taking opioid pain medication?

- What is the frequency of pain medication?

- Does the patient have any other alcohol or drug problems?

- Does the patient avoid activity?

- Is the patient depressed?

- Is the patient able to function?****

**What To Teach A Patient Taking Opioids**

- Avoid driving or operating power equipment

- Avoid stoping opioids suddenly

- Avoid taking other drugs that depress the respiratory system as alcohol, sedatives, and anxiolytics

- Contact prescribing if pain medication is not adequate for relief

- Destroy opioids based on product-specific disposal information (usually flushing down the toilet or mixing with cat litter or coffee grounds)

- Do not chew tables

- Do not share opioids with friends or family

- Follow prescribed dosing regimen

- Provide product-specific information

- Take opioids only as prescribed

- Set appropriate expectations

**Interprofessional Approach To Prevent Opioid Abuse**

Clinicians, pharmacists, and allied health professionals must work together as an interprofessional team to provide safe and appropriate opioid medication use. While clinicians initially evaluate and prescribe, pharmacists play a crucial role by evaluating the appropriateness and legitimacy of prescriptions received and make the final determination of what prescriptions should be filled. Failure to assess possible abuse, misuse, or diversion results in patient and society problems, while an overzealous effort denies patients with legitimate pain appropriate therapy. A team approach of prescribers and dispensers is likely to produce the best outcome.