Churg Straus syndrome – renamed as eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) – is a specific variant of the group of diseases characterized by necrotizing vasculitis of small and medium-sized systemic blood vessels. Other subtypes within the broad group include granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA), microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), and polyarteritis nodosa. It is distinctive from the other diseases in the category of the coexistence of asthma, rhinosinusitis, and the presence of peripheral eosinophilia.

**History**

Jacob Churg and Lotte Strauss first described the entity based on autopsy findings in a case series of 13 patients in 1951. They all had a familiar pattern of illness with severe asthma, fever, blood eosinophilia, and autopsy evidence of granulomatous necrotizing vasculitis.

- Eosinophilic infiltration

- Necrotizing vasculitis of small- and medium-sized vessels

- Extravascular granuloma formation

However, as individuals presented a wide variance of these features, rarely with the presence of all 3 features, more clinically relevant diagnostic criteria became necessary.

Lanham et al. proposed a definition based on

- Bronchial asthma

- Blood eosinophilia more than 1500/microliter

- Vasculitis involving at least 2 extrapulmonary organs

An unintended drawback of these diagnostic criteria was a delayed diagnosis of the disease, waiting until two or more organ systems were involved. Early cases with a more favorable prognosis, therefore, ran into the risk of being missed.

American College of Rheumatology proposed new classification criteria in 1990 where 4 out of 6 features needed to be identified

- Asthma

- Migratory infiltrates in lung

- Paranasal sinus abnormalities

- Mono or polyneuropathy

- Peripheral blood eosinophilia (greater than 10% total leukocyte count)

- Eosinophilic tissue infiltrates in the biopsy

It rendered a 99.7% specificity and 85% sensitivity for diagnosis.

The Chapel Hill consensus conference in 1994 came up with a definition of EGPA as "eosinophil-rich and granulomatous inflammation involving respiratory tract and necrotizing vasculitis affecting small to medium-sized vessels associated with asthma and eosinophilia."

The significance of this definition was its exclusion of biopsy as a necessity for diagnosis and, therefore, its ability to recognize early cases with only asthma and tissue and blood eosinophilia.