The prognosis depends on the remodeling potential of the bone, patient, and injury-specific factors.

**Remodeling Potential**

Remodeling depends on the following factors:

- The age of the patient and the amount of growth remaining

- The distance of a fracture from the physis

- Plane of deformity

- Degree of displacement

The distal humerus physis provides 20% of the longitudinal growth of the humerus. As a result, the supracondylar region of the distal humerus does not have a significant ability to remodel in cases of malunion. At the elbow, the sagittal plane deformity has better remodeling potential than the coronal plane deformity. Younger patients have more growth remaining and thus have a higher remodeling potential but only for sagittal plane deformity. Coronal plane deformity does not remodel.

**Patient Factors**

Children younger than five years old have better remodeling potential than those older than five.

**Injury-Specific Factors**

- Grade of injury

- Adequacy of reduction and fixation

- Neurovascular status of the limb

Appropriate treatment on time improves the long-term prognosis of these injuries. The prognosis may be worse for higher-grade injuries; however, anatomical reduction, stable fixation, and appropriate care of the soft tissues (including neurovascular injuries and compartment syndrome) improve outcomes. Nondisplaced Gartland I fractures usually heal well without complication. Gartland II fractures with medial comminution can develop cubitus varus if this is not recognized, reduced, and stabilized. Gartland III and IV injuries are more likely to be associated with neurovascular injuries; however, timely, appropriate treatment can lead to excellent outcomes.