The etiology of HLHS is multifactorial and results in underdevelopment of the left-sided structures of the heart.

During fetal development, obstruction to left ventricular (LV) outflow secondary to aortic stenosis increases LV afterload and causes LV hypertrophy, eventually leading to LV dilatation and decreased LV contractility. Additionally, reduced blood flow through the LV inhibits the growth of the ventricle leading to hypoplasia. As a result, the pressure in the left atrium increases leading to bidirectional blood flow or flow reversal through the foramen ovale. The physiologic sequela is a further decrease in blood flow to the LV. Obstruction of flow into the left ventricle due to mitral stenosis or mitral atresia will also cause hypoplasia of the LV due to decreased preload and pressure in the left ventricle. A reduction in blood flow to any developing cardiac structure will lead to abnormal development in-utero.

Neonates with HLHS are dependent on a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) to provide a blood source for the systemic circulation and coronary arteries.  After birth, a continuous infusion of prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) is necessary to maintain ductal patency.

Since the LV is nonfunctional in HLHS, there is little to no egress of blood from the left ventricle. As such, oxygenated pulmonary venous blood in the left atrium exits the left heart through interatrial communication, either the foramen ovale (FO) or an atrial septal defect (ASD). Oxygenated pulmonary venous blood mixes with deoxygenated systemic blood returning to the right atrium, which then flows into the right ventricle and is ejected to the systemic and pulmonary circulation, as described above. As a result of mixing, typical arterial oxygen saturation is between 75% to 85% and is responsible for the observed cyanosis.  Neonates with a restrictive foramen ovale or intact atrial septum may require an emergent percutaneous balloon atrial septostomy in the cardiac catheterization lab after birth to create a larger interatrial communication.