The stomach is susceptible to several primary pathologies that all manifest with similar symptomatology of epigastric pain, burning, gnawing discomfort, nausea/vomiting (+/- blood), satiety, and distention. Pathologies can subdivide into the following categories:

- **Anatomical Pathologies:**
- Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis**:**
- HPS is a condition that results from hyperplasia of the muscular layers in the mucosal wall of the pylorus in the stomach. The thickening of the pylorus leads to structural obstruction of the gastric outlet clinically presented with projectile nonbilious, non-bloody vomitus in an infant. Commonly, this condition develops in caucasian, first-born males around four weeks of age. Hypochloremic hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis develops from hydrochloric acid loss and the body's attempt to compensate for the alkalosis by increasing the renal tubular reabsorption of H+ ions, by eliminating K+ ions. On physical exam, a palpable epigastric mass, the shape, and size of an olive ("palpable olive") may be apparent. Definitive treatment is a surgical correction called a pyloromyotomy.

- **Ulcerative Pathologies:**
- Peptic Ulcer Disease:

- Gastric ulcers occur when the mucosa and submucosa of the stomach lining break down and are commonly due to H. pylori or long-term NSAID use. Less common causes include stress, diet, infection, and rarely, tumors. Often, ulcers are present in either the stomach mucosa (pain worsens after eating) or the duodenal mucosa (pain improves after eating). Patients often describe the pain as a burning or gnawing-type of pain felt in the epigastric region that may or may not radiate to the back. Patients who are clinically suspicious for peptic ulcer disease, an EGD (esophagogastroduodenoscopy) evaluation is a standard of care along with H. pylori testing. If H. pylori-positive, patient treatment will be with a proton pump inhibitor, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin. For penicillin-allergic patients, metronidazole can be an alternative. For H. pylori-negative patients with gastric ulcerations, further history should be obtained regarding NSAID use or other symptoms that could elucidate a potential etiology.
- The gold standard for testing is esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Management typically includes H2-receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).


- Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease:

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a common medical problem due to the reflux of gastric acid into the esophagus, causing symptoms or esophageal mucosal injury. Inappropriate relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter is the common cause of reflux symptoms. The symptoms may include heartburn, regurgitation, dyspepsia, hoarseness, and chronic cough. Treatment will include weight loss and lifestyle changes to decrease the reflux or use of acid-reducing medications such as proton pump inhibitors.


- Dyspepsia:

- Dyspepsia describes symptoms of indigestion, including nausea, vomiting, fullness, heartburn, belching, and abdominal pain. Functional dyspepsia refers to patients experiencing these symptoms in the absence of any clear cause.

- **Inflammatory Conditions:**
- Inflammatory Bowel Disease:

- Crohn disease is a non-caseating chronic granulomatous condition that is a type of inflammatory bowel disease. Crohn disease is capable of affecting any portion of the alimentary canal, from the mouth to the anus, including the stomach. Crohn disease is characterized by transmural inflammation that is non-continuous (skip lesions). Histologically, non-caseating granulomas are the hallmark finding. Endoscopy may show "cobblestoning" of the mucosa, mucosal strictures (i.e., string sign), or other sequelae throughout the GI tract. The terminal ileum is the most commonly affected region, but cases with gastric involvement have been noted with an incidence of <4%. Acute inflammatory flares are treated with steroids, and maintenance medical immunomodulating therapies are available.


- Gastritis: 

- Gastritis refers to gastric mucosa inflammation. Acute cases of gastritis are due to an imbalance between the stomach's acidic environment and its mucosal defense to the acid. This condition can arise with alcohol, chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), chemotherapy, decreased mucosal perfusion, or increased acid production. Chronic cases of gastritis involve atrophy of the gastric mucosa and intestinal metaplasia and primarily divide into two subtypes: autoimmune gastritis and bacterial gastritis. Autoimmune gastritis involves the autoimmune destruction of parietal cells, while bacterial gastritis refers to a gastric infection by Helicobacter pylori.


- Helicobacter Gastritis:

- Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) gram-negative bacteria is the primary pathogen responsible for peptic ulcers and gastric cancers (MALToma and adenocarcinoma) with a global prevalence of infection >50%. H. pylori-associated MALT lymphoma is incredibly unique in the fact that it is a type of cancer that can be treated effectively with antibiotics. H. pylori can colonize the stomach by neutralizing the acidic environment immediately surrounding the bacteria. The pathogen contains an enzyme called urease that is capable of converting urea to ammonia, which increases the pH, providing a protected environment until the pathogen can travel to and attach to the surface of the foveolar cells. Once anchored, the pathogen is protected by the mucus-buffer. Patients will present with epigastric burning, gnawing discomfort, dyspepsia, nighttime awakening, and relief with antacids. A urea breath test can determine if urease-positive bacteria have colonized the patient. Endoscopy is also recommended to evaluate for ulceration and intestinal metaplasia.
- Two widely accepted management regimens:

- Triple Therapy: PPI + clarithromycin + amoxicillin (alt: metronidazole) 
- Quadruple Therapy: (history of previous macrolide exposure) PPI + bismuth subcitrate + metronidazole + tetracycline

- **Gastric Cancers:**
- 90% of gastric cancers are determined to be adenocarcinomas with the remaining percentages divided between MALToma, carcinoid tumors, and stromal tumors.
- Gastric Adenocarcinoma

- Two types of adenocarcinoma are common:

- Intestinal Type: The intestinal type results from metaplasia and atrophy due to chronic gastritis, and is associated with smoking, alcohol, nitrosamines, and type A blood. Intestinal type tumors are typically intrusive growths on the lesser curvature of the stomach and may ulcerate. 
- Diffuse: The diffuse type is less common but characteristically results in a diffuse thickening of the gastric wall leading to a phenomenon called "linitis plastica."




- Gastric cancers are associated with several extra-systemic clinical findings, including acanthosis nigricans, Leser-Trelat sign, Virchow's node, Sister Mary Joseph's nodule, and Krukenberg tumors. Most gastric cancers are adenocarcinomas, and they most commonly metastasize to the liver.
- Management is mostly dependent on staging but commonly may involve tumor resection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy/radiation regimens. Gastric cancers have a good prognosis if the tumor is found early. However, most lesions are asymptomatic until later stages of disease progression.

- **Other Pathologies:**
- Menetrier's disease:

- Menetrier disease is hyperplasia of foveolar cells leading to overproduction of mucus, leading to excessive protein loss and minimal gastric acid production. Patient present with non-specific abdominal pain and edema. On endoscopy evaluation, gastric rugae will appear hypertrophied.


- GAVE (Gastric Antral Vascular Ectasia):

- Angiodysplasia conditions leading to fragility of gastric blood vessels that are susceptible to rupture and bleeding. Patients can present with chronic anemia, GI bleeds, or hematemesis. On endoscopy, the lining of the stomach appears similar to the striations on a watermelon (i.e., watermelon stomach).


- Gastroparesis:

- Gastroparesis is a condition where the gastric intrinsic nervous system called the enteric nervous system becomes impaired as a result of various etiologies like uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. Failure of the enteric nervous system fails the peristaltic contractions leading to stagnation of chyme propagation within and through the stomach. This condition can be idiopathic or caused by connective tissue disease, neurologic dysfunction, diabetes, infection, cancer, or obstruction.