Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is characterized by the separation of the tunica intima from the adventitia of the coronary arteries. The overall theory suggests that there has to be an injury or spontaneous bleeding that disrupts the vessel wall, which allows a hematoma to form. Unlike typical dissection, the inciting event in SCAD is not trauma, atherosclerosis, or intracoronary intervention.

It is hypothesized that the intimal tear from an unknown etiology is an initial event that leads to the creation of intramural hematoma and false lumen. Propagation of the hematoma leads to expansion of the false channel along the longitudinal axis and towards the center of the vessel. One study found that the primary event in SCAD is a rupture of vasa vasorum or medial dissection leading to the formation of secondary intramural hematoma and false lumen by hematoma propagation.

Irrespective of the mechanism of intramural hematoma formation, the final common pathway for myocardial infarction is an obstruction to the coronary blood flow by dissection flap or expanding hematoma. About 90% of patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection present with myocardial infarction, approximately half present with STEMI, and about half with non-ST-elevation ACS.

Ventricular arrhythmias and cardiogenic shock have been reported as well. Since the pathogenesis does not involve plaque rupture and superimposed thrombosis like atherosclerotic coronary artery disease, revascularization with PCI or CABG  is not the first-line treatment in a stable patient. PCI is associated with an increased risk of complications.

The guidewire may enter the false lumen, and balloon dilatation and stent placement may lead to iatrogenic injury, propagation of hematoma, or false lumen leading to further vessel occlusion requiring emergent coronary artery bypass surgery. Healing of the intramural hematoma may subsequently lead to malposition of the stent.