**Maintain Accurate Medical Records Regarding Opiate Prescriptions**

All clinicians should maintain accurate, complete, and current medical records, including:

- All communication should be noted

- Notes should be clear documenting dose adjustments, effectiveness, and any adverse effects

- Describe adherence or lack of adherence to treatment

- Urine drug screen results

- Concerning behaviors

- Family interactions

- In particular, document any decisions regarding the termination of care

**Federal and State Laws**

Several regulations and programs at the federal and state levels reduce prescription opioid abuse, diversion, and overdose. These laws require:

- Immunity from prosecution for individuals seeking assistance during an overdose

- Pain clinic oversight

- Patient identification prior to dispencing

- A physical examination prior to prescribing opioids

- Prescription limits

- A prohibition from obtaining controlled substance prescriptions

- Tamper-resistant prescriptions

**Federal Laws**

The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) sets national standards for controlled substances. Drug scheduling was mandated under The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. The law addresses controlled substances within Title II. The DEA maintains a list of controlled medications and illicit substances categorized from scheduled I to V. The five categories have their basis on the medication’s proper and beneficial medical use and the medication’s potential for dependency and abuse. The purpose of the law is to provide government oversight over the manufacturing and distribution of these types of substances. Prescribers and dispensers are required to have a DEA license to supply these drugs. The licensing provides links to users, prescribers, and distributors.

The schedules range from Schedule I to V. Schedule I drugs are considered to have the highest risk of abuse, while Schedule V drugs have the lowest potential for abuse. Other factors considered by the DEA include pharmacological effect, evidenced-based knowledge of the drug, risk to public health, trends in the use of the drug, and whether or not the drug has the potential to be made more dangerous with minor chemical modifications.

- "High abuse potential with no accepted medical use; medications within this schedule may not be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include marijuana (cannabis), heroin, mescaline (peyote), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and methaqualone.

- "High abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependence; however, these medications have an accepted medical use and may be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include fentanyl, oxycodone, morphine, methylphenidate, hydromorphone, amphetamine, methamphetamine (meth), pentobarbital, and secobarbital.

- Schedule II drugs may not receive a refill.

- "Intermediate abuse potential (i.e., less than Schedule II but more than Schedule IV medications)"

- Examples include anabolic steroids, testosterone, and ketamine.

- "Abuse potential less than Schedule II but more than Schedule V medications"

- Examples include diazepam, alprazolam, and tramadol.

- "Medications with the least potential for abuse among the controlled substances."

- Examples include pregabalin, Diphenoxylate/atropine, dextromethorphan.

It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling both to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and also to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescription of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and obligates providers to be wary of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is a time where federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination can potentially reduce harm to patients prescribed scheduled drugs drastically. However, it will take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling actually reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.

**Florida Law on Controlled Substance Prescribing**

Most states, including Florida, have specific laws regarding the prescription of controlled substances. Each provider should become familiar with the key provisions.

**HB 21**

Florida Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) provides changes regarding database reporting, checking, and access to information. The new law requires a prescriber or dispenser or their designee to consult the PDMP database dispensing history before prescribing a controlled substance to anyone 16 years old or older. Any dispensing of a controlled substance must be reported to the database by the close of the next business day.

A nonopioid controlled substance listed in Schedule V is exempt from mandatory checking. However, if it does contain any amount of an opioid, then the prescriber or dispenser has to consult the database prior to prescribing or dispensing.

If the PDMP database cannot be accessed, the practitioner can prescribe or dispense the controlled substance but must document the reason the database was not consulted and must limit the prescription to a three-day supply.

If a dispenser dispenses controlled substances but has no dispensing transactions in the preceding seven (7)-day period, the dispenser must report this information to E-FORCSE by filing a zero report described in the Dispenser’s Implementation Guide: https://flmd.us/dig.

Practitioners authorized to prescribe or dispense controlled substances may look up, view, and print controlled substance dispensing information on their specific patients. Prescribers should take these rules seriously. If a prescriber fails to consult the database prior to subscribing, they are subject to a DOH non-disciplinary citation. Continued offenses may result in disciple from their specialties medical board. Willful and knowing failure to report is a first-degree misdemeanor.Remember, the 3-7 day limit on prescribing Schedule II opioids applies to acute pain – not chronic nonmalignant pain. However, the requirement for checking the PDMP database applies to the prescription of virtually any controlled substance for any reason.

**Section 456.44 – Controlled Substance Prescribing**

This law covers both the management of acute and chronic pain in the State of Florida.

**Controlled Substance Prescriptions**

- Written on counterfeit-proof prescription blank ordered from DOH vendor found at http://www.floridaheatlh.gov/licensing-and-regulation

- Drug quantity must be written both textually and numerically

- Dated

- Signed by the prescriber; it may be issued electronically

**Dispensing Controlled Substances**

- Requires registration and fee; compliance with all pharmacy laws

- Patients have the option to fill a prescription in the office or pharmacy

- Generally avoid dispensing Schedule II and III, EXCEPTIONS:

- **Dispensing**
- Complimentary drugs
- Clinical trial drugs
- Methadone in a licensed facility
- Licensed hospice
- Department of corrections facility
- In the performance of a surgical procedure

- 3 to 7 day limit of Schedule II opioid
- If traumatic injury and ISS of 9 or greater must concurrently prescribe an emergency opioid antagonist
- Schedule III cannot exceed 14 days

**Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMPP)**

**Acute Pain**

Definition - The normal, predicted, physiological, and time-limited response to an adverse chemical, thermal, or mechanical stimulus associated with surgery, trauma, or acute illness.

The definition does not include pain-related to:

- Cancer

- Terminal Condition - progressive disease or medical or surgical condition that causes significant functional impairment, is not considered by a treating physician to be reversible without the administration of life-sustaining procedures and will result in death within one year after diagnosis if the condition runs its normal course

- Palliative Care - to provide relief of symptoms related to an incurable, progressive illness or injury

- Traumatic Injury - with an Injury Severity Score of 9 or greater

- **NOTE:**Pain from major surgery is not included

**3-day Pain Management**

- Acute pain treatment is limited to a prescription for a Scheduled II opioid may not exceed a 3-day supply.

**7-day Pain Management**

- Acute pain treatment requiring more than a 3-day supply based on the professional judgment of the prescriber

- The prescriber should indicate “Acute Pain Exception” on the prescription.

- The prescriber should document the acute medical condition in the medical record and the lack of alternative treatment options that justify a 7-day prescription.
- If a prescription for a Schedule II opioid for the treatment of pain other than acute pain (i.e., pain excluded from acute pain definition), the prescriber must indicate “NONACUTE PAIN” on the prescription.
- If the practitioner prescribes a Schedule II controlled substance for the treatment of pain due to a traumatic injury with a severity score of 9 or greater, the practitioner is required to also prescribe an emergency opioid antagonist.

- **NOTE:**The requirement is for a “Schedule II controlled substance” and not an “opioid drug listed as a Schedule II controlled substance.”

**Chronic Nonmalignant Pain - [S. 456.44]**

- **Prescribing physician, ARNP, or PA of any Schedule II-IV controlled substances for chronic nonmalignant pain must:**
- Follow requirements of 456.44
- Designate themselves as a controlled substance prescriber on the practitioner profile at http://www.flheatlhsource.gov/mqa-services

Definition Chronic Malignant Pain [456.44(1)(e)] - Pain unrelated to cancer that persists beyond the usual course of the disease or the injury that is the cause of the pain or more than 90 days after surgery.

**Standards**

- Complete and Document H & P Examination Before Treatment

- Nature of pain
- Intensity
- Prior and current treatment
- Comorbid conditions
- Effect of pain physical and psychological function
- Review of PMH and prior studies
- Document the history of alcohol and substance abuse
- Document 1 or more medical indications for the use of a controlled substance

- Document written plan assessing the risk of aberrant drug-related behavior and monitoring

- Includes objectives for determining the success of treatment
- Includes any further diagnostic evaluations or treatments
- Includes drug therapy adjustments and interdisciplinary care
- Includes risks of abuse, addiction, and dependence

- Document a controlled substance written agreement sign by the patient

- Frequency and number of controlled substances and refills
- Compliance and reasons for discontinuation
- Agreement controlled substances shall ONLY be prescribed by one treating physician
- Includes informed consent regarding aspects of care, expectations of behavior, and defining consequences
- Describes the tapering plan when treatment ends

- Establishes follow-up intervals not to exceed 3 months assessing:

- Etiology of pain
- Treatment efficacy
- Continued need
- Progress
- Adverse effects
- Compliance

- If any history of substance abuse, the patient must be referred to an addiction medicine specialist or psychiatrist

- Accurate, Complete, and Current Records

- Photocopy of government-issued ID
- H & P including a history of drug abuse or dependence
- Test results
- Evaluations and consultations
- Discussion of risks and benefits
- Medication type, dosage, quantity, and date prescribed
- Periodic treatment review
- Agreements and instructions
- Drug test results
- Copies of all prescriptions
- Prescriber name legibly written

- Refer patients with signs or symptoms of substance abuse to an addiction or pain specialist and follow recommendations for ongoing care

- 456.44 Does not apply to:

- Board-certified or eligible anesthesiologists, neurologists, physiatrists, or rheumatologists
- Board-certified surgeons with privileges at a hospital or surgical center that primarily provide surgical services
- Board-certified or eligible pain specialists
- Physicians who are AOA, ABMS, or ABMP board-certified or eligible who regularly performs interventional pain procedures
- Physicians who prescribe controlled substances to inpatients

**Pain Management Clinics**

- Registration – Pain management clinics must register with the Florida Department of Health.

- All facilities that (1) advertise in any medium for any type of pain management services, or (2) where, in any month, a majority of patients are prescribed opioids, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, or carisoprodol for the treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain.

- Registration Exceptions - The following entities are exempted from the registration requirement:

- A clinic licensed as a facility pursuant to chapter 395
- A clinic in which the majority of the physicians provide surgical services
- A clinic owned by a publicly held corporation whose total assets exceed $50 million
- A clinic affiliated with an accredited medical school
- A clinic that does not prescribe controlled substances for the treatment of pain
- A clinic owned by a corporate entity exempt from federal taxation under 26 U.S.C. s. 501(c)(3)
- A clinic wholly owned and operated by a board-eligible or board-certified anesthesiologists, physiatrists, rheumatologists, or neurologists
- The clinic is wholly owned and operated by a physician multispecialty practice where one or more board-eligible or board-certified medical specialists have also completed fellowships in pain medicine approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, or who are also board-certified in pain medicine by the American Board of Pain Medicine or a board approved by the American Board of Medical Specialties, the American Association of Physician Specialists, or the American Osteopathic Association, to perform interventional pain procedures of the type routinely billed using surgical codes

- **NOTE:**If the facility erroneously chose not to register, any physician who practiced medicine therein would be subject to discipline by their medical board.

**Summary of Electronic Florida Online Reporting Of Controlled Substances Requirements**

The Florida PDMP facilitates collecting, analyzing, and reporting information on controlled substances prescribing and dispensing.

- All prescribers must consult the Electronic Florida Online Reporting of Controlled Substances Evaluation (E-FORCSE) and review a patient's controlled substance dispensing history before prescribing or dispensing a controlled substance to a patient 16 years of age or older

- E-FORCSE must be consulted, and a report made for new and existing patients and should be done each time a controlled substance is prescribed or dispensed.

- If E-FORCSE cannot be accessed due to a temporary technologic or electrical failure, the prescription may be issued (with documentation of the exception) but should be limited to a 3-day supply.

- All clinicians who dispense controlled substances must report the prescription to E-FORCSE as soon as possible, but no later than the close of the next business day.

- Reporting is waived for:a. Dispensing of a controlled substance in the healthcare system of the Department of Correctionsb. Dispensing of a controlled substance to a person younger than 16 years of age

**Controlled Substance Prescribing Continuing Education**

- Prescribers authorized to prescribe controlled substances must take a board-approved two-hour continuing education course on prescribing controlled substances.

- The course must be taken from “a statewide professional association of physicians in this state that is accredited to provide educational activities designated for the AMA PRA Category 1 credit™ or the American Osteopathic Category 1-A continuing medical education credit as part of biennial license renewal”.

- The course must be taken by allopathic physicians, osteopathic physicians, podiatrists, dentists, and optometrists who are registered with the DEA.

- Advanced registered nurse practitioners and physician assistants must take a three-hour course on controlled substance prescribing.

- Each physician is required to take the course with an initial license and then prior to each subsequent license renewal

**APRN/PA Controlled Substance Prescribing Standards**

- 7-day maximum of Schedule II

- PA and ARNP prohibited from prescribing controlled substances in a pain management clinic

- ARNP prohibited from prescribing controlled substance psychiatric medication to children unless they are a psychiatric NP

- PA prohibited form prescribing controlled substances psychiatric medications to children

- PAs and ARNP must complete 3 hours of CE on effective and safe controlled substance prescribing