Fungi are unicellular or multi-cellular eukaryotic organisms that exist in all environments worldwide. From fungi visible to the naked eye, such as mushrooms, to microscopic yeasts and molds, they exist in many forms. While most fungi do not play a significant role in human disease, there are several hundred fungi that do, resulting in fungal infection or disease. Fungal infections (mycoses) range from common benign infections like 'jock itch' to serious, life-threatening infections such as cryptococcal meningitis. The term 'antifungals' encompasses all chemical compounds, pharmacologic agents, and natural products used to treat mycoses.

Clinically, fungal infections are best categorized first according to the site and extent of the infection, then the route of acquisition, and finally, the virulence of the causative organism. These classifications are essential when determining the most effective treatment regimen for a particular mycosis. Mycoses classify as local (superficial, cutaneous, subcutaneous) or systemic (deep, bloodborne). The acquisition of the fungal infection is either an exogenous (airborne/inhalation, cutaneous exposure, percutaneous inoculation) or an endogenous process (normal flora or reactivated infection). The virulence of the organism is classified as either a primary infection (disease arising in a healthy host) or opportunistic infection (disease arising in human hosts that have a compromised immune system or other defenses).

Antifungal drugs represent a pharmacologically diverse group of drugs that are crucial components in the modern medical management of mycoses. While antimycotic pharmacology has advanced significantly, particularly in the last three decades, common invasive fungal infections still carry a high mortality rate: Candida albicans (approximately 20 to 40% mortality), Aspergillus fumigatus (approximately 50 to 90%), Cryptococcus neoformans (approximately 20 to 70%).

Common, medically relevant fungal infections include, but are not limited to, the following (**Fungal Infection**-Typical causative organisms)

- **Aspergillosis**-Aspergillus fumigatus, A. flavus

- **Blastomycosis**-Blastomyces dermatitidis

- **Candidiasis**-Candida albicans, C. glabrata, C. krusei, C. parasilosis, C. tropicalis

- 
**Chromoblastomycosis (Chromomycosis)** - Cladosporium carrionii, Phialophora verrucosa, Fonsecaea pedrosoi

- **Coccidioidomycosis**-Coccidioides imitis, C. posadasii

- **Cryptococcosis**-Cryptococcus neoformans, C. gattii

- **Dermatophytosis (Tinea)**-Microsporum spp., Epidermophytum spp., Trichophyton spp.

- **Fusariosis**-Fusarium oxysporum,
F.
proliferatum, F. verticillioides

- **Histoplasmosis**-Histoplasma capsulatum

- **Mucormycosis (Zygomycosis)**-Mucor spp., Rhizopus spp.

- **Paracoccidioidomycosis**-Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

- **Pneumocystis pneumonia**-Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly called P. carinii)*

- *While this is an essential and prevalent fungal disease, it is not treated with typical antifungal agents.

- **Sporotrichosis**-Sporothrix schenckii

- **Tinea (Pityriasis) Versicolor**- Malassezia furfur (also called Pityrosporum orbiculare), M. globosa

**Antifungal Drug Classification and Common Specific Drugs**

- **Loss of cell membrane integrity:**
- **Polyenes**: amphotericin B deoxycholate, liposomal amphotericin B, amphotericin B lipid complex, nystatin
- **Azoles:**ketoconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole, itraconazole, isavuconazonium sulfate (isavuconazole), fluconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole
- ****Allylamines**:**terbinafine

- **Loss of cell wall integrity:**
- **Echinocandins**: anidulafungin, caspofungin, micafungin

- ****Mitotic****Inhibitors**:**griseofulvin

- **Antimetabolites**: flucytosine

- 
**Ciclopirox**

- **Quinoline Derivatives**: iodoquinol, clioquinol

- **Potassium Iodide**: saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI)

- 
**Zinc pyrithione**

**Indications**

**Amphotericin B deoxycholate (AMB-d)**is FDA indicated for treating life-threatening or potentially life-threatening fungal infections: aspergillosis, cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, systemic candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and mucormycosis. AMB-d is also approved for treating the parasitic disease American mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. AMB-d has an off-label use for esophageal candidiasis (both HIV infected and non-HIV infected adults and adolescents; HIV-exposed and or infected infants and children), fluconazole-refractory oropharyngeal candidiasis, candidal endophthalmitis, candidal urinary tract infections, visceral leishmaniasis, and ophthalmic aspergillosis.

**Liposomal amphotericin****B (L-AMB)**has FDA approval to treat systemic aspergillosis, candidiasis, and cryptococcosis in patients with renal function impairment and patients refractory to AMB-d therapy. Additionally, L-AMB is an empiric antifungal therapy in febrile neutropenic patients and HIV-infected patients with cryptococcal meningitis. Visceral leishmaniasis is a parasitic infection also treated with this agent. L-AMB has extensive off-label usage for patients infected or exposed to HIV, including candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, and histoplasmosis.

**Amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC)**, like L-AMB, is indicated in treating invasive mycoses in patients unable to tolerate AMB-d. Off-label use of ABLC is an indicated agent in HIV infected patients with coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcal meningitis, and histoplasmosis; empiric therapy for candidiasis and neutropenic fever; and in the treatment of the parasitic infection visceral leishmaniasis.

**Nystatin**has approval as an oral "swish-and-swallow" suspension for the treatment of cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and oralCandida infections. Topically, nystatin has approval for treating mucocutaneous and cutaneous infections with Candida spp. (most commonly C. albicans).

**Ketoconazole**, when applied topically, has been approved for treating tinea corporis, tinea cruris, tinea pedis, tinea versicolor, cutaneous candidiasis, and seborrheic dermatitis. Off-label, topical ketoconazole is used to treat several oral candidal pathologies, including chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis and oral thrush. Ketoconazole is also a systemic agent, which has approval for treating blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, chromomycosis, histoplasmosis, and paracoccidioidomycosis. Off-label oral ketoconazole treatment is used to treat Cushing syndrome and prostate cancer.

Topical **miconazole**is approved to treat cutaneous and mucocutaneous mycoses, particularly vulvovaginal candidiasis. Oral formulations of miconazole are indicated for oropharyngeal candidiasis.

In topical forms, **clotrimazole**is approved to treat tinea corporis, tinea pedis, tinea versicolor, cutaneous candidiasis, and vaginal yeast infections. The indication for the use of oral clotrimazole is the treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis.

**Itraconazole**is an oral drug. It is approved to treat aspergillosis (pulmonary and extrapulmonary), blastomycosis (pulmonary and extrapulmonary), and histoplasmosis (systemic/disseminated not involving the CNS, cavitary pulmonary histoplasmosis) in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients. In immune-competent patients, this drug is also approved to treat oropharyngeal candidiasis, esophageal candidiasis, and onychomycosis (toenail or fingernail).

**Fluconazole**indications include the treatment of esophageal, oropharyngeal, peritoneal, urinary tract, and vaginal candidiasis — additionally, fluconazole treats systemic fungal infections, including candidemia, candida pneumonia, and cryptococcal meningitis. Fluconazole serves as a first-line agent in prophylaxis for mycosis in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients. Off-label, fluconazole has a variety of applications, including blastomycosis, empiric antifungal therapy in non-neutropenic ICU patients, candida prophylaxis (ICU with a high risk of invasiveCandida spp., transplant patients), and tinea.

**Voriconazole**has approval for the following indications: invasive aspergillosis, candidemia in non-neutropenic patients, esophageal candidiasis, and disseminated candidiasis. This drug also treats life-threatening mycoses from fungi likeFusarium spp. Off-label uses for voriconazole are mostly aimed at prophylactic and suppression therapy of fungal infections, including but not limited to aspergillosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients with or without graft versus host disease, acute myelogenous leukemia, empiric therapy in neutropenic fever, and myelodysplastic syndrome.

**Isavuconazole**is approved to treat invasive aspergillosis and invasive mucormycosis in adult populations.

**Posaconazole**has approval for prophylaxis of both invasive aspergillosis and invasive candidiasis. Additionally, posaconazole is used to treat oropharyngeal candidiasis, typically for patient populations refractory to treatment with fluconazole and itraconazole.

**Terbinafine**has approvals as both a topical and systemic (oral) agent. Topical terbinafine is approved to treat tinea (pedis, cruris, and corporis). When administered orally, indications for this drug include the systemic treatment of onychomycosis (tinea unguium) and tinea capitis. Common off-label use of oral formulations includes the treatment of tinea (cruris, corporis, penis, and manuum) as well as lymphocutaneous and cutaneous sporotrichosis.

The echinocandin **anidulafungin**is only given intravenously. It has approval for the treatment ofCandida spp. infections (esophageal candidiasis, candidemia, Candida spp. peritonitis, and intrabdominal abscesses when Candida spp. is grown in culture or the suspected organism).

**Caspofungin**is only approved and administered intravenously. This agent has approval for treating invasive aspergillosis for patient populations refractory to amphotericin B and itraconazole. Caspofungin has also received approval in the treatment ofCandida
spp. infections (candidemia, esophageal, intra-abdominal abscess, peritonitis, and empiric therapy in neutropenic patients). Off-label this agent is utilized as an adjunct in other severe Candida
spp. infections not listed above.

**Micafungin**is also only approved for intravenous administration in treating esophageal candidiasis, prophylaxis ofCandida
spp. infections, candidemia, Candida
spp. peritonitis, Candida
spp. abscesses, and disseminated candidiasis.

**Griseofulvin**is only approved as a systemic (oral) agent and is indicated for the treatment of dermatophytoses of the skin, hair, and nails, which is severe or refractory to topical therapy. Specifically, this drug treats tinea (corporis, pedis, cruris, barbae, capitis, and unguium).

**Flucytosine**has attained approval as an adjunct antifungal agent in treating systemicCandida spp. or Cryptococcus spp. infections. Off-label, flucytosine is utilized in treating pediatric endocarditis caused by Aspergillus spp.

**Ciclopirox**is FDA indicated for the topical treatment of tinea corporis, tinea pedis, tinea cruris, tinea unguium (onychomycosis), tinea (pityriasis) versicolor, and theCandida spp. infection moniliasis.

**Iodoquinol**(discontinued use in the USA) is a topical agent that had approval for treating tinea capitis, tinea cruris, tinea corporis, tinea pedis, moniliasis, and candidal intertrigo.

**Clioquinol**is a combination product with hydrocortisone (USA availability ?) This combination topical agent had approval to treat the same spectrum of dermatoses as iodoquinol: tinea capitis, tinea cruris, tinea corporis, tinea pedis, moniliasis, and candidal intertrigo.

**Potassium iodide,**formulated as a saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI), has no official antifungal approvals; but is used in the off-label treatment of both cutaneous and lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis.

**Zinc pyrithione**is not officially approved for antifungal purposes but has utilization as primary or adjunct therapy in the treatment of mycoses leading to hyperkeratotic skin conditions. A common off-label use is in the treatment of tinea (pityriasis) versicolor.