**Operating Principles**

Based on the IBW (according to the Radford nomogram), the provider must set the target minute ventilation, PEEP, FiO, and maximum pressure alarm (P). With these provided variables, ASV selects the respiratory rate (RR), inspiration-expiration ratio (I: E ratio), and tidal volume (V).

**Otis et al. and Mead et al. Equations:**

Adaptive support ventilation (ASV) uses the equation by Otis et al.

**General Principles**

In ASV, the inspiratory pressure and the respiratory rate (RR) are automatically adjusted by a microprocessor to help minimize the WOB. The microprocessor switches from controlled ventilation (CV) to assisted ventilation (AV). Hence, in general, if the patient’s RR is higher than the target, pressure-controlled ventilation if there is no spontaneous breathing, and a synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) when the patient’s RR is lower than the target. The rationale is to provide a natural respiratory pattern to the patient and thereby reduce the WOB on the respiratory muscles and therefore stimulate spontaneous breathing. The optimal RR-V combination associated with the least WOB is derived from the Otis equation.

ASV maintains an operator preset minimum minute ventilation. Having MMV, the device administers mandatory volume or pressure-controlled mandatory breaths to maintain the preset minute ventilation. The inspiratory pressure and the mandatory rate are fluctuant according to the patient’s lung mechanics – thus providing different tidal volumes (V) and respiratory rates (RR).

The automation in ASV has a high potential to select adequate ventilatory patterns based on the condition suffered by the patient – i.e., normal lungs, restrictive or constrictive diseases.