Administration of all anesthetic gases is via inhalation. As described above, N2O being the only non-volatile gas clinically administered at room temperature in its gaseous state, whereas the volatile gases of halothane, isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane are liquids at room temperature requiring a vaporizer for administration.

- Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC): used as a measure of potency, defined as the % gas concentration determined to produce immobility to noxious stimuli in 50% of patients. Essentially, the higher the MAC, the less the potency of the gas for sedative purposes.

- Alveolar concentration (FA) to inspired concentration (FI): used to determine the speed of induction, works on a 0 to 1 scale where the FA/FI will approach 1 as the gas gets administered, 1 being equilibrium. The rate at which the above ratio approaches equilibrium represents the speed of induction.

- Partition Coefficients: used to determine the solubility of the gas in both arterial blood (blood to gas) and perfused tissues (brain to blood). These coefficients represent the amount of gas that can enter the blood and the amount that must be reversed for equilibrium to be achieved, forming an inverse relationship with the speed of induction (FA/FI). The higher the partition coefficient, the higher concentration that can enter the blood or the brain, and the more that must flow backward along that gradient to reach equilibrium, which causes a slower rate of induction.

All agents have individualized aspects concerning administration

- **N2O:**greater than 100% MAC, blood to gas partition coefficient of 0.47, brain to blood partition coefficient of 1.1

- **Halothane:**0.75% MAC, blood to gas partition coefficient of 2.30, brain to blood partition coefficient of 2.9

- **Isoflurane:**1.4% MAC, blood to gas partition coefficient of 1.4, brain to blood partition coefficient of 2.6

- **Desflurane:**6 to 7% MAC, blood:gas partition coefficient of 0.42, brain:blood partition coefficient of 1.3

- **Sevoflurane:**2.0% MAC, blood:gas partition coefficient of 0.69, brain:blood partition coefficient of 1.7