Management of Evans syndrome is challenging as many patients are refractory to common treatments that work very well with isolated AIHA. Treatment depends on various factors, including the severity of the condition, presenting signs and symptoms, and patient co-morbidities. Symptomatic management such as transfusions is required in those with low blood counts presenting with symptoms secondary to anemia or bleeding in those with thrombocytopenia.

For definitive management, first-line treatment is usually corticosteroids or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Steroids are given at 1 to 2 mg/kg per day tapered over weeks in isolated ITP or over months when warm AIHA is present. In the presence of ITP, IVIG is used relatively more frequently compared with patients with isolated AIHA.

Although most patients have been observed to respond to corticosteroids initially, the duration of response can vary, and more than half relapse, making the use of additional or alternative treatment options imperative.

Rituximab or splenectomy may be considered in those refractory to the standard treatment or if steroid-dependent (that is, at least prednisone greater than or equal to 15 mg required daily to prevent relapse). Again, the responses can be variable. Rituximab is usually preferred due to increased response and particularly when Evans syndrome is likely secondary to an underlying condition such as a malignancy or SLE, and also in those at increased risk of infections due to co-morbidities making it necessary to avoid splenectomy.

Immunosuppressive drugs can be used in those unresponsive to corticosteroids or rituximab. Various immunosuppressants have been tried, but cyclosporin A