The mandible develops in the same area as the first pharyngeal arch and is associated with Meckel’s cartilage, though Meckel’s cartilage does not become the mandible. The mandible begins as a condensation of mesenchymal tissue lateral to Meckel’s cartilage and proceeds through development via intramembranous bone formation. At six weeks in utero, it starts to ossify. The condyle of the mandible, which articulates with the skull as part of the temporomandibular joint, develops as independent secondary cartilage, at approximately ten weeks, and undergoes endochondral ossification.

Simply put, the mandible grows down and forward, or anteriorly and inferiorly. It does this through a combination of processes. These include concurrent resorption of bone from the anterior surface of the ramus with apposition of bone along the posterior surface of the mandible. This process, in conjunction with growth at the condyle, creates the anterior and inferior vector of growth.

In growth and development, there are standard charts commonly used by health care professionals detailing the spectrum of height, weight, age, and growth. It is worth considering there can be significant variation between individuals and that there are both chronologic and biologic ages (considering menarche/puberty). In general, facial height is the last dimension to finish growth and in females will be complete around ages 17-18 years, and in males in the early twenties. In a retrognathic patient or patients who have hypoplastic mandibles, this growth can be done much earlier.

Why does this matter? The timing of this growth and development is crucial when considering skeletal surgery to address retrognathia and is carefully ascertained for each patient.