The thoracic aorta originates from the left ventricle, guarded by the aortic valve. Just above the cusp of the aortic valve, the aorta gives off the left and right main coronary arteries that run along coronary grooves of the heart and are responsible for perfusion of the myocardium. The initial portion of the aorta ascending behind the sternum is referred to as the ascending aorta, extends approximately to the level of the T4 vertebral body. From this point, it is known as the aortic arch and begins to arch posteriorly and to the left of the vertebral bodies in the posterior mediastinum. The aortic arch both begins and ends at the level of the second rib; it lies within the superior mediastinum. in the chest radiographs, the aortic arch is identifiable as "the aortic knob." The aortic arch gives off three branches including:

- Brachiocephalic artery (also known as the innominate artery) is the first arch vessel to branch off - it travels superiorly and to the right side of the body and bifurcates into the right subclavian artery and right common carotid artery

- The left common carotid artery is the subsequent vessel to branch from the aortic arch

- Left subclavian artery is the third arch vessel to branch from the aortic arch

The final section of the aortic arch is just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery and is known as the aortic isthmus. There is a mild narrowing of the aorta that occurs at the site of the ligamentum arteriosum, which is a remnant of the ductus arteriosus.  From the fourth thoracic vertebra, it continues as the descending aorta to travels downward to the diaphragmatic hiatus at the level of T12 where it exits the thorax. The descending aorta gives off multiple vessels before exiting the thoracic cavity, including arteries to supply the pericardium, bronchi, mediastinum, and esophagus; it also gives off the superior phrenic arteries, posterior intercostal arteries, and subcostal arteries.