The best treatment is a topical combination of hydroquinone cream and avoidance of sun or estrogen exposure. In addition to the avoidance of sun exposure, discontinuing the use of high-SPF sunscreens (50 or higher) can prevent the development of melasma. First-line therapy for melasma consists of effective topical therapies, mainly in the form of triple combinations (hydroquinone 4%, tretinoin 0.05%, and fluocinolone acetonide 0.01%) and when triple combinations are unavailable or when patients have hypersensitivity to them, then dual ingredients or single agents be considered.

Chemical peels and lasers may yield unpredictable results and are associated with adverse effects including epidermal necrosis, postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, and hypertrophic scars. These interventions are second-line therapies and used only if the topical medication has failed. In experienced hands, chemical peels and lasers are usually safe and may produce results faster than topical medications.

**Skin Peels**These procedures carry a risk of adverse outcomes. Peels use glycolic or salicylic acid-based compounds which may increase turnover of hyperpigmented keratinocytes.

- They often begin as a monthly treatment using low concentration formulas and progress to weekly applications at higher concentrations.

- Lightening agents are usually used in conjunction with superficial peels for better results.

- Skin peels should only be used after a trial of therapy with at least one skin-lightening agent.

- Close monitoring of skin depigmentation is necessary, and therapy should be halted if alterations in pigmentation in the surrounding skin are noted.

**Lasers**

The efficacy of lasers for the treatment of melasma has been associated with undesired cosmetic results. Their use should be considered in cases of extensive disease that is refractory to laser use as it may actually worsen the condition.