**Indications for Long-Term Oxygen Therapy (LTOT)**

- **Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)**
- LTOT is indicated for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) when:

- A resting PaO2 = 7.3 kPa (55 mm Hg) or SaO2 88% or less while being at rest in a stable clinical condition
- A resting PaO2 = 8.0 kPa (59 mm Hg) or SaO2 89% or less if there is evidence of cor pulmonale, right heart failure or polycythemia (hematocrit greater than 55%) while being  in a stable clinical condition
- Many previous studies showed a survival benefit of LTOT in COPD patients with chronic hypoxemia.

- **Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD)**

- Patients with severe ILD may develop chronic hypoxemia, which may lead to reduced tissue oxygenation with many subsequent complications and worsen prognosis. The use of LTOT in patients with ILD may improve survival and prevent complications. There are no randomized controlled trials (RCTs) reporting the LTOT effects in ILD, and so, recommendations for LTOT are extrapolated from evidence in COPD patients.

- **Pulmonary Hypertension**

- There is no evidence of LTOT survival benefits in patients with pulmonary hypertension, except pulmonary hypertension due to COPD. But LTOT in pulmonary hypertension may improve tissue oxygenation and prevent complications due to chronic hypoxemia.

- **Cystic Fibrosis (CF)**

- Severe CF patients may develop chronic hypoxemia. LTOT in patients with CF may lead to survival improvement and prevent complications caused by chronic hypoxemia, but no studies examined the use of LTOT in CF patients. Recommendations for LTOT in these patients are extrapolated from evidence in COPD patients.

- **Advanced Cardiac Failure**

- There are no studies on the effects of LTOT in patients with chronic heart failure. Using LTOT in patients with advanced cardiac failure and resting hypoxemia may lead to an improvement in tissue oxygenation and preventing complications due to hypoxemia.