Several tests can aid in evaluating a patient in whom pericardial effusion is the differential diagnosis.

- Chest X-ray: The chest X-ray may can not directly identify pericardial effusion. If there is a significant, chronic effusion, then the heart may appear boot-shaped, and radiology may comment on a "water bottle sign" or a water bottle-shaped heart. There may also be evidence of pulmonary edema, engorgement of the pulmonary vessels, and/or pleural effusions on chest x-ray - none of which are sensitive or specific for pericardial effusion.

- ECG: The ECG findings vary from normal to non-specific ST-segment changes for small effusions. For large effusions or tamponade, the ECG may demonstrate electrical alternans, which is a specific but not sensitive finding. Electrical alternans refer to QRS complexes of varying heights corresponding to a back-and-forth motion of the heart within the pericardial sac as it swings on its anchored base during the cardiac cycle. If the pericardial effusion is due to pericarditis, then the ECG may show PR depressions or diffuse ST elevations.

- Echocardiography: Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) or transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is the diagnostic modality of choice when evaluating for pericardial effusion. Echocardiography provides a dynamic assessment of the pericardial effusion allowing for quantification of the size of the effusion and determination of whether there is evidence of cardiac tamponade physiology. Pericardial effusion is identified as anechoic fluid surrounding the heart. In cases of hemopericardium with a clot, pyogenic effusions, or exudative effusions, there may be a hypoechoic clot or debris visible within the anechoic pericardial fluid. There are numerous criteria for the diagnosis of cardiac tamponade by TTE or TEE. Right atrial free-wall collapse or inversion during systole, right ventricular free wall collapse during diastole, increased septal bowing into the left ventricle during inspiration and the right ventricle during exhalation, a dilated inferior vena cava without respiratory variation in a spontaneously breathing patient in sinus rhythm, and increased flow across the mitral valve during exhalation and the tricuspid valve during inspiration are all potentially indicative of intrapericardial pressures that are greater than intracardiac pressures and potential pericardial tamponade. It is important to note that some of these echo findings are sensitive but not specific, while others are specific but not sensitive for cardiac tamponade.

- CT/MRI: Pericardial effusion can also be identified on CT or MRI of the chest or heart; however, this is not the diagnostic modality of choice.