No treatment has been shown to be effective in FFA. The absence of controlled trials and the fact that FFA can spontaneously stabilize should induce caution before confirming the efficacy of a treatment. There are no standardized criteria for measuring the effectiveness of treatments of FFA. The most objective criteria would be the hair count, a photographic evaluation, or the measurement of the distance between the glabella and the frontotemporal line. V. Price has developed a severity score of the LPP (LPPAI: Lichen Planopilaris Activity Index)

Potent local corticosteroids are insufficient to halt the progression of alopecia in 93% of cases, even if there are some isolated cases of stabilization, sometimes in combination with minoxidil (2% or 5%). Intralesional corticosteroids provide an improvement in almost 60% of patients using intralesional injections of triamcinolone acetonide (10 mg/mL). The risk is to worsen atrophy. The efficiency is much better on the eyebrows (80% partial or total regrowth after intralesional injections of triamcinolone in the early stages)

The best results are obtained with 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors, finasteride, and dutasteride: stabilization in four out of eight patients treated with finasteride 2.5 mg per day and minoxidil 2% for 18 months

Topical tacrolimus, used alone, is not effective, and its use is difficult on the scalp. Oral ciclosporin

FFA was considered a good indication of hair transplants because of its slow evolution. A recent publication