The Fallopian tube, also known by the names uterine tube or oviduct, is named after the Italian anatomist Gabriel Fallopius.

Embryologically, the Fallopian tubes derive from the coelomic epithelium via the paramesonephric ducts. Between week five and week six after fertilization, Muller’s groove arises on each side laterally to the mesonephric duct. Muller’s groove originates from the coelomic epithelium, and the edges of this groove form the paramesonephric or Mullerian ducts. These paramesonephric ducts, in turn, fuse in the eighth week to form the uterus, Fallopian tubes, cervix, and upper two-thirds of the vagina.

Each tube consists of several anatomic regions

- **Ostia**- the tubal openings into the uterine cavity, which is visible during hysteroscopy

- **Intramural/Interstitial**- the most proximal portion of the Fallopian tube which passes through the muscle of the uterus

- **Isthmus**- narrow part of the Fallopian tube with few mucosal folds (plicae) and a thick muscularis layer

- **Ampulla**- the highly-folded portion of the Fallopian tube with mucosal folds (plicae) and secondary folds dividing the lumen; the part of the tube where fertilization most commonly occurs

- **Infundibulum**- the funnel-shaped widest portion of the Fallopian tube, proximal to the fimbriae, which channels the released ovum toward the uterus

- **Fimbriae**- the finger-like distal end of the Fallopian tube, closest to the ovary, which sweeps the ovum into the Fallopian tube

The wall of the Fallopian tube itself consists of three layers

- **Endosalpinx**- internal mucosal layer, with ciliated and secretory cells

- **Myosalpinx**- intermediate smooth muscular layer, with peristaltic activity important for egg and sperm transport

- **Serosa**- the outer layer, continuous with the peritoneum of the broad ligament, the upper margin of which is the mesosalpinx

The primary function of the Fallopian tube is to transport sperm toward the egg/ovum and then allow the fertilized egg to travel back to the uterus for implantation. Thus, occlusion or removal of the Fallopian tube acts to prevent fertilization and subsequent pregnancy. At least 3 cm of the isthmus of the tube must undergo complete coagulation if electrocoagulation is being utilized to perform a tubal ligation.