**Compartment Syndrome**

Compartment syndrome is primarily a clinical diagnosis. Stryker monitoring can is an option when the clinical exam is unequivocal, or the patient is intubated and sedated. A delta pressure of less than 30 is more specific to compartment syndrome than an absolute compartment pressure of greater than 30. Delta pressure is the difference between diastolic blood pressure and compartment pressures measured by the stryker monitor. The history usually includes a swollen forearm following some form of trauma or a vascular insult. Multiple bone fractures, especially when on the ipsilateral extremity has a strong association with compartment syndrome. However, isolated fractures such as both-bone forearm fractures in adults and supracondylar humerus fractures, especially those with associated vascular injuries, in kids are frequent causes of compartment syndrome.

**Pronator Syndrome**

The median nerve travels between the two heads of the pronator teres muscles. Based on the restrictive anatomy, the median nerve has the potential to be compressed between the two muscle heads. This commonly presents with motor weakness of the muscles innervated by the median nerve. The anterior interosseous nerve (AIN) branches off the median nerve in the forearm once the median nerve has travelled through the pronator teres. The AIN continues in the forearm to innervate muscles but lacks a sensory component. Compression of the median nerve versus the AIN can be differentiated as the median nerve contains a sensory component and therefore the patient will complain of sensory deficits.

**Medial Epicondylitis**

Many of the muscles in the anterior compartment attach to the medial epicondyle via a common flexor tendon. Medial epicondylitis, commonly referred to as Golfer's Elbow is an overuse syndrome of the flexor mass. The condition occurs in athletes whose sports require repetitive wrist flexion and pronation. These sports include golf, baseball, and racquet sports. The inflammation can progress and cause an ulnar neuropathy. Management is typically nonoperative involving rest, ice, and pain control.