Incontinentia pigmenti affects all cells of ectodermal origin, including skin, hair, nails, and teeth.

NF-kB is a transcription factor involved in expressing multiple genes, including cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, adhesion molecules, and regulators of apoptosis.

The 'canonical' NF-kB is a heterodimer consisting of p50 and p65 (RelA). enters the nucleus to bind with response elements (RE) of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and brings out the various changes in cellular functions.

Peripheral eosinophilia is noted in patients with IP. The increased production of eosinophils in the bone marrow and increased migration of eosinophils into the circulation causes this eosinophilia. An activated eosinophil secretes granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), a cytokine that induces eosinophil differentiation and maturation in the bone marrow. Activated IKK cells have been found to induce elevated expression of GM-CSF in peripheral eosinophils via the NF-kB pathway.

GM-CSF works as an autocrine factor to promote eosinophil survival, further elevating peripheral counts. IL-5, a cytokine released by Th2 (T-helper type 2) cells, stimulates the production of eosinophils in the bone marrow and their release into the peripheral blood. NF-kB pathway activation indirectly stimulates the transcription of IL-5. Currently, the mechanisms of NF-kB pathway activation and T helper cell participation in IP are not precisely known. Eotaxin is thought to contribute to tissue eosinophilia in recent studies of the pathophysiology of IP. Several eotaxin promoters possess NF-kB binding sites, including one encoding an eotaxin chemokine previously isolated from blister fluid and crusted scales of patients with IP.

Most recently, immunohistochemistry staining of lesional skin from patients with IP revealed strong eotaxin expression on nearly every epidermal layer. Strong staining for eotaxin was also seen in endothelial cells, and perivascular inflammatory infiltrates. A high level of eotaxin expression coincided with areas where eosinophils accumulate.