Complications can be divided into acute and chronic. Dreaded acute complications include pneumothorax, arrhythmias, perforation, pericardial effusion, pericardial tamponade, fistulas, heart block, arterial puncture, pulmonary embolization, nerve block/injury, hematoma, arteriovenous fistula, deep vein thrombosis, and tricuspid valve injury. Tricuspid injury, in particular, can be seen in patients undergoing multiple EMB procedures for transplant surveillance. The majority of regurgitation is tolerable and does not often progress to requiring valve replacement. However, care should be taken to minimize tricuspid valve tissue sampling during biopsies in patients who are known to expect frequent EMB procedures. The overall complication rate and the number of inconclusive samples are rather low, with severe adverse events in less than 1% and minor incidents up to 6% of procedures.

Delayed complications include access site bleeding, damage to the tricuspid valve, pericardial tamponade, and deep venous thrombosis.

The risks of EMB depend on the clinical state of the patient, the experience of the operator, and the availability of expertise in cardiac pathology. If a patient with an indication for EMB presents at a medical center where expertise in EMB and cardiac pathology is unavailable, transfer of the patient to a medical center with such experience should be seriously considered. Additionally, patients with cardiogenic shock or unstable ventricular arrhythmias may require the care of specialists for the management of heart failure, including ventricular assist device placement and potentially heart transplantation.