Antibiotic resistance is a growing problem with regard to treating Enterobacter infections. Possible treatments include carbapenems, beta-lactams, beta-lactamase inhibitors, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.

First and second-generation cephalosporins are generally not effective against Enterobacter infections. Although treatment with a third-generation cephalosporin may be effective in some strains of Enterobacter, treatment with third-generation cephalosporins can lead to multiresistant infection.Enterobacter genetic variants of AmpC beta-lactamase, leading to the overproduction of the enzyme and developed resistance. The use of third-generation cephalosporins is not recommended in severe Enterobacter infections due to increased likelihood of resistance, particularly in Enterobacter cloacae and Enterobacter aerogenes, two of the most clinically relevant Enterobacter species. Other mechanisms of resistance include the addition of transferable AmpC gene from plasmids and a mutation in the AmpR repressor.

Fourth-generation cephalosporins are relatively stable among AmpC beta-lactamases, so they are considered an acceptable treatment option if Extended-Spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) is not present. ESBL enzymes are able to hydrolyze the oxyimino cephalosporins, which may render third and fourth generation cephalosporins ineffective.

Carbapenems have been shown to be the most potent treatments for multidrug-resistant Enterobacter infections. Meropenem and Imipenem have been shown to be effective against E. cloacae and E. aerogenes. Carbapenems were not generally affected by ESBL in the past. However, resistance has been increasing in recent years. The mechanisms through which Enterobacter becomes resistant to carbapenems involve multiple enzymes that are plasmid-mediated, leading to accessible horizontal transfer and development of widespread resistance.

Possible treatment for carbapenem-resistant Enterobacter (CRE) includes polymyxins, tigecycline, fosfomycin, and carbapenems (used in a double carbapenem regimen).

With regard to CRE bloodstream infections, a combination regimen with a backbone of colistin has been found to be effective. Examples of other drugs that can be used with colistin are carbapenems, tigecycline, and fosfomycin. However, resistance to colistin has been increasing in recent years.

In CRE UTIs in which patients are not critical, aminoglycosides and fosfomycin are treatments of choice as monotherapy if susceptible.

Once the patient has improved in the inpatient setting, intravenous antibiotics may be switched to oral antibiotics, and treatment can be completed as an outpatient regimen with fluoroquinolones or sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. Enterobacter exhibits intrinsic resistance to macrolides due to resistance to the outer cell envelope’s low permeability.

Treatment for CRE is highly complex, with a wide degree of variability and requires numerous combinations of medications. Experimental drugs are still being studied as resistance continues to persist. Further discussion regarding treatment is outside the scope of this article.