Semen analyses are performed as part of the assessment of male factor infertility. It is imperative to take a complete medical and sexual history as well as perform a thorough physical examination in addition to the semen analysis to provide a complete diagnostic assessment.

**Low Semen Volume (<1.5 ml)**

- When the semen volume is low, especially less than 1 ml,  a urine specimen should be collected immediately after ejaculation. The urine specimen thus collected is centrifuged and microscopically examined for spermatozoa. The presence of substantial sperm in the post-ejaculatory urine specimen confirms retrograde ejaculation.

- Incomplete semen collection or loss of part of the sample during collection could lead to low semen volume.

- Low semen volume and low sperm count can occur in men with testosterone deficiency.

- Low semen volume with no sperm or severely low sperm count could be secondary to ejaculatory duct obstruction or congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens where the seminal vesicles have not developed.

**Low Sperm Count**

Men with a sperm count <10 million/ml with sexual dysfunction or with clinical findings suggestive of endocrine pathology should have their hormone levels checked. Initial labs should include a serum total testosterone (8 am to 10 am) and a serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). If the total testosterone is low (<300 ng/ml), then a second measurement of the total and free testosterone, serum luteinizing hormone (LH), and prolactin (PRL) should be performed.

- Low sperm count, low testosterone, high FSH, and high LH: suspect primary hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (that affects both the spermatogenesis and Leydig cell function). Rule out chromosomal anomalies - such as Klinefelter’s syndrome, Y chromosome microdeletion (sperm count is <5 million/ml) by karyotyping these individuals.

- Low sperm count, normal testosterone and normal LH, high FSH: suspect seminiferous tubule damage without Leydig cell dysfunction and abnormal spermatogenesis

- Low sperm count, low testosterone, normal or low FSH, and normal or low LH or hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: check for other pituitary hormone deficiencies including thyroid function (free T4), cortisol at 8 am, check prolactin levels.  High prolactin levels are suggestive of a prolactin-secreting tumor.

- Low sperm count, high testosterone and high LH, normal FSH: suspect partial androgen resistance syndrome in men. The androgen receptor is not functioning optimally in such men. They are phenotypically male with gynecomastia and with a variable presentation from hypospadias to normal male genitalia.

- Low sperm count, normal testosterone, normal LH and normal FSH, normal testis size: evaluate for genital tract obstruction:

- 
              
- congenital absence of the vas deferens (physical examination, low semen pH, confirmed on scrotal /transrectal ultrasound) often associated with cystic fibrosis mutations confirmed by genetic testing or an absent kidney.
              
              
- Ejaculatory duct obstruction can also be secondary to infections like chlamydia, gonorrhea, tuberculosis, or vasectomy. Scrotal or transrectal ultrasound in such cases shows dilated seminal vesicles.

- Low sperm count and low LH in muscular man - inquire about androgen abuse.

- Low sperm motility by itself does not have a significant impact on the likelihood of natural conception unless a very high proportion of sperms are immotile.

**Sperm Vitality**

A high number of immotile and non-viable sperms may be due to epididymal pathology.

**Sperm Morphology**

Abnormal sperm morphology is suggestive of a spermatogenesis problem.  Assisted reproduction, such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Whether the morphologic assessment of sperm has a significant impact on pregnancy rates after IVF or not is controversial.

**Cells in the Ejaculate**

The presence of round cells in the ejaculate must be assessed with peroxidase activity and leukocyte markers. Men with >1 million leukocytes/ml (pyospermia) must be evaluated to rule out genital tract inflammation or infection.