# Introduction

Pulmonary hypertension is a condition in which the blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs and the right side of the heart becomes elevated. This may be due to blockage, narrowing, or damage to the blood vessels of the lungs, which increases pulmonary blood pressure. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a type of pulmonary hypertension (PH) characterized by increased resistance in the pulmonary circulation, which is caused by progressive pulmonary artery remodeling and constriction of the pulmonary vasculature.

In the current era of PAH management, one-year survival rates have increased to 86% to 90% from 65% in the 1980s, and average long-term survival has increased to 6 years from 2.8 years.

This is due to the advancement of targeted medical therapy for PAH. Research that focused on phenotyping and understanding the pathophysiology of PAH at a cellular and genetic level has led to the use of precision medicine and the development of medications that may prevent or reverse pulmonary vascular remodeling associated with this disease.

Without treatment, pulmonary hypertension can slowly progress and become fatal. Treatment is primarily aimed at the reduction of symptoms and the improvement of quality of life. New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class remains an important predictor of future survival in patients. Disease progression (e.g., decline >15% in the 6-minute walking distance (6MWD) and decline in NYHA functional class) are strong predictors of mortality in PAH.

PAH-related hospitalization is associated with rehospitalization and worse survival.

Care of patients with PAH is multimodal and requires frequent nursing interventions for patient education, monitoring, and clinical assessments. A recent study reported that nurses at a specialized outpatient center treating patients with PH were highly qualified and skilled but still expressed a desire for in-depth and continued training.

# Issues of Concern

**Diagnosis**

The diagnosis of PAH can be challenging. Patients often present with a variety of progressive, nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue, chest pain, syncope, or exertional shortness of breath, all of which suggest various conditions. However, significant progress in understanding the etiology, epidemiology, pathophysiology, and prognosis of PAH has been made over the last few years in both adult and pediatric patients.

The current diagnostic gold standard for PAH is right heart catheterization, which shows a mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) > 20 mmHg.

An initial suspicion for PAH based on patient presentation and symptoms is necessary for referral for diagnostic testing, ideally at a pulmonary hypertension expert center. Accurate diagnosis and classification of PAH are necessary to initiate timely treatment to increase survival rates and decrease overall morbidity.

**Initiating Therapy and Improving Patient Outcomes**

The World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension (WSPH) published new treatment guidelines for the management of PAH in 2019.

There is a limited role for monotherapy in patients who are deemed low risk, while the majority of patients require combination therapy, most often with an endothelin receptor antagonist (ERA) and a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor (PDE5i). Patients at high risk for early mortality are also referred for lung transplant evaluation and started on an intravenous prostanoid therapy. Early regular follow-up of patients is recommended to identify early disease progression to escalate care.

Treatment options for PAH include prostacyclin therapies (intravenous epoprostenol; inhaled iloprost; intravenous, subcutaneous, inhaled, oral treprostinil, and selexipag), endothelin receptor antagonists (ambrisentan, bosentan, macitentan), phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (sildenafil, oral tadalafil), and one soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator (riociguat).

Several new therapies are in clinical trials, some of which have the potential to be disease-modifying agents. These include sotatercept, a novel fusion protein that aims to re-balance the pro-proliferative and anti-proliferative pathways in the pulmonary vasculature. Also under investigation are targeted therapies for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH); and targeted therapies for right ventricular (RV) failure.

Prior research in combination therapies has created a paradigm shift in the treatment of PAH away from sequential therapy to combination therapy for newly diagnosed PAH patients.

Initiating therapy for a patient with PAH can also be challenging. In some instances, therapy may not be readily available via formulary, and in most cases, prior approval from the insurance company may be required. Furthermore, challenges may arise in the safe and effective utilization of parenteral prostacyclin medications.

Both the US and the European guidelines endorse patient and practitioner education of potential medical risk factors and behavioral modifications as important aspects of management.

Despite these recommendations, studies have shown that patients referred to PH centers for diagnosis and treatment are often referred late in the course of their disease, have been misdiagnosed, and are inappropriately prescribed medications.

Because PAH is a rare condition, the number of patients receiving specialized therapy in the hospital setting at any given time is low. Clinicians who are not PAH specialists may have limited knowledge of the complex dosing and safety profiles of these medications. This also underscores the need for additional education on early diagnosis and initiation of therapy.

**Current Treatment Options**

Several therapies that delay disease progression and reduce the risk of hospitalization for individuals with PAH have been developed in recent years. These treatment options target the endothelin-1, prostacyclin, and nitric oxide pathways.

The therapies include the prostacyclin analogs intravenous epoprostenol; inhaled iloprost; intravenous, subcutaneous, inhaled, oral treprostinil and selexipag, endothelin receptor antagonists: oral ambrisentan, oral bosentan, oral macitentan, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors: intravenous and oral sildenafil, oral tadalafil, and the soluble guanylate cyclase stimulators: oral riociguat.

Each of these medications has its own side effect profile and method of dosing and administration, and familiarity with the adverse events associated with each drug is necessary for timely recognition and optimal treatment of the patient with PAH.

**Emerging Therapies and Treatment Pathways**

The growing understanding of the pathophysiology of PAH is identifying new treatment pathways that target the underlying mechanisms of the disease. Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are released by the bone marrow and play a role in revascularization and tissue repair of areas where vascular injury or ischemia has occurred.

In addition to in situ proliferation of vascular cells, studies over the past 20 years have revealed a role for circulating and resident vascular cells in pulmonary vascular remodeling, unveiling therapeutic potential for circulating EPCs and mesenchymal stem cells.

The phase 1 Pulmonary Hypertension and Angiogenic Cell Therapy (PHACeT) trial found that eNOS-transfected early outgrowth EPCs delivered into the right atrium of 7 patients with idiopathic PAH showed no evidence of short-term hemodynamic deterioration, a trend toward short-term hemodynamic improvements, and sustained increases in exercise capacity at 3 and 6 months. One death occurred immediately after discharge in a patient with severe, end-stage disease.

The phase II Study of Angiogenic cell therapy for Progressive Pulmonary Hypertension: Intervention with Repeat dosing of eNOS-enhanced EPCs (SAPPHIRE) trial is evaluating the efficacy and safety of angiogenic therapy to restore the microvasculature with repeat dosing of autologous EPCs transfected with human eNOS in patients with refractory PAH. Forty-five patients will be randomized to receive four doses of eNOS gene-enhanced autologous EPCs monthly. The primary endpoint is the difference in 6MWD at six months between participants receiving the eNOS-EPCs compared to the placebo. This Canadian-based trial is currently recruiting patients; trial results are anticipated in 2023. (NCT03001414)

An emerging non-prostanoid prostacyclin receptor agonist, ralinepag, has been studied in 61 PAH patients receiving either mono or dual PAH-targeted background therapy. These patients were randomized to receive ralinepag (n=40) or a placebo (n=21). The ralinepag was started at a dose of 10 μg twice daily and increased as tolerated over 9-weeks to a maximum total daily dose of 600 μg (300 μg twice daily). At week 22, ralinepag was shown to significantly decrease PVR by 163.9 dyn·s·cm−5 compared to an increase of 0.7 dyn·s·cm−5 with placebo. The data showed that ralinepag reduced PVR in patients on monotherapy by 41% and patients on dual combination therapy by 59% compared to placebo.

Several other new therapies are in clinical trials or are otherwise emerging. These include sotatercept, a novel fusion protein; targeted therapies for CTEPH; and targeted therapies for right ventricular (RV) failure.

Sotatercept binds activins and growth differentiation factors to restore the balance between growth-promoting and growth-inhibiting signaling pathways. In a 24-week multicenter randomized trial of 106 adults with PAH on background therapy, sotatercept treatment reduced pulmonary vascular resistance and was also associated with a decrease in N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide levels.

Another pathway that has recently received attention as a potential therapeutic target in PAH is that of autoimmunity and inflammation. It has been widely recognized that patients with connective tissue diseases or viral infections—including COVID-19—are more susceptible to PAH.

However, recent evidence now supports that patients with idiopathic PAH with no known autoimmune diseases also have auto-antibodies. Local immunoglobulin production may play a role in association with maladaptive immune responses in pulmonary tissue, and this provides a theoretical basis for future drug development and precision therapies in patients with PAH.

**Telehealth and Remote Monitoring**

It has been noted that patients with PAH benefit from intensive, continuous clinical monitoring to guide the escalation of therapy. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the need for physical distancing has seen a rise in the use of various telehealth modalities, which may apply in unique ways to patients with PAH. The uniquely high risk for rapid deterioration in PAH demands a high degree of sensitivity to detect changes in functional assessments.

Small studies of short-term duration have shown a reduction in hospitalization rates using telehealth monitoring for patients with PAH.

# Clinical Significance

The role of nurses in the management of patients with PAH is pivotal. Although these therapies significantly improve clinical outcomes, they are associated with adverse reactions such as flushing, headache, and hypotension. Frequent and accurate measurement of vital signs is required in patients receiving intravenous therapies to avoid severe hypotension.

Moreover, there is an increased risk of falls secondary to deconditioning, syncope, and presyncope in these patients. Additionally, patients receiving continuous I.V. infusions are at an increased risk for catheter-related bloodstream infections. Nurses play a pivotal role in monitoring the insertion sites for these catheters for potential infections.

Given the complex and progressive nature of this disease, patients require extensive education on the expected clinical course of the disease, potential adverse effects of therapies, and preventive measures to limit adverse outcomes. Nurses play an integral role in educating and monitoring these patients to optimize clinical outcomes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pulmonary hypertension is a complex clinical syndrome with high morbidity and mortality. It requires a multifaceted treatment approach, including patient education, pharmacologic management, and invasive diagnostic/therapeutic procedures to optimize clinical outcomes.

Specialty-trained nurses are essential to the interprofessional team caring for patients with PH. They educate the patient on the importance of fall preventive measures, compliance with oxygen therapy, lifestyle modifications to maintain adequate nutrition and function, as well as medical compliance to help improve morbidity and mortality associated with this disease. Specialized nurses for in-home care are especially important given the poor mobility of these patients. They can help evaluate the patient in the community setting and ensure the delivery of adequate outpatient treatment.

The clinical pharmacists assist the medical providers by reviewing patient medication lists and decreasing potential adverse drug-drug interactions for these patients. Primary care medical providers and pulmonologists must coordinate care to minimize any adverse outcomes of medical therapy and prevent the progression of this disease. A collaborative interprofessional team can significantly improve the quality of life for patients with PH and decrease mortality. [Level 5]