Treatment of Madelung deformity depends on the severity and cause of the deformity and the timing of diagnosis. In patients with no to mild symptoms, conservative management may be appropriate. Conservative management consists of oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, activity modification, and wrist splinting.

It is recommended that patients undergoing conservative treatment are evaluated with serial radiographs every six months until skeletal maturity. If the deformity continues to progress in a patient with significant remaining growth, prophylactic surgery can be done to prevent continued deformity. However, there is a significant amount of controversy in the literature regarding the timing of intervention.

There are a wide variety of operative interventions for patients with symptomatic Madelung deformity. In patients who have the congenital form of Madelung and remain skeletally immature, a resection of the Vickers or radiotriquetral ligament is typically performed. If a physeal bar is present with remaining growth potential, the physeal bar may be excised with the interposition of adipose tissue.

A classic treatment of congenital Madelung deformity in skeletally immature patients is the Langenskiold procedure which refers to a radial epiphysiodesis with fat interposition along with Vickers ligament resection.

Guided growth may be performed with an epiphysiodesis of the distal ulna and occasionally the unaffected aspect of the distal radius to even out the distal radio-ulnar joint. In a skeletally mature patient, a dome osteotomy is commonly performed to allow for correction of the deformity in multiple planes. If the prominent ulnar head is symptomatic due to ulnar abutment, an ulnar shortening osteotomy or resection of the ulnar head (Darrach procedure) may be performed. There is minimal research at this time on distal radioulnar joint arthroplasty as a treatment option.