The exact pathophysiology of MIS-C is unknown. It is speculated that MIS-C occurs due to an immune-mediated mechanism leading to a cytokine storm and oxidative stress. The cause of immune dysregulation and cytokine storm after COVID-19 infection in children and neonates remains unclear.

Maternal COVID-19 infection during pregnancy can impact the developing fetal immune system. Evidence from case reports shows increased inflammatory markers and cytokine functionality in fetuses of mothers with active COVID-19 infection during pregnancy. Less is known regarding the impact of the timing of the exposure and if these inflammatory responses are transient.

Evidence from the placental studies of the mothers exposed to covid-19 infection during the pregnancy reveals thrombotic and vascular changes,

During maternal COVID-19 infection, protective maternal IgG antibodies are transferred to the fetus via the transplacental route. In some neonates, this may cause an autoantibody reaction that binds to neutrophil and macrophage receptors and cause cytokine response which leads to MIS-C.

Depending on the timing of COVID-19 exposure in the mother, this reaction can occur prenatally or postnatally. Thus, neonates exposed to the covid-19 infection in the mother during the antenatal period can also trigger an inflammatory response postnatally, leading to the development of MIS-C.

Thus, MIS-C in neonates can develop due to immune-mediated multisystem injury either due to transplacental transfer of antibodies or antibodies from a neonatal covid-19 infection.