A thorough physical exam is essential for the diagnosis. During the observation, special attention should be given to the range of motion, hand posture, and signs of muscle atrophy.

The first dorsal interosseous muscle is assessed by placing the ulnar side of the patient´s hand on the examination table. The patient is asked to abduct the second finger while the examiner applies resistance. It is more sensitive to test the right and left hand at the same time to compare their strength. We evaluate the strength of second to fourth dorsal interosseous muscles by asking the patient to abduct all fingers against resistance. The strength of volar interosseous muscles is assessed by placing a sheet of paper between the extended and adducted fingers of the patient and asking the patient to hold the paper while the examiner attempts to pull it away. Bunnell´s test evaluates the presence of intrinsic muscle tightness by comparing the range of motion and force needed to passively flex the proximal interphalangeal joints while the MCP joints are passively extended and flexed. It also helps determine if tightness is secondary to extrinsic muscle contracture or interphalangeal capsule adhesions. Abductor digiti minimi is assessed by asking the patient to abduct the fifth finger against resistance. Flexor digiti minimi brevis is evaluated by flexing the MCP joint with the interphalangeal joints in extension, while the examiner resists at the base of the proximal interphalangeal joint. Opponens digiti minimi is assessed by asking the patient to perform a pulp to pulp pinch with the thumb. Abductor pollicis brevis is evaluated by asking the patient to abduct the first finger against resistance. Opponens pollicis is evaluated by the opposition to the fifth finger. The adductor pollicis is evaluated by asking the patient to pinch a sheet of paper between the thumb and second finger. Flexor pollicis brevis is evaluated with the thumb MCP flexion against resistance.

In cases of ulnar nerve injury, the most frequent mechanisms are lacerations, stretch, and contusions.

- Immediate studies (first week) help with determining the localization of the injury.

- 1-2 week studies help to determine if the lesion is complete or incomplete

- 3-4 week studies show the most diagnostic information from a single study. They help to differentiate between axonotmesis or neurotmesis from neuropraxia.

- 3-4 month studies help to determine if there are signs of reinnervation.

High-resolution ultrasound and MRI are useful diagnostic tools. They can accurately identify any nerve discontinuity, presence of neuromas, or perilesional scar tissue.