Ruxolitinib is a medication that is currently being used to treat several different medical conditions and was the first medication for treating patients with steroid-refractory acute graft-versus-host disease. Hence, all healthcare professionals should be aware of its indications and monitoring requirements.

Due to the adverse effects and hematological toxicities associated with ruxolitinib, patients need to be monitored closely by all interprofessional healthcare team members, including clinicians (MDs and DOs), mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. Due to hematological toxicities, it is crucial to monitor complete blood count in these patients until ruxolitinib doses stabilize. All team members should also ask patients about possible signs of infection due to increased infection rates with ruxolitinib so that ruxolitinib can be stopped if necessary. Nurses should also be able to answer questions about medication administration and serve as a contact point for when patients or other team members need to contact the prescribing clinician. Pharmacists will perform medication reconciliation and reinforce patient counseling points, including proper dosing and watching for potential adverse events. If they encounter any interactions or notice adverse events, they must immediately report these to the nursing staff so the clinician can adjust therapy as necessary.

By working together, the interprofessional healthcare team can allow for optimal treatment and monitoring that will enable patients to carry through with their long-term treatment with ruxolitinib. [Level 5]