Complication rates are higher in children than adults, 70% vs. 35%, respectively. These include:

- Greater occipital nerve palsy

- Supraorbital nerve palsy

- Supratrochlear nerve palsy

- Abducens nerve palsy (more common in pediatric patients).

- Nerve root pain

- Pin penetration

- Neck pain/stiffness

- Pin and halo ring loosening. This is thought to be caused by bone resorption at the pin site(occurs in 36% to 60%).

- Pin site infection (20%). If pin site drainage continues and the pin is not loose, leave the pin in place and start oral antibiotic therapy. If abscess forms, a new pin site must be removed and placed onto a new site along with an incision and drainage of the abscess.

- Arm motion restricted by the vest

- Redislocation/loss of reduction at the fracture site

- Respiratory impairment pneumonia/respiratory suppression (more common in elderly, older than 65 years of age, including pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)).

- Arrhythmia

- Dysphagia

- Cranium/dural puncture

- Pneumocranium from frontal sinus pin penetration.

- Pressure ulcers underneath vest/cast vest

- Loss of immobilization at the fracture site. Some unstable injuries can lose cervical reduction due to motion that occurs by what's known as the "snaking motion," which has been repeated by biomechanical studies. This motion occurs with rotation in opposite directions, hyperextension of the upper cervical spine, and hyperflexion of the sub-axial cervical spine.

- Failure to thrive (elderly)