The treatment of CMV endotheliitis should aim at both its infectious and inflammatory components. Anti-CMV treatment includes intravenous ganciclovir or oral valganciclovir, topical ganciclovir, or a combination of systemic and topical antiviral therapy. Ganciclovir and valganciclovir inhibit CMV's DNA polymerase and halt viral DNA replication. However, acyclovir and valacyclovir, which corneal specialists commonly use against HSV and HZV, are not effective in suppressing CMV, which does not utilize a viral thymidine kinase.

Anti-inflammatory treatment with topical corticosteroids is usually combined with an anti-CMV regimen and should not be used alone. In the Japan Endotheliitis study, 104 of 109 eyes received either systemic anti-CMV (ganciclovir or valganciclovir), topical ganciclovir, or both.

There were 1 case report and 3 case series with a total of 32 eyes reporting good outcomes in the majority of patients receiving topical ganciclovir and topical prednisolone. Cases successfully treated with intravitreal ganciclovir injection have also been reported.

There is no consensus on an Anti-CMV regimen in managing CMV endotheliitis. The most commonly used regimen based on literature are:

- Systemic anti-CMV regimen: The first line is oral valganciclovir. The induction dose is 900 mg twice daily for 21 days with subsequent maintenance of 900 daily. Intravenous ganciclovir 5 mg/Kg twice daily for 21 days with subsequent maintenance of 5 mg/kg daily can be used if the patient failed oral valganciclovir.

- Topical ganciclovir 0.15% every 2 hours to 6 times a day, then taper to 3 to 4 times a day. Topical ganciclovir alone can be considered for mild CMV endotheliitis.

- Stop maintenance of systemic treatment three months after clinical resolution but continue long-term topical ganciclovir for prophylaxis.

Management of CMV endotheliitis in the setting of corneal transplantation:

Following corneal transplantation, highly suspected CMV endotheliitis warrants prompt diagnosis with PCR analysis and anti-CMV treatment, usually oral valganciclovir with or without topical ganciclovir. Systemic or topical corticosteroids should be reduced as much as deemed safe in a given transplant. Treatment with therapeutic doses of oral valganciclovir is usually extended to 6 weeks to 3 months, followed by long-term maintenance with topical ganciclovir 0.15%.

Topical ganciclovir or combined with a short-term oral valganciclovir for prophylaxis after keratoplasty in patients with a history of CMV infection has been reported, including a treatment failure that ended up doing better with the addition of systemic treatment.

In the study by Koizumi et al., who evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of topical ganciclovir 0.15%, they detected ganciclovir in all aqueous humor samples. They concluded that a therapeutic level of ganciclovir concentration in the cornea was reached. Further studies are needed to determine whether topical ganciclovir alone is sufficient for prophylaxis. Still, it is an attractive treatment option considering the significant adverse effects, including pancytopenia and myelosuppression associated with systemic treatment.

Aqueous tapping before or during the time of corneal transplantation to detect CMV could be beneficial for patients with a history of CMV infection or unclear reasons for endothelial failure, particularly in regions with high seroprevalence.