Procedure-related complications can be divided into complications encountered during the surgery and post-operative complications.

Procedural complications include bleeding, most often venous in nature due to the handling of the mesocolon or during dissection of the greater omentum, and rarely from any of the named vessels.

However, an arterial bleed from the named vessels of the colon can be torrential and requires swift action, especially in laparoscopic procedures, where the bleeding can potentially obscure the view if it hits the camera.

Direct pressure where possible to temporarily arrest the bleeding buys time to strategize, reposition, request additional instruments, site further ports, if necessary, and definitively stop the bleed.

Another intra-operative complication is damage to surrounding structures. The structure most at risk is the left ureter. For left-sided surgery, it should always be identified. If an intra-operative injury (diathermy burn, transection) occurs and is recognized immediately, it can be repaired, and a ureteric stent should be placed to reduce the risk of stricture. If the injury is only diagnosed in the postoperative period, management depends on the extent and location of the injury, the general state of the patient, and the expertise available. A urological specialist should be consulted if available.

Post-operative complications include infections (wound, chest, urinary tract). Early mobilization, physiotherapy, incentive spirometry, and removal of urinary catheters can prevent infections. Wound infection risk in clean-contaminated surgery is greatly reduced by giving prophylactic antibiotics within one hour of skin incision.

Anastomotic leak is a dreaded complication for all surgeons performing colonic resection and primary anastomosis. A high index of suspicion is indicated if postoperatively, a patient does not progress as expected, as signs and symptoms can be subtle to start with, especially if the leak is in the pelvis and the patient has a defunctioning stoma. Patients may have pyrexia, tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias (new-onset atrial fibrillation), complain of abdominal pain and bloating, and have a distended, tender, and potentially peritonitic abdomen. Inflammatory markers will be raised more markedly than expected in the postoperative period. Free air under the diaphragm may not be visible on an erect chest x-ray, but CT will show pneumoperitoneum and fluid around the anastomosis. In patients who have undergone anterior resection, it is advised to perform the scan with rectal contrast.

Depending on the severity of the leak and the patient's general state, the management can include all or parts of the following:

- antimicrobial therapy,

- drainage of pus collections (percutaneously if patient stable and expertise available), and

- consideration for a re-look surgical procedure to wash and drain the abdominal cavity, inspect the anastomosis, and either defunction the patient or take the anastomosis apart and bring out the proximal bowel as an end stoma (akin to a Hartmann's procedure).