# Continuing Education Activity

Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) is a rare disorder that designates anemia secondary to failure of erythropoiesis. It is characterized by normocytic, normochromic anemia, which is associated with reticulocytopenia in the peripheral blood and absent or infrequent erythroblasts in the bone marrow. PRCA has been a subject of much laboratory research not only due to the immune mechanisms involved in the destruction of the red blood cells but also because of its association with parvovirus B19 in patients with sickle cell disease. However, due to the rarity of the disease, PRCA can never be evaluated in large controlled clinical trials. As a result, the majority of recommendations are based on small series of patients. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of pure red cell aplasia, and outlines the role of the healthcare team, evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pure red cell aplasia.
- Describe the evaluation of pure red cell aplasia.
- Summarize the treatment and management options available for pure red cell aplasia.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for better care coordination and communication to advance the management of pure red cell aplasia and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) is a rare disorder that presents with anemia secondary to the failure of erythropoiesis. It is characterized by normocytic, normochromic anemia, associated with reticulocytopenia in the peripheral blood and absent or infrequent erythroblasts in the bone marrow.

# Etiology

Pure red cell aplasia can either be inherited or acquired.

- Congenital PRCA

- Diamond-Blackfan or Blackfan-Diamond syndrome

- Acquired PRCA

- Autoimmune/ Collagen disorders - systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease.
- Leukemias
- Lymphoproliferative disorders
- Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) (common)
- Large granular lymphocytic leukemia (LGL)(common)
- Hodgkin disease
- Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
- Multiple myeloma
- Castleman disease
- Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia


- ABO-incompatible stem cell transplant
- Solid tumors
- Thymoma is strongly associated
- Breast
- Biliary
- Gastric
- Lung
- Thyroid
- Renal cell
- Carcinoma of unknown origin 


- Virus
- Parvovirus B19  (most common) - can lead to transient aplastic crises
- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
- T-cell leukemia-lymphoma virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
- Hepatitis A, B, C, and E
- Cytomegalovirus


- Bacterial infections - group C streptococcus, tuberculosis, bacterial sepsis
- Drugs - recombinant erythropoietin (rhEPO) is most common.
- Pregnancy
- Riboflavin deficiency

# Epidemiology

Pure red cell aplasia is a rare disorder. There is no definitive estimate of the incidence or prevalence of the disease in the general population. The incidence of congenital PRCA or Diamond Blackfan syndrome is estimated to be 5 to 7 cases per 1 million live births.

# Pathophysiology

PRCA is an extremely heterogeneous disease both clinically and pathologically. The pathophysiology is discussed here based on the classification.

**Congenital PRCA or Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA)**

- The congenital PRCA (also known as inherited PRCA) or DBA, is now recognized as a disease of ribosomal biogenesisRPS19), which is responsible for encoding a protein that assists in ribosome assembly.RPS19 behaving like a dominant gene. Subsequently, 19 other mutations were identified in RP genes using whole exome/genome sequencing and comparative genomic hybridization/single nucleotide polymorphism array. Out of 80 RP genes, mutations in 20 genes have been identified, which can lead to congenital PRCA.RPS19, RPL5, RPS26, RPL11, RPL35a, and RPS 24 account for 70% of the mutations.

**Transient Aplastic Crisis and Parvovirus B19 infection**

- The transient aplastic crisis occurs when the concentration of parvovirus B19 is very high in the blood. The virus has an affinity for the progenitor erythroid cells because of their P antigen, which acts as a receptor for the entry of the virus into the cell.

- Typically, in a patient with acute infection, neutralizing antibodies (IgG) develop quickly. Although a phase of reticulocytopenia may occur, anemia does not manifest unless RBC survival becomes reduced. In patients with inherited hematological disorders (like thalassemia, sickle cell disease, hereditary spherocytosis, etc.), an infection with parvovirus B19 can induce a transient aplastic crisis. Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia are also well documented in such patients. However, due to the development of humoral immunity, the aplastic crisis occurs only once in life.

- In children with sickle cell disease, transient aplastic crisis increases the frequency of fever, acute chest syndrome, pain, and acute sequestration crises.

- It is worth noting that this transient presentation is separate from the fifth disease, which is characterized by IgM antibodies against the parvovirus. The viral levels are low to undetectable, and the symptoms of arthritis, arthralgia, and ‘slapped cheek appearance’ occur due to the antibody-virus immune complex.

**Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC)**

- TEC is a poorly understood entity. Parvovirus B19 is the most commonly implicated virus in TEC.

- The drugs which carry implications in PRCA can also cause TEC via a hapten-based mechanism. The serum antibody can act against the erythroid precursors only in the presence of the offending medication.

**Secondary acquired PRCA**

- **PRCA with autoimmune disorders.**
- Immune-mediated erythropoietic failure is central to PRCA seen in patients with autoimmune diseases like RA, SLE, myasthenia gravis, auto-immune hemolytic anemia, acquired hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, and thymoma. Laboratory evidence has clearly shown the existence of both ‘antibody-mediated and cell-mediated mechanisms of inhibition of red cell erythropoiesis.in vitro.

- **Erythropoietin (EPO) associated antibodies causing PRCA.**
- Around the turn of the 21st century, new reports of EPO-associated PRCA were published in the literature.

- **ABO-incompatible transplant-associated PRCA**.
- Using donors mismatched at the major ABO locus leads to the development of ‘target-specific antibodies and leads to delayed engraftment of the erythroid precursors or even PRCA later in life. Specific targets are still not recognized in such patients.

- **PRCA associated with lymphoproliferative disorders**.
- CLL is the most common lymphoproliferative disease associated with PRCA. A T-cell-mediated mechanism is more commonly associated with the suppression of erythropoiesis rather than an antibody-mediated mechanism. Mutation in the signal transducer and activator of transcription three-gene (STAT3), which leads to activation of clonal cytotoxic CD8+ cells and suppression of erythropoiesis, have been identified in patients with PRCA.

- **Persistent Parvovirus B19 infection:**
- The intrinsic humoral immunity clears the parvovirus B19 infection within 1 to 2 weeks. Patients with immunodeficiency secondary to viruses (HIV), drugs (chemotherapy, immunosuppressive drugs), or congenital immunodeficiency cannot mount an antibody response against the parvovirus. This immunodeficiency leads to a persistent infection that is toxic to the erythroid progenitor cells and leads to chronic red cell aplasia. In pregnant mothers, the parvovirus can be transmitted to the fetus in the mid-trimester and is toxic to the erythroid progenitors in the fetal liver leading to severe red cell aplasia and hydrops fetalis. In the rare instance, when such an infant was rescued with timely red cell infusions, they still had persistent congenital PRCA or dyserythropoietic anemia.

- **PRCA as a manifestation of myelodysplasia**
- Activating point mutations in N-RAS and loss of the RPS-14 gene (in patients with 5q deletion) leads to PRCA in patients with MDS.

- **Drugs causing PRCA:**
- Many drugs have implications for involvement in PRCA; however, there is limited evidence from case reports. Drugs like diphenylhydantoin, sulfa and sulfonamide drugs, azathioprine, allopurinol, isoniazid, procainamide, ticlopidine, ribavirin, and penicillamine are implicated in the etiology of drug-induced PRCA. An IgG-mediated mechanism appears to be the cause in patients receiving diphenylhydantoin and rifampin.

# Histopathology

The peripheral smear demonstrates normocytic normochromic anemia with reticulocytopenia. The white cell count and platelet count are normal in number and morphology. The histological picture seen on bone marrow examination depends on the cause of PRCA. Complete absence or near absence of erythroblasts (less than 1% erythroblasts on marrow differential count) from an otherwise normal marrow is a characteristic of autoimmune PRCA. Rarely, a few erythroblasts or basophilic erythroblasts are present, but their number never exceeds 5% of the differential count.

# History and Physical

There are no specific signs or symptoms associated with PRCA. The most common presentation is the same as that of anemia. Generalized fatigue, decreased exercise tolerance, palpitations, and in extreme cases, presyncope or syncope (when associated with cardiac stress due to increased work of function). The physical exam is also non-specific. Pallor is a feature in all patients. A thorough skin exam is necessary to look for erythema infectiosum, which correlates with parvovirus B19. A prodromal rash is sometimes present in children where a reticular and lacy body eruption is visible. The systemic examination should look for swollen lymph nodes, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly. None of these signs or symptoms are definitively diagnostic of PRCA by themselves but will provide vital clues in establishing etiology.

Diamond-Blackfan syndrome is associated with physical anomalies in up to a third of all patients.

# Evaluation

Isolated anemia and reticulocytopenia in the presence of normal white cell count and platelet count are suggestive of PRCA. A review of the peripheral smear is the first step in the evaluation of PRCA. Further evaluation is pursued to determine the degree of anemia and the etiology of PRCA and rule out other diagnoses.

- Tests for evaluating the degree of anemia:

- Complete blood count with differential (Anemia along with a normal white count, platelet count, and a markedly reduced reticulocyte count strongly support the diagnosis of PRCA)
- Erythropoietin level (A high level supports the diagnosis)
- Type and Cross (for pure red blood cell transfusion)

- Peripheral blood to determine the etiology of PRCA:

- Autoimmune conditions

- Antinuclear antibody
- Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
- Rheumatoid arthritis antibody


- Viral studies

- Parvovirus B19
- Viral hepatitis A, B, C and E
- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
- Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)
- Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
- Human T-cell leukemia-lymphoma virus (HTLV-1)


- Flow cytometry (of peripheral blood cells) to rule out malignant clonal cells
- T-cell gene rearrangement
- Plasma cell disorder

- Quantitative immunoglobulins
- Free light chains (Kappa and Lambda)
- Serum electrophoresis and Immunofixation


- Pregnancy test (in case of women)

- Bone marrow should have testing for the following:

- Cytogenetics
- Flow cytometry
- T-cell gene rearrangement

- Tests to determine iron overload
- Ferritin level- increases as the number of transfusions increase
- Iron level
- Total iron-binding capacity
- Hepatic and Renal panel (Useful in monitoring the liver and kidney function and in choosing iron chelator)
- MRI Liver to determine the liver iron concentration

- Diamond Blackfan syndrome is associated with increased activity of erythrocyte adenosine deaminase. Critical challenges exist in performing this test.
- Very few labs perform this test all over the world (In the US, only one lab performs this test)
- The test must be performed only in patients who have not received red cell transfusions. 
- The test must be done only on a fresh blood sample or on a blood sample stored at 4 degrees C only for a few days.

# Treatment / Management

**Inherited PRCA**

Untreated inherited PRCA results in severe anemia, which leads to congestive heart failure and death. Glucocorticoid use, blood transfusion, and allogeneic stem cell transplant (ASCT) are the mainstay of treatment in children.

- **Glucocorticoids:**
- Corticosteroids were the first drugs proved to be efficacious in children with DBA.
- Various patterns are possible, ranging from patients having a prompt recovery and apparent cure to treatment-refractoriness long after an initial response to being completely unresponsive to steroids. Those who do not respond to steroids should restart on chronic transfusions. A second attempt at steroids can be made 12 to 18 months after initial unresponsiveness.
- Long-term use of steroids is associated with toxicity, which includes growth retardation, cushingoid facies, hypertension, diabetes, and cataract. Patients treated with high-dose steroids must receive prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jirovecii. All attempts should be made to give live vaccines before starting steroid therapy; however, once the therapy starts, live vaccines should not be administered.

- **Red cell transfusions:**
- This is mostly used in acutely symptomatic patients and in those who are refractory to steroids. Chronic red cell transfusion is preferable to long-term use of high-dose steroids. On the other hand, frequent transfusions not only result in hemosiderosis but also leads to alloimmunization and antibody formation.

- **Stem cell transplant (SCT):**
- Transfusion dependence remains the number one indication for pursuing stem cell transplant in patients with DBA.

- **Other therapies:**
- Treatment with interleukin-3, high-dose methylprednisolone, cyclosporine, and other immunosuppressive agents, prolactin induction by metoclopramide have not gained much success.RSP19 has shown promise but remains in the experimental stage.

**Transient PRCA**

- **Parvovirus B19**
- The effect of the viral infection cedes with the development of humoral immunity, which happens within a couple of weeks. This is a lifelong immunity that prevents re-infection. In patients with persistent parvovirus infection, a course of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (2 g/kg divided over five days) corrects parvovirus induced PRCA in 93% of patients, but up to 50% relapse within 4 to 5 months.

- **Transient erythroblastopenia of infancy (TEBI):**
- TEBI resolves within a few weeks, but anemia may persist for months. Any drug suspected of causing TEBI should be withdrawn. Transfusion support may be necessary for a brief period.

**Acquired PRCA**

- **Immune-mediated PRCA in adults**
- Cyclosporine has emerged as the first choice of treatment with a response rate as high as 75%.
- Corticosteroids were the therapy in an era before the discovery of cyclosporine. The first series of patients with PRCA who received treatment with steroids reported a response rate of 37% with a median duration of response at 2.5 weeks. Since then, other reports have recorded a response rate between 30 to 60%. The rate of relapse was as high as 80% in patients who were being tapered off steroids.
- Cytotoxic agents have been used primarily in patients who are refractory to cyclosporine. Cyclophosphamide has been the most researched cytotoxic agent compared to other drugs.
- Tacrolimus provides effective immunosuppression, which can be useful in the management of PRCA; however, few reports have identified tacrolimus as the drug causing PRCA.
- Antithymocyte globulin, used in the same dose as aplastic anemia, has a 50% response rate in PRCA.
- Rituximab (anti-CD20) and alemtuzumab (anti-CD52) have demonstrated efficacy in patients with PRCA.
- Daclizumab, a monoclonal antibody against the IL-2 receptor is effective in approximately 40 percent of patients.
- Intravenous immunoglobulins, plasma exchange, and allogeneic stem cell transplant are some other modalities of treatments for immune-mediated PRCA in adults.
- Despite a few case reports describing success with splenectomy, androgens, and the use of erythropoietin, these modalities are not recommended.

- ******Thymoma associated PRCA:**
- Although resection of thymoma is mandatory in patients with thymoma-associated PRCA, the utility of this is not clear. Only a third of patients experience remission after surgery, and most of them would continue to have some degree of anemia throughout their lives. Many patients develop PRCA after resection of the thymoma, which raises questions regarding the utility of resecting the gland. Cyclosporine is the treatment of choice in patients with thymoma-associated PRCA.

- **PRCA associated with incompatible stem cell transplants.**
- The persistence of anti-donor isohemagglutinins directed against donor RBC and erythroid precursors beyond two months is an ominous sign. The likelihood of spontaneous remission decreases beyond this period.

- **PRCA due to rhEPO antibodies**
- It is rare to develop PRCA due to antibodies against rhEPO; however, a few cases remain. A few reports have suggested rechallenging with rhEPO (subcutaneous or intravenous) once no antibodies are detectable in the blood. However, this approach should be considered high risk and has resulted in the recurrence of PRCA.

**Iron overload from chronic transfusions**

- Deferoxamine: Used at a dose of 40 to 60 mg/kg/day subcutaneously over 8 to 12 hours/night and 4 to 7 nights/week. This is not as frequent an option due to the availability of oral formulations. It can still be used IV over 24 hours in patients with severe cardiac iron overload and cardiomyopathy.

- Deferasirox: Dosed at 20 to 30 mg/kg/day orally.

- Deferiprone: 80 to 100 mg/kg/day orally. Agranulocytosis is a major adverse effect. This treatment is very effective for patients with cardiac iron deposition.

# Differential Diagnosis

Any patient presenting with anemia and reticulocytopenia requires evaluation for PRCA. The low reticulocyte count helps differentiate PRCA from hemolytic anemia (which can also have isolated anemia, albeit with reticulocytosis).

Within PRCA, a differentiation should be made between inherited, acquired, and transient PRCA.

- Inherited PRCA is usually present since birth, but can present in older age as well.
- Diamond Blackfan syndrome is associated with craniofacial and thumb abnormalities in the majority of patients; however, it is not a universal presentation. Elevated fetal hemoglobin (HgF) levels, elevated erythrocyte adenosine deaminase (very difficult to obtain), and ribosomal mutation analysis helps in establishing a diagnosis. 
- Fanconi anemia must be ruled out with the use of cytogenetic analysis and clastogenic stress.
- Transient PRCA of infancy demonstrates self-recovery 
- It is hard to differentiate inherited PRCA from acquired PRCA when the patient presents in adulthood. A thorough history, including family history, physical exam to look for anomalies, bone marrow examination, and cytogenetic analysis, would aid in establishing a diagnosis.

- Transient PRCA

- It is hard to distinguish transient PRCA from inherited PRCA. Spontaneous recovery gives a clue towards the diagnosis.
- When concomitant neutropenia is present, then aplastic anemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia should be ruled out. A bone marrow exam will help in ruling this out. 
- A thorough medication and drug exposure history is a must. Treatment with the offending medication must stop. 
- Evaluate for parvovirus infection, which is treatable.

- Acquired PRCA

- Look for secondary causes, as listed in the etiology section above. 
- Bone marrow should be examined thoroughly to rule out MDS, which can present with isolated anemia and reticulocytopenia. 
- It is crucial to establish whether the PRCA is inherited or acquired, using the same tests listed.

# Prognosis

The prognosis depends on the etiology of PRCA.

1. Inherited PRCA

- Patients who respond to and can get weaned off steroids can have a normal life span.

- Patients who do not respond to steroids and are dependent on chronic transfusions suffer from organ toxicity secondary to iron overload. Their median life expectancy is 30 to 40 years.

- Those who receive stem cell transplant (SCT) at a younger age have better outcomes compared to those who receive SCT at an older age and after chronic transfusions.

2. Acquired PRCA:

Japanese consortium reported the long-term follow-up results of patients with PRCA in their cohort of patients, which gave some insight into the long-term prognosis of patients with acquired PRCA.

- The life span of patients with acquired PRCA is significantly shorter than the general population.

- The life expectancy amongst patients with different causes of PRCA (LGL versus thymoma versus idiopathic PRCA) was not different

- Infection and organ failure were the most common causes of death rather than the progression of the underlying disease. This finding further stresses close monitoring and prompt management of infection (in patients on immunosuppressive therapy) and iron overload (in patients who receive chronic transfusions). Iron chelation in a cohort of patients with aplastic anemia showed improvement in hematopoiesis.

- Maintenance with cyclosporine is essential for most patients to prevent relapses.

- Patients who respond to steroids have a median survival of 12 years. For those who respond to cyclosporine A, their median survival has not been reached, and 95% of patients were alive at 14-year follow-up.

# Complications

Children diagnosed with Diamond Blackfan anemia are predisposed to cancer. Although the risk of developing cancer is lower in patients with DBA compared to those diagnosed with Fanconi anemia, the risk is still higher than the general population belonging to the same age group. Reports exist of both solid and liquid malignancies with DBA in international registries. Acute myeloid leukemia is the most common hematologic malignancy, and osteogenic sarcoma is the most common solid organ malignancy diagnosed in children in DBA.

Chronic anemia can lead to growth retardation and poor psychomotor development in children. Severe anemia can also lead to hyperdynamic circulation, which increases the work of the heart and hence, the risk of cardiac failure, especially in those with pre-existing heart disease and the elderly. In pregnancy, it can prompt premature labor, abnormally low birth weight. In pregnant patients with severe anemia, there are reports of increased maternal and fetal mortality. Overall, anemia can cause low energy, constant fatigue, and in general, poor quality of life.

Patients with PRCA who receive chronic transfusions eventually develop iron overload and related toxicities. Immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine or chronic steroid therapy can lead to myelosuppression and, eventually, opportunistic infections. The use of corticosteroids, whether short-term high dose therapy or long-term maintenance therapy, correlates with multiple adverse events.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and physicians should understand the recurrent nature of the disease, the need for long-term therapy, repeated blood transfusions, and iron chelation therapy. Any patient diagnosed with inherited PRCA should be evaluated for stem cell transplant at an early age, rather than performing it later, when the comorbidities from additional therapies have increased exponentially. A close follow-up of the affected patients should be kept to prevent complications from both the underlying disease as well as the treatment.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Pure red cell aplasia is a rare pathology that either presents as an inherited disease or that the patient acquires secondary to other conditions. Few pearls are listed here:

- The most common presentation is isolated anemia with reticulocytopenia. Bone marrow exam shows under 1% erythroblasts

- Diamond Blackfan anemia is the most common inherited PRCA. Craniofacial and thumb abnormalities are common, but not present in all patients.

- Steroids, chronic transfusion therapy, and stem cell transplant are the most effective modalities of managing patients with Diamond-Blackfan syndrome.

- Transient PRCA most commonly results from parvovirus B19 infection. Recovery is spontaneous, and immunity to parvovirus is lifelong. One must remember that parvovirus infection-related PRCA is different from the fifth disease, where the IgM antibody against the virus is at play.

- In immunocompromised patients, no humoral immunity may develop against parvovirus, and this may lead to chronic infection and a relapsing course of PRCA.

- Acquired PRCA is both antibody-mediated as well as T-cell-mediated.

- The most common lymphoproliferative diseases associated with PRCA are chronic lymphocytic leukemia and large granular lymphocytic leukemia.

- Many drugs are associated with acquired PRCA, which the clinician should stop before starting therapy for PRCA.

- Cyclosporine is the most effective drug for PRCA with the highest response rates. A maintenance dose of cyclosporine is needed to prevent relapse of PRCA, which usually occurs when stopping the medication completely.

- Steroids are an effective alternative to cyclosporine, albeit with low response rates. They are usually used along with cyclosporine.

- Chronic red cell transfusions correlate with iron overload and hemosiderosis. Iron chelation should start early in the course of treatment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pure red cell aplasia is a rare disorder. The inherited form is usually detected at birth, although many patients can also present in adolescent age or as young adults. It is imperative to maintain a broad outlook of the disease and investigate thoroughly starting with obtaining a good history, performing a thorough physical exam, and using appropriate clinical and genetic tests to determine the etiology.

Nurses, transfusion medicine, hematology, bone marrow transplant unit, and geneticist should work in close harmony with all clinicians as an interprofessional team to maximize the benefit to the patient. Patients managed with corticosteroids should be followed by the pharmacist to ensure that they are not developing complications. If there is any suspicion of osteoporosis, a bone scan is necessary. A pharmacist should examine the patient's medication record to look for drugs that may cause PCRA, as well as assist the clinician in any medication therapy undertaken in the management of the condition. These patients should also be followed by an infectious disease nurse, as they are prone to infections due to steroid therapy; the nurse can also monitor patient compliance and assess the effectiveness of the current treatment. Chronic blood transfusions can also result in iron overload, and hence the patient requires vigilant monitoring by the hematologist. These are examples of the interprofessional team approach to case management that optimizes positive patient outcomes. [Level V]

Due to the rarity of the pathology, no large randomized trials are possible, and the evidence of treatment comes from case series, retrospective studies of international registries, and few small prospective trials. [Level III to Level IV]