While levonorgestrel is a first-line emergency contraceptive for unwanted pregnancy, communication and teamwork between primary care physicians, gynecologists, obstetricians, pharmacists, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and nursing staff working together in an interprofessional team approach to care can make a tangible difference in a patient’s experience while taking levonorgestrel. There has been controversy about the morning after pill being available without a prescription and sold over the counter at any local pharmacy.  This agent can be deemed a drug that promotes risky sexual behavior and can also be a drug of convenience for both perceived and verifiable contraceptive failures. This issue is how healthcare teams can combine patient education with adequate treatment plans to promote levonorgestrel use in the most effective way without compromising patient safety.

- Primary care physicians and gynecologists should routinely ask the patient about pertinent sexual history to help monitor sexual behavior and document any changes.

- Maintenance of a strong physician-patient relationship so that the patients trust the physicians and can be open and honest about their sexual practices and potentially risky behavior in a judgment-free atmosphere.

- Pharmacists should emphasize the side effects of levonorgestrel, its strict timeline to achieve optimal drug efficacy, and how it will not prevent sexually transmitted infections and diseases.

These examples of interprofessional strategies can optimize the benefits of therapy with levonorgestrel. [Level 5]