In the lumbosacral region of the spine, there are eleven pairs of spinal nerves (five lumbar, five sacral, and one coccygeal) that emerge from the spinal cord.

L2-L4 radiculopathies are typically grouped together. It is challenging to distinguish an isolated spinal lesion due to the broad L2-L4 myotomal overlap of the anterior thigh muscles (as well as adjacent root overlap).

The most common level of lumbosacral disc herniation occurs at L4. Clinical presentation of numbness and tingling at the medial lower leg may occur. Diminished patellar reflexes may also present.

Diminished sensation along the anterolateral aspect of the lower leg and dorsum of the foot, accompanied by foot drop, and difficulty with heel walking, are common features that may suggest L5 radiculopathy. Of note, it is essential to be knowledgeable on other causes of foot drop and sensory changes along the lateral lower leg; additional causes include common fibular and sciatic neuropathy and lumbosacral plexopathy.

A patient presenting with difficulty toe walking, a diminished or absent Achilles reflex, and/or weakness in plantar flexion may represent S1 radiculopathy. Of note, sciatic neuropathy and lower lumbosacral plexopathy may present similar to S1 radiculopathy. An abnormal H-reflex (a recordable mon-synaptic S1 reflex response elicited with electrical stimulation) observed when stimulating the tibial nerve during the nerve conduction study can be seen in S1 radiculopathy.  The H-reflex response is sensitive, although not specific for the detection of an S1 radiculopathy.

Of note, in the lumbosacral spine, the nerve roots exit below their corresponding vertebral level. For example, the L4 nerve root exits at the L4-L5 disc space.