Managing bumetanide therapy requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) in multiple specialties, nurses, and pharmacists. Ensuring the proper management of patients using bumetanide may require consideration of some of the following by health professionals:

- There may be a need to involve specialty consultation depending on the reason for diuretic therapy and the patient's associated comorbidities.

- Ordering/prescribing clinicians should order serum electrolyte levels periodically and check for any fluid or electrolyte imbalance.

- Monitor the patient for signs of dehydration frequently, such as low urine output, etc. Taking prompt action can be beneficial and even lifesaving. It is critical to follow up on serum electrolyte levels. Proper dose adjustments can be crucial in improving the various conditions discussed above in the indications section.

- Hypokalemia must be ruled out, as it can be an alarming sign of impending cardiac arrhythmia, especially for those patients with a history of ventricular arrhythmia.

- Discuss and consult with a toxicologist and nephrologist if an overdose is suspected.

- Provide reassurance for asymptomatic hyperuricemia and azotemia in patients with signs of dehydration as they are likely to resolve after fluid replacement.

Utilizing an interprofessional approach with each discipline sharing patient information and their particular clinical expertise will provide the best patient outcomes while minimizing adverse events. [Level 5]