Ammonia is produced in various organs of the body by different mechanisms:

- **Colon:**Bacterial metabolism of protein and urea

- **Small intestine:**Glutamate degradation by bacteria

- **Skeletal muscle:**Amino acid transamination and the purine-nucleotide cycle

Abnormalities in the urea cycle or liver disorders may lead to increased levels of ammonia, which is then transported to the brain, skeletal muscle, and kidneys for elimination.

**Role of Ammonia in Neurotoxicity**

The exact mechanism by which ammonia results in CNS damage has not been established. It has been hypothesized that various alterations in the neurotransmitter system are responsible for the neuronal damage seen in both acute and chronic hyperammonemia. Animal studies have shown that acute ammonia intoxication in vitro results in elevated extracellular levels of glutamate in the brain. This results in activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, which causes decreased phosphorylation of protein kinase C that results in the activation of Na/K-ATPase. The resultant ATP depletion is responsible for ammonia toxicity and is the most probable cause of seizures in acute hyperammonemia.

Another consequence of acute hyperammonemia is cerebral edema. This occurs primarily due to the swelling of astrocytes, which are the only cells involved in ammonia detoxification in the brain. Proposed mechanisms for astrocyte swelling include altered water and K+ metabolism in the astrocytes, activation of tumor suppressor protein p53, increased uptake of certain compounds including pyruvate, lactate, and glutamine and decreased uptake of ketone bodies, glutamate, and free glucose. Cerebral edema leads to raised intracranial pressure, which may result in brain herniation.

Chronic hyperammonemia results in two major pathological changes, both of which result in increased inhibitory neurotransmission.

- Increased extra-synaptic glutamate accumulation leading to the downregulation of glutamate receptors. Changes in the glutamate-nitric oxide-cGMP pathway resulting in impaired signal transmission in the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. This contributes to the cognitive dysfunction seen in hepatic encephalopathy.

- Benzodiazepine receptor overstimulation from endogenous benzodiazepines and neurosteroids, resulting in an increased GABAergic tone

Ammonia increases the transport of tryptophan, an aromatic amino acid, across the blood-brain barrier. The resultant increased serotonin levels in the brain are responsible for anorexia commonly seen in chronic hyperammonemia.