Hyperlipidemia subdivides into two broad classifications: primary (familial) or secondary (acquired) hyperlipidemia. Primary hyperlipidemia derives from a plethora of genetic disorders that a patient may inherit through birth, while secondary hyperlipidemia typically originates from an alternate underlying etiology, such as an unhealthy diet, medications (amiodarone, glucocorticoids), hypothyroidism, uncontrolled diabetes, and/or a poor lifestyle regimen.

Underlying disturbances in lipoprotein metabolism are often familial, making a patient's family history that much more valuable. For example, about 54 percent of patients (in one study) with a history of premature coronary artery disease had an underlying hereditary disorder. In most patients, hyperlipidemia has a polygenic inheritance pattern, and manifestations of the disorder are largely influenced by secondary factors such as (central) obesity, saturated fat intake, and the cholesterol content within a person's diet.

Cholesterol is the circulating fatty substance, most implicated in the atherogenic process. Its origin is twofold: 300 to 700 mg per day is of exogenous origin, that is, coming from an excessive intake of dietary fats, especially of animal origin; 800 to 1200 mg per day is the work of an endogenous synthesis, in particular the liver. In addition to excessive consumption of animal fats, other frequent causes of hypercholesterolemia and/or increase in triglycerides are diabetes, chronic renal failure, nephrotic syndrome, hypothyroidism, age, sedentary lifestyle. Other iatrogenic causes may be the intake of certain drugs such as thiazide diuretics, beta-blockers, estrogen-progestin contraceptives, antiretrovirals.

Genetic dyslipidaemias, much rarer, are the basis of the changes in the blood lipid rate in the measure of about 60% and are often responsible for cardiovascular diseases at an early age.