Bleeding, scar, and infection represent the most common potential complications with paramedian forehead flaps. Careful hemostasis and proper surgical dressings can decrease the risk of significant postoperative bleeding, as can patient avoidance of strenuous activities. Moderate oozing is common from the base of the flap in the first 48 hours, but can usually be controlled with pressure. Scar formation is unavoidable, but it can be minimized with the appropriate surgical techniques. The skin should be precisely approximated, and the flap should be sized and thinned appropriately. The use of the anatomic subunit principle can improve the aesthetic appearance as well. One or more revisions may be required, and the patient should be told this prior to the surgery. "Pincushioning," wherein the flap contracts at the wound base and results in a firm, round, raised appearance is more common if the reconstructed defect is round. This is best prevented by adhering to subunit principles and avoiding rounded defects. Should it occur, it is treated with corticosteroid injection, which may require repeated treatment. Should this fail, revision surgery is needed. Sterile technique and preoperative antibiotic administration can minimize the risk of infection. Necrosis of the flap may rarely occur and is usually due to smoking, overaggressive thinning of the flap, too narrow pedicle, or patient manipulation of the flap. This can often be managed expectantly with minimal debridement. Venous insufficiency presents as a profound purple-ish discoloration of the skin and must be rapidly recognized and treated with leeches or serial pinprick to relieve the venous congestion, or the flap will fail. True arterial insufficiency will present as a doughy-pale flap without capillary refill. This is usually a result of inadvertent arterial injury and often requires revision flap surgery. If this presents early in the postoperative period (postoperative day zero or one), it may be due to vasospasm which can potentially be reversed with the application of nitroglycerin paste; this must be used with great caution in any patient with underlying heart disease.