Diabetes Mellitus (DM) is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas cannot produce enough insulin, or the body cannot effectively utilize insulin, which results in high glucose plasma level (hyperglycemia) causing tissue damage over time. There are two common types of DM that account for the majority of cases: type 1 and type 2.

**Type 1 DM**

It is a chronic autoimmune disease in which the beta cells of islets of the pancreas are destroyed resulting in insulin deficiency.

Pathophysiology: It is not entirely understood yet, but it is caused by a combination of events in genetically susceptible individuals. Three mechanisms lead to islet cell destruction: genetic susceptibility, autoimmunity, and environmental insult(s). A virus or allergen (environmental insults) in genetically susceptible individuals induces the production of autoantibodies to Beta cells of the islets of the pancreas. This autoimmune reaction creates autoreactive T cells that destroy beta-islet cells and cause loss of insulin secretion.

Diagnosis: The serum autoantibodies serve as a marker. The autoantibodies are typically present years before the diagnosis of T1DM is made because clinical manifestations appear after 80% of beta-islet cells have been destroyed.

**Type 2 DM**

It is a progressive disease that develops due to a continued decline in beta-cell function and/or due to a defect in insulin sensitivity that causes hyperglycemia. The development and rate of progression of T2D are influenced by both genetic and environmental factors, such as obesity and physical inactivity.

Pathophysiology: Beta-cell dysfunction manifests in different ways: (1) reductions in insulin release, (2) changes in pulsatile insulin secretion, (3) an abnormality in the efficiency of proinsulin to insulin conversion, and (4) reduces the release of amylin. Insulin resistance is present in most patients with T2D. Insulin resistance is characterized by higher than expected plasma glucose level with the prevailing plasma insulin secretion. In patients with T2D insulin, stimulation fails to induce normal GLUT4 protein translocation to the sarcolemma in skeletal muscle membrane. Also, excessive production of free fatty acids and overexpression of TNF-alpha by adipocytes have been proposed as mechanisms for the development of insulin resistance.