Alpha-2 agonists are prescribed for multiple indications in a variety of patient populations causing common toxicity in patients of different ages with different backgrounds and comorbidities. Clonidine is often prescribed to adults for treating hypertension, opioid withdrawal, and adjunctively to pediatric patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It is used to directly treat ADHD and adjunctively for those who are on stimulant medications, as evidence exists that it enhances REM sleep patterns at night. Guanfacine is often prescribed for the same indications and is often used in the pediatric population. Tizanidine, another alpha-2 agonist, is prescribed for muscle relaxation in conditions involving spasticity, such as multiple sclerosis. Other central alpha-2 agonists, such as oxymetazoline, tetrahydrozoline, and naphazoline are generally used as over-the-counter topical agents intended for nasal or ophthalmic vasoconstrictive purposes due to their peripheral alpha-1 stimulatory properties; however, when ingested, also can cause alpha-2 agonism. These medications can lend themselves to improper use, abuse, and intentional and accidental overdose. In addition, children can be of significant risk of exposure due to inadvertent ingestions of any of these medications, as well as due to pharmacy dosing and compounding errors. Despite the vast exposure to numerous populations, the rising use of these agents to treat ADHD and other behavioral disorders lends to increased risk, and particularly salient is self-harm attempts among adolescents.