Vancomycin is FDA-approved for administration by either intravenous injection or oral route. Rectal administration is an off-label use of vancomycin useful in treating Clostridium difficile infection. The administration is dependent on the type and location of the infection. Vancomycin has poor oral bioavailability; therefore, its administration is via the intravenous route to treat most infections.

Intravenous vancomycin injection can treat MRSA infections and other susceptible gram-positive organisms. It is available in 5 mg/mL IV solution, 10 mg/mL in NaCl 0.9% solution, or 5 mg/mL in dextrose 5% or NaCl 0.9% solution. It is also available as a sterile powder for reconstitution in 500 mg, 1 g, 1.25 g, 1.5 g, and 10 g per vial. The dose of vancomycin required is dependent on the type and severity of infection, the patient’s overall clinical presentation, renal function, and body weight. The desired intravenous dose should be administered slowly over at least 60 minutes. The frequency of administration ranges from every 8 to 24 hours and should be adjusted based on renal function, age, and serum trough concentrations. Serum trough concentrations require close monitoring in all patients.

Oral vancomycin has low systemic absorption and is only effective for treating intestinal infections. Therefore, its only indications are for the treatment of Clostridioides difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD), pseudomembranous colitis, and Staphylococcal enterocolitis. Oral vancomycin is not an appropriate treatment option for systemic infections affecting other organs or parts of the body. Oral vancomycin is currently available as 125 mg and 250 mg capsules and 250 mg / 5 mL oral solution. It is typically administered four times a day for 7 to 10 days. However, the determination of the exact dose and length of therapy is dependent on multiple factors, including indication, assessment of the patient’s clinical presentation, and the severity of an infection. Due to its low systemic absorption, oral vancomycin does not require dosage adjustment for renal impairment. Moreover, routine serum trough monitoring is not a recommendation for patients who are only receiving oral vancomycin.

**Pharmacodynamics/Kinetics**

**Route of administration:**Intravenous, oral, rectal administration (off-label)

**Inhibition of bacterial growth:**Slowly bactericidal

**PK/PD parameter:**AUC: MIC

**Absorption:**Oral vancomycin has a bioavailability of less than 10%.

**Onset of action:**Vancomycin has a rapid onset of action with a serum peak concentration immediately following the completion of the intravenous infusion. The onset of action of oral vancomycin is currently unknown.

**Distribution:**Large volume of distribution (0.4 L/kg to 1.0 L/kg) in body tissues and fluids, excluding cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with non-inflamed meninges

**Protein Binding:**approximately 55%

**Metabolism:**No evident metabolism (excreted unchanged)

**Clearance:**0.71 mL/minute/kg to 1.31 mL/minute/kg in adults with normal renal function

**Half-life:**Vancomycin has a bi-phasic elimination half-life, with its initial half-life being relatively quick and a terminal half-life of 4 to 6 hours in healthy adults with normal renal function. The elimination half-life is significantly prolonged in patients with renal dysfunction. Close monitoring is necessary for these patients.

**Excretion:**Intravenous vancomycin injection is primarily eliminated by glomerular filtration in the kidney (75% via urine). Oral vancomycin predominantly gets excreted in feces.