**Exercise EKG Stress Test (Exercise Treadmill Test, ETT)**

Clinical interpretation provides information on exercise capacity (if not pharmacologic) and stress-induced symptoms, hemodynamic changes, and electrocardiogram abnormalities. Recurrence of angina, hypotension, ventricular arrhythmias, and concerning EKG changes such as horizontal or downsloping ST depression > 1 mm for at least 60-80 ms suggest ischemic coronaries, constituting a positive test. Unlike ST elevations, ST depressions do not localize to specific vessels but still indicate ischemic disease needing further evaluation with image testing or coronary angiography.

Duke treadmill score (DTS) is a prognostic tool summarizing the results of an ETT.

DTS = exercise time – (5 × ST deviation) – (4 × exercise angina)

- Exercise angina is defined as follows : 0 = none, 1 = non-limiting, 2 = exercise-limiting

- DTS >= 5 is low-risk, –10 to +4 is moderate risk, and <= -11 high-risk

- Low-risk= 0.25% 1-year mortality; 40.1% risk of single-vessel 75% stenosis

- Moderate-risk= 1.25% 1-year mortality; 67.3% risk of single-vessel 75% stenosis

- High-risk= 5.25% 1-year mortality; 99.6% risk of single-vessel 75% stenosis

**Stress Echocardiography:**

A normal stress echocardiography test demonstrates global myocardial normokinesis at rest and then a normokinetic or hyperkinetic response to stress. Regional wall motion dysfunction (hypokinetic, dyskinetic, akinetic) that occurs at rest and stress represents scar tissue, likely from a prior infarct. Dysfunction that occurs only during stress suggests ischemia. Dysfunction present at rest, which improves at minimal stress and then worsens again at peak stress, indicates viable hibernating myocardium. Dysfunction at rest with sustained improvement on various levels of stress predicts stunned myocardium. Negative stress echocardiography test confers a 0.5% to 0.8% 1-year risk of cardiac death or nonfatal myocardial infarct (MI).

**Stress Nuclear (SPECT-MPI and PET-MPI):**

As a potent coronary vasodilator acting on the A2A receptor, regadenosin increases significantly more flow to healthy vessels than obstructed vessels. This imbalance of blood blow is detected as a perfusion defect in a diseased vessel territory, ischemic EKG changes, or recurrence of symptoms.

A normal SPECT stress demonstrates global, uniform isotope uptake at rest and then uniformly increased uptake at stress. Regional reductions in uptake during both stress and rest, termed a fixed defect, suggest scar tissue likely secondary to infarct. A relatively lower increase in tracer uptake in specific vascular territories during stress suggests reduced blood flow from stenosed coronary vessels.

Like SPECT, PET offers perfusion information and provides more quantitive measures of such and metabolism. PET can more precisely identify perfusion defect location, severity, and extend, including assessing the distal coronary microcirculation. While PET is more accurate than SPECT with relative immunity to attenuation artifacts, its higher expense and infrequent availability make it less commonly used.

**Cautions**

**False Positives**

Patients with LBBB or RV pacing are best evaluated with vasodilator MPI. In LBBB or RV-paced patients, the septum contracts later than the rest of the LV, requiring less blood flow. This physiologic septal hypoperfusion is exaggerated with exercise and reduced by a vasodilator. Therefore vasodilator MPI is preferred to exercise to avoid false positives.

**False Negatives**

False-negative results are common in older women with small LV cavities since LVH, and their hyperdynamic left ventricular function impairs the sensitivity of both stress echo and stress NPI to detect abnormalities.

**Management of Positive Test**

All positive stress tests warrant a discussion with the patient regarding further revaluation. A positive exercise treadmill test is followed with either stress imaging or high enough concern for patients interested in possible therapeutic interventions directly to coronary angiography. Similarly, a positive stress imaging test indicates a consideration for coronary catheterization.