Typically, the pathophysiology for both conditions is similar to direct tissue damage to the foreskin or penile skin from compression and entrapment. The injury may demonstrate bleeding, swelling, pain, contusions, bruising, and other signs of tissue damage. In general, the longer the tissue is trapped, the greater the degree of tissue damage, edema, bruising, scarring, and trauma. Therefore, the conditions should be relieved as quickly as reasonably possible.

Of the two problems, penile ring entrapment is potentially more dangerous as it can quickly progress to more serious and permanent injury to the penis. Zipper injuries are more likely to show tissue damage to the entrapped skin, while penile ring entrapment will tend to progress from venous stasis to distal edema with lymphatic and arterial blockage, followed by increasing ischemia. This ischemia can progress to infarction, necrosis, urethral fistulas, and either self-amputation or gangrene in a matter of hours.

Rings of various materials have been reported, including, but not limited to, metal rings, wedding rings, iron sleeves, nuts, washers, plastic bottles, bull rings, hammerheads, and rubber bands. Almost any material that can be manufactured into a ring can potentially be used. This complicates removal as, ultimately, this will depend on the nature of the ring material and the equipment available.

Penile hair strangulation typically occurs in young male children less than five years of age. It is often from long maternal hair, which accidentally becomes wrapped around the penis and then shortens as it dries out, causing penile strangulation.

Two types of zipper engagement of the penile or preputial skin are seen. Most commonly, the foreskin is engaged by the median bar sliding mechanism of the zipper. Less commonly, the penile skin may become trapped by the interlocking teeth of the zipper, with the median slider body being pulled up beyond the engagement area.