**Procedure**

- In bilateral exploration, a transverse low collar incision is made about one finger wide above the clavicular head in an existing skin crease. The dissection is carried down through the subcutaneous tissue and the platysma muscle. Hemostasis is obtained by electrocautery or ligation using ties.

- Dissection continues to elevate the upper subplatysmal flap to the thyroid notch and the lower flap to the sternal notch. Self-retaining retractors are used to retract the skin flaps.

- The deep fascia is opened by a midline incision along the median raphe of the strap muscles. Dissect the fascia along the anterior margins of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and either retract the strap muscles or divide the sternohyoid muscles and sternothyroid muscles vertically. Blunt dissect to the plane of cleavage between the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the outer boundaries of the sternothyroid muscle.

- A midline vertical incision is made between the sternohyoid muscles, extending from the thyroid notch to the level of the sternal notch. The sternohyoid muscles are then elevated to develop a plane between the thyroid gland and the sternohyoid muscles. Blunt dissection with the index finger or other blunt instrument such as a Kittner is performed in this plane to the lateral edge of the thyroid to mobilize the entire lateral surface of the thyroid and expose the paratracheal space between the trachea and carotid sheath.

- Ligate the middle thyroid vein, then retract the thyroid lobe medially and anteriorly; the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the parathyroid glands can be identified at the upper and lower poles of the thyroid lobe. A similar exploration is made on the other side.  The serum sample of PTH is collected for the baseline level.

- The solitary adenoma often appears to be enlarged in size and discolored. The enlarged gland is dissected and divided from the surrounding tissue without injuring the recurrent laryngeal nerve especially isolating the inferior parathyroid glands. It is important not to rupture the gland capsule in cases of malignancy but also in benign diseases to prevent parathyromatosis.

- The tissue specimen is sent for frozen section pathology to confirm it is the parathyroid gland. The PTH serum level is repeated, the removal of the overactive parathyroid gland is confirmed if the level drops >50% AND to within the normal PTH range. Continue to explore additional adenoma if the PTH level doesn’t fall to the expected level.

- Irrigate the wound, approximate the strap muscles with interrupted absorbable sutures, close the platysma with interrupted absorbable suture, close the skin with a running subcuticular absorbable suture.

- With preoperative localization of abnormal parathyroid gland, focused parathyroidectomy can be performed only in the imaging identified area. The incision size, the extent of dissection, and the duration of surgery are limited.

**Intraoperative Decision Making**

- It is important to fully mobilize the thyroid to search for a missing parathyroid gland. If the upper gland is missing, explore the tracheoesophageal groove, the retropharyngeal space, and above the thyroid cartilage.  The search for a missing lower gland should begin with a thorough exploration of the inferior pole of the thyroid and the surrounding soft tissue. If the gland is not found, performing a formal cervical thymectomy (or at least pulling up the thymus for examination is reasonable).

- In the patient with four gland hyperplasia, remove three and a half glands. The remnant half gland can be left in situ or implanted into the sternocleidomastoid muscle. In some patients with secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism, total parathyroidectomy with subcutaneous forearm autotransplantation is recommended.

- For patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1-associated PHPT, the initial surgical procedure usually includes resection of three-and-one-half hyperplastic parathyroid glands (subtotal resection) with strong consideration for concomitant cervical thymectomy. For patients with MEN type 2A-associated PHPT, parathyroid hyperplasia is heterogeneous; bilateral exploration is usually performed as the initial procedure, only the visibly enlarged glands are resected. For patients with MEN type 2A-associated recurrent hyperparathyroidism, a complete parathyroidectomy with forearm autotransplantation is typically performed.

- Parathyroid carcinoma should be completely resected, requiring en bloc resection of the parathyroid mass, and any adjacent tissues have been invaded. Complete surgical resection with microscopically negative margins is the recommended treatment and offers the best chance of cure.