Squamous cell carcinoma composes over 90% of all laryngeal malignancies. It is slow-growing and can appear as an exophytic or endophytic lesion. Glottic tumors typically arise from the free margin of the anterior 1/3rd of the vocal cords. Numerous anatomical boundaries can contain the lesion within the Reinke space for a significant period. Spread may occur locally across the anterior commissure (although the anterior commissure ligament provides a resilient barrier to the invasion) or posteriorly to the arytenoid cartilages.

Cancers may eventually breach the glottis through a direct invasion of the vocal ligament and vocalis muscles, causing vocal cord fixation via involvement of the thyroarytenoid muscle. From here, tumors gain access to the paraglottic space, facilitating cranial and caudal spread. Laryngeal cartilage is relatively resistant to direct tumor invasion, although invasion of the thyroid cartilage will often occur in advanced T4a disease. While supraglottic cancers often exhibit early bilateral nodal metastasis and subglottic cancers invade paratracheal and mediastinal nodes, carcinomas of the glottis have a low rate of lymphatic spread, attributed to an inadequate submucosal lymphatic supply. Nodal metastasis tends to occur when the tumor breaches the anterior commissure or invades another laryngeal subsite, most often spreading to levels 2, 3, 4, and 6.

Lymphoma is the second most common laryngeal malignancy; however, only thought to represent less than 1% of all cancers in this region. Nevertheless, it remains an important differential diagnosis, as it rarely requires surgical intervention beyond initial biopsy or tracheostomy in acute airway obstruction. It has a good prognosis when managed with chemoradiotherapy.