Supraglottic obstruction in pediatric patients is more common in children than in adults with a similar illness, and this is due to factors that make the pediatric airway more susceptible to airway obstruction and distress. The pediatric airway is narrower and more prone to obstruction. The relatively high larynx, larger head, large tongue, poor tone, increased compliance which predisposes to kinking, and the narrowest diameter at the cricoid make the pediatric airway increasingly challenging. Air flowing in and out of a more limited airway flows under greater resistance. This results in stridor for upper airway obstruction and wheezing for lower airway obstruction. The presence of stridor indicates the loss of 50% of the airway diameter. Streptococcal vaccines have resulted in a dramatic decrease in upper airway infections and inflammation. This has led to a dramatic decrease in rates of intubation or invasive interventions to relieve airway obstruction.

Angioedema has multiple mechanisms, but a common presentation.  Histamine-mediated  angioedema results in mast cell degranulation.  Bradykinin-mediated angioedema results from an overproduction of bradykinin due to  either an acquired or inherited C-1 deficiency.

Oversedation during procedures may contribute to airway obstruction and adverse events. In closed-claims analysis, 24% of liability claims during sedation were related to respiratory events.

Neck hematomas may obstruct the upper airway by external compression of the trachea. These may occur post-surgery or due to trauma (blunt and penetrating), or post-extubation.