Rotator cuff dysfunction does not always isolate the most superior aspect of the shoulder. Pain is the most common reason for presentation in rotator cuff injury, and pain lateral or anterior are the most common sites of pain in all comers.

Patients with subacromial impingement will often complain of pain with overhead activities and may also endorse weakness. In one study, >98% of presenting patients had pain as an element of their presentation.

To examine the shoulder, first inspect the shoulder, as well as the scapula, for any obvious asymmetry. Evaluate for scapular winging or dyskinesia.  There may or may not be wasting about the scapula if rotator cuff pathology is present. To perform a focused examination of the supraspinatus, ask the patient to forward flex the arm. Pain at liftoff or pain at 90 to 120 degrees of active elevation may indicate rotator cuff pathology.

Furthermore, pain during active slow de-elevation of the arm may indicate cuff pathology.

The neurovascular exam should be normal in patients with isolated rotator cuff dysfunction or tendonitis. Decreased pulsed with overhead arm positioning, radicular or dermatomal sensory abnormalities, or focal weakness outside of the shoulder should raise the evaluator to look for alternate or concomitant diagnoses including cervical radiculopathy, thoracic outlet syndrome, brachial plexopathy, or peripheral nerve compression.

The Hawkins test (90 degrees forward flexion and passive significant internal rotation of the arm) may also recreate acromial contact with the inflamed bursa/tendon creating pain. Furthermore, the Jobe (or empty can) test has the patient hold their arm in 90 degrees of abduction, 30 degrees of forward flexion, and resist a downward force while in the thumbs down position.

Some constellation of positive findings may lead to the diagnosis of subacromial bursitis, external shoulder impingement, or supraspinatus tendonitis. Weakness that is frank or painless may be more indicative of a complete supraspinatus tear, but a lack of this finding does not rule out the diagnosis.