Frey syndrome is theorized to result from injured parasympathetic axons of the auriculotemporal nerve that undergo aberrant regeneration.

The parasympathetic nerve fibers originate from the inferior salivatory nucleus and the glossopharyngeal nerve, pass through the inferior petrosal nerve, and synapse at the otic ganglion. From there, the postganglionic parasympathetic fibers join with the auriculotemporal nerve, being responsible for secretomotor control of the parotid gland. Signal transduction in postganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers to the parotid gland occurs via the neurotransmitter acetylcholine acting at muscarinic receptors. The sympathetic nerve fibers in the auriculotemporal nerve are responsible for vasomotor and sweat gland innervation in the overlying skin. Although most postganglionic sympathetic fibers are adrenergic and activated by noradrenaline, the postganglionic sympathetic fibers controlling the sweat glands are cholinergic, like the salivary secretomotor fibers and are also activated by muscarinic receptors.

Both parasympathetic and sympathetic axons of the auriculotemporal nerve can be damaged in trauma or surgical procedures like parotidectomy. Aberrant nerve regeneration can occur, resulting in the postganglionic parasympathetic fibers growing along the sympathetic pathways to cross-innervate the vessels and sweat glands of the face.

Frey syndrome can also occur after submandibular excision and neck dissection due to aberrant nerve regeneration after damage to the postganglionic parasympathetic nerve fibers to the submandibular gland, postganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the sublingual gland, or postganglionic parasympathetic fibers arising from the cervical sympathetic ganglia to innervate the sweat glands of the skin.

Another theory regarding the development of Frey syndrome is that damaged sympathetic nerve fibers result in increased sweat gland sensitivity, which can then be stimulated by acetylcholine released from adjacent parasympathetic fibers. This theory may be more convincing in cases wherein gustatory sweating occurs shortly after surgery when nerve regeneration has yet to occur.