Most poisonings occur in Eastern Europe, particularly in the conifer forests of Germany, Poland, and Finland. In North America, most exposures occur in Michigan, although a less toxic variety grows west of the Rockies and has been clustered in Idaho and Western Canada. Exposures occur mostly in the Spring, unlike other serious mushroom poisonings, such as Amanita phalloides, which occur more commonly in the fall.

Over the centuries, poisonings due to the consumption of gyromitra were recorded across those regions of Europe and the United States, although the species' names changed over time. Investigation of cases allowed for the identification of the mushroom and identification of its toxin. In France in 1793, poisonings were attributed to the then-named Morchella pleopus. In 1885, an extract from the same mushroom was named “helvellic acid," the toxin we now know as gyromitrin, as isolated by List and Luft of Germany in 1968, who identified the chemical nature and structure of the toxin.

From 1953 to 1962, there were 138 documented poisonings with two fatalities in Poland.

Between 1994 to 2002, the Swedish poison center received 706 calls related to gyromitra mushrooms, with no fatalities.[9]

In the United States, from 2001 to 2011, poison centers received 82,140 calls related to mushrooms. Of these, 448 calls involved gyromitrin mushrooms. Over 30 years, the North American Mycological Society (NAMA) reported on 27 cases. None were fatal but nine developed liver injury and three acute kidney injuries.