**Scapulothoracic Articulation**

The scapulothoracic articulation is an intricate, sliding junction that composes part of the shoulder in conjunction with the glenohumeral, acromioclavicular and coracoclavicular joints. The scapula has a complex anatomical relationship, comprised of 17 muscular attachments that function to dynamically stabilize the scapula and control the position of the glenoid to permit a wide range of motion for the upper extremity through the glenohumeral joint. The scapula does not have any ligamentous connections to the thorax. Due to the complexity of the scapulothoracic articulation, scapulothoracic disorders can be present and go underdiagnosed or underestimated because of the various and often subtle morphological alterations in normal architecture.

**Levator Scapulae Syndrome**

The most common clinical manifestation of levator scapulae pathology is levator scapulae syndrome or tenderness over the upper medial angle of the scapula. Though well documented, this condition is often unrecognized. Movements that stretch the muscle tend to exaggerate symptoms. There is a hypothesis that constant trigger points, crepitation, and increased heat emission result from a combination of anatomic variability and the confluence of a bursa between the insertion of the levator scapulae, origin serratus anterior, and the scapula. Effective treatment modalities include physical therapy and/or local corticosteroid injections.

**Snapping Scapula Syndrome**

Significant shoulder dysfunction can present as painful crepitus or scapulothoracic bursitis, termed snapping scapula syndrome or "washboard syndrome." This condition commonly manifests secondary to a chronic injury, overuse, or muscle imbalance that impacts the scapulothoracic articulation. Osseous lesions at the superomedial angle of the scapula secondary to repetitive injury or avulsion of the levator scapulae have also been implicated in the clinical manifestation.

**Myofascial Pain**

Cervical myofascial pain is a musculoskeletal disorder consisting of pain attributed to muscles and their surrounding fascia. The levator scapulae are one of the most commonly involved muscles in the cervical spine. The etiology of myofascial pain is not completely understood but commonly results from postural mechanics, muscle overuse, trauma, or secondarily to another pathologic condition, such as fibromyalgia or arthropathies of zygapophyseal joints.

**Other Clinical Considerations**

There are also documented cases of active trigger points of the levator scapula with a high prevalence, including those secondary to an acute whiplash injury.