Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is necessary to confirm ALCL (ALK-positive). Positive stains supporting ALCL (ALK-positive) diagnosis include:  CD30 (cytoplasmic), EMA, CD2, CD4, CD5, TIA1, granzyme B, perforin, CD45, CD45RO, CD61, CD25 (strong), BNH9. Negative stains include: CD15, CD20, CD79a, cytokeratin, bcl2, PAX5 / BSAP, PGM1, EBV (EBER & LMP1).  ALCL (ALK-positive) can show loss of several pan-T- cell antigens, referred to as null-cell phenotype. However, these cells still show evidence of a T-cell lineage at the genetic level. No clinical or prognostic difference between T-cell versus a null-cell phenotype has been found. ALK immunohistochemistry (ALK IHC), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) results have been shown to be comparable diagnostic tools. FISH using an ALK break-apart probe or karyotyping is not mandatory in clinical practice if ALK staining is positive. RT-PCR is usually used for the detection of minimal residual disease in blood or bone marrow. Genetic testing is useful in confirming ALCL (ALK-positive) diagnosis. T cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement is seen in most cases and can be assessed by PCR or flow cytometry. There are different distinct translocations all of which result in upregulation of ALK protein. The most common translocation is t(2;5)(p23;q35). Other translocations/rearrangements include: t(1;2)(q25;p23), inv(2)(p23;q35),  t(2;3)(p23;q21),  t(2;17)(p23;q23), t(2;X)(p23;q11-12), t(2;19)(p23;p13.1), t(2;22)(p23;q11.2) and t(2;17)(p23;q25). Other secondary genetic alterations include: -4, del11q, del13q, +7, +17p, +17q). Gene expression profiling comparing ALCL (ALK-positive) and ALCL (ALK-negative) has shown significant differences, although the two tumors show similarities.  ALCL (ALK-positive) shows unique overexpression of BCL6, PTPN12, SERPINA1and CEBPB.