# Introduction

Blood cell development begins as early as the seventh day of embryonic life.

# Development

The process of gastrulation begins with the epiblast, a single epithelial cell layer, transforming into three embryonic germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm).

Shortly after the development of primitive hematopoietic cells (EryP), a group of cells called highly proliferative, multipotent progenitor colony forming cells (HPP-CFC) arise in the yolk sac. These cells initiate the first wave of definitive hematopoiesis and produce cells of the definitive erythroid lineage. These cells are often called erythroid/myeloid progenitors, and they bridge the transition between primitive and hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) derived erythropoiesis.

The second wave of definitive hematopoiesis replaces primitive hematopoiesis and the first wave of definitive hematopoiesis. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) emerge from a specialized hemogenic endothelium within a limited region of the developing aorta's ventral wall called the para-aortic splanchnopleure. The aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region develops from the para-aortic splanchnopleure and produces HSC.

EryD cells express fetal hemoglobin (HbF) and are composed of two γ-globin chains and two adult alpha-globin chains. HbF remains the predominant hemoglobin for most of gestation.

Toward the third trimester of development, as skeletal components begin ossification and bone marrow is developing inside bony cavities, the marrow of specific bones will become the essential hematopoietic organ. Both the liver and spleen at this point cease erythropoiesis as the bone marrow predominates in hematopoietic cell production. In postnatal life, definitive erythropoiesis originates from the marrow (BM) that occurs under normal physiologic conditions. In infants, all spongy bone and trabecular bone produce RBC. However, in adults, RBC production is limited to the vertebra, sternum, ribs, and proximal ends of long bones. HSCs in the BM give rise to all mature hematopoietic cells through a series of intermediate progenitors that will be discussed further in the next section.

# Cellular

Many models have been studied to explain the development of the definitive erythroid lineage. HSC lack lineage-specific cell markers and instead express markers called lineage negative (lin-), Sca1+, and c-Kit+ (LSK).

The earliest erythroid progenitors arise from MEPs and can form a burst-forming unit (BFU-E), which are large red colonies. BFU-E is a large colony that has thousands of hemoglobinized cells. They have the same immunohistochemistry as MEP, which makes it difficult to distinguish between the two. These cells respond to erythropoietin, stem cell factor, interleukin 3 and 6, corticosteroids, and insulin growth factor 1 and divide to form colony forming units erythroid (CFU-E). It is here that CFU-E is committed to erythroid differentiation and require EPO for survival (4). These cells display the phenotype of CD45+, GPA -, IL-3R-, CD34-, CD36+, and CD71 high in humans, and IL-3R-, c-Kit+ and CD71 high in mice.

The transition from CFU-E to proerythroblast involves the loss of c-Kit to gain Ter119 expression. EPO engages cell division, the expression of erythroid-specific genes, and prevents apoptosis. Proerythroblast undergoes three mitoses, resulting in 2 basophilic, four polychromatic, eight orthochromatic erythroblasts and ending in 16 reticulocytes. After each division, the maturing erythroblast gets smaller, its nucleus will condense, and hemoglobin gathers in the cytoplasm. By the orthochromatophilic stage of growth, the erythroid cell will exit the cell cycle resulting in a condensed nucleus polarized to one side of the cytoplasm. The nucleus gets extruded and forms the reticulocyte. Reticulocytes express high amounts of CD71, and as they progress to become fully mature red blood cells, they lose most CD71 but gain CD235a+ expression.

# Molecular Level

Induction of HbF is a heavily regulated process that depends on various gene expressions. Three genetic loci that influence HbF levels include a region in chromosome 2 within the BCL11A gene, an area that is intergenic between HBSIL, MYB genes located on chromosome 6, and also variants that are within the beta-globin locus on chromosome 11.

# Clinical Significance

Errors in the development of HbA can lead to significant consequences for the newborn infant to adulthood. Beta-thalassemia is a genetic mutation where there is a reduced amount or absence of beta-globin chain synthesis. A reduced amount of beta-globin chains results in a decrease in hemoglobin in red blood cells, decreased red blood cell production, and anemia. There are more than 200 mutations reported with the majority of these caused by point mutations in the functionally essential gene regions for beta-globin chain production.

Sickle cell anemia is the result of a non-conservative missense mutation, a change of one nucleotide in the beta-globin gene region. This mutation will cause red blood cells to distort into a "sickle" shape when deoxygenated. These sickle cell RBC (HbS) can continuously change their form, which results in their premature destruction intravascularly.

In both diseases, hydroxyurea has been shown to improve the quality of life for patients.