Neuropathic ulcerations arise from prominences from the internal structure, causing pressure point abnormalities on the external surface of an insensate body part. This is most commonly seen in the foot when pedal prominences cause pressure during ambulation. Due to the lack of sensation in the area, the patient is much less likely to be able to feel any pain or abnormalities in sensation associated with the ulceration.

There are multiple known causes of peripheral neuropathy that can be broken down into categories: anatomic, systemic, metabolic, and toxic. The anatomic causes of neuropathy are sciatic nerve compression, fibular nerve compression or entrapment, or nerve dissection from surgery or accidental injury. The systemic causes of peripheral neuropathy include but are not limited to HIV infection, carcinoma, paraneoplastic syndrome, monoclonal gammopathy, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Sjogren’s syndrome, and tick bites. The metabolic causes of neuropathy include diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, renal disease, and chronic liver disease. The toxic causes of neuropathy include multiple vitamin deficiencies (B1, B6, B12), vitamin B6 excess, heavy metal poisoning, drug-induced neuropathy, organophosphate exposure, and alcohol use. These each has their own way of causing an effect on the body.

Peripheral neuropathy within the diabetic population is the most common. It is considered to be caused by cell death from inflammation and oxidative stress on the tissues leading to nerve dysfunction. This is accentuated by hyperglycemia and insulin resistance, causing the inability to regulate many metabolic pathways within the body, increasing the reactive oxygen species (ROS) within the tissues. ROS leads to direct nerve injury and eventual peripheral polyneuropathy. This neuropathy progresses from unmyelinated fibers to eventual demyelination of myelinated nerve fibers, which is the reasoning behind sensory, autonomic, and motor neuropathies.

A lack of blood flow and sensorium often leads to a disease progression called Charcot neuroarthropathy. Charcot neuroarthropathy is an inflammatory condition that leads to osseous subluxation, dislocation of joints, and fracture of bones that lead to remodeling of the structure of the foot. Charcot neuroarthropathy has multiple theories on etiology and can be challenging to manage as it has multiple stages with a variable timeline and different theories on the causality. It can often lead to neuropathic ulcerations and bone infection.