The intercostal arteries mainly supply the muscles of the thoracic wall and posterior thorax. Each intercostal space receives supply by three arteries (one posterior intercostal artery and two anterior intercostal arteries) that run in between the internal intercostal muscle and innermost intercostal muscle in the costal groove and anastomose laterally. The posterior intercostal artery of the first two intercostal spaces comes from the superior (supreme) intercostal artery, which subsequently arises from the costocervical trunk of the subclavian artery. The remaining posterior intercostal arteries from the third to eleventh intercostal spaces and a pair of subcostal arteries emerge directly from the descending thoracic aorta. Their corresponding veins drain into the azygos or hemiazygos veins. The anterior intercostal arteries of the first six intercostal spaces are branches of the internal thoracic artery, which come from the first portion of the subclavian artery. The remaining anterior intercostal arteries from the seventh to ninth intercostal spaces come from the branches of the musculophrenic artery, which is a terminal branch of the internal thoracic artery. Their corresponding veins drain into the internal thoracic or musculophrenic veins. The lymphatic drainage of the thoracic wall involves the parasternal lymph nodes and intercostal lymph nodes. The parasternal lymph nodes from the upper thorax drain into the bronchomediastinal trunk. The intercostal lymph nodes from the upper thorax also drain into the bronchomediastinal trunk, whereas the intercostal nodes from the lower thorax drain into the thoracic duct.

The pectoralis major and minor muscles are supplied by the pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial trunk, which is the second branch of the axillary artery. Their venous drainage comes from the pectoral vein via the subclavian vein.

Last, the diaphragm is supplied by multiple arteries that include the musculophrenic artery branch of the internal thoracic artery, superior phrenic artery branch of the aorta, lower five intercostal arteries and subcostal artery, and the inferior phrenic artery.