The traditional treatment for a patient presenting with an acute gastric volvulus has been an immediate operation reducing and untwisting the volvulus. This remains the gold standard; however, attempted medical management may be useful in patients that are a very high risk for surgery. Immediate surgical resection is required for necrosis or perforation of the stomach. Simultaneously, the diaphragmatic hernia should be reduced and closed. The stomach is then fixed to the anterior abdominal wall with suture, or by the placement of a gastrostomy tube. Open surgery, or the combination of laparoscopic and endoscopic surgical techniques, have good results. Laparoscopy, when used to repair chronic and intermittent gastric volvulus, is often be less morbid than an open operation. Patients who are fit enough to undergo a surgical procedure should proceed to have their chronic gastric volvulus repaired because of the high morbidity and mortality (30% to 50%) associated with strangulated gastric volvulus.

Good results have also been reported with conservative treatment of an acute gastric volvulus in elderly patients if they are not presenting in extremis. Conservative treatment has also been used to help patients with intermittent and chronic volvulus.  The patient should be kept sitting upright, and a nasogastric tube should be gently inserted to decompress the stomach. The patient should be adequately resuscitated and re-evaluated often. Some high-risk, elderly patients can be treated endoscopically with decompression and reduction of the stomach, and placement of a percutaneous gastrostomy tube to gastropexy the stomach to the abdominal wall. Percutaneous gastrostomy placement can be done as an adjunct in ill patients with chronic or intermittent volvulus, or that may have other critical issues that need to be handled before definitive surgery, for example, sepsis from another source.