# Introduction

Creatine phosphokinase (CPK), also known by the name creatine kinase (CK), is the enzyme that catalyzes the reaction of creatine and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to phosphocreatine (PCr) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP).

# Pathophysiology

**Molecular**

Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) is a compact enzyme of around 82 kDa that is found in both the cytosol and mitochondria of tissues where energy demands are high.B on 14q32 and M on 19q13. These subunits allow the formation of three tissue-specific isoenzymes: CPK-MB (cardiac muscle), CPK-MM (skeletal muscle), and CPK-BB (brain). Typically, the ratio of subunits varies with muscle type: skeletal muscle: 98% MM and 2% MB; cardiac muscle: 70 to 80% MM and 20 to 30% MB, while the brain predominantly has BB.

Mitochondrial (Mt-CK) and cytosolic CK are connected in a so-called PCr/Cr-shuttle or circuit.

Normally, creatine phosphokinase occurs in heart tissue, skeletal muscles, the brain, etc. However, upon muscular injury, there is leakage of CPK into the bloodstream. Thus, CPK is indicative of muscular damage. CPK-MB is a more specific indicator of myocardial muscle damage, while CPK-MM is more indicative of skeletal muscle damage.

When electrophoresed, CPK-MM runs closest to the cathode, CPK-MB has intermediate mobility, and CPK-BB moves farthest from the point of application toward the anode. Mt-CK, which runs more cathodal than the MM fraction, is usually associated with tissue necrosis that accompanies severe anoxic shock and severe liver disease.

Both M and B subunits have a C-terminal lysine residue, but only the former is hydrolyzed by the action of carboxypeptidases present in the blood. Carboxypeptidases B or N sequentially hydrolyze the lysine residues from CKMM to produce two CK-MM isoforms—CK-MM2 (one lysine residue removed) and CK-MM1 (both lysine residues removed).

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Specimens for CK analysis include serum and plasma heparin. Anticoagulants, other than heparin, should not be used in collection tubes because they inhibit CK activity. The collection of specimens in gel separator tubes does not appear to affect CK activity compared to tubes not containing gel.

Fresh serum, free from hemolysis, is the specimen of choice for analysis of the CK isoenzyme pattern.

# Testing Procedures

Numerous photometric, fluorometric, and coupled-enzyme methods have been developed for the assay of CK activity, using either the forward (Cr --> CRP) or the reverse (Cr <-- CRP) reaction.

The techniques most commonly used for the analysis of CK isoenzyme are electrophoresis and various immunological methods.

Immunochemical methods apply to the direct measurement of CK-MB. In the immunoinhibition technique, an anti-CK-M subunit antiserum is used to inhibit both M subunits of CK-MM and the single M subunit of CK-MB, thus allowing the determination of the enzyme activity of the B subunit of CK-MB, the B subunits of CK-BB, and macro-CKs. To determine CK-MB, this technique assumes the absence of CK-BB (and of the other sources of interference such as macro-CKs) from the tested serum.

In contrast with immunoinhibition, which measures the CK-MB isoenzyme by determination of its catalytic activity, mass immunoassays measure CK-MB protein concentrations.

# Interfering Factors

A moderate degree of hemolysis (up to 0.32 g/dL of hemoglobin) does not significantly influence the measured CK activity because erythrocytes contain no CK activity.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

Serum CK activity is subject to a number of physiological variations. Sex, age, muscle mass, physical activity, and race all interact to affect measured serum activity. Males generally have a larger muscle mass, which results in higher serum CK activities than those in females. The racial type also has an effect on CK activities, and the mean activity in White individuals is 66% of the mean activity in Black individuals.

Newborns generally have higher CK activities resulting from skeletal muscle trauma during birth. Serum CK in infants decreases to the adult reference interval by 6 to 10 weeks.CK-BB may be elevated in neonates, particularly in newborns with brain-damaged or very low birth weight.

With the CK-MB mass assay, the upper reference limit for males is 5.0 μg/L, with values for females being less than for males. However, many laboratories use a single reference interval (male).

# Clinical Significance

Creatine kinase activity is one of the oldest markers of acute myocardial infarction (AMI).

Elevated levels of CK-MB have long been used to diagnose a case of AMI. Although many centers are now going by troponin levels instead of CK-MB, there is a newer, more specific CK-MB method.

Serum CK activity is greatly elevated in all types of muscular dystrophy.

CPK levels also elevate in patients with rhabdomyolysis

Patients on statins such as simvastatin may have an adverse effect of significantly elevated CPK levels, potentially leading to rhabdomyolysis.

Serum CK activity demonstrates an inverse relationship with thyroid activity. About 60% of hypothyroid subjects show an average elevation of CK activity fivefold more than the upper reference limit.

Plasma creatine kinase activity is significantly associated with blood pressure in the general population and is thought to contribute to hypertension by increasing vascular contractility and renal sodium retention.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. Laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently if deemed necessary to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Creatine phosphokinase is an important enzyme in diagnosing rhabdomyolysis than AMI in the current medical setting. It is essential in patients with sickle cell anemia or sickle cell trait. It requires careful management with an interprofessional team consisting of a pediatrician and a geneticist. The geneticist should assess the type of sickle cell disease during newborn screening.

In a patient who already presents with rhabdomyolysis after an increased creatine phosphokinase level, an interprofessional team consisting of a nephrologist, surgeon, and nurse may manage the condition. The nephrologist would be working to increase kidney function in such patients, as acute kidney injury is the most common complication of rhabdomyolysis. The surgeon may need to surgically repair any damaged muscle or tissue that leads to the condition. The nurse should teach the patient about managing their condition and how to avoid having an attack of rhabdomyolysis again. The healthcare team can also consult with the pharmacist to verify that any patient's medications are not potential sources for elevated CPK.