The management of osteoarthritic joints should aim to limit the pain and improve function. Usually, a combination of non-pharmacological (or conservative) and pharmacological treatments are required for optimal care. Non-pharmacologic treatments include specific exercises, physical therapy, bracing, acupuncture, and weight reduction. The pharmacologic management of osteoarthritis utilizes topical and oral medications. Frequently used medications include oral and topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), topical capsaicin, and duloxetine. Corticosteroids can be injected directly into the joint. In most instances, topical NSAIDs, capsaicin, and other ointments are first-line therapy, and oral NSAIDs are to be initiated if symptoms are not relieved by these, or the disease is more systemic. Duloxetine can be useful for patients that have medical contraindications to NSAID use and has been proven to be beneficial especially in osteoarthritis of the knees. If both non-pharmacological and pharmacological management fails, intra-articular corticosteroid injections might provide symptom relief. Opioids should be avoided.

The emphasis in the pharmacological management of rheumatoid arthritis and the seronegative spondyloarthropathies is on early disease remission and preventing radiographic progression. The early use of disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and biologics is more effective than treatment with glucocorticoids and NSAIDs.

In gouty arthritis, flare-ups can be quite debilitating and painful. The use of anti-inflammatory medications can provide substantial relief and shall be ideally initiated within 24 hours an acute gouty flare. These include oral corticosteroids, NSAIDs such as indomethacin or high-dose naproxen, or colchicine. The use of intra-articular corticosteroid injections may be useful for a patient with pauciarticular involvement, whereas the use of intramuscular or intravenous corticosteroids may be used if the patient is not able to take medications orally. Medications that decrease uric acid levels play no beneficial role in the treatment of an acute flare but are recommended for patients with recurrent flares, chronic kidney disease, nephrolithiasis or tophi.

The treatment of septic arthritis requires draining the affected joint and the use of antibiotics. Cultures and sensitivities of the joint fluid determine the joints of antibiotics.