There are several significant clinical correlations to consider while analyzing the female internal genitalia:

- The uterus typically sits in an anteverted, ante flexed position. A retroverted uterus is associated with an increased risk of early bleeding and spontaneous abortion. The caesarian sections have correlated with a retroverted uterus.

- Embryologic defects in the shape of the uterus, such as Bicornuate uterus anomalies, may also lead to infertility and first-trimester spontaneous miscarriages.

- The uterus receives vascular supply from the uterine artery, an anterior division of the internal iliac artery, which travels within the cardinal ligament. Physiologic variants of the uterine artery may be present in many cases, and surgeons must anticipate these cases for appropriate ligation of the artery.

- Moreover, there must be careful consideration of the ureter during surgeries involving the female genitals to avoid unintentional ligation.

- The ovaries are the gonadal structures of females; they derive from the gonadal ridge. The “Z” gene hypothesis names FoxL2, Dax1, and Wnt4 as possible ovary determining factors.

- The ovaries obtain their blood supply from the ovarian arteries, and their lymphatic drainage is directed to the paraaortic nodes.

- The fallopian tubes are the connections from the ovary to the uterus. Salpingitis may lead to scarring of the fallopian tubes and predispose to infertility and ectopic tubal pregnancy. Tubal infertility must be a consideration in young women with infertility of undetermined significance.

- A pudendal nerve block is an option to alleviate the pain of labor. However, they are no longer commonly used since the popularity of epidurals has increased.

- The pubococcygeus muscle bears the largest tissue strain compared to other pelvic floor muscles and is at significant risk of being compromised during vaginal delivery.

- Studies have shown that embolization of the round ligament may help to control recurrent or persistent postpartum hemorrhage.

- There have been rare cases of femoral herniation containing the ovary, fallopian tube, and uterus.

- Pelvic organ prolapse is prevalent among women.