Developing a reliable framework for self-change, or professionally-assisted-change is beneficial for those seeking change and for those in the health care system who are assisting with change. When using this model of change, “changers” are not coerced, but rather supported and accepted at the stage they present. Treatment becomes personalized based on the individual and the stage in which they reside. With this method, “change behavior” is thought of as a fluid and dynamic evolution, with possible recycling of stages, rather than focusing on the end goal of change. The importance of discussing the common and potential risk of relapse allows for the focus to be shifted from a failure mindset to the success that was achieved up until the point of relapse. Allowing the discussion of relapse in a nonpunitive manner leads to an honest examination of lessons learned regarding the individual, their triggers, and better ways to address those triggers. Overall, TTM assists in improving compliance and motivates people regarding the prospect of change.

Although much of the documented research has centered around smoking cessation and other addictive behaviors such as alcohol abuse, and other illicit drug use; applications of the stages of change theory (TTM) has been seen in a wide variety of problematic behaviors. The numerous applications of this model have ranged from stress management, medication compliance, exercise participation, weight control, and condom use, to preventative measures such as medical screening tests.

Using TTM to assist with preventative medicine is another category of significance. One way to comply with healthy lifestyle behaviors is to encourage compliance with medical assessments. One study showed that patient-no show rates were not only a financial burden on the U.S. healthcare system but also indirectly affected patient access to medical care.