The onset of LA toxicity can be variable ranging from immediate onset to delayed onset hours after the administration of the LA. There may be signs and symptoms that suggest impending LA toxicity, or systemic reactions may occur without forewarning. Peak absorption of LA is most rapid in intercostal block applications, followed by caudal/epidural uptake, then uptake in the brachial plexus, ending with the least rapid uptake from distal peripheral sites (sciatic/femoral) and topical administration.

The direct effect on the mitochondria is to inhibit metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. Central nervous system (CNS) toxicity can result in seizures, while direct cardiac effects include impaired myocardial contractility and conduction disturbances.  Toxic signs and symptoms may vary from perioral tingling, confusion, dizziness, seizure, hypotension, and cardiac arrest.

A direct decrease in the rate of depolarization and increased duration of the action potential can result in cardiac arrhythmias and even cardiac arrest. The increased heart rate of neonates and infants makes them more susceptible to the cardiac effects of LA.

Prilocaine alone or as EMLA cream can cause methemoglobinemia, especially in neonates and infants less than 3 months old. The risk of methemoglobinemia is increased by concurrent medication use with medications such as dapsone, acetaminophen, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and chloroquine. Treatment of methemoglobinemia is supportive with oxygen and intravenous fluids, and if needed, IV methylene blue 1 to 2 mg/kg infused over 5 minutes or ascorbic acid.

Treatment of LA toxicity must prioritize securing the airway, oxygenation, and treatment of cardiac arrest and seizures. It is imperative to prevent acidosis, as this will exacerbate the toxic effects of LAs. A smartphone app developed by the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, ASRA LAST, guides and assists in the treatment of suspected or diagnosed LAST.

In the treatment of LAST first stop the administration of all LAs. Then call for help, maintain ventilation and oxygenation while securing the airway, and consider early use of lipid emulsion therapy and consultation for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. For CNS and cardiac toxicity, you must control seizures with benzodiazepines (i.e., diazepam 0.05 mg/kg IV bolus, may repeat once) and treat cardiac sequelae with Pediatric Advanced Life Support and Neonatal Resuscitation Program protocols. Care is necessary to know which medications to avoid: vasopressin, calcium channel and beta-adrenergic blockers, and local anesthetics. If epinephrine is used, the dose should be less than 1 microgram/kilogram.

The gold standard for treatment of LAST is 20% lipid emulsion (20 grams in 100 mL or 0.2 g/mL). The recommended dose for pediatric patients begins with an initial bolus dose of 1.5 mL/kg (0.3 g/kg) followed by a continuous infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min (0.05 g/kg/min), not to exceed 10 mL**/**kg (2 g/kg) in the first 30 minutes.