The goal standard diagnostic modality is imaging. However, diagnosis is possible from clinical findings, which may suggest possible subclavian artery thrombosis, including unequal upper limb blood pressures, absent or diminished axillary, brachial, radial, or ulnar pulses, and digital ulceration or gangrene.

The difference in systolic blood pressure of over 10 mm Hg between both arms has a positive predictive value of 13%.

Non-invasive diagnostic imaging for the diagnosis of subclavian artery thrombosis is duplex ultrasound with color flow. Duplex ultrasonography shows waveform dampening or monophasic changes, color aliasing suggestive of turbulent flow, and increased blood flow velocities at the location of the stenosis. Doppler ultrasonography can also diagnose a reversal of ipsilateral vertebral artery flow, as seen in subclavian steal syndrome.

Duplex ultrasonography of the subclavian arteries enables the detection of stenosis. Detection of high-velocity flows indicates a greater than 50% stenosis.

Detailed Duplex evaluations are mandatory to identify the severe stenotic or obstructive right brachiocephalic trunk. Reduced flow velocities in the right subclavian and common carotid arteries reflect higher grades of right brachiocephalic trunk stenotic lesions.

More accurate diagnostic modalities include computed tomography and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), reserved for when intervention is mandatory. The advantage of MRA in evaluating these lesions is providing not only morphological but also functional characteristics, enabling optimal differentiation and measuring the stenotic severity.

Multi-detector CT (MDCT) angiography is an excellent measure for diagnosing pathologic conditions of the subclavian arteries.