Patients at the stage of subclinical hyperthyroidism can be monitored without intervention and with the recommendation to avoid excessive iodine intake in the form of supplements and medications and avoid iodinated contrast media for radiological studies if possible. Patients with risk factors for atrial fibrillation or with atrial fibrillation, patients with osteoporosis, and women with osteopenia should be treated, even if they have subclinical hyperthyroidism due to toxic multinodular goiter.

**Surgery:**Surgical treatment is the mainstay therapy for toxic MNG. It provides rapid resolution with low morbidity and mortality.

- Unilateral or bilateral vocal cord paralysis

- Hypoparathyroidism

- Significant post-operative bleeding or infection

- Tracheostomy

**Radioactive iodine ablation (RIA):**RIA (sodium iodide-131) is indicated in the treatment of Plummer disease.

- Hypothyroidism

- Mild thyrotoxic symptoms

- Exacerbation of congestive cardiac failure and atrial fibrillation

- Tracheal compression

- Thyroid storm (rare)

**Antithyroid drugs:**Propylthiouracil and methimazole are used in the time period of waiting until RAI is given and for surgery preparation.

**Ethanol ablation:**Percutaneous ethanol ablation is a minimally invasive procedure used to treat hyperfunctioning nodules. It can be performed in the outpatient department. Before careful ultrasound assessment, thyroid scintigraphy and thyroid FNA cytology for cold nodules should rule out malignancy before ethanol injection of hot nodules.

**Other drugs:**Cardiovascular effects such as hypertension and tachycardia should be treated with beta-blockers.