The ALT flap is versatile and has a wide range of indications, including:

1. Head and Neck Reconstruction: following resection of head and neck tumors, the ALT flap can be used to resurface the defect either as a cover or as double skin paddle with cover and lining. The ALT flap is an alternative to the radial forearm free flap in patients with low body mass index, but in larger patients, the flap is bulky due to subcutaneous adipose tissue and can be used to fill deeper defects. An unique application of the ALT flap is in esophageal reconstruction, wherein it is folded onto itself (skin inside to form a  lumen) as a tubed flap.

2. Secondary Burn Reconstruction: following sequelae of burn injuries like extensive scar contractures, the ALT flap can be used after the release of extensive post-burn contractures to help prevent recurrence.

3. Breast Reconstruction: it can also be used for breast reconstruction if lower abdominal skin is unavailable due to previous scars or surgeries (abdominoplasties, laparotomy) or as a salvage option following failure of primary breast reconstruction.

4. Abdominal Wall Reconstruction: it can be used as a pedicled flap for lower abdominal reconstruction, wherein it is harvested as a myocutaneous flap or a composite flap with fascia (tensor fasciae latae). For more significant and extensive defects of the abdominal wall, free ALT transfer is preferred. These flaps can include multiple tissue components, such as muscle and/or fascia (fascia lata), using the chimeric flap principle.

5. Upper and Lower Extremity Reconstruction:****posttraumatic defects around the knee can be resurfaced using the distally-based ALT flap. For defects involving the lower one-third of the leg and the foot, a thinned ALT flap may be used. It can also be used as a flow-through flap for resurfacing defects in the lower limb while maintaining blood supply in an ischaemic leg. Similarly, it can be used for extensive defects in the upper extremity. When tendon gliding is paramount, the ALT can be harvested as a composite flap by including fascia lata to facilitate this.

6. Perineum and penile reconstruction:****a proximally-based ALT flap can be used for perineal reconstruction. The free ALT flap has also been used in gender reassignment surgery (female to male) for phalloplasty.