Lipoprotein lipase deficiency usually presents with the following:

- Abdominal pain is the most common presentation and occurs due to acute pancreatitis, intensity varying from mild to incapacitating (mimicking acute abdomen). The attacks of acute pancreatitis are recurrent and usually culminate in chronic pancreatitis.

- Xanthomas - In about 50 % of the individuals with lipoprotein lipase deficiency, eruptive xanthomas, which are yellow papules of around 1 mm in size, appear mostly on the trunk, knees, buttocks, and extensor surfaces of arms. These may coalesce to form larger patches. The formation of xanthomas occurs as a result of extravascular phagocytosis of chylomicrons by macrophages and deposition in the skin. They happen when plasma triglyceride levels rise above 2000 mg/dL and disappear when the plasma triglyceride levels return to normal. They are painless unless exposed to repetitive abrasion.

- Loss of appetite

- Nausea, vomiting

- Arthralgia

- Myalgia

- Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly occur as a result of markedly increased plasma triglyceride levels. The excessive chylomicrons in the bloodstream are ingested by macrophages(phagocytes), which then travel to the liver and spleen. The fatty cells accumulate in the liver and spleen, leading to an increase in their size.

- Retinalis lipemia - the retinal arterioles, venules, and fundus appear pale-pink as a result of scattering of light by the large chylomicrons. This change is reversible, and the vision gets spared. Retinalis lipemia is seen when the plasma triglyceride levels rise above 2500 mg/dL. When the triglyceride levels are between 2500 and 3499 mg/dL, the peripheral vessels of the retina appear thin. At triglyceride levels of 3500 to 5000 mg/dL, the retinal vessels at the posterior pole appear creamy in color. At triglyceride levels above 5000 mg/dL, the retina appears salmon in color with the creamy appearance of the retinal venules and arteries.

- Neuropsychiatric changes like mild cognitive dysfunction, depression, and memory loss have been reported. These changes are reversible.

Infants may present additionally with the following:

- Abdominal pain which appears as colic

- Irritability

- Diarrhea

- Intestinal bleeding

- Pallor

- Seizures

- Failure to thrive

In women, the presentation may be delayed until pregnancy. A woman with lipoprotein lipase deficiency may present with marked signs and symptoms during pregnancy due to increased uptake of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins by the macrophages, owing to the increased apolipoprotein E during pregnancy.

The severity of the clinical presentation of lipoprotein lipase deficiency correlates with the chylomicron levels.