**Cataract Surgery**

Viscoelastics form an essential component for every step of all types of cataract surgery, whether it is phacoemulsification, manual small incision cataract surgery (MSICS), extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE), or intracapsular cataract extraction (ICCE). Viscoelastics assist in capsulorhexis, hydrodissection, nucleus prolapse and manipulation, trenching and emulsification of nucleus, IOL implantation, and they also coat the endothelium and prevent corneal damage. The primary function of OVDs is to form the anterior chamber by replacing aqueous humor.

For capsulorhexis, a viscoelastic should have high viscosity, high transparency, good capsular flap control for a spatula effect, and high molecular weight at zero shear rate and must maintain the anterior chamber. The pediatric capsule is highly elastic; hence high density viscoelastic like Healon GV is viscoelastic of choice. In the case of posterior capsular rent during irrigation and aspiration, a dispersive viscoelastic is used to plug the defect.

**Viscoelastics Required During Various Steps of Phacoemulsification**

S. No

Surgical step

Function of viscoelastic

Property of viscoelastic helpful

Viscoelastic used

Example

1

Capsulorhexis

Maintain the anterior chamber

High viscosity, elasticity

Cohesive viscoelastic

1% Sodium hyaluronate

2

Nucleus trenching

Corneal endothelial protection by coating it

High viscosity, low molecular weight, and surface tension

Dispersive viscoelastic

2% Hydroxypropyl

Methylcellulose

(HPMC)

3

Cortex removal

Inflation of capsular bag, protection of posterior capsule

Low surface tension

Dispersive viscoelastic

2% Hydroxypropyl

Methylcellulose

(HPMC)

4

IOL implantation

Inflation of capsular bag, protection of posterior capsule, maintenance of anterior chamber

High viscosity, elasticity

Cohesive viscoelastic

1% Sodium hyaluronate

**Glaucoma Surgeries**

In trabeculectomy, hyaluronic acid is the viscoelastic of choice. It helps to prevent endothelial trauma maintain the anterior chamber depth. Some surgeons leave viscoelastic in the anterior chamber to prevent postoperative hypotony and retino-choroidal folds. Viscoelastic can also be injected subconjunctivally for bleb formation.

In viscocanalostomy surgery, viscoelastic is used to open the Schlemm canal. Hyaluronic acid containing viscoelastics is used for viscocanalostomy as they have high pseudo-plasticity and high viscosity. Due to these properties, the viscoelastic can be injected into the Schlemm canal through a small needle, and they help maintain the space.

**Corneal Surgeries**

In penetrating keratoplasty, the viscoelastic helps maintain the anterior chamber before trephination, provides good support for perfect trephination, helps in the protection of intraocular structures, tamponade the vitreous, and coat the corneal donor button while suturing to prevent endothelial damage. Viscoelastics also play a significant role in deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) for layer by layer removal of the host cornea and for exposing the Descemet membrane (DM) during surgery. In Descemet stripping, endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK) and Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty (DMEK) viscoelastic help perform DM scoring and any anterior chamber maneuvers. In femtosecond laser application of cornea, viscoelastics help to protect the corneal endothelium.

**Viscoanaesthesia**

Viscoelastic can be mixed with lidocaine, and the mixture is used for intracameral anesthesia. This treatment modality is labeled as viscoanaethesia. Viscoelastic helps to prolong the effect of lidocaine.

**Viscomydriasis**

Viscoelastic specially cohesives help to dilate the pupil during the surgery. In small pupil cases, it helps in viscomydriasis.

**Intraoperative Floppy Iris Syndrome (IFIS)**

Intraoperative Floppy Iris Syndrome (IFIS) is a known complication in patients treated for prostatic hyperplasia with alpha-adrenergic blockers. Viscoadaptive viscoelastics are helpful in such a scenario to dilate and stabilize the pupil. This also helps to prevent iris prolapse.

**Retinal Surgery**

The membranous adhesions during retinal surgery can be safely separated and excised with the help of viscoelastics. It also helps to release the traction. Sodium hyaluronate is one of the most commonly used viscoelastic during retinal surgeries.

**Orbit and Oculoplasty Surgery**

**Congenital Nasolacrimal Duct Obstruction (CNLDO)-**Viscoelastic helps pass the probe through the NLD and keeps the NLD patent.

**Ptosis Surgery**- It helps to avoid friction with fascia lata.

**Dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR) -**In DCR surgery, it helps in to separate the adhesions and identify the lacrimal sac

**Lacrimal Canaliculus tear -**Viscoelastics help to identify the cut ends.

**Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus Surgery**

In pediatric cataract, viscoelastic help in all the routine steps of cataract surgery. In strabismus, surgery helps in suture adjustment with less force, helps to coat the muscle, and decreases scar formation in the muscular tissues.