The human skeleton begins to develop soon after conception. The notochordal process starts to form around day 17. The floor of the notochordal processes forms the notochordal plate after fusion of the roof of the yolk sac (of the underlying endoderm). The notochordal plate then folds inward to create the notochord. The notochord helps maintain the structure of the embryo and is the location of the development of the vertebral column. Parts of the notochord persist in adults to form the nucleus pulposus. In addition, the notochord stimulates the overlying ectoderm to form neuroectoderm, creating the neural plate. The neural plate gives rise to the neural tube, the rostral part becomes the adult brain, and the caudal end becomes the spinal cord.

When the embryo begins gastrulation around 3 weeks, the scleroderma of somites, specifically the mesodermal portion, grows around the neural tube and notochord to form vertebral bodies and arches as well as the ribs. Each vertebral body is formed in a process called segmentation from the fusion of 2 adjacent sclerotomes (caudal and cranial halves).

The vertebrae develop through endochondral ossification. Cartilage is formed first around week 6, and it is replaced with bone starting around week 7 to 8. Complete endochondral ossification occurs around age 26. Bony remodeling (degeneration and regeneration) occurs throughout the lifespan.

**Congenital Anomalies of the Spine**

VACTERL (Vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects, trachea-esophageal fistula, renal anomalies, limb anomalies): Defects of the spine in this association include fused vertebrae, missing or extra vertebrae, or misshapen vertebrae. While only 3 of these features are required for the diagnosis of this condition, 60% to 80% of patients with VACTERL have vertebral defects.

Spina Bifida: Incomplete closure of the vertebral column and meninges known as a neural tube defect. There are 3 types. In order of increasing severity, they are spina bifida occulta, meningocele, and myelomeningocele. Myelomeningocele is often associated with Arnold-Chiari malformation and tethered spinal cord.