DTI is generally sensitive but has a lower specificity. Specificity can be increased by combining the interpretation of DTI with the clinical history and the other findings on conventional imaging.

**Artifacts and Noise**

Artifacts are seen in all modalities of imaging including submodalities of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and have many causes. Artifacts can result in misinterpretation of imaging findings if the radiologist is unaware of these artifacts. With a thorough understanding of artifacts associated with DTI, measures should be taken to decrease the artifacts and to become more aware of unavoidable artifacts.

A limitation of DTI is that it currently has a low signal to noise ratio (SNR), which may increase scanning times. SNR compares the level of background noise to the level of the signal obtained. When the noise is too great in comparison to the signal (low SNR), image quality is poor. Two ways to improve on this signal to noise ratio is to either increase scan times or reduce image resolution.

Voxels continue to decrease in size, but a current limitation in DTI is the size of voxels. Low anisotropy shown in a particular voxel may seem to represent unorganized tissue contained within. However, this may just be apparent and what actually lies within the particular voxel is multiple anisotropic structures orientated in multiple directions resulting in isotropy. This means that diffusion anisotropy will only show on DTI when all structures coursing a voxel align on a microscopic (microstructure, myelin sheath, protein filaments) and macroscopic (axons and dendrites) scale. In the cortex, low FA occurs because of macroscopic disorganization. As image resolution improves, the cortex will likely show higher patterns of anisotropy.

Other causes resulting in artifacts can include eddy currents and motion. Changing data acquisition methods can help decrease these artifacts.

**Acceptance**

DTI has now moved beyond research investigation and is becoming incorporated into routine clinical practice. However, some have urged caution in the interpretation of DTI and other advanced imaging sequences at the individual level, including a 9/13/18 Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) guideline statement.

"Despite significant variability in sample characteristics, technical aspects of imaging, and analysis approaches, the consensus is that DTI effectively differentiates patients with TBI and controls, regardless of the severity and timeframe following injury. Furthermore, many have established a relationship between DTI measures and TBI outcomes."

DTI has proven to be highly sensitive to brain injury and a variety of pathological conditions and in many instances is becoming a routine part of clinical practice. Further research will continue to expand the application of DTI in evaluating neurological conditions.