The treatment of a branchial cleft cyst is elective excision due to the risk of infection, further enlargement, or extremely low risk of malignancy. So long as there is no airway compromise or frank abscess, there is typically no urgency; clinicians can defer excision beyond 3 to 6 months of age or allow treatment of an acute infection.

The incision is planned to optimize cosmesis, placing it within a natural skin crease whenever possible. If a fistula or sinus is present, then identifying the tract by gentle insertion of a probe or catheter is important in order to ensure complete excision and decrease the chance of recurrence. Methylene blue can be used by dipping a lacrimal probe in the solution and inserting it into the tract to make it easier to identify intraoperatively. Dissection should be performed carefully over the surface of the lesion as the tract can be thin-walled. If the track is long, then exposure should be obtained by using a second "stepladder" incision placed within a skin crease cephalad to the primary incision. In first branchial cleft cysts, initial exposure of the main trunk of the facial nerve and branches should be performed with a superficial parotidectomy approach to reduce the risk of facial nerve injury, as the anomaly can be intimately associated with the nerve. Preoperative fistulograms can also be useful.

Third and fourth branchial cleft cysts are treated with a standard transverse cervical incision to identify the recurrent laryngeal nerves, occasionally requiring thyroid lobectomy to completely excise the tract to the piriform sinus. Before the trans-cervical portion of the surgery is begun, direct laryngoscopy is performed to confirm the diagnosis and to allow endoscopic cannulation of the opening into the piriform sinus to facilitate dissection during excision.