**EPL tenosynovitis**

Patients with extensor pollicis longus stenosing tenosynovitis, a rare condition, likely require surgical treatment because there have not been any documented successful attempts at treating patients non-operatively. Additionally, as previously advocated in the literature, the importance of surgical treatment for EPL tenosynovitis is inevitably linked to concerns about EPL tendon rupture with chronic attrition.  When performing the surgical correction, it is imperative that the EPL tendon is completely released and transposed into the subcutaneous tissue on the radial aspect of Lister's tubercle. Transposing the EPL tendon prevents the recurrence of tenosynovitis, tendon bowstringing, and prevents compromise of its function.

**Distal Radius Fractures**

Displaced distal radius fractures that require open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) may receive surgical treatment with dorsal or volar plating procedures. Patients treated with a dorsal plate have an increased risk for iatrogenic injury to the extensor tendons in the wrist and hand through mechanical irritation of the tendons, which may lead to a ruptured extensor pollicis longus tendon.  Although technological advancements in low-profile dorsal plating procedures have continued to evolve with mitigation of the risk of iatrogenic extensor tendon injury,

**Tendon transfers**

Patients requiring surgical reconstruction of a ruptured extensor pollicis longus tendon may get a tendon transfer or a free tendon graft. The extensor indicis is commonly used for tendon transfer, while other tendons that are usable include the palmaris longus, extensor carpi radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis brevis, and abductor pollicis longus. While the palmaris longus tendon is avascular, a palmaris longus tendon transfer may be performed to preserve index finger extension power, which commonly decreases after a tendon transfer involving the extensor indicis. It is essential to make sure there is an appropriate amount of tension in the reconstructed tendon; if there is too much tension, the thumb will be hyperextended and will not be able to flex correctly. Without enough tension, there will be extension deficits. A surgical technique to approximate the appropriate tension is to lay the patient’s hand on the table, with the forearm pronated and the wrist in a neutral position, and measure the distance of the center of the patient’s thumbnail edge to the table. The distance should be 2 cm. If it is more or less the suturing holding together, the reconstruction should be removed and re-done to achieve appropriate tension in the reconstructed EPL so that the thumbnail edge remains 2 cm off the table.

The thumb's sagittal band is vital to stabilizing the extensor pollicis longus tendon, especially the radial component of the sagittal band. When lacerations occur near the MCP joint of the thumb, damage to the radial and ulnar components of the sagittal band may occur, as well as damage to the surrounding tendinous structures such as the EPL and the extensor pollicis brevis. Therefore, it is crucial to repair the damaged structures, especially if there is damage to the radial sagittal band, since its function is to stabilize the EPL tendon. If the radial sagittal band is not repaired surgically, EPL tendon subluxation may occur. In patients who have rheumatoid arthritis, contracture of the ulnar sagittal band may occur, along with weakness of the radial sagittal band. Ultimately, that can lead to a boutonniere deformity in the thumb. When patients have early rheumatoid arthritis, performing a surgical release of the contracting ulnar sagittal band and fortifying the radial sagittal band through augmenting it may treat the boutonniere deformity.

Patients with EPL tendon anomalies typically are asymptomatic, without deficits in thumb extension or wrist/hand pain. Often, EPL tendon anomalies are found during surgery while correcting another wrist/hand pathology. In those cases, surgical intervention is not indicated because the patient is not having symptoms. However, when patients are having symptoms, surgical correction through procedures such as an extensor retinaculum release and Lister's tubercle removal is indicated to decrease the amount of EPL tendon compression within the extensor compartment.