One hundred million Americans suffer from some form of chronic pain that results in more than $100 billion in expenses annually. Furthermore, 84% of American adults will suffer from chronic, low-back pain at some point in their lifetime. While the causes of low-back pain are often multifactorial and can be due to many causes, the degenerative cascade that affects the spine plays a significant role. Destruction of cartilage that comprises the spinal facet joints results in severe discomfort when placed under stress, typically in extension or rotation of the spine. The sensory nerves responsible are the medial branches of the dorsal rami, which are the most common target in ablative procedures. Radiofrequency ablation is efficacious in reducing the severity of back pain for extended periods of time (ranging from 6 months to 24 months in duration). It has utility in treating trigeminal and occipital neuralgia, complex regional pain syndrome, hip and knee osteoarthritis, and plantar fasciitis. As with other interventional procedures that provide pain relief, ablation aims to play a significant role in reducing opiates and other habit-forming pain medications.

This review focuses on conventional radiofrequency ablation, which utilizes a continuous energy source causing coagulative thermal necrosis. Other forms of ablation used in pain management include:

- Pulsed radiofrequency: Applies heat in a pulsatile manner but uses lower temperatures than conventional radiofrequency to avoid neurolysis.

- Cooled radiofrequency: Utilizes specialized electrodes cooled with water-flowing along its shaft but not at the active tip. This allows higher temperatures and more spherical lesion sizes to be achieved at the target site and less risk of tissue damage superficial to the target.

- Cryoablation: Causes the destruction of axons by disrupting the vasa nervorum. It increases in popularity due to a decreased incidence of post-procedural hyperalgesia and neuroma formation compared to conventional radiofrequency.

Cases of the use of ablative nerve blocks have been used for intercostal neuralgia with success.