# Continuing Education Activity

Oophorectomy is the surgical removal of one or both ovaries and can be done laparoscopically unless otherwise indicated. It may be performed for ovarian pathology (such as a neoplasm), risk-reducing purposes (reducing the risk of reoperation or cancer), or fertility preservation. In children and adolescents specifically, ovarian sparing surgery is a viable approach in most cases of torsion and benign ovarian masses. The ovaries are responsible for sex hormone synthesis; therefore, the risk of bilateral oophorectomy must be weighed against the benefits. This activity reviews the anatomy and physiology of the ovaries, indications, and techniques for oophorectomy, and complications of gynecologic adnexal surgery.

**Objectives:**
- Identify indications and contraindications for oophorectomy.
- Outline the steps to an oophorectomy
- Summarize the risks associated with bilateral oophorectomy.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and coordination amongst the interprofessional team to improve surgical outcomes in patients undergoing adnexal surgery.

# Introduction

Oophorectomy is the surgical removal of the ovary and can be unilateral or bilateral. Hysterectomy is the most common major gynecologic surgery, but salpingo-oophorectomy remains a frequent concomitant surgery.

# Anatomy and Physiology

**Anatomy**

The ovaries are the female gonads responsible for the production of the majority of a female’s sex hormones and ovulation. In the infant and young child, ovaries are located intra-abdominally (around T 10) and are less than 2 ccs.

**Blood Supply**

Blood supply is primarily through the ovarian artery, which runs through the infundibulopelvic ligament (i.e., IP ligament or suspensory ligament of the ovary); however, there are anastomoses with the ovarian branch of the uterine artery through the utero-ovarian ligament.

**Lymphatics**

There are three lymphatic drainage pathways for the ovary. The two most common routes are through the IP ligament to the paraaortic lymph nodes and the ovarian ligament to the pelvic lymph nodes (internal iliac lymph nodes, external iliac lymph nodes, and obturator nodes).

**Histology**

Histologically, ovaries have a medulla, cortex, and mesothelium. The inner medulla is comprised of ovarian stroma with an array of spindle-shaped fibroblast-derived cells and their collagen matrix, as well as other active cell lines, including smooth muscle cells and luteinized stromal cells.

# Indications

**Adnexal Masses**

Adnexal mass management depends on age, the evolution of mass, radiographic characteristics, tumor markers, disease process, and symptomatology.

Simple cysts can be expectantly managed if asymptomatic up to 10 cm in the adult but carry a risk of torsion.

Ovarian cystectomy and/or oophorectomy can be performed during pregnancy (optimally in the second trimester) if there is a concern for malignancy, high torsion risk, or symptomatic.

When benign pathology is suspected and an ovarian cystectomy is planned, there remains an inherent risk of an oophorectomy if ovarian stroma is denuded, the mass cannot be fully excised, or bleeding cannot be controlled.

**Torsion**

If there is a concern for ovarian torsion, timely surgical intervention with detorsion and possible cystectomy is indicated. This preserves ovarian function and, thus, fertility. Oophorectomy should only be considered if the ovary is severely necrotic and friable.

**Infection**

Oophorectomy for pelvic inflammatory disease with tubo-ovarian abscesses (TOA) is rarely indicated. Antibiotics are the first-line treatment. Depending on the response to antibiotics and the size of TOA, drainage of the fluid can be considered.

**Elective**

Elective bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) refers to removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries without specific indication, but rather at the time of a hysterectomy due to surgical nature and ease. This should be discussed with a patient in the pre-operative planning phase, and the risk of surgical menopause should not be taken lightly. A BSO for benign disease is associated with increased all-cause mortality if performed under 65 years of age.

**Risk-Reducing**

A risk-reducing BSO (however, it could be unilateral) refers to removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries to reduce the risk of re-operation or cancer. Risks of re-operation compared to risks of menopause should be discussed in patients with a history of pelvic inflammatory disease, TOAs, endometriosis, pelvic adhesions, or primary dysmenorrhea.

**Fertility Preservation**

Oophorectomy for ovarian tissue cryopreservation is still considered experimental for fertility preservation, but this field is rapidly evolving. Since 2004, this process has achieved more than 100 live births.

# Contraindications

There are no absolute contraindications to an oophorectomy; however, since the ovaries provide beneficial hormones and fertility to a patient, oophorectomy (especially bilateral) risks versus benefits should be thoroughly discussed with the patient first. The effects of estrogens are complex, broad, and still being elucidated but seem to play a prominent role in cardiovascular, bone, and psychosocial health.

According to the Nurses’ Health Study, BSO compared to ovarian conservation at the time of hysterectomy for benign pathology carries a decreased risk of breast and ovarian cancer, but it incurs an increased risk of all-cause mortality.

Specifically, in the pediatric and adolescent patient population with benign ovarian lesions, efforts should be made for ovarian sparing surgery.

# Equipment

- Laparoscopic monitor

- Laparoscope (5/10 mm, 0/30 degrees)

- Carbon dioxide source/tubing for insufflation

- Two 5 mm trocars

- One 5 mm to 12 mm trocar (umbilical, larger if needing to remove adnexal mass)

- Atraumatic graspers

- Electrocautery/ligation device

- Endoscopic retrieval bag

- Scalpel (11/15 blade)

- Forceps

- Needle driver

- Absorbable sutures

- Incision dressing of choice

# Personnel

- Operating surgeon

- Surgical assist

- Scrub tech or scrub nurse

# Preparation

- Medically optimized

- No pre-operative antibiotics are indicated unless other indicated procedures are performed or if an infection is suspected.

- Grounding pad

- Consider the need for Foley catheter placement

- Proper positioning and cushioning to avoid nerve injury

- Consider the utility of an anti-slip pad underneath the patient

- Sequential compression devices of the lower extremities if meeting institutional criteria as well as deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis

- Aseptic surgical field

# Technique or Treatment

Laparoscopic approaches should be considered for oophorectomies unless there is a concern for malignancy or otherwise indicating an open approach.

**Positioning**

Consider the need for vaginal access. If needing access to the perineum or vagina for support, then the patient should be placed in the modified lithotomy position with care to avoid injury. Otherwise, adnexal surgery can be performed in the supine position. Depending on the length of the case, age of the patient, and size of the mass, consider placing a Foley/urinary catheter for bladder drainage.

**Entry and Setup**

Entry to the abdomen is traditionally through the umbilicus; however, if there are concerns for adhesions, abnormal anatomy, or size of the adnexal mass, other locations such as Palmer’s point are an option. Once intra-abdominal, accessory trocars should be strategically placed to optimize the economy of motion during surgery and avoid injury. Anatomy of the anterior abdominal wall should be reviewed to avoid vessel (namely the inferior epigastric artery) and nerve injury with trocars or an open incision. The patient is then usually placed in the Trendelenburg position to give better exposure to the pelvic viscera.

**Surgical Steps**

Traditionally, a right oophorectomy will be easier than a left oophorectomy due to the sigmoid colon. There are a few approaches to oophorectomy, and none have shown to be superior. In one method, the IP ligament (with the ovarian artery) and the ureter are first identified. Then, an incision is made on the peritoneal surface (using either electrocautery or sharply) parallel to the IP between the ureter and IP. This retroperitoneal space is then dissected to increase the distance between the ureter and IP ligament. Once the IP is isolated from the ureter, it can be ligated.

**Special Considerations**

If performing a risk-reducing oophorectomy, it is important to ligate the IP ligament 2cm proximal to the ovarian hilum to ensure no pathology is left behind. This tissue should undergo protocolized sectioning by the pathology department to ensure there is no malignancy.

# Complications

**Large Vessel**

The risk of large vessel injury during gynecologic laparoscopic surgery range from 0.1% to 0.64%, but overall is a rare occurrence.

**Genitourinary Tract**

Genitourinary tract injury occurs in 1% to 2% of gynecologic surgeries, with higher rates in those with predisposing risk factors.

**Nerve**

Neuropathies occur in about 2% of major gynecologic surgeries.

# Clinical Significance

Oophorectomy is generally a low-risk and outpatient procedure; however, the indications and implications carry significant weight long-term. In the case of adnexal masses, the role of pre-operative evaluation with imaging and laboratory data is improving but is not perfect at predicting tissue histology.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Oophorectomy alone or in conjunction with a hysterectomy has excellent outcomes. Most oophorectomies are performed as outpatient surgeries. Laparoscopic oophorectomy should be considered standard unless an open approach is otherwise indicated. As fertility preservation techniques evolve, the recommended technique for oophorectomy may change, as well, specifically with where to begin dissection and if electrocautery versus sharp dissection yield better outcomes.