Management of ZMC fractures can broadly classify into three categories: medical management, closed reduction, and open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF). Management of ZMC fractures is controversial and requires tailoring to each case.

**Medical Management**

Zygomatic fractures are usually observable if there is minimal or no displacement of fracture segments. Additionally, medical management may be the choice if other comorbidities preclude safe surgery. No strong evidence supports the use of prophylactic antibiotics in upper and midface fractures, though some surgeons prescribe a 5 to 7-day course of antibiotics, particularly if a communication exists with the maxillary sinus. If prescribed, antibiotics should cover sinonasal flora.

**Operative Management**

The indications for operative management of zygomatic arch and ZMC fractures are to restore the form and function of the ZMC. Fractures of the ZMC or zygomatic arch can often lead to unsightly malar depression, which should be corrected to restore a normal facial contour. ZMC fractures can also cause significant functional issues, including trismus, enophthalmos and/or diplopia, and paresthesias of the infraorbital nerve. A suspected globe injury is a contraindication to operative management of ZMC fractures and should be diagnosed/addressed before any surgical intervention to repair the zygomatic arch or ZMC fracture sites.

A principle of facial fracture repair includes the ability to reduce and/or fixate fractures that involve the facial buttresses to restore the structural integrity of the midface. Several methods exist to repair zygomatic arch and ZMA fractures, though closed reduction may be adequate for simple, low-velocity injuries of the zygomatic arch (see TYPE A1 below) that are non-displaced or minimally displaced and remain stable after initial attempts of reduction

Herein we summarize a management algorithm based on Zingg's classification system of ZMC fractures as described above (see EVALUATION)

- Type A1 (zygomatic arch fracture) - Nondisplaced fractures of the zygomatic arch are often observable, whereas displaced fractures of the zygomatic arch require reduction, which is possible via a Gillies approach via a temporal incision, a transcutaneous Caroll-Girard screw directly over the depressed fracture site, or a Keen approach via a transoral incision in the maxillary vestibule. Isolated arch fractures that are not stable after reduction can be splinted externally with cardiac wires, or plated via a coronal incision.

- Type A2 (Lateral orbital wall fracture) - Reduction and fixation of this area are best via a lateral brow incision or a blepharoplasty incision. Small mini-plates provide adequate stabilization of such fractures.

- Type A3 (Infraorbital rim) - The infraorbital rim (IOR) should be reduced and plated to restore its normal contour, and the optimal approach is via a transconjunctival incision or lower eyelid incision.

- Type B (Tetrapod fracture) - Mildly displaced tetrapod fractures may occasionally be reducible via a Gillies or Keene approach. Most tetrapod fractures, however, remain unstable after such reduction attempts and ultimately require ORIF with single point fixation (zygomaticomaxillary buttress or the zygomaticofrontal suture), two-point fixation (the ZM buttress and the zygomaticofrontal suture), and three-point fixation (the IOR). Finally, the zygomatic arch can be plated via a coronal incision or pre-existing lacerations as the fourth point of fixation if necessary.

- Type C (Comminuted tetrapod fracture) - comminuted tetrapod fractures are an absolute indication for ORIF (after excluding an orbital injury). Treatment is similar to a type B fracture, with ORIF of the ZM buttress, IOR, zygomaticofrontal suture, and zygomaticotemporal suture.

**Orbital Floor Exploration and Repair**

Indications for the repair of the orbital floor are controversial. Generally, if greater than 50% of the floor is involved or the defect is 1 to 2 cm^2 or larger, the orbital floor should be repaired. Additional indications include a non-resolving oculocardiac reflex, primary diplopia, enophthalmos, and entrapment of extraocular muscles. Many different materials can be used, including titanium mesh, dura, temporalis fascia, and other allogeneic implants.

**Number of Fixation Points**

There is no consensus as to how many fixation points are necessary when treating ZMC fractures. In general, the more comminuted or unstable a fracture is, the more fixation points will be needed to ensure a good result. A recent meta-analysis suggested that three-point fixation had less fracture instability and orbital dystopia at three months post-operatively as compared to two-point fixation, but the quality of evidence was low.

**Order of Plating**

There is no universal order of plating in multipoint fixation. In single-point fixation, the ZM buttress usually gets plated. The zygomaticofrontal suture can also get plated, though most would argue that the intraoral incision used to plate the ZM buttress is less morbid than approaches to the ZF suture. In two-point fixation, the zygomaticofrontal suture should be plated first, followed by the ZM buttress. In three or four-point fixation, the ZF requires plating first, then the ZM buttress, then the IOR followed by the zygomatic arch if necessary. If one plans to plate the zygomatic arch from the outset, it can often be plated first to ensure adequate projection of the ZMC. If concomitant repair of the orbital floor is necessary, it should take place after the zygoma has had a reduction performed.

**Soft tissue suspension**

If the lateral canthal tendon has suffered disruption, it requires resuspension with suturing to the tubercle of Whitnall. The malar eminence can be suspended to prevent ectropion or scleral show.

**Summary of Surgical Approaches**

- If possible, existing lacerations are utilized to approach fixation sites.

- Zygomaticofrontal suture

- Lateral brow incision
- Upper blepharoplasty incision
- A transconjunctival incision with lateral canthotomy
- Coronal incision

- ZM suture

- intraoral incision

- IOR and orbital floor

- Subciliary or subtarsal incision
- Transconjunctival incision

- Zygomatic Arch

- Percutaneous stab incision for placement of Caroll-Girard screw - requires a conspicuous scar and theoretically puts the facial nerve at risk
- Temporal incision (Gillies) - conceals the scar in the hairline; NOTE: the facial nerve can be preserved by staying deep to the temporalis fascia (e.g., the superficial layer of deep temporal fascia) during dissection
- Intraoral incision (Sheen) - conceals the scar in the mouth and avoids facial nerve injury; NOTE: a careful, watertight closure of the intraoral incision can prevent plate exposure in the mouth and oroantral fistula formation to the maxillary sinus
- Coronal or hemicoronal incision

**Timing of repair**

Fracture repair should take place as quickly as possible before scarring, and healing of bony fragments begins. Because significant facial edema guises aesthetic deformities and increases exposure difficulty, fracture repair should ideally take place within 7 to 10 days of the initial injury. Fracture repair from 2 to-6 weeks post-injury is possible, but usually more difficult due to ensuing fibrosis and scarring. Fracture repair past six weeks is extremely challenging, but the surgeon can facilitate it by the use of intraoperative imaging and navigation. If orbital floor repair is necessary, it should ideally occur within two weeks of the injury.