The bone marrow is the primary lymphoid organ for B cell development after birth, and the production of new B cells occurs throughout the life of a healthy individual. Developing B cells that can successfully produce a transmembrane IgM BCR that is non-reactive to self are permitted to leave the bone marrow as immature B cells expressing transmembrane IgM. Immature B cells migrate to the spleen, where they must compete with other B cells to access follicles within the spleen to receive survival signals. Only a portion of immature B cells entering the spleen survive to become mature, yet naive, B cells, and these bone-marrow-derived B cells are B-2 cells. Mature B-2 cells have two fates, as they can differentiate into either follicular B cells or marginal zone B cells; the majority of B cells in the human body are follicular B cells. Follicular B cells leave the spleen expressing both IgM and IgD as transmembrane BCRs and begin migrating through secondary lymphoid organs such as lymph nodes, mucosal tissues, and spleen in search of antigen. Follicular B cells predominantly recognize peptide antigens and are thymus-dependent, as they require help from T lymphocytes to become fully activated against a foreign antigen. With the assistance of T-cells, follicular B cells undergo clonal expansion in response to foreign antigen recognition, producing progeny that can differentiate into either antibody-producing plasma cells or memory B lymphocytes. IgM is the primary antibody produced during an initial antigen challenge. Yet, upon subsequent antigen exposure, follicular B cells undergo isotype switching, resulting in IgG, IgG, IgE, or IgA production. Furthermore, T-dependent B cells undergo somatic hypermutation and affinity maturation on repeat antigen exposure, resulting in the production of antibodies such as IgG with increased affinity for the foreign antigen.

Marginal zone B cells are also bone marrow-derived B-2 cells that complete their maturation in the spleen and largely remain in the spleen, localizing in the marginal zone between the red and white pulp junctions, where they provide the first line of defense against blood-borne pathogens.Streptococcus pneumoniae or Haemophilus influenzae is extremely important for their eradication.

B-1 cells represent a third subset of B cells derived from the fetal liver, rather than the bone marrow, and exhibit a limited diversity of antibody production, which is predominantly IgM. B-1 cells are self-renewing and primarily found at mucosal layers and the peritoneal cavity, representing an additional source of thymus-independent natural antibodies. Similar to marginal zone B cells, B-1 cells produce primarily IgM of limited diversity against polysaccharides and lipids commonly found in microbial species. They do not undergo isotype switching, affinity maturation, or memory lymphocyte formation upon subsequent antigen exposure.