The etiology of lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma has not been established. However, genetic factors and viral infections such as EBV and HIV may play a role in the pathogenesis of this disease.

**1. Genetic Disorders**

Various gene mutations and chromosomal abnormalities in classic Hodgkin lymphoma affect transcription factors, signaling molecules, tumor suppressor genes, and immune regulators. These result in the transformation of germinal center B-cells to characteristic Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells.

**1.1.**Genetic Abnormality****

A genetic amplification or copy number gain of chromosome 9p24.1 leads to overexpression of programmed death-ligand 1 and 2 (PD-L1 and PD-L2).

**1.2. Aberrant Signaling**

Constitutive activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) in HRS cells is hypothesized to stimulate proliferation, encourage migration, and inhibit apoptosis of malignant cells.

**2. Viral Infections**

**2.1. Epstein-Barr Virus**

EBV infection is present in 60% to 72% of patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma, which is relatively more common than other subtypes of classic Hodgkin lymphoma.

Moreover, LMP 1 acts as a functional homolog of CD40.

**2.2. Human Immunodeficiency Virus**

Approximately 15% of patients with lymphocyte-depleted classic Hodgkin lymphoma have HIV infection that induces chronic B-cell activation via interacting with CD40-ligand-bearing virions, HIV-associated proteins such as gp120, p17, and nef, and altering cytokine production and release.