The vertebral canal comprises the vertebral foramen located in the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebrae. The vertebral or spinal cord typically ends at the level of the L2 vertebra, where the spinal cord gives off multiple branching spinal nerves and nerve rootlets known as the cauda equina. These spinal nerves traverse at the levels of the second through the fifth lumbar vertebral levels.

The vertebral foramen forms by the posterior portion of the vertebral body, the pedicles, the bilateral laminae, and the connection of the laminae at the transverse process. The only exceptions to this anatomical formation are the atlas and axis (C1 and C2 vertebrae), considered atypical vertebrae of the cervical spine. These two vertebrae lack a vertebral body; the atlas comprises an anterior and posterior arch, and the anatomy of the axis is made up of the odontoid process that projects superiorly into the vertebral foramen of the atlas. In addition, the transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae contain an opening - the transverse foramina (plural of foramen). The transverse foramina of C1-C6 transmit the vertebral arteries. Those of C1-C7 transmit the vertebral veins.

Two crucial structural ligaments surround the vertebral canal. These ligaments include the ligamentum flavum and the posterior longitudinal ligament. The ligamentum flavum is a ligament that traverses the entire spinal column and connects the laminae of each vertebra. The posterior longitudinal ligament runs along the posterior portion of the vertebral body, which is the anterior border of the vertebral canal.

The spinal canal diameter varies with each vertebral region, including the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar regions. The average diameter of the cervical vertebrae is 17 mm. The thoracic vertebral canal varies, with each vertebra moving in a cranial-caudal direction. Starting at the T1 vertebral level, the spinal canal diameter is 16 mm on average, and the diameter begins to decrease at the T2 level to 14 to 15 mm. The T4 vertebra has the smallest diameter moving caudally; the spinal canal diameter from T3-T11 remains relatively stable at 15 mm. At the T12 vertebra, the spinal canal diameter increases to an average of 18 mm. Compared to the cervical and thoracic regions, the lumbar vertebral group has a larger spinal canal diameter, on average, with the L5 diameter being the largest of the lumbar vertebrae at around 17.5 mm.

The spinal cord is the primary structure contained within the vertebral canal. The spinal cord gives off projections bilaterally that project out of the vertebral canal at each vertebral level. These spinal nerves contain nerve fibers from the dorsal and ventral roots of the spinal cord. The dorsal root nerves carry sensory innervation traveling back to the spinal cord from the rest of the body. The ventral roots contain motor innervation exiting from the spinal cord to travel throughout the human body.

The primary and most important function of the vertebral canal is to provide a patent and protective cavity for the spinal cord to traverse from the cranium down to the sacrum. Not only does the vertebral column provide structure and support to the human body, its canal also provides physical protection for the spinal cord.