# Introduction

Telomeres are protein structures located at the ends of each eukaryotic DNA chromosomal arm. These chromosomal caps are one of the most important structures that preserve the structural integrity of linear DNA during each cycle of replication.

# Molecular Level

**Telomere**

A telomere structure consists of repeats of non-coding nitrogenous bases (5'-TTAGGG-3'). In mammals, telomeres are highly conserved, indicating that this nuclear sequence remains relatively unchanged throughout the course of evolutionary biology.

The telomere is associated with six proteins that collectively create the Shelterin complex. This complex helps to create the final end cap structure of the chromosome. The associated proteins are described as follows: telomere repeat binding factor 1 (TERF1 or TRF1) regulates the telomere length. Telomere repeat binding factor 2 (TERF2 or TRF2) stabilizes the T-loop. Protection of telomeres 1 (POT1) inhibits DNA damage response at the single-stranded telomere overhang.

**Telomerase**

The synthesis of a telomere involves a reverse transcriptase telomerase, which functions as an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase. Telomerase is present in germline and stem cells and has enhanced activity in cancer cells. This enzyme is responsible for elongating telomeres by de novo addition of TTAGGG sequences onto 3' chromosome ends to prevent replicative cellular senescence.

While the telomerase core complex mainly consists of the two main components, hTERC and hTERT, essential supportive proteins exist for the proper functioning of the entire telomerase structure. Tcab1, Gar1, Nhp2, Reptin, and Pontin, are proteins that are required for telomerase assembly and the proper recruitment of chromosomes.

# Function

The main functions of a telomere are to maintain chromosomal stability and prevent chromosomal degradation. Additionally, telomeres protect ends of the chromosome from DNA end-joining to one another or each other, from damage response to DNA, and accidental DNA recombination.

# Mechanism

DNA replication is facilitated by DNA polymerase. This enzyme only has the ability to synthesize DNA in the 5' to 3' direction. DNA replication begins with an RNA primer, which is synthesized by primase. The RNA primer allows the DNA to locate the area of the chromosome where replication will begin. The RNA primer anneals to the template DNA to provide a free 3'-OH group where new nucleotides are added. During the synthesis of the leading strand, which runs from the 5' to 3' direction, only one primer is needed for synthesis at this location to be continuous. This is due to the addition of new nucleotides in the direction of the replication fork.

Telomere replication and maintenance presents numerous challenges. Repetitive tandem repeats of DNA predisposes DNA polymerase slippage during DNA replication. Frequent slippage of the enzyme may cause insertion or deletion of nucleotide bases as well as strand mispairing. The next challenge is the G-rich structure of the telomere. A higher number of guanine nucleotides can cause G-quadruplexes to form. Tethered G-rich tetrads are highly stable due to their increased amount of hydrogen bonds. The G-quadruplexes, which require specific helicases for proper disassembly, may induce replication fork stalling if the specialized helicase is unable to function.

# Pathophysiology

**Cellular Senescence**

Telomeres play a crucial role in cellular senescence, and thus, biological aging. Cellular senescence refers to the irreversible loss of cellular division capability. The end replication problem, which describes the loss of base pairs during each S phase of cellular synthesis, can expose the ends of the DNA of a somatic cell, activating a process called DNA damage response (DDR). The purpose of this phenomenon is to prevent abnormal fusion of exposed chromosomal ends as well as chromosomal instability. Without telomere elongation, which is characteristic of most somatic cells, the telomeres will shorten. Telomerase has the ability to elongate telomere structures; however, with persistent telomeric DNA damage response activation, in addition to DNA damage, a senescence-initiating signal will be elicited. Cellular senescence, or replicative senescence, will also initiate when the telomere shortens to below a critical length.

# Clinical Significance

**Telomeres and Oxidative Stress**

DNA stressors include numerous endogenous and exogenous factors such as mitochondrial dysfunction, cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, inflammation, a high-fat diet, and other lifestyle and environmental factors.

Obesity is highly associated with chronic inflammation and increased ROS levels in adipose tissue. These patients with a higher body mass index (BMI) are associated with a higher blood volume, leading to greater proliferation of blood cells- all of which are related to the shortening of the telomere

**Cancer**

While the synthesis of telomeres by the reverse transcriptase, telomerase, is absent in the majority of human somatic cells, it is found in greater than 90% of tumorigenic cells and in-vitro immortalized cells.

**Telomerase-targeted Cancer Immunotherapy**

Because upregulated telomerase activity is significant in tumor cells, hTERT makes an attractive tumor antigen for telomerase targeted cancer immunotherapy. Several approaches exist, including oligonucleotide inhibitors, immunotherapeutic approaches, and telomerase-directed gene therapy. Oligonucleotide inhibitors are modified nucleic acids that are able to inhibit telomerase, thereby inducing telomere shortening and forced cellular senescence and apoptosis. Immunotherapeutic approaches use high-avidity T lymphocytes that are reactive against the catalytic enzyme. Finally, telomerase-directed gene therapy involves the selective killing of tumor cells by targeting telomerase promoters.