Percutaneously inserted LVDs (2.5 L/min) have been studied in comparison with the intra-aortic balloon pump. In the ISAR-SHOCK trial, 25 patients with acute myocardial infarction and severely reduced LV function randomly allocated to either percutaneously inserted LVD or IABP arm; the cardiac index after 30 min of support was greater in patients with the percutaneously inserted LVD (2.5 L/min)  compared with patients with an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), however, no difference in the 30-days mortality between both arms.

In PROTECT II, A total of 448 high-risk patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) were randomized, 223 to IABP, and 225 to the percutaneously inserted LVD (2.5 L/min). The study terminated early. There is no difference in the 30-day incidence of major adverse events for patients with IABP or percutaneously inserted LVD (2.5 L/min). However, on per-protocol analysis,  improved outcomes were observed for percutaneously inserted LVD (2.5 L/min)-supported patients at 90 days, driven mostly by a reduction in the need for repeat revascularization.

On the other hand, the RECOVER RIGHT trial studied prospectively 30 patients with refractory RV failure (12 patients with myocardial infarction and 18 patients after cardiac surgery). It demonstrated the safety and efficacy of percutaneously inserted RVD  in improving the central venous pressure and the cardiac index immediately after activation. The overall survival in the trial at 30 days was 73.3%.