The first step in diagnosing a patient with a mediastinal tumor is performing a chest x-ray on the posteroanterior and lateral chest. A contrast-enhanced chest CT scan, an MRI, or a PET scan can then be used to further evaluate the mass depending on its origin and location. Because mediastinal seminomas are most commonly found in the anterior-superior mediastinum, a chest CT scan with contrast is the initially recommended imaging modality due to its ability to differentiate between masses that are solid versus cystic in nature. Magnetic resonance imaging can be used to demonstrate the precise location and pattern of mediastinal seminomas as well as invasion of adjacent structures such as the pleura. Seminomas typically present with homogenous internal attenuation as well as signal intensity on CT and MRI. They have clear cut boundaries except in the presence of hemorrhage and necrosis in which degenerative changes appear as small foci upon imaging. In the presence of seminomas, contrast shows minimal enhancement.

In addition to size, location, and CT attenuation of mediastinal tumors, it is equally important to assess for the shape, for the abnormal shape of any structure, as well as the displacement of any structure within the mediastinum, may be indicative of an underlying mass. When it is unknown whether a mediastinal tumor is malignant or benign, a PET CT scan is advised. Additional PET CT scans can be done to evaluate the patient’s response to treatment, specifically chemotherapy.  Treatment can be started based on tumor markers alone, but it is best to have a tissue diagnosis. A core needle biopsy is the recommended technique for tissue sampling. If a core needle biopsy does not provide the sample that is needed, a surgical biopsy can be performed through an anterior mediastinotomy, also known as the Chamberlain procedure. A fine-needle aspiration sample can be performed, but this technique can have a discrepancy in tissue diagnosis and may miss a poorly differentiated cancer from a mediastinal seminoma.

Germ cell tumors that are malignant, such as mediastinal seminomas, may secrete alpha-fetoprotein, embryonal carcinoma components, and human chorionic gonadotropin (beta hCG). These three labs are tumor markers, which, in conjunction with imaging, can be utilized in the diagnosis of mediastinal seminomas and in evaluating a patient’s response to therapy.  Pure mediastinal seminomas do not secrete AFP. Mediastinal seminomas usually have elevated beta hCG levels in one-third of all patients. If the beta hCG is greater than 1,000, a non-seminomatous component may be present and should be evaluated.

Lastly, mediastinal gonadal tumors should be excluded in the diagnosis of a patient with a primary mediastinal germ cell tumor, such as mediastinal seminoma. Gonadal germ cell tumors usually involve metastasis to retroperitoneal lymph nodes; whereas, primary mediastinal germ cell tumors can metastasize to cervical and abdominal lymph nodes.