A careful history should be obtained with an initial focus on respiratory symptoms and patient stability. During the evaluation, it is important to ask about previous intubations, perinatal history, onset and progression of symptoms, any trauma, or voice changes. Associated symptoms like feeding difficulties, allergic rhinitis, vocal abuse, and reflux irritation are key questions since it may distinguish from alternative diagnoses. Afterward, clinicians should observe the patient for tachypnea, stridor, use of accessory muscles, speech, cry or change of stridor with position.

The flexible fiberoptic nasopharyngoscope provides a precise preoperative diagnosis and the ability to rule out some differential diagnoses. Laryngeal papilloma is observed as pinkish to white “grape-like” projections that can be sessile or pedunculate with a visible central vascular core. It appears as a clear grape with visible seed. Furthermore, when stroboscopy is available, the use of novel technology known as narrow-band imaging (NBI) is extremely helpful. NBI is a short wavelength blue light absorbed mostly by hemoglobin. Therefore, since laryngeal papilloma has a vascular core, it will be depicted as a soft tissue surrounding blue foci.

The condition has a predilection to respiratory tract transition zones. The true vocal cords transition from pseudostratified epithelium to stratified squamous epithelium. Therefore, they are a common location for papilloma lesions to occur. Nevertheless, LP may be seen in other regions of the respiratory tract.