**Neurological Medications**

Medications for neurologic conditions are among the drugs with the highest teratogenic potential. One of the most commonly prescribed drug categories in pregnant women is antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), used primarily to prevent seizures, but also for neuropathic pain, migraines, and psychiatric disorders. AEDs in low doses can cause cognitive defects and, in higher doses, cause structural malformations. Phenobarbital, an inducer of CYP450 2B and 3A genes, at a molecular level, produces free radicals and causes DNA bases transversion while macroscopically, results in impaired growth, motor development, and fetal mortality.

**Antimicrobial Medications**

Antimicrobials are among the most generously prescribed medications during pregnancy and lactation.

Tetracyclines and fluoroquinolones are drug categories that should be avoided during pregnancy. Quinolones and fluoroquinolones, a very effective group of bactericidal antimicrobials, act by inhibiting the bacterial DNA gyrase or the topoisomerase IV enzyme. They have correlated with renal, cardiac, and central nervous system toxicity.

**Anticoagulants**

Coumarin derivatives, e.g., warfarin antagonize vitamin K, and inhibit γ-carboxylation of glutamyl residues, reducing protein binding ability with calcium. This inhibition during fetal development could explain the skeletal abnormalities, the stippled calcification of epiphysis, and the nasal hypoplasia.**Antithyroid Medications**

Maternal hyperthyroidism is still managed with antithyroid drugs during pregnancy. Propylthiouracil (PTU), methimazole (MMI), and carbimazole inhibit the TPO-mediated iodination of tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin and thus hinder the synthesis of T4.

**Vitamin A**

Vitamin A, in large doses, can also be teratogenic. A pregnant woman can receive an excessive amount of vitamin A by eating excess food or by taking nutrient supplements with Vitamin A or drugs containing retinoids.

**Hormonal Medication**

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is a nonsteroidal estrogen drug that acts by inhibiting the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. DES was being prescribed in pregnant women for three decades, to prevent pregnancy miscarriage. Research later showed that it could potentially be a carcinogen or even a teratogen upon prenatal exposure.