The diagnosis of HP is extremely challenging due to its infrequency, difficult anatomical site, intermittent course of bleeding, and several pathological causes behind it. Typically, Laboratory values are normal except for elevated serum bilirubin in pancreaticobiliary reflux and serum amylase and lipase if it is caused due to pancreatitis. The diagnosis is mainly through imaging modalities, as laboratory tests are generally normal and nonconclusive. Many diagnostic modalities that help in the diagnosis of HP include Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, contrast-enhanced CT, angiography, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), and ERCP.

Regarding endoscopy, Once GI bleeding is noticed, it is imperative to perform an endoscopy to rule out common etiologies of GI bleeding such as peptic ulcer, erosive gastritis, varicose, and so on. Bleeding from the ampulla is not commonly detected as Hemorrhage usually has an intermittent and suboptimal view of the ampulla with a forward-viewing Endoscope due to the fiber-optic illumination in the design that pointed to the same direction. It can detect bleeding in about 30% of cases. Due to this fact, a negative endoscope does not rule out the possibility of HP. However, a side-looking endoscope such as ERCP can help visualize and localize the pancreatic duct and the source of bleeding. The presence of Intraductal clots in the form of filling defects suggests a diagnosis of HP.

Abdominal ultrasound (US), whether doppler or dynamic, can both help to visualize the presence of an Aneurysm or pancreatic pseudocyst. The US has positive results in about 38% of the cases.

A contrast-enhanced CT scan is considered an excellent choice for demonstrating pancreatic pathologies such as chronic pancreatitis, pseudocysts, and pseudoaneurysms. Suggestive findings for HP on the CT scan were detected as a sign of blood clots within the pancreatic duct. Other signs, CT scan also might show a constant opacification within the aneurysmal vessels, the presence of pseudocyst, or/and persistent presence of the contrast after the arterial phase. These findings suggested an urgent angiography to be done for confirmation and therapeutic purposes. CT scan shows positive results in about 90% of the cases.

Angiography is the gold standard diagnostic and therapeutic method directed toward the celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery, and tributaries. Angiography identifies the causative artery and allows for the delineation of the arterial anatomy and therapeutic intervention. Usually, yield positive results in more than 90% of the cases.