The radiographic evaluation consists of standard views of the foot, including anteroposterior, 45 degrees oblique, and lateral projection. To diagnose metatarsal overload, additional weight-bearing roentgenograms, including the lateral view of the foot and tangential view of metatarsal heads, are helpful. Acute stress fractures are usually not detected with a standard X-ray. To confirm the diagnosis of stress fractures, the x-rays can be repeated after 10 to 14 days of the onset of symptoms. A radiolucent resorption gap can be seen around the fracture, which confirms the diagnosis.

Alternatively, MRI and Technetium scans can be ordered as they have a high sensitivity in detecting such fractures. In scenarios of multiple fractures of the base of metatarsals, computed tomography is advised to rule out the possibility of Lisfranc fracture-dislocation.

Metatarsal fractures can be topographically classified into metatarsal head fractures, sub-capital fractures, midshaft fractures, and basal fractures. Fifth metatarsal fractures have been described by Dameron and later on by Quill as Zone 1 (tuberosity avulsion fractures), Zone 2 (metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction fractures), and Zone 3 (proximal shaft stress fractures). Lisfranc fracture-dislocation is characterized by traumatic disruption between the base of the second metatarsal and the medial cuneiform. They have been classified into two types: homolateral and divergent. In the homolateral type, there is lateral displacement of first to fifth metatarsals or second to fifth metatarsals where the first metatarsophalangeal joint remains congruent, while in the divergent type, there is lateral displacement of second to fifth metatarsals with medial displacement of the first metatarsal.

Lisfranc fracture-dislocations are commonly associated with multiple foot fractures, including the second metatarsal base, cuboid bone, the shaft of the other metatarsals, navicular bone, and dislocations of the medial and middle cuneonavicular joints. When comparing with other metatarsal bones, the base of the second metatarsal remains relatively fixed. Hence, it is involved in both of the varieties of Lisfranc fracture-dislocation. In as many as 20% of cases, this pattern of fracture-dislocation remains undiagnosed due to poor judgment of the alignment of metatarsals. This type of injury should be highly suspected if a gap of more than 5 mm is noted in between the medial and middle cuneiforms or in between the bases of the first and second metatarsals.