**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Both intraoral and extraoral radiographs, in addition to CT scans, can be used to help identify dental and periodontal fractures. The recommended radiographs are one parallel periapical view, two additional views with a vertical and horizontal angle, and an occlusal view.

They can be useful to discern between a dental luxation and a dental avulsion and can also better evaluate the extent of fractures below the gingival margin. Depending on the history obtained and the physical exam, radiographs and CT scans may not change the treatment plan. Dentists should consider the risks and benefits of radiation exposure to the patient.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Visual inspection and palpation are the best initial methods to evaluate for infection. Common signs of infection include tissue erythema, swelling, or pus extrusion. Tooth discoloration and gingival necrosis may also be noted. Periodontal probing can aid in the diagnosis of periodontal disease.

Dental radiographs can show the extent of the infection and can help evaluate areas not obvious to visual evaluation. These include intraoral periapical radiographs, bitewing radiographs, and panoramic radiographs. These radiographs help to identify the extent of dental caries, the presence of a periapical abscess, alveolar bone loss concerning periodontitis, as well as third molar eruptions. All radiographic evidence must be confirmed with the dental practitioner’s physical examination for a full evaluation and accurate diagnosis.

CT scans and MRIs help assess deep-space infections and osteomyelitis. Cone-beam CT is becoming increasingly common in clinical settings to visualize areas of oral infections better.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-procedural Bleeding**

Unless in a traumatic oral injury setting, radiographs and CT scans have little utility in managing post-extraction and postoperative bleeding.

Ideally, any history of congenital coagulopathy, systemic illness, or medication use that would predispose a patient to have abnormal bleeding would have been identified by the oral surgeon or dentist before the procedure. It can be useful to ask whether bleeding disorders are present in any members of the patient’s family, as congenital coagulopathies are inherited and may not yet be diagnosed in the patient themselves. If a patient has been diagnosed with congenital coagulopathy, it is ideal for coordinating their dental care in conjunction with their hematologist and providing factor replacement before any invasive procedures to prevent postoperative bleeding. Similarly, if a patient is known to have a systemic illness or uses anticoagulant medications, it can be beneficial to coordinate their dental care in conjunction with their primary care physicians to minimize the risk of postoperative bleeding.

Some literature reviews suggest that patients should discontinue their anticoagulation medications before their dental procedure. Clinical trials suggest that patients on warfarin or direct oral anticoagulants would benefit from starting oral tranexamic acid before their dental procedure. However, these points remain controversial, and other sources suggest that the risk of bleeding is lower than the risk of thromboembolism and recommend patients continue their anticoagulant therapy perioperatively given the high efficacy and availability of local hemostatic therapies.

In addition to a thorough physical exam, laboratory studies can be performed preoperative or postoperative if clinically indicated to evaluate hemoglobin and platelet levels, to identify supratherapeutic international normalized ratio (INR) levels with warfarin use and in patients with cirrhosis, and to determine clotting Factor VIII and IX blood levels in patients with Hemophilia A and B, respectively.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

Alveolar osteitis is a clinical diagnosis and does not require laboratory studies or radiographic examination. A thorough history and physical exam are sufficient to diagnose this postoperative complication. However, if there is a concern for a retained tooth fragment within the alveolar socket, panoramic radiographs can be performed.