**Laparoscopic Transabdominal Adrenalectomy**

Positioning:

Lateral decubitus with affected gland upward, flex bed at the lower chest. The surgeon and assistant stand facing the front of the patient. No need for foley or preoperative antibiotics.

Anesthesia:

- General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation.

- Central venous catheter and arterial line for right-sided adrenalectomy, pheochromocytoma, or cardiovascular risk.

Operative steps:

- The abdomen is entered at Palmar's point using a Veress needle to technique.

- CO2 insufflation increased to the pressure of 15mmHg and a 5mm port placed using an optical trocar.

- A 30° endoscope placed, and three additional ports are placed, two 5mm trocars, and one 12mm trocar.

- Dissection is dependent on the side of the adrenal gland. 

- LEFT:

- Mobilize the splenic flexure of the colon.
- Mobilize the spleen, taking down the splenocolic and splenorenal ligaments.
- Dissect the avascular plane between the anterior surface of Gerota's fascia and the posterior surface of the spleen and pancreas.
- The left adrenal vein can be found draining into the left renal vein.


- RIGHT

- Incise the peritoneal reflection of the triangular ligament of the liver
- Retract the liver and
- Dissection of the adrenal gland begins medially along with the IVC, identifying the right adrenal vein draining into the IVC.

- Once identified, the adrenal vein is transected using clips, bipolar clamp, or harmonic dissector.

- Dissection is then continued, freeing the adrenal gland from the surrounding tissue, taking small arterial branches throughout the dissection.

- When the adrenal gland has been completely dissected, it is placed in a retrieval bag and removed through the 12mm port incision.

- The wound bed is irrigated and inspected for hemostasis.

- The fascia of the 12mm port site is closed with 2-0 absorbable suture.

- Skin incisions are closed using 4-0 absorbable sutures.

**Posterior Retroperitoneoscopic Adrenalectomy**

Positioning:

Prone, gel rolls to lift the pelvis and at the chest to allow the abdomen to hang freely if Cloward Prone Positioner is not available. Hip and knees flexed at 110°. No need for foley or preoperative antibiotics.

Anesthesia:

- General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation.

- Central venous catheter and arterial line for right-sided adrenalectomy, pheochromocytoma, or cardiovascular risk.

Operative steps:

- Transverse incision 1.5cm in length just below the tip of the 12th rib and deepened to the retroperitoneal space with blunt and sharp dissection of the posterior abdominal wall.

- The retroperitoneal space is developed bluntly with digital dissection for placement of a 5mm trocar 6-8cm laterally, just below the 11 The port is placed under finger guidance.

- A 12mm balloon port is placed in the first incision.

- CO2 insufflation is used to create the retroperitoneal space with a pressure of 20-30mmHg.

- A 30° endoscope is inserted, and Gerota's fascia visualized.

- Gerota's fascia is opened using a grasper in the lateral trocar, and the fatty tissue of the abdominal wall is pushed down to create the retroperitoneal space.

- A third trocar is then placed, making a 10mm incision 4-5cm medial to the initial incision 4cm below the tip of the 12th rib, parallel to the spine, under direct visualization. The camera is then placed in this port.

- The upper third of the kidney is then freed of perirenal tissue, allowing it to be turned upward and retracted.

- The lower pole of the adrenal gland is mobilized, identifying the Gerota's anteriorly through the dissection of fatty tissue.

- Dissection is dependent on the side of the adrenal gland. 

- Right: Dissection of the adrenal gland begins lateral and posterior to the right lobe of the liver and continued medially until the lateral IVC is observed. Dissection is then continued cephalad, taking small arterial branches throughout the dissection. The gland is dissected bluntly from Gerota's laterally.
- Left: Dissection of the adrenal gland begins lateral, between the kidney and the adrenal gland, behind the spleen, and continued medially. The inferior part of the adrenal gland is identified and dissected free until the adrenal vein is identified medially. Small arterial branches are coagulated throughout this dissection.

- The adrenal vein is identified and transected using a bipolar clamp or harmonic dissector. Clips are not routinely used but may be employed for a large right adrenal vein.

- The upper pole of the adrenal gland is dissected free from its attachments.

- Once the adrenal gland has been completely dissected, it is placed in a retrieval bag and removed through the 12mm port incision.

- The bed of the adrenal gland is irrigated and inspected for hemostasis.

- Skin incisions are closed using 4-0 absorbable sutures.