**X-Ray Production**

X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation (also called radiant energy), a type of ionizing radiation (meaning radiation with enough energy to detach electrons from atoms or other molecules) that transports energy utilizing waves and photons. A photon's energy can be described by characteristics such as frequency, wavelength, and constant speed (the speed of light; 299,792,498 m/s). Generally speaking, the photon's energy is inversely proportional to its wavelength. It is directly proportional to its frequency, meaning there are higher energy photons with a shorter wavelength and higher frequency. Energy transmitted as electromagnetic radiation is used to characterize radiation into different groups, such as radio-waves, microwaves, ultraviolet light, and X-rays. The wavelength of X-rays is typically in the range of 0.01nm to 10nm, and the associated frequency of X-rays ranges from 3x10^19Hz to 3x10^16Hz. These concepts become important in discussing the controlling factors of X-ray production later in this article.

X-ray tubes are vacuum tubes that are used to convert input electrical power to X-rays. Essential components of the x-ray tube and housing include a negatively-charged cathode filament, a positively-charged anode target, a glass envelope, and lead tube housing. Producing X-rays in a tube generally requires three essential steps: the proper assembly of a tube with a source of electrons, a means to accelerate the electrons, and then decelerate the electrons.

The cathode filament serves as an electron source that, when heated by electrical current (measured in milliamperes, mA; produced by a high-voltage generator) flowing through it, produces an electron cloud called a "space charge." The process by which heating a cathode results in electrons' emission has been named "thermionic emission." There is a limit to the total amount of electrons produced from an anode in this process and can occupy the space charge at one time. This is known as a phenomenon named the "space charge effect," which happens when the current being sent through the cathode is around 1000mA. Beyond this, too much heat is produced, and it can cause the cathode to break.

The accumulation of electrons at the cathode results in a large negative charge that results in the acceleration of electrons towards the anode target. The cathode of an X-ray tube is made of a tungsten filament. X-ray tubes tend to have two pieces of tungsten per anode (dual-focus tubes), one measuring 1 centimeter in length and the second measuring 2 centimeters in length. The smaller the filament, the smaller the current the filament can handle, and the fewer electrons the filament can produce. The smaller filament is used to take radiographs of smaller body parts. The larger filament is used for larger body part imaging. Because of the increased amount of electrons in the beam, there is increased repulsion amongst the beam's electrons, creating scattering of the beam and decreased spatial resolution of radiographs. This is corrected for by having a negatively charged focusing cap at the end of the cathode, which repels the electrons away from the peripheral areas and creates a very narrow, focused electron beam, increasing spatial resolution. Now that the electrons have been excited and emitted from the tungsten filaments, they are accelerated towards the positively-charged anode.

The anode is where electrons are decelerated; the energy from deceleration is then released in the form of heat and X-rays (photons). Approximately 99% of the energy is emitted in the form of heat and 1% in the form of X-rays. There are two types of anodes: stationary anodes and rotating anodes. Stationary anodes cannot absorb as much heat (low heat capacitance) and, because of this, are not commonly used in medical imaging. Rotating anodes are made from an anode disc which rotates with the help of an induction motor. The induction motor is made from stators (electromagnets) surrounding the rotor, activated in series to induce rotation of the rotor, which rotates the anode disc. This significantly increases the heat capacity of the anode and allows it to produce more X-rays. Once X-rays are produced through this process, they must be directed properly out of the X-ray tube housing.

X-ray tube housing is composed of an inner envelope made from Pyrex glass, which keeps the X-ray tube protected and creates a vacuum around the tube to prevent corrosion and oxidation. This glass envelope has a target window for the X-rays to travel through, thinning the glass envelope. Surrounding the glass envelope is the outer portion of the tube housing, made from lead, which prevents X-rays from escaping the tube housing. Once the X-ray is produced and makes it out of the tube housing, it then travels through a lead filter. The lead filter prevents low-energy X-rays that have been emitted from the X-ray tube from reaching the patient, as these X-rays will not have enough energy to pass through the patient and contribute to the radiograph. The X-rays then pass through a collimator.

Collimation is the process of "focusing" an X-ray beam on a specific target using lead plates. The X-rays shot from the beam move through the collimator, and said plates absorb any X-rays that are not parallel with the lead plates. This produces X-rays that increase the spatial resolution of the resultant radiograph. Proper collimation is important, as X-ray beams that are over-collimated may hide diagnostically useful details, and under-collimation can expose extra radiation to patients and result in increased scatter radiation. The collimated X-rays then travel through the patient, through the lead grid behind the patient (which only allows parallel X-rays to pass through), and onto the imaging cassette.

In summary, an X-ray beam is produced by an X-ray tube, travels through a lead filter, is collimated, passes through the patient, passes through a lead grid, and then hits the imaging cassette to produce a radiograph.

**Controlling Factors of X-Ray Production (mAs and kVp)**

Controlling factors of X-ray production that are manipulated by X-ray technicians to produce technically adequate images include the number of photons being produced by an X-ray beam, measured in milliamperes per second (mAs), and the energy of the photons that are being produced, measured in peak kilovoltage (kVp). The mAs reflect the image quantity/intensity, and the kVp reflects the image quality. The specific combinations used may vary depending on the patient's clinical scenario being imaged and the radiographer's experience taking the image.

Increasing the mAs of an X-ray comes from increasing the current being sent through the X-ray tube's cathode, which results in increased photons in the X-ray beam being shot towards the patient. Having too low a mAs may result in "quantum mottle," which is essentially X-ray noise. In this scenario, there are not enough photons reaching the X-ray cassette, and important details from images may be missing or unable to be seen well. On the other hand, when mAs is too high, more photons are being shot from the X-ray tube, and the patient gets overexposure to radiation. An additional factor to consider when manipulating mAs is that it is a time-dependent variable. If the electrical current is held constant, the amount of photons a patient is exposed to is entirely dependent on the amount of time they are in front of an X-ray beam. Ideally, a patient is imaged in as little time as possible with a higher electrical current so that there is a reduction of motion artifact during an X-ray.

As for kVp, when this value is increased, the photons of the X-ray beam are of higher energy and can penetrate through tissues more easily. This is due to an increase in the potential difference between the cathode and the anode, resulting in electrons being excited to higher energy levels when accelerated towards the anode. The resulting X-rays produced at higher kVps are at higher frequencies, allowing them to pass through more tissues, meaning more photons hitting the imaging cassette, creating darker radiographs. Depending on where in the body a radiographer is imaging, the kVp is manipulated as such so that there are enough photons, both penetrating tissue and attenuating tissue, to produce clinically useful contrast on radiographs. If the kVp is too high, more photons will hit the cassette, and the radiograph will appear too dark. If the kVp is too low, more photons will attenuate in the body's tissues and appear too bright.

The above concepts of mAs and kVp are important for radiographers to produce technically adequate radiographs.

**X-Ray Interactions**

Tissue-specific absorption and attenuation of X-ray photons with resultant variable loss of photon energy and subsequent detection by the image receptor produces the variable densities seen on a radiograph. X-ray energy traveling through the body typically will result in one of three outcomes: absorption, transmission, and scatter. In general, more dense materials (e.g., bone) absorb more energy (X-ray photons) than that of less dense material (e.g., fat.) The patient's tissues will absorb approximately two-thirds of X-ray photon energy produced by X-ray tubes. About one-third results in scatter radiation, and less than 1% is transmitted to the image cassette/receptor to create a radiologic image.

Scatter X-rays are X-rays that do not hit the digital detector and are also not absorbed into the tissue. These X-rays “scatter” throughout the room and can be absorbed by personnel who do not practice proper radiation safety. A few important scatter concepts to know about include the Photoelectric effect, Compton scatter, and coherent scatter.

The photoelectric effect happens when a photon from an X-ray beam interacts with an inner electron shell and results in an ionized, low-energy electron (photoelectron) that is ejected from its' orbit (secondary radiation). During this process, the X-ray photon is completely absorbed, and there is a subsequent filling of this inner electron shell by outer-shell electrons. The photoelectric effect results in no transmitted photon through the patient to the imaging cassette. This type of interaction predominates in X-ray beams with 30 kVp and below and happens more frequently in denser substances with higher atomic numbers (e.g., bone.)

Compton scatter is when an X-ray photon hits an electron in an outer shell of an atom and results in the production of both a lower-energy scattered X-ray photon and an ionized electron, which is immediately knocked out of orbit. This scatter occurs at all energy levels but begins to predominate at higher kVps. Compton scattering is undesirable in medical imaging. It "fogs" the image because of photon scattering, causes biological damage to tissue, and is the reason for radiographer exposure to X-ray radiation. It also increases the patient's dose of radiation. Patients with larger body habitus are at increased risk for Compton scatter, as there is more soft tissue density for X-ray photons to travel through. Compton scattering is one reason it is so important for radiographers to understand and apply the concepts of mAs and kVp, as proper manipulation of these two values can significantly reduce the amount of Compton scatter in a radiograph.

Coherent scattering is when a photon interacts with an entire atom; the photon is temporarily absorbed. The photon is released as a lower-energy scatter photon with no ionization event, no free electron, and no biological harm. Coherent scattering is less important to medical imaging, as these effects have minimal impact on image contrast.

The collimator mentioned previously is supposed to help reduce the amount of scatter radiation in each performed radiograph, but there is always some degree of scatter radiation. Additional methods to help reduce scatter include the grid placed behind the patient and in front of the image cassette/receptor. Different scatter grids will have different grid ratios, which is the height of the lead strips (H) divided by the space between the strips (D). The standard grid ratio is approximately 10 with 45 lines per centimeter of the scatter grid.

The absorption of X-rays means the energy hits the X-ray photon's target organ, and the energy is dispersed throughout the tissue through the photoelectric effect discussed above. Tissues where more energy is absorbed (e.g., bone) are said to be higher “attenuated” than those that absorb less energy (e.g., fat). From a safety standpoint, absorbed radiation per unit of mass, the "absorbed dose," is measured in grays (Gy). However, because not all types of radiation produce the same biological effects, the dose equivalent or "effective dose," measured in sieverts (Sv), is used instead, which implements a tissue-weighting factor based on the type of radiation to take into account potential biological effects of a given radiation dose.

Transmission of X-rays means the X-rays photons have passed through the patient and hit the photosensitive detector (historically called a “cassette”) on the patient's other side. This digital detector detects the X-ray photons that have hit it and converts it into an electrical signal used to represent different pixels, which are then put together to produce the conventional radiograph (colloquially called an “X-ray”). This is done by scintillators (phosphors) that emit light in the digital detector when exposed to radiation. The scintillator's emitted light is then detected by a light detector, which converted the information into a pixellated digital image. Digital detectors exposed to a small amount of radiation by manipulating the mAs and kVp may result in "noisy" images that degrade image quality. On the other end of the spectrum, digital detectors exposed to a large amount of radiation may not necessarily affect image quality but do expose the patient to unnecessary radiation. In comparison, analog radiographs (less commonly used) use film to capture, display, and store radiographic images. An analog radiograph film is made from a thin emulsion with support from Mylar (thick polyester). The emulsion contains silver halide grains, which, when exposed to radiation, become sensitized. Once the film is passed through a developer and fixer solution, the film may be hung on a lightbox for viewing.

**Radiation Safety and Exposure**

Radiation damages tissues through two mechanisms: direct injury and indirectly through free radical creation, which alters cellular function. Effects of radiation exposure can be further classified as "deterministic" and "stochastic." Deterministic effects of radiation exposure are predictable effects in severity that have a certain likelihood of occurring at given radiation exposure (e.g., skin erythema generally occurs in a 2 Gy radiation exposure). Deterministic effects of radiation exposure are considered to be "nonrandom" effects of radiation exposure. Stochastic effects from radiation exposure are those effects that can occur at any level of radiation exposure and are considered "random" effects from radiation exposure. The severity of stochastic effects at a given radiation exposure is random, but their likelihood does increase with a larger radiation dose.

**Technical Evaluation**

Depending on how a radiograph is taken, different tissues and anatomical structures may appear to have different attenuation and may even alter the size and location of organs. Because of this, it is important to thoroughly evaluate whether or not a radiograph taken is technically adequate so that accurate clinical decisions can be made.

Technical evaluation of radiographs is necessary so they can be interpreted with confidence and precision. Interpretation of radiographs without first confirming that the image is technically adequate can lead to incorrect imaging assessment that can ultimately lead to improper patient management and negatively impact clinical outcomes. Images should be looked over by both the performing technologist, the interpreting radiologist, and even clinical staff outside of this directly involved patient care to minimize mistakes. There are several things to look for when assessing the technical adequacy of a radiograph, such as the following:

**Labeling**

Initial assessment of the technical aspect of a radiograph should involve confirming that the study is of the correct patient, has been performed on the correct date, and is labeled correctly (e.g., left and right.)

**Artifact**

An artifact on an image is a feature that does not correlate with the physical properties of the subject being imaged and may confound or obscure the interpretation of that image. Because the mechanism for image creation is different between flat-panel detectors and computed radiography, the causes and appearances of some artifacts can be unique to these different modalities. Artifacts can occur for several reasons; examples include damage to X-ray detectors, liquid contamination of X-ray detectors, backscatter radiation detection, and image saturation. The typical appearances of the aforementioned artifacts on chest radiography are listed below.

- Damage to X-ray detectors: white banding that can progressively grow over time

- Liquid contamination: repeated vertical banding

- Backscatter radiation: shadow image of superimposed digital detector electronics

- Image saturation: clipping of anatomy

**Five Anatomic Technical Assessments of Chest Radiographs**

Some of the more common criteria to assess radiographs, specifically chest radiographs, are penetration, inspiration, rotation, magnification, and angulation. “PIRMA” is a helpful mnemonic that can help one remember these five criteria.

**1. Penetration**

One of the most useful properties of X-ray beams has been their ability to penetrate through otherwise opaque objects.

**2. Inspiration**

Adequate inspiration on a chest radiograph is generally defined as being able to visualize eight to ten posterior ribs at the midclavicular line.

**3. Rotation**

Rotation is assessed by measuring the distance from the medial end of the clavicles on both sides to the thoracic vertebrae's spinous process, which should be at the midline. In an adequate study, this distance should be nearly the same, meaning the patient is not rotated. If a patient is rotated to the left, the distance from the left clavicle's medial end to the spinous process will be larger than that of the distance from the right clavicle's medial end to the same spinous process.

**4. Magnification**

Magnification refers to how large the heart appears on a chest radiograph. One can quickly and conveniently determine whether the heart is the proper size by assessing the cardiothoracic ratio (CTR). The cardiothoracic ratio is determined by measuring the heart's widest diameter on a chest radiograph, then measuring the thoracic cage's widest internal diameter, usually directly above the diaphragm. The heart's measured diameter is then divided by the thoracic cage's measured diameter to yield the CTR.

Magnification comes into play with this concept because depending on how the patient is positioned during the radiograph, the heart can appear slightly different. To grasp this concept, one must remember that objects closer to the X-ray beam in a radiograph will appear larger when projected onto the digital detector. Chest X-rays can be taken in multiple ways, including the posterior-anterior (PA) and anterior-posterior (AP). PA radiographs are taken with the patient's posterior elements closest to the X-ray beam and their anterior elements closest to the digital detector. PA chest radiographs are generally considered the best reflection of a patient's true heart size, as the heart is close to the digital detector and does not get magnified as much. However, sick patients in the hospital, especially in the ICU, may not have PA radiographs performed and have to have an AP radiograph done at the bedside. In AP radiographs, the heart is closer to the X-ray beam, and there is more magnification of the heart, making it appear larger than it is.

**5. Angulation**

Angulation can generally be thought of as the inclination at which the patient is positioned during a chest radiograph. An example of when a patient may have altered angulation is during a bedside chest radiograph when the bed's head is raised. This type of radiograph is called an apical lordotic view or a lordotic projection. These images can be especially useful in evaluating suspected lung pathology at the apices of the lungs. However, the distortion of several other structures in this view can lead to diagnostic error.