Vasomotor rhinitis is a diagnosis of exclusion after performing an exhaustive investigation into a patient’s history. Vasomotor rhinitis is the most commonly diagnosed nonallergic rhinitis, not because of high prevalence, but often from healthcare professionals resorting to diagnosis without performing an extensive workup. Allergic rhinitis and nonallergic rhinitis have very similar symptomatology, such as congestion, rhinorrhea, facial pressure, and headache. They are often differentiated by whether an immunoglobulin E (IgE) response assessment is positive. However, not all allergic rhinitis patients are affected by an IgE inflammatory process. Skin and serum allergy tests are often inadequate in their ability to describe local allergic rhinitis.

Clinicians are almost always involved in the care of patients with allergic and nonallergic rhinitis. Whether it is an allergist, otolaryngologist, and/or primary clinician, rhinitis is very common with most providers encountering the disease in their practice. When the diagnosis becomes more complex, consultation with a rhinologist or specialist may be warranted. As will all aspects of healthcare, interprofessional coordination is critical for the effective management of patients with nonallergic and allergic rhinitis. The laboratory technicians collect serum samples for IgE testing and analyze the results. The allergy technicians perform the appropriate allergen skin testing and interpret results. The nurses are vital members of the interprofessional group as they monitor the patient's vital signs, review patients’ medications, assess therapeutic effectiveness, and triage symptom severity. The pharmacists ensure proper dosing for intranasal steroids and histamines and other medical management of rhinitis while screening for interactions amongst medications. Pharmacists can also discuss alternative agents with the prescriber in the event of inadequate therapeutic response or adverse events. The radiologists also play a vital role in analyzing nasal anatomic obstructions on imaging. As with any condition, an interprofessional team approach to diagnosis and management ensures the best potential for positive results for the patient. [Level 5]

Patients with negative systemic allergy assessments and negative imaging are often categorized into a nonallergic rhinitis subtype but have a clinical picture congruent with local allergic rhinitis. A recent cross-sectional study was performed to assess the clinical characteristics of patients with nonallergic rhinitis. Older patients who denied a history of asthma and lacked an inhalant allergy trigger were more likely to have true nonallergic rhinitis. Environmental triggers were not considered a distinguishing feature between local allergic rhinitis and nonallergic rhinitis. The results of this research study may help guide differentiation between truly nonallergic etiologies and those with falsely negative systemic allergy testing. [Level 4]