Innervation to the upper extremity derives from the brachial plexus. It is composed of the ventral rami from the C5 to T1 nerve roots. The anterior muscles of the upper extremity receive their innervation from the musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerves. The posterior muscles are innervated by the axillary and the radial nerves.

The spinal cord gives off dorsal (sensory) and ventral (motor) roots. These join to form the mixed spinal nerve. The mixed spinal nerve then gives off a dorsal primary ramus (which feeds the area of the back adjacent to the vertebrae -perhaps three inches on either side). The much larger ventral rami then supply most of the body at the appropriate level. For the brachial plexus, the roots of the plexus are formed by the ventral primary rami from C5 through T1. The primary rami of C5 and C6 are termed roots of the brachial plexus. They join to form the superior trunk of the plexus. The C7 primary rami form the C7 root of the plexus. It forms the middle trunk of the brachial plexus. The C8 and T1 ventral primary rami form the C8 and T1 roots of the plexus. They join to form the inferior trunk of the brachial plexus.

The next step involves separating the neural components that supply the anterior part of the limb from the posterior part of the limb. The anterior divisions supply the anterior part, and the posterior part of the upper limb is supplied by the posterior divisions.

For the superior trunk of the brachial plexus C5, C6),  the anterior division separates from the posterior division. The anterior divisions of C5 and C6 join to form the superior trunk of the plexus.

For the middle trunk, the anterior division separates from the posterior division. The anterior division joins with the superior division to form the lateral cord of the brachial plexus. The anterior division of the inferior trunk continues as the medial cord. All the posterior divisions join to form the posterior cord.

The three cords - lateral, medial, and posterior - are named for their relationship to the axillary artery. These cords then give off branches which are specific nerves.

- A memory trick for this arrangement is "Randy Travis drinks cold beer" - roots trunks division cords branches.

**Branches of the Brachial Plexus**

The dorsal scapular nerve arises from the C5 root, often with a contribution from C4. It innervates the rhomboid and (sometimes) the levator scapulae.

The suprascapular nerve arises from the superior trunk. It innervates the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles.

The **lateral cord**is formed by the ventral roots of C5, C6, and C7. It gives rise to the musculocutaneous nerve, the lateral pectoral nerve, and the lateral root of the median nerve.

The musculocutaneous nerve gives rise to motor branches that innervate the coracobrachialis, biceps brachii, and brachialis muscles. It is referred to as the "BBC nerve." It then passes into the forearm as the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm.

The lateral pectoral nerve innervates the clavicular head of the pectoralis major.

The lateral cord contributes to the lateral root of the median nerve. The medial root of the median nerve is formed from the medial cord of the brachial plexus. The median nerve has no branches in the arm. It passes into the forearm medial to the brachial artery, where the nerve can be damaged by a needle used to sample arterial blood from the brachial artery. The median nerve passes beneath the flexor digitorum superficialis and innervates it. It then passes into the hand beneath the flexor retinaculum (which forms the roof of the carpal tunnel). In the hand, it gives rise to the recurrent branch of the median nerve, which innervates the three thenar muscles (abductor pollicis brevis, flexor pollicis brevis, and opponens pollicis). The median nerve supplies sensory function to the thumb, index finger, middle finger, and half the ring finger. This pattern is useful for testing for lesions of the median nerve. The median nerve can be damaged in the carpal tunnel, giving rise to carpal tunnel syndrome. The three muscles of the thumb supplied by the median nerve will be denervated in this lesion.

The sensory distribution involves the thumb, index finger, middle finger, and the lateral half of the ring finger. One can test for carpal tunnel syndrome by forced flexion of the hands at the wrist. One has the patient place the dorsal surfaces of the hands together and straighten the forearms to a horizontal position. The patient is then instructed to hold this position for 30 to 60 seconds. If carpal tunnel syndrome is present in either hand, this provocative test will cause pain because it puts additional stress on the median nerve in the carpal tunnel. One can also use the reverse Phalens' test in which the palmar surfaces of the hands are placed together rather than the dorsal surfaces. If a carpal tunnel is severe, one can divide the flexor retinaculum to relieve the pressure on the median nerve. One can also microtunnel the flexor retinaculum to relieve pressure on the nerve.

While in the forearm, the median nerve gives rise to the anterior interosseus nerve, which innervates the flexor pollicis longus and the radial half of the flexor digitorum profundus. It ends by innervating the pronator quadratus. One test for the anterior interosseus nerve is to have the patient touch the tip of the thumb to the tip of the index finger ("OK sign"). This action requires the use of the flexor digitorum profundus (to flex the distal phalanx of the index finger) and the flexor pollicis longus (to flex the distal phalanx of the thumb).

The **medial cord**is formed by the ventral roots of C8 and T1. The medial cord gives rise to the ulnar nerve, the medial root of the median nerve, the medial pectoral nerve, the medial cutaneous nerve of the arm, and the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm.

The ulnar nerve has no branches in the arm. It passes into the forearm by passing posterior to the medial epicondyle, where it can easily be injured by fracture of the medial epicondyle or sitting with the elbows on a desk while studying ("student's palsy"). In the forearm, it innervates the flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial half of the flexor digitorum profundus. It passes through Guyon's canal between the pisiform and the hook of the hamate bone. It can be injured here by a fracture of the hook of the hamate bone. It gives rise to a superficial branch that innervates the skin of both sides of the little finger and the ulnar half of the ring finger. The deep branch innervates the abductor digiti minimi, opponens digiti minimi, and flexor digiti minimi, the four dorsal interossei muscles, the three palmar interossei muscles, lumbricals 3 and 4, and ends by supplying the adductor pollicis.

When the adductor pollicis is suspected to be denervated by an ulnar nerve lesion, the examiner has the patient attempt to hold a piece of paper between the thumb and index fingers. The patient then attempts to hold the paper as the examiner pulls the paper from the patient's hand. When the patient attempts to hold the paper without the adductor pollicis, he will automatically flex the distal phalanx of the thumb using the flexor pollicis longus. This is termed "Froment's sign" and signifies the presence of a lesion of the ulnar nerve that has denervated the adductor pollicis.

The medial pectoral nerve supplies the pectoralis minor and the sternocostal head of the pectoralis major.

The medial cutaneous nerve of the arm supplies sensory function to the skin of the medial surface of the arm. The medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm supplies sensory function to the skin of the medial surface of the forearm. Note that this nerve does not cross the wrist. If the patient has anesthesia or pain in the medial surface of the hand, this must be due to a lesion of the ulnar nerve and not the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm. If the area of anesthesia or pain is present on both the medial side of the distal forearm and hand, the lesion is due to damage to the C8 root and dermatome. (A dermatome is an area of skin supplied by a single dorsal root for sensory function).

The **posterior cord**of the brachial plexus is formed from the C5-T1 roots. It gives rise to the axillary and radial nerves. For motor function, the axillary nerve innervates the deltoid and teres minor muscles and terminates by forming the upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, a sensory branch. The radial nerve has a much longer course and function. It passes around the shaft of the radius where it can be injured. It then passes over the lateral epicondyle, which is also subject to injury. It innervates the triceps brachii and anconeus in the arm. In the forearm, it innervates the brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus. These two muscles receive radial nerve branches that form while in the arm. A fracture of the lateral epicondyle may spare these two muscles while damaging the rest of the radial nerve.

The nerve then divides into a superficial and a deep branch. The superficial branch passes beneath the brachioradialis to provide a sensory function to the dorsal thumb and part of the proximal dorsal surfaces of the fingers. The deep branch innervates the supinator by passing through it. It emerges from the supinator in a fascial area termed the arcade of Frohse, where it may be compressed by the fibers of the arcade, damaging the nerve. It then becomes the posterior interosseus nerve, which innervates the extensor carpi radialis brevis, the extensor digitorum, the extensor digiti minimi, and the extensor carpi ulnaris. The radial nerve has no motor function in the hand. Damage to the radial nerve produces a wrist drop in which the patient is unable to extend the hand at the wrist. One can test the degree of damage by holding the patient's hand and having him extend it against resistance. Alternatively, the examiner may try to push the hand into flexion. Resisting the flexion requires extension by muscles innervated by the radial nerve. If the hand radially deviates during this testing, then the innervation to the brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus is intact, and the lesion must be at the level of the lateral epicondyle. Damage to the radial nerve at mid-humeral levels or higher will produce a complete wrist drop. Other sensory branches of the radial nerve are the lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, the posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm, the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm, and the superficial branch of the radial nerve in the hand.

The posterior cord of the brachial plexus gives rise to three nerves before the formation of the radial and axillary nerves. These are the upper subscapular, thoracodorsal, and lower subscapular nerves. The upper and lower subscapular nerves innervate the subscapularis muscle. The lower subscapular nerve also innervates the teres major muscle. The thoracodorsal nerve innervates the latissimus dorsi muscle.