As with other second-generation fluoroquinolone drugs, ofloxacin is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial that exhibits a bactericidal effect. It works by binding to and inhibiting bacterial topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase), an enzyme that relaxes supercoiled DNA, and topoisomerase IV, an enzyme that separates linked daughter chromosomes following replication. These inhibitory effects interrupt DNA replication, transcription, and repair, thereby preventing cell division in bacterial cells.

**Mechanism of Resistance**

- Chromosome-encoded mutation in DNA gyrase

- Plasmid-mediated resistance, efflux pumps

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**After oral administration, the bioavailability of the ofloxacin tablet is approximately 98%. Maximum serum concentrations (Cmax) are achieved one to two hours after an oral dose.

**Distribution:**In vitro, approximately 32% of the drug in plasma is protein bound. After oral administration of recommended therapeutic doses, ofloxacin has been detected in lung tissue, blister fluid, cervix, ovary, prostatic fluid, prostatic tissue, sputum, and skin.

**Metabolism:**Ofloxacin has a pyridobenzoxazine ring that appears to decrease the extent of parent compound metabolism.

**Excretion:**Ofloxacin has biphasic elimination. Between 65% to 80% of an administered oral dose of ofloxacin is excreted unchanged via the kidneys within 48 hours of dosing. In addition, studies indicate that 4% to 8% percent of an ofloxacin dose is excreted in the feces indicating a small degree of biliary excretion of ofloxacin.