The Wood's lamp can detect areas of skin that are pigmented or depigmented and can also detect fluorescence. Normal healthy skin appears as a blue color but may show white spots when the skin is thick and yellow when it is oily. Purple spots indicate dryness or dehydration. Clothing lint is often bright white and shiny.

A positive result is when there is a pigmentary disorder that is obvious, or the fluorescence is noted. The Wood's lamp is often used to make a diagnosis of the following skin disorders:

- Disorders of pigmentation like melasma, vitiligo

- Pityriasis Versicolor presents as a rash on the chest or back - the rash will emit an orange glow.

- Tinea capitis will reveal areas of baldness, and the Microsporum species will fluoresce blue-green - however, many other fungal infections may not fluoresce with Wood's lamp

- Scabies and head lice

- Erythrasma is caused by Corynebacterium, which presents as a coral red pigmented rash in the skin folds

- Pseudomonas, which will fluoresce green

A Wood's lamp is also used to look for signs of porphyria in erythrocytes, stool, and urine. Sometimes beauticians may assess for skin imperfections and signs of aging with a Wood's lamp. When a slit lamp is unavailable, the ophthalmologist may use the Wood lamp to search for scratches and foreign bodies in the cornea.

Physicians often use the wood lamp to examine for fungal, bacterial, and parasitic infections.

The Wood lamp is safe and does not damage the skin or cause sunburn. The examination is usually very brief and unlikely to cause harm even to light-sensitive individuals. The recommendation is for patients to close their eyes when during exposure to a Wood's lamp.