Beta-blockers, as a class of drugs, are primarily used to treat cardiovascular diseases and other conditions.

Beta receptors exist in three distinct forms: beta-1 (B1), beta-2 (B2), and beta-3 (B3). Beta-1 receptors located primarily in the heart mediate cardiac activity. Beta-2 receptors, with their diverse location in many organ systems, control various aspects of metabolic activity and induce smooth muscle relaxation. Beta-3 receptors induce the breakdown of fat cells and are less clinically relevant at present. Blockade of these receptors by beta-blocking medicines is used to treat a broad range of illnesses.

Beta-blockers are indicated and have FDA approval for the treatment of tachycardia, hypertension, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias, coronary artery disease, hyperthyroidism, essential tremor, aortic dissection, portal hypertension, glaucoma, migraine prophylaxis, and other conditions. They are also used to treat less common conditions such as long QT syndrome and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Beta-blockers are available for administration in three primary forms: oral, intravenous, and ophthalmic, and the route of administration often depends on the acuity of the illness (parenteral use in arrhythmias), disease type (topical use in glaucoma), and chronicity of the disease.

Congestive heart failure patients are treated with beta-blockers if they are in a compensated state. Specifically, the beta-blockers bisoprolol, carvedilol, and metoprolol succinate are the agents chosen. Metoprolol tartrate is not indicated for heart failure and is instead used for other conditions such as atrial fibrillation.

Athletes and musicians may use beta-blockers for their anxiolytic effect as well as their inhibitory effects on the sympathetic nervous system. They are not FDA approved for the treatment of anxiety-related disorders; however, they have a potent anxiolytic effect. Combined with a reduction in tremors, they may lead to improved stage performance. An example of a beta blocker that is commonly prescribed for anxiety or stage fright is propranolol; it may reduce some peripheral symptoms of anxiety, such as tachycardia, sweating, and general tension.

Certain beta blockers are also used specifically in inpatient units rather than for outpatient prescriptions. A common example is esmolol, which is typically used either in the intensive care unit or a cardiac inpatient unit. It is generally used for refractory tachycardia, such as atrial fibrillation, and is titrable given its short onset of action and short half-life. It may also play a role in refractory ventricular tachycardia, which is also known as electrical storm.