The ultrasound-guided supraclavicular block is performed typically at the distal trunk or proximal divisions level of the brachial plexus. While no confirmatory data exists, this location’s compactness may explain the supraclavicular block’s reputation for producing short latency and dense sensory and motor anesthesia. It can also be utilized for shoulder surgery but requires supplementation of the more proximal cervical nerves including supraclavicular nerve (C3 to C4) and suprascapular nerve (C5 to C6) for coverage of the cape of the shoulder.

The improved safety afforded by the use of ultrasound allowing visualization of the pleura has likely been the turning point in the increased use of supraclavicular blockade. et al. demonstrated that ultrasound-guided supraclavicular block had a rapid procedure time (4 minutes), provided optimal intraoperative conditions with a mean surgery time of 75.2 minutes (range 6 to 232 minutes), and a mean of 437 minutes of postoperative analgesia.

If ultrasound guidance is used, concomitant peripheral nerve stimulation may be redundant and has not been shown to increase the success rate of the block. Furthermore, there is a high false-negative rate, suggesting these ultrasound-guided blocks are typically effective even without a motor response.

Which approach to brachial plexus blockade (e.g., supraclavicular, infraclavicular, interscalene, and axillary) you decide on ultimately depends on several patient, provider, and system-related factors including location of desired anesthetic coverage, operator experience, variation in anatomy, coagulopathy (compressible site preferred), infection over the intended site, and ability to appropriately position the patient. Also, it will depend upon the desired goal for primary anesthesia or postoperative analgesia.  A prospective randomized study by Stav et al. comparing the efficacy of supraclavicular, infraclavicular, and axillary blocks in 101 patients demonstrated that all three approaches produced similar quality for surgical anesthesia for operations below the shoulder. et al. comparing supraclavicular blocks and interscalene blocks for shoulder surgery revealed no difference in procedural time, need for rescue analgesia, and dyspnea rates. However, the incidence of hoarseness and Horner syndrome was statistically lower in those receiving a supraclavicular block compared to those receiving an interscalene block.