The treatment goals of hyperglycemia involve eliminating the symptoms related to hyperglycemia and reducing long-term complications. Glycemic control in patients with type 1 diabetes is achieved by a variable insulin regimen along with proper nutrition. Patients with type 2 diabetes are managed with diet and lifestyle changes as well as medications. Type 2 diabetes also may be managed on oral glucose-lowering agents. Patients with hyperglycemia need to be screened for complications including retinopathy, nephropathy, and cardiovascular disease.

**Goals of Treatment**

Treatment goals are to reduce the following complications associated with hyperglycemia:

- Kidney and eye disease by regulation of blood pressure and lowering hyperglycemia

- Ischemic heart disease, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease by control of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and cessation of smoking

- Reduce the risk of metabolic syndrome and stroke by control of body weight and control of hyperglycemia

Patients who have hyperglycemia and are confirmed to have type 2 diabetes need to be referred to an endocrinologist. Unless there is a contraindication, the drug of choice to lower hyperglycemia is metformin. In addition, some patients may require insulin therapy in combination with other agents.

**Prevention of Complications**

To prevent complications of hyperglycemia, the following preventive approaches are recommended:

- Refer to an ophthalmologist for yearly eye exams

- Monitor hemoglobin A1c levels every 3-6 months

- Check urinary albumin levels every 12 months

- Examine the feet at each clinic visit

- Maintain the Blood pressure to less than 130/80 mmHg

- Initiate statin therapy if the patient has hyperlipidemia

Some patients are prone to greater glycemic variability of their blood sugars within a day and also variability for the same time on different days, thereby causing frequent episodes of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. These patients need close monitoring by an endocrinologist with a treatment plan intended to reduce both the risks or at least maintain one risk while reducing the other.