**Centra**l**Venous Access (Internal Jugular Approach)**

The internal jugular vein is a preferred initial access site for a central venous catheter. Ultrasound (US) guidance is typically used for assessing cervical anatomy, patency of the vessel, the presence of a thrombus in the lumen, and the internal jugular veins relationship to the common carotid artery. The right internal jugular vein has a relatively straight course into the subclavian vein and right atrium. When cannulating the internal jugular without ultrasound guidance, the main external landmark is the division of the medial and lateral heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The patient is placed in Trendelenburg positioning with their head rotated away from the side of cannulation. Under ultrasound visualization, the skin above the internal jugular vein is anesthetized with lidocaine. A 16-gauge multipurpose introducer needle is introduced and directed inferiorly toward the ipsilateral nipple. Backward pressure should be applied to the syringe as the needle is advanced. Observe the needle puncture the anterior wall of the vein with ultrasound. Following cannulation of the vein, there should be dark red, non-pulsatile blood aspirated back into the syringe. The syringe is removed, and a guidewire advanced through the introducer needle about 5 to 10 cm. There should be no resistance felt during this step. If the patient is on telemetry, monitor the ECG for ectopy. The needle can be withdrawn over the guidewire, and a small skin incision is made using an 11-blade scalpel at its entry point. A dilator(s) is then advanced over the wire to create a subcutaneous tract. The dilator is removed, and the central venous catheter can advance over the wire. The guidewire is then withdrawn. Each port should be aspirated, noting adequate blood return, and then flushed with sterile saline. The catheter can then be sutured to the skin surface and dressed in a sterile fashion. A stat chest X-ray should undergo evaluation for appropriate placement of the catheter tip at the atriocaval junction and absence of the pneumothorax.

**Trauma**

The jugular vein has a superficial course in the neck and has no protection from bone or cartilage. It is beneath the sternocleidomastoid muscle and easily prone to blunt or penetrating trauma. Injury to the vein can result in significant hemorrhage as well as a risk of air embolism. Digital compression is the simplest way to control bleeding from a lacerated internal jugular vein. Surgical exploration may be necessary. If possible, the internal jugular vein should be repaired, with care taken to limit narrowing the vessel. In severe cases, the internal jugular vein may require ligation. At the time of exploration, attention is also necessary to assess other structures such as the vagus nerve and carotid artery, as well as the nearby aerodigestive structures.