A history of trauma, heavy lifting, or chronic bulge may be elicited from the patient. The patient will usually describe a bulge and pain, which is worse when lifting or straining. When strangulation exists, the patient may present with bowel obstruction symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, and obstipation. If bowel ischemia is present, the patient will have severe pain and may present with sepsis (hypotension, tachycardia). Before palpating the abdominal wall, it is important to inspect the skin overlying the hernia visually. Any appearance of erythematous or dusky skin is a concern for a possible strangulated hernia. An emergent surgical consult should be obtained if skin changes are noted before attempting to reduce the hernia. When evaluating a patient for a hernia, it is essential to ask the patient to increase abdominal pressure via a Valsalva maneuver.

The patient should be evaluated in both the sitting and standing position. Palpate the area of the abdominal wall to evaluate for a hernia during Valsalva, and a bulge or weakening of the abdominal musculature should be appreciated. When evaluating for inguinal hernias in males while standing, invaginate the scrotum and place a finger within the external inguinal ring to palpated for a bulge. There should be a push against your finger when the patient is performing a Valsalva maneuver. Large hernias in the groin area may appear as a mass in the femoral area near the vessels or a scrotal mass. Hernias that are acutely incarcerated will appear erythematous, indurated, swollen, and painful to palpation. When there is a bowel within the hernia defect, you may feel peristalsis of fluid in the hernia sac. If bowel strangulation is present, the patient may have focal or generalized peritonitis on examination.