**HHV-8-Associated Tumors**

The HHV-8 or KSHV is a double-stranded DNA virus subclassified as gammaherpesviruses. The gammaherpesviruses are a lymphotropic virus that undergoes lytic replication in epithelial cells such as skin, blood vessels, and organs. These viruses can establish latency in their host cells for a lifetime. The HHV-8 goes into a latency period in the B-lymphocytic cells and vascular endothelium. It intermittently undergoes a period of lytic replication, especially in favorable conditions like immunodeficiency, malnutrition, solid organ transplant, and so on. It causes Kaposi sarcoma (a vascular malignancy) and B cell lymphoproliferative diseases such as primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and multicentric Castleman disease (MCD). The likelihood of HHV-8-associated malignancies is significantly higher amongst individuals living with HIV; however, these malignancies can occur without HIV coinfection. In rare cases where KS is diagnosed in non-AIDS patients, it is usually in elderly Mediterranean men or iatrogenic immunosuppression, including the transplant population.

**Kaposi Sarcoma (KS)**Moritz Kaposi, the dermatologist, first discovered the disease in 1872 among elderly European men. KS is typically regarded as an AIDS-defining condition, HHV-8 is the cause of approximately 95% of all cases of KS, regardless of the HIV/AIDS status. KS is a type of malignancy that affects the lymphovascular system and presents as pigmented skin lesions. There are four epidemiological forms of KS categorized as endemic KS, classic KS, and AIDS-associated KS and iatrogenic KS.

Classic or sporadic KS – This form of KS is commonly seen in elderly Jewish and Mediterranean, Eastern European HIV-negative men, and clinically less aggressive. The classic KS typically presents as an upper and lower limb skin lesion, sparing the lymph nodes and visceral. Iatrogenic KS – KS in organ transplantation, this is relatively less aggressive and presents with lymphadenopathy and visceral involvement. Epidemic or AIDS-associated KS – This is the most common and clinically aggressive form. Endemic KS – KS in Africa and highly aggressive KS in adults, lymphadenopathy in children.

**Primary Effusion Lymphomas (PELs)**PELs are rare lymphomatous effusions, also known as body cavity-based lymphoma (BCBL), and commonly associated with AIDS. It rarely occurs in individuals without HIV and is characterized as non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This disease is unique because it occurs as an effusion in the pleural, pericardial, or peritoneal cavities without the presence of a mass, although masses may occur in the lymph nodes, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract.

**Multicentric Castleman Disease (MCD)**MCD is a rare form of lymphoproliferative disorder, it has an estimated equal prevalence in both HIV/AIDS positive and negative patients. The virus can be isolated in almost all cases in the HIV infected population and about half the HIV negative patients.