Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) encompasses a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disabilities. This spectrum is characterized by repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, activities, and problems in social interactions. ASD is a complicated neurodevelopmental disorder that is characterized by behavioral and psychological problems in children. These children become distressed when their surrounding environment is changed because their adaptive capabilities are minimal. The symptoms are present from early childhood and affect daily functioning. Children with ASD have co-occurring language problems, intellectual disabilities, and epilepsy at higher rates than the general population.

Childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD), also called disintegrative psychosis and Heller syndrome, is a rare disorder that is subsumed under ASD. In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), childhood disintegrative disorder, along with other types of autism, is merged into a single spectrum called autism spectrum disorder. Childhood disintegrative disorder has a relatively late onset and is characterized by regression of previously acquired skills in the areas of social, language, and motor functioning. It is not known what causes this disease, and it is often seen that children who have this disorder have achieved normal developmental milestones before the regression of skills. The age at which this disease manifests is variable, but it is typically seen after three years of reaching normal milestones. The regression can be so fast that the child may be mindful of it, and in the beginning, may even ask what is going on with them. Some children may appear to be responding to hallucinations, but the most common and distinct feature of this disease is that the attained skills are gone.

Many children are already delayed when the disorder becomes apparent, but these delays are not always evident in young children. This condition has been described as a devastating disease that affects both the individual's life and the family.