**Preventing Future Attacks and an Interprofessional Team Approach**

Beyond the recovery period from an acute episode of status asthmaticus, the management goal should shift to an interprofessional team approach to help prevent future severe attacks. This team is comprised of clinicians (including NPs and PAs), specialists, nurses, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists, all collaborating to drive the best possible patient outcomes. [Level 5] It should start with extensive patient education from nurses, respiratory therapists, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and physicians about the pathophysiology of asthma, warning signs and symptoms, elimination and avoidance of triggers, and early identification and treatment of attacks. Inpatient education by respiratory therapists or nursing team about an asthma action plan, tools of self-assessment of severity with peak flowmetry, the appropriate technique of inhaler use, and relevant numbers to call for specialist help. Maintenance inhaler therapy should be appropriately addressed and assessed for the need for advanced immunotherapy based on the asthma phenotype and allergy profile.

Patients should be well-versed in detecting early warning signs at home and be well equipped to detect and address, based on the asthma action plan.

A 20% drop in PEFR below predicted or personal best is a good objective indicator.

Finally, patients with a history of anaphylaxis or sudden asphyxic asthma presentation should also be equipped with Epipen for immediate subcutaneous use if needed.

Health systems across the United States are endorsing the role of outpatient pharmacy in monitoring for patient compliance, as well as an increase in disease severity based on prescription refills. Bluetooth-enabled monitors to inhaler devices can be an answer to remote monitoring of rescue inhaler needs and effective use for physicians. An example of a similar sensor-enabled smart inhaler is the San Francisco based propeller health device.

**Outcomes and Evidence-based Medicine**

Over the years, several protocols and guidelines have been developed to manage patients with status asthmaticus. Overall, when the patient is brought to the emergency room and quickly managed according to a streamlined protocol, the outcomes are good.