The three primary sources for simulation evaluation are observational ratings of trainee performance, trainee responses, and haptic sensors.

The various simulation modalities available to an educator include human patient simulators, task trainers, SPs, and virtual reality/augmented reality. Task trainers represent one body part or structure and are useful for high-volume basic skills training. These are less expensive than the purchase of a full mannequin, easy to operate and allow repetition of specific skill sets. Disadvantages of task trainers include the frequent need for replacement, maintenance of parts due to high utilization, and a limited focus of training. Full human patient simulators include full-body mannequins of various sizes, race, sex, and age, and can be either high or low fidelity. While low fidelity mannequins are static, more cost-effective, and allow the practice of a specific skill, they lack realism and are unable to be utilized to gauge interpersonal skills. High-fidelity mannequins are more realistic in terms of their bodily functions, vital signs, and hemodynamic parameters, and are manipulable by an instructor. They are, unfortunately, more expensive to purchase and maintain, and require professional training and knowledge for successful operation.

SP’s are live actors that portray a role or specific medical condition. These actors can adapt or adjust to the learner’s level of expertise, and physical assessment skills are honed on a live person. The SP can also provide individualized feedback to the trainee. Unfortunately, such actors are expensive, may find it challenging to recruit and train, and may present logistical scheduling issues. Virtual reality (VR) or augmented reality simulation is a computer-generated three-dimensional interactive environment that provides an immersive effect for the learner.

Simulation-based mastery learning is a rigorous approach to competency-based education that involves learners taking a pretest, receiving timely instructor feedback following a simulation activity, and achieving a minimum score on a posttest. Implementation of mastery learning can be logistically challenging as it requires flexibility in both educator time and simulation space and equipment. In a randomized study of training for thoracentesis, internal medicine residents had fewer clinically significant pneumothoraces and no hemothoraces if they engaged in mastery learning versus those who trained traditionally.