A bladder diverticulum is suspected in all patients with symptoms such as recurrent infection, dysuria, and abdominal distension, suggesting bladder outlet obstruction and urinary retention. The initial evaluation of the bladder diverticulum requires a thorough medical history and physical examination, including a digital rectal examination. For men, prostate-specific antigen testing is done. The medical record should quantify the lower urinary tract to help reveal potential hidden neurological causes and any previous lower urinary tract surgery.

Urine analysis, urine culture, and urine cytology should be performed in most patients with bladder diverticula, especially when nonoperative therapy is explored. The urine abnormalities are prevalent in those patients where pyuria and hematuria are commonly found.

Radiographic and endoscopic results are primarily used to diagnose bladder diverticula. They are frequently discovered by chance during a radiographic evaluation and study of recurrent urinary tract infections or other non-specific lower urinary symptoms or signs. Fluoroscopically monitored voiding cystourethrography is a good test for detecting bladder diverticula because it provides information about the diverticulum's location, anatomy, and size. Other imaging modalities, such as cross-sectional imaging of the lower urinary system, aid in diagnosing bladder diverticula. Diverticula can be detected through endoscopic examination of the bladder. The entire diverticula should be checked for any stones or aberrant epithelium during this procedure.