The infant will be assessed sequentially by three criteria as listed below.

- Criteria 1: Infants > 36 weeks gestation with one out of the following four criteria:

- 
              
- Apgar scores less than five at ten minutes.
              
              
- The requirement for positive pressure ventilation, at ten minutes
              
              
- Umbilical cord pH or any arterial pH less than 7, within 1 hour of life
              
              
- Base Deficit more than 16 mmol/L in cord blood or arterial blood within 1 hour of life

- Criteria 2: If the infant meets criteria 1, then assess for modified Sarnat exam. The second criterion required to qualify for therapeutic hypothermia is moderate or severe encephalopathy, corresponding to stage 2 or 3 in the modified Sarnat exam.

- 
              
- In Sarnat stage 2, the neonate may be lethargic, hypotonic with strong distal flexion and overactive tendon reflex. They might have constricted pupils, bradycardia, weak primitive reflex, and periodic breathing. Seizures are common in this stage. 
              
              
- In Sarnat stage 3, the neonate may be stupor, flaccid with decerebrate posturing and diminished deep tendon reflexes. They might have absent primitive reflexes, dilated pupils, and apnea.

- Criteria 3: If the infant meets criteria I & II, we can start therapeutic hypothermia. If available, record amplitude-integrated electroencephalography (aEEG) for at least 20 minutes.
- electrical seizure activity with normal background
- Moderate abnormal background activity (<5uV and >10uV)
- Suppressed background activity (<5uV and <10uV)
- Continuous seizure activity