Reports of complications after elective inguinal hernia repair are approximately 10% overall. The most commonly reported complications are similar to those seen in other operations and include seroma, hematoma, urinary retention, and surgical site infection. Two serious complications directly related to an inguinal hernia are hernia recurrence and chronic pain.

**Hernia Recurrence**

Elective repair of an inguinal hernia has a low rate of recurrence overall. Recurrence with mesh repair is lower compared to recurrence with suture repair with rates of 3% to 5% and 10% to 15% respectively. Recurrence is associated with technical factors like improper mesh size, excessive tension on repair, missed hernias and tissue ischemia. Comorbidities associated with hernia recurrence are smoking, steroid use, diabetes, malnutrition, and chronic cough. As a general rule, re-operations are usually done laparoscopically for previous open repairs and open approach for previous laparoscopic hernia repairs. This facilitates easy exposure and dissection through a fresh plane without scar tissue and decreases injury and complications to cord structures and nerves.

**Chronic Pain**

Chronic pain following inguinal hernia repair is reported in approximately 10% of cases overall. It remains a challenging problem and has superseded hernia recurrence as the primary complication. In open repairs, identification, and protection of the ilioinguinal, genitofemoral, and iliohypogastric nerves are essential in the prevention of nerve entrapment injuries. In laparoscopic repairs, it is essential to avoid using tacks or sutures to secure the mesh inferior to the iliopubic tract beyond the external iliac artery as this can cause injury of the genitofemoral or lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. When a nerve is injured, it should be transected and ligated proximally. Treatment of chronic pain should be conservative, and a multidisciplinary approach is essential. Anti-inflammatory medications should be used as first-line agents. When these are unsuccessful nerve blocks may be implemented. Groin exploration with neurectomy of all three nerves may be necessary and may improve pain when other treatments have failed.