The International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD) recognizes over 200 headache disorders and divides them into three groups, which are primary, secondary, and painful cranial neuropathies.

All chronic headaches meet the criteria of occurring at least 15 times a month for at least three months, but both primary and secondary chronic headaches have unique characteristics.

Primary headaches lasting more than four hours include chronic migraines, tension headaches, persistent daily headaches, and hemicrania continua.

- Chronic migraine has typical features of being unilateral, pulsatile, moderate to severe, and may or may not have an aura.

- Chronic migraine in children and adolescents is often bilateral, and associated symptoms such as photophobia and phonophobia are often inferred from behavior.

- Chronic headaches, which are bilateral, non-pulsatile, and lack associated symptoms, are classified as chronic tension headaches.

- A new persistent daily headache (NDPH) occurs suddenly and becomes unremitting within 24 hours of onset. Patients typically have no prior history of headaches. NDPH is rare and refractory to treatment.

- Hemicrania continua is unilateral, has autonomic symptoms, and is continuous with exacerbations. Responsiveness to indomethacin helps distinguish this form of headache.

Primary headaches lasting less than four hours include chronic cluster headaches, neuralgiform headache attacks, and primary stabbing headaches.

- Chronic cluster headache varies from the acute form in that there are no remissions, and headaches must occur over at least one year. Headaches are unilateral in the trigeminal distribution and associated with unilateral autonomic symptoms. Patients often experience agitation during the headache.

- The short-lasting neuralgiform headaches include short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) and short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA). Both types have severe, unilateral pain associated with autonomic symptoms. In addition, SUNCT has both lacrimation and conjunctival injection. SUNA may have either but not both of those features and may be accompanied by rhinorrhea or nasal congestion.

- Primary stabbing headaches may frequently occur throughout the day. Sharp, sudden, jabbing pain occurs in the temporal or peri-orbital regions.

Secondary chronic daily headaches include medication overuse, CNS infection, CNS hematomas, intracranial tumor, raised intracranial pressure, low-pressure headache, vasculitis, aneurysms, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak.

- Chronic medication overuse headaches often overlap with other acute and chronic headache types. Analgesics are widely used for symptom control in migraine and tension headaches. Patients inadvertently increase headache frequency by overuse of analgesics. The ICHD further classifies this disorder based on the medications used, including NSAIDs, triptans, ergotamines, non-opioid, and opioid analgesics.

- The remainder of the secondary chronic headache etiologies is beyond the scope of this article.