**Chest radiograph:**

A chest radiograph is usually the initial imaging study to order, especially in an acute setting, to differentiate between cardiac and pulmonary etiologies of severe respiratory symptoms. The chest radiograph can also be used to distinguish different types of cardiomyopathy although it is not a sensitive test in the workup. In dilated cardiomyopathy, the chest radiograph will show increased left and right ventricular size. The chest radiograph can show evidence of cardiomegaly and increased cephalization, pleural effusion, and Kerley B-lines in the setting of acute congestive heart failure. Cardiomegaly on chest radiograph usually reflects the decreased ejection fraction, and the increased cephalization reflects increased preload. These can be helpful to establish a diagnosis of acute heart failure but are not adequate to confirm the diagnosis.

In peripartum cardiomyopathy, findings are consistent with other dilated cardiomyopathies including enlargement of the heart silhouette and increased pulmonary venous congestion with or without interstitial edema. In contrast, the chest radiograph in Chagas heart disease usually shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette, which is typically due to pericardial effusion.

**Echocardiography**

Echocardiogram remains the main imaging study in the workup for cardiomyopathy and to differentiate between the different types of cardiomyopathy. The ease of use and cost efficiency of echocardiogram comparing to other imaging studies has always made it the first choice in the evaluation of new-onset cardiomyopathy and follow up on the progress of the disease. The echocardiogram helps to evaluate the systolic and diastolic dysfunction, wall motion abnormalities, and valvular abnormalities. The sensitivity of the 2D echocardiogram is 81%, and the specificity is 100% in diagnoses of left ventricular dysfunction.

In dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the echocardiogram is an essential imaging test to make the diagnosis. The echocardiogram shows dilation with or without dysfunction of the left ventricle.

Abnormal global longitudinal strain (GLS) is a predictor of mortality in patients with systolic heart failure with decreased ejection fraction and is superior to other echocardiogram parameters as a prognostic measure.

In peripartum cardiomyopathy, there is a global decrease in the left ventricular systolic function with or without evidence of dilated ventricles. A left ventricular thrombus may occur when LVEF is less than 35%.

All patients with suspected hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) should be evaluated with an echocardiogram, to check the LV wall thickness, systolic and diastolic function, left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction, and presence of mitral regurgitation. Clinical diagnosis of HCM is possible with the finding of LV hypertrophy on echocardiogram.

Diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy by echocardiogram is more difficult than the diagnosis of hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies. The left ventricle usually is usually normal in size or small and associated with a normal left ventricular systolic function. These patients usually have an abnormal diastolic function with biatrial enlargement.

Echocardiogram has low sensitivity when used for workup of cardiac sarcoidosis. In systemic sarcoidosis, an echocardiogram can show abnormal findings in up to 46% of patients even if they are asymptomatic for cardiac disease; findings can include: diastolic dysfunction, abnormal wall motion, and wall thickness (increased in acute cardiac sarcoidosis and decreased in chronic).

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a cardiomyopathy that is caused by the fibrous-fatty replacement of myocardium of the right ventricle. Echocardiogram has limited sensitivity in the diagnosis of ARVC, it can show regional RV akinesia, dyskinesia, or aneurysm,