An increased number of cases of milk-alkali syndrome have been reported in the past decade. Clinicians should keep milk-alkali syndrome high on the differential when dealing with a patient presenting with hypercalcemia. Though generally asymptomatic and discovered incidentally, it can rapidly lead to the development of life-threatening hypercalcemia and alkalosis and may progress to renal failure if left untreated. Clinicians need to be well-versed in the causes, pathophysiology, complications, and management of hypercalcemia and alkalosis resulting from this disorder. Being a reversible condition, early management can prove to be life-saving.

An interprofessional team approach with effective communication between the members, including internists, endocrinologists, nephrologists, nurses, and pharmacists, is required to enhance patient care and improve outcomes. The various clinicians will guide the case, but nursing will play a crucial role in the case, assisting with patient assessment, counseling the patient on their condition and treatment, and helping coordinate the activities of the various specialists and other clinicians. Pharmacists will counsel patients on medication taken to treat the disease, as well as looking at which medications may lead to milk-alkali syndrome. They will also perform medication reconciliation to check for drug interactions. All care team members must maintain meticulous records on the patient and report any concerns or noted changes in the patient's condition to other team members. This interprofessional approach with open communication will yield the best possible patient results. [Level 5]