Due to the lack of specificity in a clinical presentation, more tests are needed to establish a diagnosis.

To evaluate for the presence of any pleural effusion, the first test that should be ordered is a chest x-ray. It is a widely available and simple test, but it is not 100% sensitive. A certain amount of fluid needs to be present to be detected, usually 75 ml in a lateral view, and approximately 175 ml in an anterior view. On an x-ray, some of the characteristics of a pleural effusion are blunted due to costodiaphragmatic angles and lungs filled with radiolucent fluid (depending on the size of the effusion).

If an effusion is suspected with the chest x-ray, the next step is an ultrasound. Ultrasound is increasingly common because of its benefits, namely because it is widely available, it can be done at a patient's bedside, it is more sensitive at identifying pleural effusions than an x-ray, it allows differentiation between parenchyma and pleural fluid, and it also has a therapeutic use. Ultrasound can be useful in guiding a chest tube placement during thoracentesis. Some empyema characteristics found with ultrasound are homogenous echogenicity, anechoic effusion with hyperechoic septation, pleural thickening and split pleural, separation of the parietal, and visceral pleural by the fluid.

CT scan of the chest must be done in patients with empyema. It may be an alternative option after a chest -ray or ultrasound. CT scan ideally is done with intravenous (IV) contrast to enhance the pleura. CT scan can also be diagnostic and therapeutic, thoracentesis and tube thoracotomy can be performed under this modality. Some of the characteristics on CT scan are thickening of the pleura (present in approximately 80% to 100% patients), pleural enhancement, split pleural sign, bubbles in the absence of tube drainage, and septations. With a CT scan practitioners can better assess the lung parenchyma and the position of a chest tube.

After thoracentesis, the obtained fluid should be sent for analysis and culture.

Pleural fluid cultures have poor sensitivity; this can improve if the fluid is not the only stored in sterile containers but also in blood culture bottles. Ideally, the culture fluids should be obtained from the thoracentesis, chest tube placements, or surgical intervention, but never from pre-existing drainages.

Pleural fluid analysis is not necessary for the diagnosis of empyema, as mentioned before the presence of pus, gram-positive bacteria, or cultures will yield the diagnosis; nevertheless, all pleural fluids should be sent for analysis.