# Introduction

Proteins in the body are produced by the cytoplasmic ribosomes and the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). The cytoplasmic ribosomes produce proteins necessary for cytoplasmic, mitochondrial, and peroxisomal functions. The RER produces the proteins required for endoplasmic, Golgi, and lysosomal functions. These proteins must be localized appropriately to carry out their intracellular and extracellular tasks. The process of directing proteins to their appropriate location is termed protein targeting.

# Fundamentals

Certain receptors recognize specific sequences in newly-produced proteins to bring the proteins to the necessary area. After the protein has been delivered, the receptors will be recycled for further use. Proteins made in the RER are sent to the Golgi through gaps in the RER membrane known as endoplasmic reticulum exit sites (ERES). After quality control at Golgi, misfolded proteins are sent back to the RER to go through a degradation pathway ending at the 26S proteasome. The adequately configured cargo is encircled at the ERES by COPII-coated vesicles.****The Sec16 gene maintains the ERES and the COPII vesicular transport. These vesicles are then taken to the RER-Golgi-intermediate compartment (ERGIC) to begin protein targeting.

The Golgi apparatus is a transit for approximately one-third of newly-formed proteins before reaching their final destination.cis (the side facing the RER), medial, and trans (the side facing the plasma membrane and opposite the cis side) compartments. The cis cisternae mature into the trans cisternae. The trans cisterna is continuous with the trans-Golgi network (TGN).

Described as a separate organelle, the TGN is responsible for routing proteins to their appropriate destinations.****Also known as the trans-Golgi reticulum, the TGN contains enzymes and compounds such as sialyltransferases, P-galactosyltransferase, and sialylated glycoconjugates.

Proteins enter the cis-Golgi, pass sequentially through all the cisternae, and leave through the TGN, which is the organelle's sorting component.****The TGN sends proteins to the plasma membrane, endosomes, or lysosomes. Pakdel and Blume concluded that sorting at the TGN occurs through a CaATPase SPCA1 channel which brings calcium into the lumen to be recognized by Cab45, a calcium-binding protein. Upon calcium binding, oligomerization and binding to specific proteins occur, differentiating cargo that remains in the Golgi from cargo that goes to other cellular locations.trans end of the Golgi carry the proteins to the endosomal system, which eventually end up in lysosomes.

Endosomes sequentially mature into lysosomes by first becoming early endosomes (sorting endosomes) and then late endosomes. The late endosomes become lysosomes by fusing with existing lysosomes.

Cargo delivery to the plasma membrane is dependent on GTP requiring ARF (ADP-ribosylation factor), GTPases (guanine triphosphatases), or Rab (Ras-associated binding) GTPases. The activity of either microtubules or actin directs the vesicles to the plasma membrane. Kinesins play a role in this route. The vesicles and granules fuse with the plasma membrane via the octameric exocyst complex composed of Sec3, Sec5, Sec6, Sec8, Sec10, Sec15, Exo70, and Exo84.****

# Cellular Level

The process of protein targeting begins with the synthesis of proteins and ends with their delivery. Depending on where the protein is produced and where it needs to be delivered determines the method of transport. Three protein-coated vesicles have been described in intracellular transport: COPI, COPII, and clathrin.

Apart from playing roles in vesicle formation, these three proteins decide which protein and lipid cargo are sent in each package.trans-SNARE complex by combining SNAREs on the surfaces of the vesicle (v-SNARE) and target site (t-SNARE), the energy barrier posed by the lipid bilayers is overcome, and the trans-SNARE complex is converted to a cis-SNARE complex on the target membrane.

Membrane fusion is completed by the SNARE complex in a zipper-like fashion by zippering from the distal N-terminal to the proximal C-terminal region. Before the fusion, the vesicle's coat must be slightly restructured, and this may happen reversibly by phosphorylation and ubiquitylation, but this needs further exploration. The cis-SNARE complex binds to the alpha-SNAP (soluble NSF-attachment protein) and the NSF (N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion) protein to create a 20S complex. The ATPase of the NSF breaks down ATP. This breaks up the union of the v-SNARE and t-SNARE, allowing them to be used again for membrane fusion.

**COPI**

COPI-coated vesicles participate in retrograde transport (cis-Golgi/ERGIC to RER). It is suggested that they also play a role in anterograde transport from the RER. Additionally, they have also been found in the post-Golgi compartment.

The membrane-anchored and myristoylated ARF1 GTPase brings the COPI components to the Golgi upon activation from ARF-GEFs (guanine nucleotide exchange factors).****The loaded COPI vesicles proceed to the RER via signals from the cytoplasmic or endoplasmic located multisubunit DSL1 tethering complex and SNARE proteins (syntaxin-18, Sec20, Sec22B, and Slt1). Long coiled-coil tethers are also involved in tethering. While multisubunit tethering complexes control vesicle targeting to membranes over shorter distances, long coiled-coil tethers target membranes over longer distances.

Examples of multisubunit tethering complexes include DSL1, COG, GARP, HOPS, CORVET, EXOCYST, and TRAPP (transport protein particle). The DSL1 complex is comprised of Dsl1, Tip20, and Dsl3/Sec39. TRAPP I, TRAPP II, and TRAPP III collectively participate in anterograde cargo transport from the RER to Golgi and are also involved in autophagy. Examples of long coiled-coil tethers include p115, Giantin, CASP, GM130, Golgin-97, Golgin-245, GCC185, and EEA1. Giantin, GM130, and p115 are involved in transport from the RER to the Golgi.

COPI is also uniquely involved in endosomal and lipid droplet functioning, mRNA transport, and the nuclear envelope's breakdown. The final step of COPI vesicle formation is the disassembly of the COPI complex by the activity of ARF GAPs (GTPase activating proteins).

COPI proteins are also involved with intra-Golgi trafficking and maintaining the structural integrity of the mammalian Golgi complex interface. COPI-coated vesicles perform most of the trafficking from the Golgi to the RER. However, it may not be the sole protein involved in this path since delivery of specific cargo like Shiga toxin, Shiga-like toxin, or certain glycosylation enzymes still occurred after blocking the recycling of ERD2 receptors or the VTC (vesicular-tubular clusters) markers.****Liquid lipid cargo such as sphingomyelin and cholesterol are excluded from COPI-coated vesicles due to the ability of membrane lipids to affect the construction of vesicles at various stages.****This also explains why the RER has less sphingomyelin and cholesterol when compared to thecis-Golgi.

**COPII**

COPII-coated vesicles participate in anterograde transport (RER to the Golgi). COPII may also be active beyond the Golgi since COPII proteins, Sec23 and Sec24, have been found on endosomes.****Assembly of the COPII complex is initiated by the Sar1 signal and mediated by the Sec12/PREB guanine nucleotide exchange factor.

These vesicles are approximately 60-100 nm in size. In-vitro knockdown studies have shown that the ability of COPII to accommodate large cargo, such as procollagen fibrils composed of a triple-helix matrix extending up to 400 nm, is due to the action of the transmembrane protein TANGO1. Another hypothesis suggests that a portion of the ERGIC is recruited and combined with the ERES, creating tubular uncoated buds capable of carrying large cargo. RAB GTPases, tethering factors, and SNARE proteins mediate vesicular movement and fusion. In mammals, tethering events are coordinated by RAB1, GM130, GRASP65, p115, and the TRAPP1 complex. COPII vesicles are formed by the COPII coat-mediated deformation of the RER.****COPII directs misfolded proteins to degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

**Clathrin**

Clathrin-coated vesicles are essential for lysosome biogenesis, endocytosis, retrograde transport (endosome-to-TGN), and anterograde transport (TGN-to-endosomes).

Clathrin-coated vesicles contain high amounts of MPR (mannose-6-phosphate receptors). The TGN is almost entirely populated by clathrin-coated vesicles, with COPI vesicles also present to a lesser extent. Clathrin adaptor proteins can be either monomeric or tetrameric. Clathrin adaptor protein 1 (AP1), a heterotetrameric protein, functions to form vesicles at the TGN, sort lysosomal hydrolases, and retrieve cargo like SNAREs, MPRs, sortilin, and furin.

The externalized LDL (low-density lipoprotein) receptor takes LDL into the cell via clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Once LDL binds to its receptor, a clathrin-coated pit forms, which moves the LDL receptor-ligand complex intracellularly. Clathrin dissociates from these vesicles and then goes back to the plasma membrane for further use.

# Molecular Level

**Transport of Lysosomal Proteins (Enzymes)**

Lysosomal hydrolases are made in the RER and then carried through several organelles before reaching their target.cis-Golgi along with N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase.cis-Golgi to the trans-Golgi.

G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase is a hexameric enzyme complex composed of two alpha and two beta subunits encoded by the GNPTAB gene and two gamma subunits encoded by GNPTG. The alpha and beta subunits are synthesized as alpha/beta precursors. The enzyme subunits are assembled in the RER and are then sent to the Golgi apparatus. The alpha/beta precursor is then disassembled into individual alpha and beta subunits by a site-1 protease. The gamma-subunit enhances the M6P post-translational modification activity of G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase by binding to the alpha-subunit.

The mannose residue on newly formed hydrolase enzymes acquires a phosphomannosyl targeting signal in the cis-Golgi by transferring G1cNAc phosphate from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine. To expose the M6P in the TGN, the outer phosphodiester-linked N-acetylglucosamine is removed by N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase, which is an uncovering enzyme.

There are two types of MPRs named according to their molecular mass. MPR46 (cation dependent/CD) and MPR300 (cation independent/CI) are 46 and 300 kDa, respectively. MPR300 is identical to the human insulin-like growth factor (IGF) II receptor, and therefore it is also referred to as the M6P/IGF II receptor. MPRs is a type 1 integral membrane proteins. Initially, the receptor-enzyme complex is sent to a prelysosomal compartment and then to the lysosome. Upon reaching the lysosome, the acidic intralysosomal pH assists in dissociating the enzymes from the attached MPRs. The detached MPRs are then recycled back to the Golgi for later use.

Retromer, Rab9, and TIP47 mediate the recycling process.

In the study by DiCioccio et al., which focused on pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy and ICD, there were normal intracellular and intralysosomal concentrations of specific lysosomal enzymes. This led to the investigation of alternate trafficking pathways, including the M6P-independent path. Both diseases are due to decreased levels of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. DiCioccio et al. found that most enzymes in ICD and pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy cells, which did not have the M6P signal, were still localized to the lysosome.

Lysosomal integral membrane protein type 2 (LIMP-2/SCARB2) is the MPR-independent trafficking receptor responsible for beta-glucocerebrosidase transport.cis-Golgi to the trans-Golgi and is taken to the lysosome, where the acidic pH disconnects the complex.

LIMP types I, III,10, 12, and 39 also cross the Golgi in an anterograde fashion. The lack of involvement of beta-glucocerebrosidase in the M6P-dependent trafficking pathway accounts for its normal serum levels in ICD. The identification that LIMPs can transport to lysosomes in the presence of tunicamycin, a drug that blocks the traditional transport of hydrolases, further adds evidence that LIMP transport is not coupled with that of soluble hydrolases and to the fact of the existence of an MPR-independent pathway.

Cathepsin D, alpha-glucosidase, and acid phosphatase are other enzymes using this lesser-used delivery system.

**Protein Targeting and the Signal Recognition Particle**

The signal recognition particle (SRP) is a cytoplasmic protein-targeting device that targets the hydrophobic signal sequences of newly forming proteins from ribosomes and brings them to the RER.****SRP is composed of a 7S RNA and a signal sequence recognizing protein; therefore, it is deemed a ribonucleoprotein.****SRP is regulated by GTPases present within itself and its receptor. After the SRP binds to the signal peptide of the translating protein from the ribosome, a complex cumulatively termed ribosome nascent chain complex (RNC), the RNC then interacts with the SRP receptor on the RER membrane. The binding of SRP with the RNC results in the halting of further peptide elongation.****After the translation of the protein is complete, a signal peptidase separates the signal peptide leaving the completely translated protein in the RER lumen.

**Protein Targeting to Other Organelles**

Macromolecules enter and leave the nucleus through gaps called nuclear pore complexes (NPC).

The peroxisomal proteins are trafficked post-translationally from the cytosol since the peroxisome has no DNA.

PTS1 and PTS2 proteins are then carried inside the peroxisomes. The PTS and Pex complex dissociates, leading to the Pex receptor being recycled back to the cytoplasm for later use. To leave the peroxisome, ubiquitin is first added to Pex5 by E3 ligase.

Cytoplasmic ribosomes translate mRNA into proteins which then target the mitochondria. These proteins need to have an amino-terminal targeting sequence to target the mitochondria. These protein sequences then allow for the localization of the protein to either the outer membrane, intermembrane space, or across the inner membrane into the mitochondrial matrix.

A TOM complex, present in the outer membrane, is a translocase responsible for the translocation of proteins into the mitochondria by recognizing the amino-terminal targeting sequence by the TOM receptors (Tom20 and Tom22). The TIM23 complex, present in the inner membrane, handles the import of proteins that localize to and cross the inner membrane.

Tim21 is a subunit of TIM23 that regulates TIM23 and is involved with tethering the TOM and TIM23 complexes. Tim21 is not necessary for the early stages of tethering; therefore, TIM23 complexes without Tim21 function with subunits of the PAM complex instead. Components of the PAM complex include Hsp70 and Pam18. Pam18, through interactions with the Tim17 subunit, links the PAM and TIM23 complexes. Once the protein has entered the mitochondrial matrix, Tim21 replaces the PAM complex. The PAM complex does not completely dissociate from the inner mitochondrial membrane, and it is assumed to tightly binds alternate tight-sites on Tim17 with Tim21 binding in between.

# Testing

**Prenatal Diagnosis**

The autosomal recessive nature of ICD means a higher risk of inheritance among consanguineous families. In a case series performed by Okada et al., eight out of the 18 families had consanguinity. Five families were first cousins, two were second cousins, and one family had grandmothers who were both first cousins.

Manifestations of ICD are recognized at birth, with death occurring within the first decade of life at an average of five years.

Aula et al. was the first group to comment on prenatal diagnosis in ICD. They suggested prenatal diagnosis be made by checking the levels of lysosomal hydrolases in extracellular fluids. They assayed enzymes N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase, N-acetyl-beta-galactosaminidase, beta-glucosidase, beta-galactosidase, alpha-mannosidase, and N-aspartyl-beta-glucosaminidase from samples of amniotic fluid, amniotic cells, fetal skin fibroblasts, and placental fibroblasts. When the amniotic fluid levels of these enzymes were compared with the enzyme levels from a normal pregnancy, there were several-fold increases in the ICD-affected pregnancy. They recorded a 5-fold increase in the levels of beta-galactosidase, a 7-fold increase in the levels of beta-glucosidase and alpha-mannosidase, a 6-to-10 fold increase in the levels of N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase, and an 8-to-20 fold increase in the levels of N-acetyl-beta-galactosaminidase. However, the enzyme levels of beta-glucosidase were decreased in the amniotic cells and fetal fibroblasts. The other enzymes showed similar changes. The characteristic cytoplasmic inclusions were also present in amniotic cell cultures and fetal fibroblasts. The amniotic cell cultures had a smaller amount of inclusions when compared to the fetal fibroblasts.

Hexosaminidase is another enzyme that may be elevated in maternal serum. As a diagnostic marker, Hug et al. suggested that mothers with a more than 15-fold increase in the serum levels of hexosaminidase, compared with enzyme levels in normal maternal serum, were likely to bear a child with ICD. They believed the proximity between the maternal serum and the trophoblastic cells played a role in the elevation of the serum level of the enzyme.

Parvathy et al. devised a trimester-based prenatal diagnostic plan. First-trimester prenatal diagnosis can be performed by demonstrating the intracellular deficiency of G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase from a chorionic villus specimen, with the second-trimester diagnosis being established by looking for the enzyme deficiency within amniotic fluid cells. The trimester-based diagnosis was reinforced by looking for the intracellular lack and extracellular elevation of several lysosomal enzymes in fetal cell cultures and enzyme elevations in maternal serum. Confirmatory tests should be performed when the initial testing is indefinite or when the sample is insufficient. Prenatal diagnosis based on enzyme elevation can be similarly applied to Hunter syndrome and Tay-Sachs disease.

Owada et al. suggest that relying on enzyme elevations, detection of inclusion bodies, and measuring uptake of radioactive material may not be as reliable or realistic to perform due to their time-consuming natures. Elevations of lysosomal enzymes in normal amniotic fluid may be present depending on the gestational age. Their study emphasizes the value of finding altered characteristics of enzymes rather than altered levels of enzymes. Concerning alpha-mannosidase, its Km in high-risk pregnancies had values ranging from 1.20 to 1.46 x 10^-3 mol/l, whereas the value in non-high-risk pregnancies had values of 2.63 x 10^-3 mol/l and 3.03 x 10^-3 mol/l. The alpha-mannosidase from high-risk pregnancies also had a relative resistance to heat as two of their samples functioned normally while being heated to 56 degrees Celsius for 20 minutes. Further, the enzyme showed an optimal pH of 3.5 compared with the control's pH of 5.

Examination of the placenta may also provide clues pointing to ICD. The macroscopic examination may not show distinguishing features, but the syncytiotrophoblast layer will show characteristic inclusions. The cytotrophoblast layer may be normal.

Pregnancy may be complicated by polyhydramnios or end poorly with stillbirth and infant death.

With such non-invasive and safer methods, patients may not need invasive prenatal testing. However, these ultrasound findings are not pathognomic as several other aneuploidies, such as Turner syndrome and Down syndrome, may also show the same features. Achondroplasia, Russell-Silver syndrome, and Shprintzen syndrome also add to the differentials based on imaging findings alone.

In a mother without a previous history of having a fetus with an ICD, ultrasound identification of such features cannot guarantee a diagnosis. Further adding to the uncertainty behind this method, clinical suspicion of ICD should warrant additional ultrasound examinations as the routine 20-week ultrasound assessment may not identify these features.

In the report by Lees et al., their patient had a routine 20-week ultrasound, with the 30-week ultrasound showing femurs below the 5th percentile and an increased echogenicity surrounding the periosteum of the humerus and femur. They decided to perform a 30-week ultrasound due to the mother's previous history of delivering a baby with ICD and because the patient developed polyhydramnios in the presenting pregnancy.

Yuksel et al. suggest that a prenatal diagnosis of ICD should be considered even in mothers without a family history of ICD. Chromosomal analysis may help rule out other differentials. They ascertain a definite diagnosis by measuring the G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity in chorionic villi or cultured amniocytes.

**Diagnosis**

History of a mother having a baby with ICD in the past or having a baby with dysmorphic features matching those of ICD may warrant subsequent investigation. The diagnosis is usually made between 6 months to 12 months of age.

The clinical and lab reporting similarities between ICD and rickets often lead to late recognition. The similarities may be attributable to the exact chromosome location (chromosome 12) of the genes encoding the GNPTAB and the vitamin D receptor. The significance of the proximity has to be explored further. Though similar PTH (parathyroid hormone) and calcidiol levels can be seen in both ICD and rickets, an exaggerated decrease in calcidiol and increased PTH point more towards the latter.

# Pathophysiology

In 1972, Hickman and Neufeld

The term 'mucolipidosis' covers diseases belonging to both mucopolysaccharidoses and sphingolipidoses.

Of the two genes encoding the functional components of G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase, GNPTAB has been connected with the mutations causing ICD. Mutations like frameshift, nonsense, splicing defects, missense, and deletions/duplications/insertions lead to the production of a stop codon 80% of the time. The stop codon forms an incomplete and dysfunctional enzyme or may lead to truncated enzyme subunits.

Although the mutation variants are evenly spread throughout GNPTAB, approximately 25% of the mutations are in the 1112-bp exon 13. Clinical severity correlates with the level of enzyme activity. Absent or severely reduced GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity due to strong alterations of GNPTAB leads to the severe ICD phenotype. Having residual enzyme activity (approximately 10%) due to at least one GNPTAB allele being active is associated with the less severe ML III alpha/beta disease.

Patients with ML III can survive into their adulthood, whereas patients with ML II often die within the first decade of life. ML III is divided into ML IIIA (pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy) and ML IIIC (variant pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy). In ML IIIA, the G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity is reduced. In ML IIIC, G1cNAc-1-phosphate transfer to alpha-methylmannoside is normal, but the transfer to lysosomal substrates is reduced.

The lysosomal enzymes, lacking the M6P signal, cannot be sensed by the receptors in the TGN, so further targeting of the endosome/lysosome system cannot be carried out.

Braulke et al. found that I-cell fibroblasts have twice as many MPRs and a higher affinity for M6P and IGF II than normal fibroblasts. The increase in receptors is due to increased mRNA expression of MPRs in I-cells. The receptor count in I-cells remained relatively stable under the influence of substances that increased the surface receptor count.

In ICD, lysosomal enzymes like glycosidases and sulfatases, among several others, are improperly sorted and targeted, leading to their extracellular accumulation. Lysosomes become dysfunctional and enlarged due to nondegradable macromolecules such as cholesterol, phospholipids, and glycosaminoglycans. This disrupts cellular functioning and homeostasis.

The inclusions of ICD have been described extensively from microscopic studies of cultured fibroblasts.

Both types of inclusions are often found within the same cell. In the study by Aula et al., fibroblasts, primitive mesenchymal cells like macrophages, and endothelial and perithelial cells contained the inclusions, whereas epithelial and glandular cells did not. A peculiarity was found by identifying numerous type 1 inclusions and some type 2 inclusions in the glomerular podocytes of the kidney, which are differentiated epithelial cells.

**Apoptosis**

Apoptosis is programmed cell death that can occur via two different pathways (mitochondrial and death receptor pathways). Lysosomes play a role in the progression of apoptosis, particularly with the release of proteases such as cathepsin D.****As a result of the misdirection of various lysosomal enzymes in ICD, apoptosis still occurs but is delayed. This is related to the lower activities of cathepsins D, B, and L in I-cells compared to normal fibroblasts, as found by Terman et al. The same group performed a series of experiments that assessed I-cells' ability to undergo apoptosis compared to normal fibroblasts. Their group found that apoptotic inducers such as MSDH, staurosporine, and naphthazarin had a decreased effect on I-cells. The self-destruction process was reduced when using apoptotic inhibitors leupeptin and pepstatin A on staurosporine-treated normal fibroblasts. No significant change was noted when the same experiment was performed on I-cells.

# Clinical Significance

**Epidemiology**

A high concentration of cases is present in the Saguenay Lac-Saint-Jean region of Quebec, Canada, with a prevalence of 1/6,000 live births.

Worldwide, however, the prevalence is estimated to be between 1/100,000 to 400,000.

**Clinical Features**

ICD is characterized by a multisystemic involvement with prominent bony abnormalities. Table 1 shows the various manifestations and clinical features of ICD. The presence of corneal clouding is variable. When ICD was first considered in 1967 by Leroy et al., two patients did not have corneal clouding or excessive urinary secretion of acid mucopolysaccharides. The absence of these features helped distinguish Hurler syndrome from ICD. Other studies report that the corneas may be clear.

Patients with ICD often have a developmental delay, of which motor delay is more prominent than cognitive delay.

In contrast, Okada et al. reported several cases to have exceptional levels of cognitive development where children were independent, toilet-trained, had good academic performance, were able to sing songs, and recognized foreign words. Autopsy studies on patients with ICD have not revealed any brain abnormalities.

Taber et al. suggest that hepatomegaly is a feature mainly identified with Hurler syndrome. However, other reports have identified liver enlargement in patients with ICD.

**Table 1:Clinical Features of ICD**

Craniosynostosis, hip dysplasia, shoulder dislocation, congenital hip dislocation, pseudoacetabulum, rickets, thoracic deformity, kyphosis, lumbar gibbus deformity, clubfeet, premature fusion of metopic suture, multiple joint contractions, long tubular bone deformities, osteopenia, fractures, median nerve compression due to tendon nodules, restricted range of movements of shoulders, elbows, and wrists, flexed fingers (claw-like deformity), relative sparing of lower limbs (apart from skin thickening and hip dislocation)

Mucosal thickening of airways, airway obstruction, anterolaterally displaced airway, and thoracic cage stiffening contribute to respiratory insufficiency (a common cause of death), infections/bronchopneumonia

**Bony and Radiological Abnormalities**

Dysostosis multiplex is the broad term that encompasses the skeletal abnormalities of ICD. General x-ray findings are demineralization, osteopenia, coarse trabecular bones, and periosteal cloaking (predominantly long bones).

Bone dysplasia with shortened and curved bones is considered a prenatal manifestation of ICD. Deformities of the vertebral bodies may show anterior beaking, leading to abnormal spinal curvatures.

The cellular causes underlying the bony features of ICD may be due to the excessive formation of normal osteoclasts (osteoclastogenesis) and subsequent destruction of bone along with the subfunctional activity of osteoblasts. The increased osteoclasts are due to the osteoblasts producing the osteoclastogenic cytokine IL-6.

These patients had normal extracellular calcium levels with an elevated PTH, indicating that the parathyroid glands compensated to overcome the prenatal calcium deficiency.

Using a mouse model, Unger et al. suggested that a receptor other than the CASR is responsible for recognizing and coupling the signal of fetal PTHrP to the transplacental transfer of calcium.

**Differential Diagnosis**

Mucopolysaccharidoses, ML III, rickets, and osteogenesis imperfecta are other conditions to consider before diagnosing a patient with ICD.

**Treatment**

Treatment for ICD is mainly supportive and symptomatic, as there is no definitive treatment.

**Medical Management**

Bisphosphonate therapy has been used in those with profound bony involvement and decreased bone mineral density (z score <-2.5). Bisphosphonates work by reducing the activity of the numerous osteoclasts in ICD, reducing bone resorption. Bone marrow transplants affect both skeletal growth and cognitive development. A positive association between the duration of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and skeletal growth was seen in ICD. However, the benefits of ERT are limited to the viscera and are restricted in their effects on the bones and brain. The real challenge with ERT is creating multiple recombinant lysosomal enzymes already having the M6P residues.

Vitamin D supplementation may help with bone manifestations as well. Pazzaglia et al. reported two cases of ICD with radiological images of metabolic bone disease.

Genistein is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of epidermal growth factor that reduces glycosaminoglycans like heparan sulfate. Genistein usage at 5 mg/kg/day showed an improved range of motion of joints and increased elasticity. Genistein's estrogen-like effect may play a role in its benefits to bone health.****The drawback with genistein is decreased cellular growth, hypothesized to be due to its interference with cellular growth factors.

**Surgical Management**

In cases of acute airway obstruction, using a video laryngoscope may be more helpful to secure the airway, as laryngeal mask airways only provide temporal placement with questionable success.

**Other Treatment Methods**

Matos et al. devised a novel therapeutic strategy to reduce G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity instead of absent enzyme activity by skipping exon 19 on GNPTAB.

**Other Disorders of Protein Targeting**

Based on previous literature, protein targeting has been implicated in neurodegeneration, several infections, and other metabolic disorders. LIMP-2 is concerned with the pathogenesis of hand, foot, and mouth disease by acting as a cell membrane receptor for entering enterovirus 71 and coxsackievirus 16.

Cholera toxin, Pseudomonas exotoxin, Shiga toxin, and ricin use the retrograde endosome-to-TGN pathway to avoid lysosomal degradation. These AB-type toxins use the B fragment to bind to the cell surface, allow the active A component to enter the cell, and use the endosome-to-TGN pathway. Manganese (specific to Shiga toxin) and Retro-1 or 2 (small molecular compounds) are protective against these toxins, as seen in cultured cells and animals.Nef, a virulence factor for HIV-1, disrupts the trafficking of MHC-I, thereby preventing the destruction of virion-infected cells by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis and COPI play roles in the infectivity of the Dengue virus. The acidic pH of the endosomes creates an optimal environment for integrating the virus with the endosomal membrane, leading to the release of the viral genetic material into the cytoplasm for further viral growth.

Neurons are susceptible to trafficking defects due to the long distances the cargo must travel and the requirement of exact localization. A unique feature of neurons is that membrane and secretory neuronal proteins often bypass the Golgi and go to the plasma membrane. Whether this feature increases the susceptibility for targeting defects remains to be known. Neuronal targeting defects cause diseases like epilepsy, hyperekplexia, and ataxia. Alpha-Synuclein, the predominant component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson's disease, is responsible for inhibiting RER-to-Golgi trafficking. This leads to its toxic cellular accumulation. Increases in RAB1, a modifier of alpha-Synuclein activity, have reduced neuron loss in animal models of Parkinson's disease. Patients with developmental disorders may have mutations of TRAPPC6A, TRAPPC6B, and TRAPPC9. Mutations of TRAPPC2L and TRAPPC12 can cause encephalopathy.

Neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques characterize Alzheimer's disease. The main component of these plaques is beta-amyloid. Beta-amyloid is formed by the beta-cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE).

Other studies have shown that blocking proteolysis with protease inhibitors or removing gamma-secretase using a presenilin knock-out leads to APP collection within the lysosomes.

Sortilin is one of many trafficking proteins. One of its functions is to act as a sorting receptor for PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/Kexin type 9) in lipid metabolism. PCSK9 degrades LDL receptors and is inhibited by medications like alirocumab and evolocumab to achieve cholesterol control. The sortilin-related receptor with A-type repeats (SorLA) is associated with Alzheimer's disease. Murine models lacking SorLA will have increased levels of beta-amyloid. Overexpression of SorLA can lead to the accumulation of APP in the Golgi, impeding its further cleavage.

A mutation of SEC31A, a component of COPII, can lead to intrauterine growth retardation, developmental delay, and seizures. A receptor molecule involved with COPII functioning is cTAGE5. A proline-to-alanine replacement in cTAGE5, showing a variant known as P521A, is a risk factor for developing Fahr disease.