Nutrient exchange involving osteocytes may nourish a chain of approximately 15 cells. Processes involving adjacent cells allow contact with gap junctions; molecules pass intracellularly via these structures. The small amount of extracellular substance between the bone matrix and osteocytes may instigate a few molecular exchanges between blood vessels and osteocytes. Osteocytes are actively involved in the perseverance of the bony matrix; osteocytic necrosis leads to resorption of the bony matrix. Despite their inert qualities, osteocytes perform molecular modification and synthesis along with signal transmission over long distances. After a bone fracture, for instance, osteocytic glutamate transporters compose nerve growth factors, proving their ability to sense and transfer information. Matured osteocytes are the most common cells in bone tissues, and the majority of receptor activities involved with bone function are available in these cells. Osteocytic necrosis also leads to trabecular bone decay, decreased bone formation, and malfunctioning loading.

Osteocytes also control osteoblastic and osteoclastic activities within a basic multicellular unit (BMU), a transient anatomic structure for insulating bone remodeling. Osteocytic proteins like sclerostin contribute to mineral metabolism aside from other molecules such as  MEPE, FGF-23, PHEX, and DMP-1, which help to regulate phosphate and biomineralization. Osteocytes also regulate bone mass and act as an essential endocrine regulator of phosphate metabolism.