**Clinical Testing**

It is important to understand stereognosis assessments in general sensory function due to the dependent relationship between cortical sensory processing and afferent sensation. Tests of peripheral sensation often include sensation to light touch (using fingertip palpation or cotton swab), pain (alternating between relatively sharp and dull stimuli), temperature (often using a cool metallic object), vibration (using a tuning fork), and two-point discrimination (using calipers). If all of these functions are intact, the patient's cortical sensory function can then undergo assessment. To test stereognosis specifically, clinicians often perform a tactile object recognition (TOR) test. The TOR test involves asking the patient to close their eyes, place a series of common objects in the patient's hand, and ask him or her to identify the object. The objects frequently used in the TOR test include a pen, key, comb, and paperclip. If the patient can recognize the object placed in their hand, their stereognosis is said to be intact. If they are unable to identify the object despite having an intact peripheral sensory function, they are said to have astereognosis.

**Astereognosis**

Astereognosis indicates that a patient is suffering from a lesion of the primary somatosensory cortex or somatosensory association area of the parietal lobe; this is commonly described as a cortical sensory loss. As previously discussed, afferent sensory fibers located in the periphery decussate before reaching the cerebral cortex, which means that defects in these cortical processing regions will produce contralateral deficits. Fine motor functions involved with activities of daily living, such as feeding one's self, require coordination between sensory and motor processing areas of the cortex. Therefore, defects in the processing of haptic information can result in difficulty performing activities of daily living and impede the recovery of patients with cortical injuries. Many conditions precipitate astereognosis, including but not limited to cortical dementias, cerebral palsy, cerebrovascular stroke, and meningioma.

**Cerebrovascular Strokes**

Between 2013 and 2016, approximately 7 million Americans reported having a stroke, with a significant proportion of these individuals (17%) being above the age of 85. It is widely recognized that the motor and sensory deficits following strokes, including cortical sensory modalities like stereognosis, represent a large portion of the burden of disease and recovery. With the high prevalence of cerebrovascular strokes, there is a great opportunity for improving outcomes and recovery. This is of particular interest in the elderly populations who tend to have poorer outcomes. In cases of cortical sensorimotor stroke, tracking recovery and rehabilitation status often include an assessment of tactile object recognition. Also, many of the therapeutic modalities that allow stroke patients to regain their functional status focus on sensory discrimination and recognition skills. Thus, stereognosis provides great clinical utility in prognostication and maximizing sensorimotor recovery following cerebrovascular strokes.