The RGEA and LGEA serve as notable landmarks when identifying anatomy inside the abdomen. The distal vessels are usually visible both laparoscopically and during open operations. The stomach can be located cephalad to these vessels and the omentum caudad. Penetrating traumatic injury can compromise the RGEA and LGEA, causing copious bleeding. Damage of this type would require prompt surgical intervention to control hemorrhage.

**GEA aneurysms**

One of the rarest types of aneurysms is a visceral artery aneurysm, and GEA aneurysms make up roughly 3.5% of all visceral artery aneurysms. The most frequent etiology is atherosclerotic disease. The aneurysm is typically asymptomatic; thus, diagnosis is commonly made only after rupture. If a non-ruptured lesion is incidentally found, the recommendation is to have an elective repair performed because the vessel has a high risk of complication and likelihood of future rupture.

**Esophagectomy**

The RGEA and LGEA both donate blood flow to the stomach and therefore are useful in the creation of a gastric tube during an esophagectomy. Many physicians who perform this procedure choose to preserve the RGEA for blood supply when other vessels are ligated to mobilize the stomach. The RGEA can supply enough blood to serve as the main source of blood for a reconstructed stomach. One anatomic study measuring resins injected into the vasculature of 30 cadavers showed that the RGEA (and its branches) directly supplied 60% of the gastric tube post-esophagectomy. The LGEA and anastomotic branches supplied another 20% of the gastric tube.

**Cardiac Grafting/Physiology**

The RGEA is an appropriate and dependable graft for coronary bypass surgery and has been shown to undergo less arteriosclerosis than other graft vessel candidates.