Based on the pathophysiology, there are many potential targets for treatment in ischemia-reperfusion injury. The therapeutic targets include complement depletion, attenuating the excess ROS, mitigating the effects of inflammatory cascades, and inhibiting leukocyte activation and platelet recruitment.

1. Since the prolonged ischemia and the subsequent I/R injury associated with recanalization are closely intertwined with the proinflammatory conditions, it is a theoretical possibility to deal with this proinflammatory state with glucocorticoids.

2. ROS, which is to be blamed for much oxidative stress associated with ischemia, also increases manifold during the reperfusion injury beyond the cellular milieu's ability to contain this excess production. Studies have shown that hydrogen gas's inhalation has attenuated the mitochondrial pore formation and eventual mitochondrial cell death and apoptosis. Inhalation of Hydrogen gas has been proposed to mop up these free ROS. The main premise behind Hydrogen gas supplementation as a treatment possibility is that the H2 gas will react with the ROS to form free water, thus attenuating the ROS's toxicity.

3. A Rho-kinase inhibitor aimed at inhibiting the NADH oxidase and further limiting ROS production has shown promise in rat models of I/R injury, as did Apocynin.

4. In animal models of cerebral ischemia, hyperbaric oxygen treatment has helped mitigate MMP-2 led injury and inhibited apoptosis. Hypothermia, inhalation of isoflurane, and non-invasive vagal nerve stimulation have all showed positive effects in mitigating the damage caused by activated MMP in ischemic tissue.

The failure of the aforementioned substances in clinical trials versus their apparent successes in animal studies reverts us to a fundamental question of the validity of the animal models of ischemia and whether they can simulate and be compared to human cerebral ischemia. Nevertheless, expanding research in targeted treatments and modern, functional, and temporal neuroimaging abilities holds a future promise.

I/R injury could be prevented by proper assessment with perfusion studies to assess the risk-benefit aspects from reperfusion therapies and prevent any unintended consequences of recanalizing a thrombosed cerebral vessel. The finding of HARM is associated with permeability changes to the blood-brain barrier in acute stroke. Breach of the BBB may evolve into HT and may further and frequently lead to neurological instability. Better outcomes are associated with immediate admission to a dedicated neuroscience intensive care.

Supportive management of an I/R injury could include aiming for normovolemia, normotension, avoidance of hypoglycemia, antiepileptic drugs (can be considered if there are any seizures), and maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure >70mmHg, amongst others. If there is significant edema associated with clinical decompensation, the use of osmotic therapies like mannitol and/or hypertonic saline can be considered. On the contrary, Mannitol could also increase hemorrhagic risk due to vessel damage and its osmotic effect.