The arterial blood supply for the small intestine first comes from the celiac trunk and the superior mesenteric artery (SMA).

- The superior pancreaticoduodenal artery is fed from the gastroduodenal artery, which branches from the proper hepatic artery, which is traceable back to the celiac trunk. It anastomoses with the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, which comes from the SMA, to supply blood to the duodenum.

- The jejunum and ileum receive their blood supply from a rich network of arteries that travel through the mesentery and originate from the SMA. The multitude of arterial branches that split from the SMA is known as the arterial arcades, and they give rise to the vasa recta that deliver the blood to the jejunum and ileum.

The venous blood mimics that of the arterial supply, which coalesces into the superior mesenteric vein (SMV), which then joins with the splenic vein to form the portal vein.

Lymphatic drainage starts at the mucosa of the small intestine, into nodes next to the small intestine in the mesentery, to nodes near the arterial arcades, then to nodes near the SMA/SMV. Lymph then flows into the cisterna chyli and then up the thoracic ducts, and then empties into the venous system left internal jugular, and subclavian veins meet. The lymphatic drainage of the small intestine is a major transport system for absorbed lipids, the immune defense system, and the spread of cancer cells coming from the small intestine, explaining Virchow’s node enlargement from small intestine cancers.