Once the crystalline lens is surgically excised from the eye, the overall power of the eye has lessened. A high-powered plus (eyeglass, contact, or intraocular) lens is necessary to focus light onto the retina. Eyeglasses cause relative magnification of the image subtended on the retina. For a patient with bilateral aphakia, eyeglasses can work well if the level of difference does not exceed three diopters.

Even with a balanced prescription, patients may complain of diplopia from induced prism when looking off-axis, a ring scotoma or "jack-in-the-box" effect, or cosmetic concerns from the lens magnification. Certain eyeglass materials in high prescriptions cause colorful distortions when viewing lights, known as chromatic aberrations.

When electing to use eyeglasses as the preferred method of vision correction, the eyecare provider should carefully consider several things. First, is the frame selection; a larger frame produces a thicker lens centrally, making the eyeglasses heavier and possibly harder to tolerate. Avoiding rimless or semi-rimless frames is typically advised. One option is to offer a lenticulated carrier for high-plus lenses.

Often young children younger than 4 years are purposely over-plussed meaning slightly overcorrected for nearsightedness, to compensate for the potential development of hyperopia (farsightedness) as they grow. This over-correction resulting in mild myopia is ideal given the small stature and short working distance of infants and toddlers. Once children reach age 4, it is crucial to include bifocal correction to promote clear images at both distance and near. Recall that patients with aphakia lack accommodation and cannot focus in near-field vision. Therefore, these patients may require prescriptions for various focal distances. This may come in the form of multiple pairs of eyeglasses or multifocal correction. Lined bifocals, including flat-top, round segment, and executive designs, have been utilized, but progressive addition lenses could be considered once the child is considered mature enough to use these effectively.

Ultimately, contact lenses and intraocular implantation are frequently utilized to reduce the effects of relative spectacle magnification. RGP contact lenses tend to be the preferred form of contact lens correction due to their small size and rigid material, making lens application and removal easier in pediatric cases.

The evolution of silicone hydrogel in soft materials has made these lens options perfectly acceptable. RGP contact lenses remain the most ideal form of correction, particularly in traumatic cases that result in the irregularity of the corneal surface. Any induced irregular corneal astigmatism would be masked by the RGP contact lens and, thus, is the preferred modality.

In the absence of a crystalline lens, there is greater exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UV). Thus, UV protection is an important consideration. While the sunglasses may not have a refractive correction, it is important to remind patients of this protective eyewear. Lastly, in patients who might not utilize eyeglasses for refractive error purposes, eyecare providers must continue to show vigilance in recommending protective eyewear and lenses with impact-resistant properties, particularly in cases of reduced monocular vision.

**Conclusions**

Aphakia is a condition that affects individuals of all ages, genders, and ethnicities. Improvements in contact lens materials and surgical techniques have allowed for more options to manage the significant vision change induced by aphakia, including reduced vision and lack of accommodation. While eyeglasses might not be a first-line option in most cases, they should still be considered in case-by-case situations.