Glaucoma is a chronic progressive optic neuropathy characterized by visual field changes and optic nerve cupping. It is the second most common cause of irreversible blindness across the globe.

The conventional treatment modalities for mild to moderate glaucoma are antiglaucoma medications and laser procedures in the form of laser iridotomy and laser trabeculoplasty. Advanced cases or cases with non-resolving intraocular pressure require a target IOP to safeguard vision and field. The treatment for advanced stages can be trabeculectomy and glaucoma drainage devices (GDD).

Scientists and Ophthalmic researchers have always searched for alternative surgical treatment modalities for rapid and effective reduction of IOP, maintaining a safety profile, using ab-interno procedures with minimal tissue trauma and faster recovery.

MIGS work either by bypassing the trabecular meshwork (Hydrus stent, iStent, Trabectome, Kahook dual blade), increased aqueous outflow through Schlemm's canal (canaloplasty), increased uveoscleral outflow (iStent supra), aqueous shunt through subconjunctival space (XEN implant) or by ciliary body ablation (endocyclophotocoagulation).

Although long-term results are awaited, MIGS has revolutionized glaucoma management with minimal tissue trauma, good post-operative recovery, and improved patient satisfaction. The MIGS options have opened a whole new bunch of options for all the glaucoma specialists with promising results. Another advantage is that MIGS can be combined with phacoemulsification reducing surgical time. This activity deals with various available MIGS options, their design, efficacy, the technique of implantation, and safety profile for better patient management.

**MIGS Characteristics**

- High safety- reduced risk of complications like choroidal detachment, hypotony, hemorrhage, and effusion

- Minimal alteration of normal angle anatomy- MIGS improves the physiological aqueous outflow by minimal disruption to angle structures

- Ab interno procedure- MIGS is performed through the clear corneal incision using an ab interno approach with direct visualization of the anatomical target

- MIGS is an excellent alternative to traditional angle surgery in lowering the IOP - the amount of IOP reduction is lesser than trabeculectomy but should be at least 20%.

- Good post-operative recovery with minimal bedtime for patients - MIGS offers ease to patients as well as surgeons

**Minimally Invasive Glaucoma Surgery Classification**

There are four main approaches for IOP reduction by MIGS

**1. Increasing Aqueous Outflow from Trabecular Meshwork and Schlemm Canal**

**Stents**

- iStent

- iStent Inject

- Hydrus

**Tissue Removal**

- Gonioscopy-assisted transluminal trabeculotomy (GATT)

- Kahook dual blade goniotomy

- Trabectome

- TRAB 360 system

- Excimer laser trabeculostomy

**Through Schlemm Canal**

- VISCO360 device

- Ab Interno canaloplasty (ABiC) using the iTrack microcatheter system

**2. Increased Uveoscleral Outflow through Suprachoroidal Space**

- CyPass micro-stent

**3. Aqueous Shunt through Subconjunctival Space**

- Xen implant

**4. Ciliary Process Ablation Resulting in Reduced Aqueous Outflow**

- Endocyclophotocoagulation

**Table Depicting Various Types of MIGS Based On Mechanism of Action**

**S. No**

**MIGS Mechanism**

**Type of MIGS**

**Remarks**

**1**

Increased Trabecular Outflow

iStent Micro-Bypass

Made of titanium, the stent has a heparin coating and is non-ferromagnetic. Dimensions 1 mm x 0.3 mm. Ab interno insertion into Schlemm's canal.

****

****

Gonioscopy-assisted transluminal trabeculotomy (GATT)

In this technique microcatheter or prolene/ nylon suture is passed through Schlemm's canal 360 degrees under gonioscopic assistance. This is an ab interno trabeculotomy.****

****

****

Trabectome

This is an ab interno technique which is a combination of electrocautery, irrigation, and aspiration.

****

****

TRAB 360 Trabeculotomy

This is performed with the help of a disposable, non-powdered device. A flexible nylon trabeculotome is advanced in the Schlemm canal 180 degrees and then lysed.

****



Kahook Dual Blade

This is a type of ab interno trabeculotomy which is done using a stainless steel blade.

****

****

Ab interno canaloplasty

This is a microcatheter used to vasodilate the Schlemm's canal.

****



Hydrus Microstent

This is a crescent-shaped ab interno nickel-titanium device inserted into the Schlemm canal.

**2**

Increase Uveoscleral / Suprachoroidal/ Supraciliary Outflow



CyPass Micro-Stent

This stent has fenestrations made up of biocompatible polyamide material—inserted ab internally between the sclera and suprachoroidal space.

****



iStent Supra

This is a heparin-coated stent with a polyethersulfone and titanium sleeve inserted internally between the sclera and suprachoroidal space.****

**3**

Increase Subconjunctival Outflow



XEN Glaucoma  Treatment System

This is a tube implant made up of gelatin and glutaraldehyde. Inserted ab internally into the anterior chamber, then through the sclera into subconjunctival space, forming a bleb.

****



InnFocus MicroShunt (PRESERFLO MicroShunt)

It is a flexible micro shunt composed of SIBS (poly(styrene-block-isobutylene-block-styrene)) inserted ab externally into the anterior chamber through subconjunctival space, forming a bleb.

****

**4**

Decrease Aqueous Production



Endocyclophotocoagulation

Cyclodestruction of the ciliary body using continuous mode energy

****