Rivastigmine is available as oral capsules, oral liquid, and transdermal patches. Capsules are 1.5 mg, 3 mg, 4.5 mg, and 6 mg. The oral solution is 2.0 mg per mL. Transdermal patches are 4.6 mg, 9.5 mg, and 13.3 mg  per 24 hours.

Rivastigmine indications include mild to moderate Alzheimer dementia and dementia associated with Parkinson disease. A mini-mental state examination (MMSE) is performed on patients to see if they qualify for cholinesterase inhibitor therapy. The patient is a candidate for therapy if the MMSE score is between 24 to 26 and 10 to 11 for mild to moderate dementia. Studies show that long-term treatment at a maximum dosage of rivastigmine has the most significant improvement in cognitive performance.

Oral capsule dosing by indication is as follows:

- Alzheimer disease; mild to moderate dementia: 3 to 6 mg daily by mouth twice daily. Start with 1.5 mg orally twice daily, then increase by 1.5 mg per dose every two weeks per patient tolerated. The maximum dose is 12 mg daily.

- Parkinson disease-associated mild to moderate dementia: 3 to 6 mg daily by mouth twice daily. Start with 1.5 mg orally twice daily, then increase by 1.5 mg per dose every two weeks per patient tolerated. The maximum dose is 12 mg daily.

Doses should be given with food. Clinicians should re-titrate starting at 1.5 mg if treatment interruption exceeds three days.

No renal impairment dosing is necessary. In cases of hepatic impairment, no dose adjustment is necessary for Child-Pugh Class A or B. Child-Pugh Class C dosing is undefined.

Transdermal patch dosing by indications is as follows:

- Alzheimer disease; mild to moderate dementia: Initially apply one 4.6 mg patch daily for four weeks, then increase to a 9.5 mg patch daily for four weeks, then, if necessary, increase to a 13.3 mg patch daily.

- Alzheimer disease; severe dementia: Initially apply one 4.6 mg patch daily for four weeks, then increase to a 9.5 mg patch daily for four weeks, then, if necessary, increase to a 13.3 mg patch daily.

- Parkinson disease-associated mild to moderate dementia: Initially apply one 4.6 mg patch daily for four weeks, then increase to a 9.5 mg patch daily for four weeks, then, if necessary, increase to a 13.3 mg patch daily.

Maximum dosing is 13.3 mg transdermally daily. When converting from oral dosing of 6 to 12 mg daily dosing, start with the 9.5 mg patch. If treatment has been interrupted for more than three days, start with the 4.6 mg patch and titrate.

No renal impairment dosing is necessary. In cases of hepatic impairment, the maximum dose in Child-Pugh Class A or B is 4.6 mg every 24 hours. Child-Pugh Class C dosing is undefined.