Plaque psoriasis is asymptomatic in many individuals but can cause considerable itching, especially when there is an involvement of the scalp. Some people complain of soreness or pain due to fissuring, particularly affecting the palms and soles.

Psoriatic plaques are well-defined and erythematous with a predilection for the extensor aspect distributed over elbows, knees, and lower back. The plaques are invariably symmetrical, but the number of plaques may vary. They are covered by silvery-white scales which on removal show pinpoint bleeding spots (Auspitz sign). This is an important clinical sign although not pathognomonic in the diagnosis of plaque psoriasis. The depth of color of the plaques differs according to skin type; the full, rich red or salmon pink color is lost in dark-skinned individuals. In some patients, erythema and scaling may be less pronounced.

The presence of isomorphic (similar) lesions along the line of trauma indicates active disease and is known as the Koebner phenomenon. Fissuring is a common feature on palms, soles, and thick plaques of the limbs and lower back. The scalp, the most common initial spot, the retro-auricular area, and umbilical region are sites that should be examined in all suspected cases as these can give a signal to the evolving disease. The involvement of scalp and face may take any one or more of the following presentations: hairline psoriasis, sebopsoriasis, and true facial psoriasis.

Guttate plaques, which are commonly seen in children, may eventually evolve into psoriasis vulgaris with larger plaques in typical sites. Nail psoriasis is seen in up to 40% of cases, with pitting being the most common finding. Rupioid, elephantine and ostraceous psoriasis are special types characterized by gross hyperkeratosis. Psoriasis area and severity index [PASI] scoring is used at initial assessment and follow-up to monitor the effectiveness of therapy. Based on the PASI score, plaque psoriasis can be graded mild, moderate and severe.

About 15% of patients will present with arthritis of the small joints with features like dactylitis, joint deformity, and sausage-shaped digits.

Almost 80% of patients with psoriasis present with mild to moderate severity. Metabolic comorbidities are seen in association with psoriasis, leading to significant morbidity including type-2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and metabolic syndrome. Erythrodermic, generalized pustular and arthropathic variants of psoriasis represent severe forms of psoriasis.