The differential diagnosis should include other genetic conditions with oculocutaneous albinism.

**Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome and Griscelli Syndrome**

- Griscelli syndrome is a rare disorder with features similar to Chediak Higashi, including partial oculocutaneous albinism, pancytopenia, hemophagocytosis, and humoral and cell-mediated immune deficiency.

- Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is characterized by ocular and cutaneous albinism, bleeding disorders, and deposits of ceroid lipofuscin in various organs

- The differentiating factor is that these syndromes lack the presence of abnormal granules in the neutrophils which is the hallmark for Chediak Higashi.

- Giant granules might also be seen in acute and chronic myeloid leukemia resembling those seen in Chediak Higashi. This is referred to as the Pseudo-Chediak-Higashi anomaly.

**Other Conditions to Consider**

- Cross syndrome which is characterized by hypopigmentation, CNS involvement such as developmental delay, and ocular defects.

- Deficiency of endosomal adaptor p14, a syndrome identified in 2007, includes short stature, partial albinism, congenital neutropenia, and lymphoid deficiency. The neutrophils demonstrate azurophilic granules and abnormal microbicidal phagosome functions. This is in contrast to the giant inclusions that are seen in neutrophils in Chediak Higashi.

- Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is an autosomal recessive disorder that is caused by mutation of one of the five [FHL1-FHL5] gene which corresponds to the five disease subtypes. Symptoms include prolonged fever, hepatosplenomegaly, neurologic abnormalities including ataxia, coma, hemiplegia, convulsions, and increased cranial pressure. The onset is within the first few months or in utero. The symptoms can also appear later in adulthood or childhood.