The benefit and toxicity of a drug are determined by its concentration in the plasma. Bioavailability plays an essential role in maintaining drug plasma concentration within the therapeutic range. Since the bioavailability of a drug is directly dependent on the rate and extent of drug absorption at the site of administration, factors affecting drug absorption, including the route of administration directly affect the bioavailability of that drug. For a drug with optimal physicochemical absorption properties under normal physiological conditions, the rate and extent of drug absorption are directly affected by the route by which the drug is administered.

Generally, the order of bioavailability among different routes of administration ranked highest to lowest is parenteral, rectal, oral, and topical, respectively.

Although the bioavailability of orally administered drugs is complex and variable depending on the factors affecting the absorption process, it is more convenient for many patients. It is the most common route of administration used for most drugs.

Absolute bioavailability is a test in which the bioavailability of an orally administered drug is compared to its bioavailability following IV administration. It is useful in the identification of the absorption characteristics of a drug administered orally. Another type of bioavailability test is called relative bioavailability, in which the bioavailability of an orally administered drug is compared with that of an oral standard of the same drug. It is also known as comparative bioavailability. In contrast to absolute bioavailability, it identifies a drug's absorption characteristics from different formulations. Bioequivalence studies are conducted to differentiate between two drug products having the same active ingredients. It is useful in the comparison between a brand and generic formulations.

Drug absorption and bioavailability are essential aspects of pharmacokinetics. They influence drug effectiveness and safety. They can also affect the onset, intensity, and sometimes the duration of action. Many factors can affect the absorption and bioavailability of drugs; some are drug-specific while the others are patient-specific. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetic studies aim to optimize drug use by maintaining the drug concentration within the therapeutic range.