Treatment of microscopic polyangiitis involves extensive use of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive agents in different combinations. The aim of treatment has been defined in 2 parts: induction of remission and, subsequently, maintenance of remission. MPA can manifest as a mild disease with mild systemic vasculitis and renal insufficiency. However, it can also present as an acute severe disease with rapid deterioration of renal function and pulmonary capillaritis that leads to respiratory failure. The choice of medication depends on the extent of the disease, the rate of progression, and the degree of inflammation.

It is essential to know that remission does not imply the complete absence of symptoms; instead, the term is used to convey the absence of symptoms attributable to active vasculitis.

**Induction of Remission**

Generally, remission is achieved using a combination of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide. Rituximab is a comparable substitute to cyclophosphamide in terms of safety and efficacy for the induction of remission in MPA. However, in the severe form of diseases, induction using cyclophosphamide with glucocorticoids may be the first-line option. Cyclophosphamide is started at 1.5 to 2 mg/kg/day. The CBC should be monitored for leukocytopenia and neutropenia. Prednisone is started at 1 mg/kg/day and is continued for one month. Induction of remission may take between 2 and 6 months.

Treatment of the severe disease may include corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, and plasmapheresis.

**Maintenance of Remission**

After complete remission, the maintenance phase is started. In case of life-threatening alveolar capillaritis with pulmonary alveolar hemorrhage, plasmapheresis is done in addition to intravenous cyclophosphamide, and pulse doses of steroids may be used. The Rituximab versus Cyclophosphamide for Induction of Remission in AAV trial (RAVE trial) established that comparable results could be achieved using rituximab, especially in individuals experiencing side effects of cyclophosphamide therapy.

Maintenance therapy is started after induction of remission and typically involves the use of azathioprine compared to cyclophosphamide, as demonstrated by the Cyclophosphamide versus Azathioprine for Early Remission Phase of Vasculitis trial (CYCAZAREM trial).

Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis with low-dose trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole is necessary.