**Erectile Dysfunction**

Sildenafil is available as oral tablets of 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg strength for erectile dysfunction (ED). Most patients receive a prescription for 50 mg of oral sildenafil, taken as needed approximately 1 hour before sexual activity.

Patients are advised not to exceed a maximum dosing frequency of once daily. It can be taken 30 min to 4 hours before desired intercourse. The onset of action can occur within 30 minutes, while the duration of the effect can last up to 18 hours.

Consider starting at a dose of 25 mg in patients with hepatic dysfunction (e.g., cirrhosis), patients with CLcr less than 30 mL/minute (severe renal impairment), and patients age 65 years and above, as the administration of sildenafil in these group patients have resulted in higher plasma levels of sildenafil. Patients taking concomitant inhibitors of CYP3A4 may benefit from initiation at the lower dosage.

**Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension**

In the treatment of PAH, sildenafil is available in tablets 20 mg,  oral suspension 10 mg/mL, and injectable 10 mg/12.5 mL forms. The recommended dosage for tablet and oral suspension formularies is 5 mg or 20 mg three times daily, 4 to 6 hours apart. Injections are dosed at 2.5 mg or 10 mg three times a day, 4 to 6 hours apart, as an intravenous bolus.

No dose adjustment is required in patients with renal impairment (including severe impairment CLcr < 30 mL/min). No dose adjustment is required for mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Its use is not studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Pediatric Patients:**Increased mortality with increasing sildenafil dose was observed in a clinical trial of pediatric patients with PAH. Deaths were first reported after approximately one year of use, and hence sildenafil, particularly chronic use, is not recommended in pediatric patients with PAH.

**Pregnant Women:**There are increased risks for stroke, heart failure, preterm delivery, and maternal and fetal death for pregnant women with untreated pulmonary arterial hypertension. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of sildenafil in pregnant women. Small case studies in pregnant women with PAH indicate a low risk of harm, though caution is warranted.

**Breastfeeding Women:**There is a lack of information about the effects of sildenafil on milk production and the effects of sildenafil on the breastfed infant.