**Special Cases**

**Injuries**

Death can occur as a result of an injury sustained in the hospital or outside the hospital setting. Death related to injury has no statute of limitations. A patient developed overwhelming sepsis secondary to empyema and necrotizing pneumonia from a stab wound with a knife to the chest. Even though the immediate cause of death in this instance is overwhelming sepsis, the manner of death for medical-legal reasons is still homicide.

Hip fracture from falls, especially in elderly, frail patients, is very common. The presence of hip fracture can predispose patients to sepsis and a thromboembolic event that can ultimately cause death. If, as a sequela of a hip fracture from a fall, a patient later develops pulmonary embolism from prolonged immobilization, the manner of death in this instance will be an accident.

Even if an injury is listed only in part II of the death certificate, the non-natural cause, in this instance, the accident prevails and is used as a determinant of the manner of death. The cause of death on a death certificate can be changed or amended, if needed, based on the specific circumstances related to the death. If death or demise occurs as a result of injury or poisoning, non-natural causes are listed as the manner of death.

**Example**

- Part I

- a. Sepsis and septic shock
- b. Empyema and necrotizing pneumonia
- c. Knife wounds to the chest

- Part II

- Type 2 diabetes
- The manner of death: homicide
- Autopsy: yes/no

**Place of Injury**

The place of injury should be specified in the death certificate. The place of injury might also be the place where the pronouncement of death is made. For example, the place of injury can be listed as a shopping mall, fast food restaurant, hotel, or resort.

Location of injury should include the street name, zip code, county where the injury happened, or where the decedent is found.

**Injury at Work**

This is usually a yes or no. This part is important to fill in, especially if there is an employer/employee relationship.

**How the Injury Happened**

This should be described precisely, for example, "skiing on a steep slope, lost control, and hit a tree;" or "driving a car, struck from behind, and ejected from a vehicle."

In most jurisdictions, if the cause of death is not natural, the medical examiner or coroner is responsible for completing the death certificate.

**Acute and Chronic Substance Abuse**

Acute and chronic consumption of illicit drugs or alcohol can cause death. Chronic alcohol abuse can cause pancreatitis, seizure from alcohol withdrawal, or hepatic cirrhosis. Bacterial endocarditis can develop from chronic intravenous drug abuse. Oral carcinoma can develop from tobacco chewing or chronic obstructive lung disease from smoking. Death from a chronic condition is classified as natural.

On the contrary, death resulting from acute drug toxicity, for example, overdose with cocaine, phencyclidine, or opiate, is classified as suicide or accident. Classification of death as suicide as a manner of death depends on whether there is evidence to support self-harm or injury. When a death occurs as a result of therapeutic intervention, for example, overwhelming sepsis from bone marrow suppression secondary to the initiation of chemotherapy, the manner of death in this instance is natural.

**Physician-Assisted Suicide or Euthanasia**

In some states, this form of death is classified as “other” or “unclassified.”

**Terminal Events**

Events like electromechanical dissociation, ventricular fibrillation, pulseless ventricular tachycardia, asystole, respiratory arrest, or respiratory failure are common and nonspecific. It is recommended not to use these terminologies in the death certificate.

**Amending a Death Certificate**

As at the time of certifying death, the certifier fills in information in the death certificate based on the information available at that time. In other words, this is the best medical opinion at the time of completing the death certificate. Most states have provisions in their laws to amend the death certificate. If an autopsy is requested and will be completed within a reasonable time, it is best to wait for the result of the autopsy before completing the death certificate. Some institutions have policies to ensure that the pathologist performing the autopsy consults with the medical certifier of death, and both assume responsibilities for signing the death certificate. This is to prevent discordance between the autopsy report and the cause of death certification.

The medical examiner or coroner can amend the death certificate should additional information comes up.