Euglycemic DKA is becoming more prevalent with the appearance of the new SGLT2 inhibitors. However, it is important to recognize the variety of etiologies of a potentially fatal condition. Early diagnosis and initiation of treatment can significantly improve morbidity and mortality. In patients presenting with euglycemic anion gap acidosis, great care is necessary to rule out other causes, including sepsis, toxic alcohol ingestion, and alcoholic ketoacidosis, among others. Early IV crystalloid and prompt initiation of insulin and dextrose infusion are the primary treatment.

Treatment requires a team of interprofessional healthcare workers consisting of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPS, or PAs), possibly including consultation with a critical care intensivist as well as an endocrinologist. Emergency and critical care nurses monitor patients, administer ordered treatments, and report changes to physicians so treatment can be optimized. The clinicians can also consult with the pharmacy regarding appropriate interventions and have them run a full medication reconciliation to check for drug interactions or agents that may contribute to EDKA. ALl interprofessional team members must be prepared to communicate with the rest of the team as they note any changes in patient status, including therapeutic failure. The observations must also be documented in the patient's health record so all interprofessional team members can access the same accurate patient data. In this way, appropriate corrective actions can be implemented. These interprofessional interventions are crucial to achieving better patient outcomes. [Level 5]