Treatment of acute dacryocystitis includes conservative measures such as warm compresses and attempts of Crigler massage. For uncomplicated cases, consideration of oral antibiotics should be given. Coverage should be aimed at gram-positive organisms, particularly antistaphylococcal agents. In complicated cases or patients who appear toxic, intravenously antibiotics should be administered. Empiric antibiotics should include gram positive and gram negative coverage.  Lacrimal probing is discouraged in the acute phase. For recurrent infections, referral to ophthalmology for surgical evaluation is advised.

Chronic dacryocystitis is almost always managed surgically with high success rates. Probing is accepted as first-line management in chronic cases and can be done in the outpatient setting. Inevitably, patients will likely need to progress to further surgical options to treat the condition. Balloon dacryoplasty, nasolacrimal intubation, and nasolacrimal stenting have all been attempted with variable first-time success rates. If these therapies fail, evaluation for percutaneous dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR) or endonasal dacryocystorhinostomy (EN-DCR) is then pursued.

Treatment of congenital dacryocystitis includes conservative measures first. Crigler massage should be taught to parents or caregivers to perform at home. Topical antibiotics can be considered for acute flares.  About 90% of congenital dacryocystitis will resolve by six months to one year of age with conservative measures. If conservative measures happen to fail, a referral is then made to ophthalmology for nasolacrimal probing. Nasolacrimal probing is successful in more than 70% of cases. If symptoms recur, balloon dacryoplasty, nasolacrimal intubation, or nasolacrimal stenting can be pursued. Ultimately, if these measures fail, then dacryocystorhinostomy by percutaneous or endonasal approach will serve as the definitive treatment.