**The ovulatory cycle:**

Understanding the role of the corpus albicans requires first exploring the basics of the ovulatory cycle itself. The ovulatory cycle, or menstrual cycle, average 28 days in length and consists of two ovarian phases: the follicular phase and the luteal phase. The structure of the menstrual cycle (ranging from 26 to 35 days) begins with 5 days of menstruation followed by the remaining 9 days of the follicular phase, then followed by the 14 days of the luteal phase.

**Follicular phase:**

The follicular phase lasts fourteen days and starts on the first day of menses and continues until the day of ovulation. The luteal phase, which also lasts 14 days, then follows from ovulation until the day before the beginning of menses. These phases are responsible for producing a viable egg and preparing the endometrium for implantation, respectively. During the follicular phase, the follicle grows and develops under the influence of surrounding stromal cells called granulosa and thecal cells. As the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge reaches its peak, the follicle ruptures and releases a single developed oocyte.

**Luteal phase:**

The portion of the follicle remaining in the ovary after ovulation will become the corpus luteum. This process is called luteinization. The cells making up the corpus luteum are granulosa cells, thecal cells, and contributing blood vessels. These granulosa cells go on to produce progesterone and estradiol, whereas thecal cells have the job of making androstenedione. The luteal phase will experience one of two outcomes; either an oocyte will be fertilized and implanted into the uterus, or menses will begin. If fertilization occurs, the corpus luteum is responsible for maintaining the endometrium with the production of progesterone and no corpus albicans will be formed. This maintenance of the corpus luteum initiates by the hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) produced by the implanting trophoblast which will begin production around day 8 after fertilization.

**Luteolysis:**

The first sign of formation of the corpus albicans is with shrinkage of the granulosa cells within the corpus luteum, followed by apoptosis. This process gets explicitly triggered by uterine prostaglandin F2alpha, which ensures that both the corpus luteum will undergo both structural and hormonal degradation.