Fosinopril received official approval for use in 1991 and is available for administration in 10, 20, or 40 mg oral tablets. It is traditional to prescribe the drug at a low dose and increase the dosage as needed while evaluating the patient’s response and tolerance. The maximum dose is typically 80 mg for the average patient with hypertension. In patients with sodium or water depletion or renal failure, the initial dosing is reduced to 5 mg. It’s not uncommon to co-administer hydrochlorothiazide with fosinopril to regulate fluid volume and counteract high blood pressure.

**Hypertension**

- **Monotherapy:**The recommended initial adult dose of fosinopril is 10 mg once daily, both as monotherapy and when the drug is added to diuretic treatment. The dose can then be adjusted according to the patient’s blood pressure at peak (in 2 to 6 hours) and trough ( at 24 hours) blood levels. Most patients gain optimum blood pressure control with 20 to 40 mg daily, and only some need 80 mg. However, if blood pressure control response is not adequate around the end of the dosing interval, dividing the daily dose may give better control.

- **Co-administration with Diuretics:**A diuretic can be added if blood pressure is inadequately controlled with fosinopril alone. Co-administration of fosinopril with potassium supplements, potassium salt substitutes, or potassium-sparing diuretics can increase serum potassium.

- In patients currently treated with a diuretic, symptomatic hypotension can result following the initial dose of fosinopril. To reduce the chances of hypotension, the diuretic should, if possible, be discontinued two to three days before beginning therapy with fosinopril. Then, if blood pressure is not adequately controlled, the diuretic should be resumed. If diuretic treatment cannot be stopped, start fosinopril at 10 mg with close medical supervision for several hours and until the patient’s blood pressure is stabilized.

- **Pediatrics:**Monotherapy- In children weighing more than 50 kg, the recommended dose of fosinopril is 5-10 mg once daily.

**Heart Failure**

- Fosinopril should be started at 10 mg once daily and observe patients under medical supervision for at least 2 hours for any hypotension and/or orthostasis, and if any present, until blood pressure stabilizes.

- A starting dose of 5 mg is recommended in patients with heart failure and moderate to severe renal failure. Then, the dose should be increased over several weeks to be tolerated but not more than 40 mg daily. The usual effective dose range is 20-40 mg per day.

**Hypertension/Heart Failure with Renal Impairment**

In patients with renal impairment, the total clearance of fosinoprilat slows by 50 %. However, hepatobiliary elimination partially compensates for diminished renal elimination. Hence, the total body clearance of fosinoprilat stays normal with all degrees of renal impairments (CrCl < 80 mL/min/1.73 m2), including end-stage renal diseases.

**Pregnant Women**

Fosinopril is contraindicated during pregnancy due to its ability to cross the placenta. As a result, it may increase the risk of fetal malformations and cause congenital disabilities or death to the developing fetus. Therefore, if the patient reports pregnancy at any time during treatment, fosinopril therapy should stop immediately. In general, all ACE inhibitors should be avoided when treating hypertension in pregnancy.

**Breastfeeding Patients**

The manufacturer recommends against breastfeeding while using fosinopril as it is secreted in breast milk.