Managing central pain syndrome requires an interprofessional team that includes a pharmacist, nursing staff, and physicians in different specialties. The healthcare team consists of a primary care physician, a pain medicine specialist, and possibly a specialist for the primary source of the patient's pain, such as a rheumatologist or neurologist, and a pharmacist should also consult on these cases. Without proper management, the morbidity from central pain syndrome is high. Centralized pain requires proper identification to receive appropriate treatment. In addition, it requires a different treatment strategy compared with peripheral or mechanical pain:

- Ordering a CBC, ESR, CRP, and CK is often part of the initial workup in central pain disorder.

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of centralized pain, such as allodynia or hyperalgesia.

- Pain typically lasts for greater than three months. There is possibly a genetic component to the pain, as well as an environmental component.

- Consult with the pharmacist about using anticonvulsants and or antidepressants for chronic pain.

- Consult with a pain medicine specialist and the primary care physician for further management, which may include neuromodulation.

- Consult with the radiologist about imaging tests, such as a functional MRI, which can aid in diagnosis.

- Consult with the rheumatologist or neurologist to treat the underlying inflammatory or neurological disorder, respectively.

The management of central pain disorder requires a full complement of healthcare professionals. Prevention of the development of centralized pain is a worthy goal, given the significant morbidity associated with the diagnosis. The long-term improvement of the symptoms of centralized pain remains guarded. Nursing staff can monitor the patient, serve as a liaison between disciplines, and answer patient questions while charting and informing the team of their observations. Treatment requires meaningful patient education and patience for both healthcare professionals and patients. Eliminating pain may not be possible, but improving the quality of life for the patients is nearly always achievable. [Level 2] An interprofessional team approach will optimize patient outcomes in these cases. [Level 5]