Bariatric surgeries are designed to induce either a restrictive or malabsorptive state that limits calorie intake leading to sustained weight loss after surgery. Of note, some surgical techniques produce both restriction and malabsorption.

**Restrictive surgeries:**Surgery intended to decrease the stomach volume leads to reduced oral intake by promoting early satiety.

**Adjustable Gastric Banding (AGB)**

An adjustable silicone band is placed distal to the gastroesophageal junction, forming a small upper gastric pouch that limits gastric filling and thus leads to the sensation of fullness. The silicone band is adjustable by injecting or withdrawing saline using a subcutaneous port connected to the band via a tube system.

**Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy (LSG)**

Surgery involves removing a large portion of the stomach at the gastric fundus and greater curvature of the stomach. This limits the size of the stomach, producing a tubular conduit.

**Malabsorptive surgeries:**Surgery intended to reduce small bowel length available for mixing biliopancreatic juices, resulting in calorie malabsorption.

**Combined surgeries:**These surgeries have both restrictive and malabsorptive components.

**Roux En-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB)**

This surgery has both restrictive and malabsorptive components. The stomach is resected proximally into a small gastric pouch (GP). The small bowel is resected about 50 cm from the ligament of Treitz at the jejunum. The distal resected portion is called the Roux limb (RL). The excluded portion of the stomach remnant and the proximal small bowel is called the biliopancreatic limb (BPL). The RL is then anastomosed with the GP (GJ anastomosis) and side to side with the jejunum (JJ anastomosis). The length of the Roux limb can be varied to different sizes to alter the malabsorptive element.

**Biliopancreatic Diversion with Duodenal Switch (BPD/DS)**

BPD/DS is often combined with a gastric sleeve procedure.

Biliopancreatic loop (BPL) is anastomosed side to side distally, forming an ileoileostomy anastomosis. The common channel (CC) is the length of the small intestine between enteroenteric anastomosis and the ileocecal valve. This channel length determines the malabsorptive element; the shorter the length, the lesser the distance available for mixing with biliopancreatic juices.

The restrictive and malabsorptive nature of these surgeries can often lead to the development of both macro and micronutrient deficiencies after surgery.