Marfan syndrome (MFS) is one example of a disorder following an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. MFS results from a mutation in the FBN1 gene on chromosome 15, producing defective fibrillin. Fibrillin is a glycoprotein that forms a protective wrap around elastin, and it is an essential component of the extracellular matrix. Compared to the average population, individuals with MFS usually show higher height percentiles for their age, with long extremities and hypermobile joints. MFS can also involve cardiovascular structures, presenting as cystic medial necrosis of the aorta, mitral valve prolapse, and other conditions.FBN1 mutation, clinical features, and/or family history of the disorder.

Tuberous sclerosis, or tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), is another autosomal dominant disorder. TSC is a neurocutaneous disorder resulting from loss-of-function mutations in either the TSC1 or TSC2 genes. TSC1 encodes the protein hamartin, and TSC2 encodes tuberin; these two proteins together form the TSC protein complex that usually inhibits the mTOR intracellular signaling cascade. Without these two proteins, there is dysregulated mTOR signaling, which can lead to abnormal cell growth, proliferation, autophagy, and synthesis of biomacromolecules.de novo mutations.

Individuals with either MFS or TSC have a 50% chance of passing on the disorder to their offspring. Additionally, some individuals have these syndromes who did not inherit it from their parents or had a de novo occurrence to the pathogenic variant. These individuals are still at a 50% risk for passing it on to their children.