Adverse reactions are common after doxorubicin administration, including fatigue, alopecia, nausea and vomiting, and oral sores. Bone marrow suppression and an increased risk of secondary malignancy diagnoses may occur. Doxorubicin extravasation during intravenous administration can result in severe tissue ulceration and necrosis, which worsens over time. Doxorubicin is also associated with significant cardiac toxicity, which limits the long-term use of the drug. The mechanism of action of doxorubicin-induced cardiac toxicity differs from the drug’s antitumor mechanism. It involves increased oxidative stress, down-regulation of cardiac-specific genes, and induction of cardiac myocyte apoptosis by doxorubicin. The acute cardiac toxicity of doxorubicin occurs within days of the drug’s administration and occurs in approximately 11% of patients who receive the drug.

Acute cardiac toxicity manifests as reversible myopericarditis, left ventricular dysfunction, or arrhythmias. Doxorubicin-related arrhythmias occur in up to 26% of patients who receive the therapy and can include sinus tachycardia, premature atrial and ventricular contractions, and supraventricular tachycardia. Rarely, acute left ventricular dysfunction can occur after doxorubicin administration; this condition is reversible. Chronic, late cardiac toxicity may also occur after doxorubicin administration and is the most serious and potentially lethal adverse effect associated with doxorubicin therapy. The incidence of chronic doxorubicin cardiac toxicity is approximately 1.7%.

Doxorubicin-induced irreversible cardiomyopathy occurs within a few months of the end of treatment but has also been reported to occur up to twenty years after treatment termination. Congestive heart failure may also occur. Risk factors for doxorubicin-induced congestive heart failure include a higher cumulative drug dose, extremes of age, combination chemotherapy with other cardiotoxic drugs, pre-existing left ventricular dysfunction, hypertension, and previous radiation to the mediastinal region. When congestive heart failure develops after doxorubicin administration, the 1-year mortality rate is approximately 50%.