Treatment of Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is based on the type, stage, histopathological features, and symptoms. The most common treatment includes chemotherapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy, stem cell transplant, and in rare cases, surgery. Chemoimmunotherapy, i.e., rituximab, in combination with chemotherapy, is most commonly used. Radiation is the main treatment for early-stage (I, II). Stage II with bulky disease, stage III, and IV are treated with chemotherapy along with immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and in some cases, radiation therapy. Treatments, according to the type of lymphoma, are listed below:

**B Cell Lymphoma**

**Diffuse Large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL):**In Stage I or II, the R-CHOP regimen is often given for 3 to 6 cycles, with/without radiation therapy to the lymph node that is affected. In stage III or IV, six cycles of R-CHOP is the preferred treatment. Imaging tests such as PET/CT scans are done to evaluate treatment response after 2-4 cycles. Intrathecal chemotherapy or high doses of methotrexate intravenously is given to patients in the presence or at high risk of central nervous system involvement. For "Double-hit" lymphomas, that is, with translocations of MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6 as detected by FISH or standard cytogenetics, DA-EPOCH-R is preferred. Refractory or relapsed DLBCL can be treated with a salvage regimen followed by bone marrow transplant for eligible patients or Chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) cell therapy.

**Follicular lymphoma:**This type of lymphoma has indolent nature, and it shows a good response to treatment, but it is quite difficult to cure. Relapse is usually common after several years. Patients with low-burden disease can be observed, and treatment deferred unless symptomatic. The preferred treatment in stage I and stage II in the early stage is radiotherapy. Chemotherapy, along with a monoclonal antibody, is another option. Treatment in stage III, IV, and bulky stage II lymphoma is a monoclonal antibody (rituximab or obinutuzumab) along with chemotherapy. Among the chemotherapy options, bendamustine or a combination regimen such as CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) or CVP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone) are commonly used. After the response to initial treatment, the role of maintenance therapy is conflicting.

**Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL):**MCL with multiple areas of involvement is commonly treated with aggressive chemotherapy plus rituximab in eligible patients. Intense chemotherapy regimens such as R-Hyper-CVAD regimen (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and dexamethasone, alternately given with high-dose methotrexate plus cytarabine) + rituximab, alternating RCHOP/RDHAP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone)/(rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin),  NORDIC regimen (dose-intensified induction immunochemotherapy with rituximab + cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisone [maxi-CHOP]) alternating with rituximab + high-dose cytarabine, or RDHAP (Rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin). After the response to initial chemotherapy, high-dose therapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation is undertaken in eligible patients. This is typically followed by maintenance rituximab for three years.

**Burkitt lymphoma:**This is a very fast-growing lymphoma. Some examples of chemo regimens used for this lymphoma include Hyper-CVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin [Adriamycin], and dexamethasone) alternating with high dose methotrexate and cytarabine (ara-C) + rituximab, CODOX-M (cyclophosphamide, vincristine [Oncovin], doxorubicin, and high-dose methotrexate) alternating with IVAC (ifosfamide, etoposide [VP-16], and cytarabine [ara-C]) + rituximab, or Dose adjusted EPOCH (etoposide, prednisone, vincristine [Oncovin], cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin) + rituximab.

**Primary CNS lymphoma:**High dose methotrexate-based chemotherapy regimen has been shown to be the most effective treatment. If the patient achieves a complete response to initial chemotherapy, high-dose therapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation should be considered for eligible patients.

**T Cell Lymphoma**

**Anaplastic large cell lymphoma:**This is a rapidly growing lymphoma and mainly affects lymph nodes. Brentuximab vedotin + CHP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone) is preferred. Other regimens include CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) or CHOEP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, etoposide, and prednisone).

**Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma:**It is linked to infection with the HTLV-1 virus. There are four subtypes, and treatment varies depending on the subtype. Smoldering and chronic subtypes grow slowly. These often do not require treatment. If treatment is needed, interferon and the antiviral drug zidovudine to treat HTLV-1 infection, or skin-directed therapy if the skin is involved. The acute subtype is treated with either antiviral treatment or chemotherapy (typically the CHOP regimen). If it responds to chemotherapy, consider an allogeneic stem cell transplant. This lymphoma subtype is often treated with chemotherapy; antiviral therapy is not helpful for this subtype. It may involve the brain and spinal cord; therefore, intrathecal chemotherapy is given.

**Enteropathy-associated T cell lymphoma:**This is highly associated with celiac disease. Combination chemotherapy is preferred.  Patients should be evaluated for surgery at the diagnosis, prior to chemotherapy or radiation, because they are at high risk of perforation or intestinal blockage (obstruction). A stem cell transplant may be an option if the lymphoma responds to chemotherapy.

**Other**

**HIV-associated lymphoma:**Patients with HIV tend to have more aggressive forms of lymphoma, such as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, primary CNS lymphoma, or Burkitt lymphoma. The use of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) to treat HIV in addition to chemotherapy±immunotherapy is usually employed.

Some exceptions in the treatment of lymphomas can be found here:

**Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma of the stomach:**If infection withHelicobacter pylori is present and the lymphoma is confined to the stomach, and peri-gastric lymph nodes, treatment with antibiotics and Histaminic (H2) blockers can eliminate the organism-related antigenic stimulus, and the lymphoma may regress permanently.

**Mycosis fungoides:**This type of T-cell lymphoma of the skin usually has a very indolent course and is best treated with skin-directed treatments, including topical steroids, topical retinoids, skin irradiation, psoralen-associated ultraviolet exposure, topical chemotherapy. If the patient experiences failure with skin-directed therapies can then use systemic biologic therapies.