Postpartum depression is diagnosed when at least five depressive symptoms are present for at least 2 weeks. In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM–5), postpartum depression is considered when a patient has a major depressive episode along with the peripartum onset, and it is not mentioned as a separate disease. By definition, it is defined as a major depressive episode with the onset of pregnancy or within 4 weeks of delivery. The nine symptoms are present almost every day and represent a change from the previous routine. The diagnosis should include either depression or anhedonia (loss of interest) in addition to the five symptoms to be diagnosed.

- Depressed mood (subjective or observed) is present most of the day

- Loss of interest or pleasure, most of the day

- Insomnia or hypersomnia

- Psychomotor retardation or agitation

- Worthlessness or guilt

- Loss of energy or fatigue

- Suicidal ideation or attempt and recurrent thoughts of death

- Impaired concentration or indecisiveness

- Change in weight or appetite (weight change 5% over 1 month)

These symptoms can lead to significant distress and/or impairment. Furthermore, these symptoms are not attributable to a substance or medical condition. A psychotic disorder does not cause the episode, nor has been a prior manic or hypomanic episode.

In the 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10), a postpartum onset is defined to be within 6 weeks after delivery. ICD-10 describes a depressive episode as follows:

- In typical mild, moderate, or severe depressive episodes, the patient has a depressed mood with a decrease in activity and energy.

- Capacity for enjoyment, interest, and concentration is reduced. The patient feels very tired after the minimum effort, along with sleep disturbance and a decreased appetite. Guilt or worthlessness are commonly present, along with reduced self-esteem and self-confidence.

- Somatic symptoms, such as anhedonia, unusual walking in the very early morning, along with agitation, weight loss, loss of libido, decreased appetite and marked psychomotor retardation. These symptoms vary little from day-to-day and are not responsive to circumstances.

- A depressive episode may be classified as mild, moderate, or severe, and it depends on the severity and number of the symptoms.

The signs and symptoms of PPD are identical to non-puerperal depression with an additional history of childbirth. Symptoms include depressed mood, loss of interest, changes in sleep patterns, change in appetite, feelings of worthlessness, inability to concentrate, and suicidal ideation. Women may also experience anxiety. Patients having PPD may also have psychotic symptoms, which include delusions and hallucinations (voices saying to harm infants).

PPD may lead to poor maternal-infant bonds, failure of breastfeeding, negative parenting practices, marital discord, as well as worse outcomes concerning the child's physical and psychological development. The remission of symptoms will reduce the risk of behavioral and psychiatric problems in the offspring.

A prior episode of PPD increases the future risk of major depression, bipolar disorder, and PPD.

Past personal and family histories of postpartum depression and postpartum psychosis should also be noted.