The most important is to feature in reaching the proper diagnosis of GCTs is to maintain a high index of suspicion in patients presenting with adnexal mass and endocrine effects([estrogen/androgen excess). Hence the workup typically includes lab tests for serum hormonal levels (total testosterone in case of virilization, estradiol if there is hyperestrogenism), and tumor markers like Inhibin A and B [Inhibin-B is more accurate than inhibin A).

Imaging of the adnexal mass is with a pelvic ultrasound and other additional imaging studies like contrast-enhanced CT to evaluate the abdomen or other sites in patients with suspected metastatic disease. Radiographic studies usually reveal either a solid mass with hemorrhagic or fibrotic changes, a multilocular cyst, or an entirely cystic tumor. The key differentiating features from epithelial ovarian tumors are that GCTs are usually confined to the ovary at diagnosis and don’t have intracystic papillary projections. Furthermore, the chance of peritoneal spread is low, and these tumors are rarely bilateral. An enlarged uterus with a thickened endometrium is often noted due to estrogenic action. Endometrial sampling may detect endometrial hyperplasia/intraepithelial neoplasia in 25% to 50%, with granulosa cell tumors and carcinoma in another 5 to 10 percent. In patients with thecoma, carcinoma may be detected in 20 to 25 percent of patients, and another 15% may have a precursor lesion.

Ascites is very rarely seen. As in the workup of all adnexal masses, surgery is performed to resect and determine the histology if ultrasound findings suggest the risk of harboring malignancy, if there are other risks associated with the mass (e.g., torsion) or if the mass is causing symptoms.