Although much of the research on DTI has been in traumatic brain injury, other applications include aid in diagnosis, prognosis, and classifications of stroke, brain tumors, neurodegenerative diseases, developmental disorders, neuropsychiatric disorders, movement disorders, and neurogenetic developmental disorders.

**Traumatic Brain Injury/Diffuse Axonal Injury**

Diffuse axonal injury (DAI) can be seen in traumatic brain injury. Diffuse axonal injury is diffuse brain injury damage to axonal microstructures and can potentially appear normal on traditional CT and MRI when there is an absence of macroscopic tissue disruption. Additionally, if there are macroscopic findings of DAI on computed tomography (CT) or MRI, it indicates poorer outcomes. A predominance of published literature on DTI is about diffuse axonal injury its close correlation with decreased FA values throughout specified regions of the brain. The clinical effectiveness of DTI has been compared to control subjects for validation in various scenarios involving the use of MRI to help diagnose a brain injury. There are numerous peer-reviewed and case-control studies in the medical literature allowing for individual evaluations of brain-injured patients using DTI. The comparison of cases (patients with a history of traumatic brain injury) and controls (no history of traumatic brain injury) utilizing DTI is an accepted methodology and standard technique utilized in order to demonstrate the clinical utility of DTI in adding incremental diagnostic information to structural MRI, multimodal MR studies, other imaging modalities, and the clinical condition.

**Carbon Monoxide (CO) Poisoning**

DTI has utility for studying the brains of patients after CO poisoning.

DTI has also demonstrated evidence of demyelination with abnormal FA values in the central nervous system of patients who develop chronic neurological symptoms in the subacute phase after CO intoxication.

**Hypoxic Brain Injury**

A recent 2018 multicenter review article demonstrated DTI might be more predictive of neurologic outcome than conventional MRI in patients with cardiac arrest and hypoxic brain injury.

**Demyelination/Dysmyelination**

As the brain develops, diffusivity is found to decline particularly in the direction that myelination would be oriented. Damage to the myelin sheath affects diffusivity.

**Neoplasia**

The application of DTI in instances of neoplasia is used mostly for surgical planning. With DTI and tractography, a more in-depth layout of neuroanatomy and specific eloquent white matter tracts can be seen allowing a neurosurgeon to plan precise surgical approaches to minimize damage to the critical tracts and preserving vital functions such as motor capabilities, language, and vision. DTI has even been used intraoperatively to compensate for shifting tissue to minimize complications.

Another application of DTI in neoplasia is using FA values. Correlations have been found between FA values and cell density. In neoplasia with high cell proliferation and density such as glioblastomas, higher FA values have been reported.

Some neoplastic disease requires radiation and DTI has found that FA decreases in areas targeted by radiation. By observing the changes of FA in the anatomy, it can potentially be used to monitor the dose distribution.

**Epilepsy**

The addition of the DTI sequence to the routine MRI protocol has been found to be of advantage in specific pediatric patient groups with temporal lobe epilepsy or for the planning of epilepsy surgery.

**Fetus/Neonate Imaging**

A relatively new limb of DTI research has been showing correlations between DTI findings and developmental neuropathology in a fetus or neonate. Discovering the utility of DTI in fetuses and neonates has been hopeful for a field that has limited diagnostic imaging options.

**Extracranial DTI Applications**

Additional DTI applications include imaging of peripheral nerves, including the brachial plexus.

**White Matter Tractography and Future Research**

Using the assumption that diffusion anisotropy represents white matter bundles, these bundles of aligned voxels can be parcellated, providing a 3D map of white matter bundle tracts. Fiber tracking or reconstruction by starting with a voxel and propagating forward following the anisotropic path until encountering isotropy is also known as tractography and can give insight into brain connectivity. Further study and mapping of these tracts, in conjunction with fMRI, resting state, and other MRI submodalities remain exciting cutting edge research.