Dermatomyositis is a rare condition and is best managed by a multidisciplinary team and may even require referral to a tertiary care center. All physicians must be able to recognize the typical presentation of dermatomyositis as most patients initially present to a rheumatologist, internist, family physician, or pediatrician, depending on their age.

The recently formulated European League Against Rheumatism and the American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) criteria for idiopathic inflammatory myopathies is a highly sensitive and specific probability-based classification system which can be used to identify cases of dermatomyositis. Initial workup for patients with suspected dermatomyositis includes testing for muscle enzymes and myositis specific autoantibodies. Electromyography, muscle, and skin biopsy may be done if the diagnosis is uncertain, especially in patients who lack characteristic findings. In addition to a comprehensive evaluation and assessment for malignancy, consultations with other specialties may be indicated depending on the type of associated complications. For example, patients with underlying malignancy should be referred to oncology. The presence of extra muscular manifestations warrants consultations with pulmonology, gastroenterology, cardiology, and speech therapy. Patients with a skin rash should be referred to a dermatologist for assessment, management, and follow up. Early recognition and prompt initiation of treatment can reduce the morbidity and mortality of patients. The first-line treatment for dermatomyositis is prednisolone.

Concomitant treatment with glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants should be given to patients who are resistant to treatment with glucocorticoids alone or have extra muscular complications or severe weakness. Sun avoidance and sun-protective measures are recommended in all patients with skin disease. Rehabilitation in the form of resistive exercises should be started in the early phase of the disease as it can improve daily functioning.