Fluid moves throughout cellular environments in the body by passively crossing semipermeable membranes. Osmolarity is defined as the number of particles per liter of fluid. Physiologic blood plasma osmolarity is approximately 286 mOsmoles/L. Less than this is hypoosmotic, and greater is hyperosmotic. Cellular osmotic concentration gradients are maintained largely through the active pumping of transmembrane ionic transport proteins. However, rapid changes in fluid volume without changes in ionic components cause dilation or concentration of those components. Blood plasma osmotic gradients are maintained through the absorption of solutes from the gastrointestinal tract or secretion into the gastrointestinal tract or urine. In addition to ionic components, osmolarity is partially composed of proteins such as albumin in the serum. Another important osmotically active component to consider is glucose. Fluid will move towards hyperosmotic compartments and away from hypoosmotic compartments. All body fluids should have an ionic net electrical charge close to zero, indicating a balance of cations and anions. Ionic components will diffuse through fluids selectively depending on the presence of permeable membranes. If a membrane is non-permeable to an ion, this creates a gradient of relatively higher concentration osmolarity. Solute gradients can be physiologically created by membrane pumping proteins, which expend energy in the form of ATP to move components from areas of low concentration into higher concentrations against their diffusion gradient. These processes create a cellular environment to osmotically “pull” water into fluid compartments. In addition to the osmotic pull of fluids, fluid movement within the body relies on created and maintained hydrostatic pressures. This is best utilized in the movement of fluid from plasma in the extracellular blood space into the interstitial spaces of tissue across the capillary membrane. Hydrostatic pressure is the “push” factor on fluid movement where increased pressures force fluid out of a space.  The combined “push” of hydrostatic forces and the “pull” of osmotic forces create a net movement of fluid. This is mathematically explained using the Starling equation:

- Jv = Kfc ([Pc - Pi] - n [Op-Oi])

Where Jv is the net rate of capillary fluid movement, Kfc is a capillary filtration fluid coefficient, Pc is capillary hydrostatic pressure, Pi is interstitial hydrostatic pressure, n is the osmotic reflection coefficient, Op is plasma oncotic pressure, and Oi is interstitial oncotic pressure.