The correct classification of a patient’s agraphia is paramount to proper treatment, as treatments vary greatly depending on the localization and etiology of the agraphia. In general, speech and language therapy (SLT) and occupational therapy are the cornerstones of treatment for both central and peripheral agraphia. Often, a multimodal approach including therapy, medication, and sometimes surgery is required to treat agraphia successfully: for example, a patient with micrographia due to Parkinson disease might require deep brain stimulation, antiparkinsonian medication, occupational therapy, and/or orthotic devices to optimally address their writing impairment.

In addition to addressing the symptoms of agraphia, it is essential to address the underlying etiology of agraphia to prevent the potential progression of writing impairment. For instance, a patient with a tumor leading to central agraphia should be offered appropriate chemotherapy, radiation, and/or surgical treatments.

Of the various etiologies of central agraphia, the strongest evidence is in central agraphia due to stroke. SLT is shown to be beneficial for language impairment after stroke, with evidence that high-dose SLT is favorable to low-dose SLT for improving writing ability.

Limited evidence suggests that piracetam may be useful in agraphia in the acute setting after a stroke.

The treatment of peripheral agraphia is broader than central agraphia and depends on the subtype of agraphia. Visuospatial agraphia due to hemispatial neglect, for instance, may benefit from prism lenses.