Patients with salicylate toxicity are volume depleted due to hyperventilation, fever, and increased metabolic activity. Fluid resuscitation should utilize D5 with 3 amps of sodium bicarbonate. The dextrose will treat the central nervous system (CNS) hypoglycemia. The sodium bicarb will help correct the metabolic acidosis. Potassium may be supplemented if hypokalemia is present. Goal urine output is 2 to 3 mL/kg per hour.

Patients with severe toxicity will eventually fatigue and be unable to maintain respiratory compensation for the metabolic acidosis. Mechanical ventilation, while not ideal, may be required. Consider a bolus of 1 to 2 mEq/kg of sodium bicarbonate at the time of intubation to temporize the patient’s pH until hyperventilation can be resumed on the ventilator. Mechanical ventilation will not be able to compensate for the metabolic acidosis as well. Arrangements for emergent hemodialysis should be arranged following intubation. Patients may also experience respiratory distress secondary to pulmonary edema following fluid resuscitation.

Following initial stabilization, attempts should be made to decrease the serum salicylate levels. Activated charcoal has been shown to decrease salicylate levels. However, no morbidity or mortality benefit has been shown. Gastric lavage may be considered if the patient presents after acute ingestion of enteric-coated aspirin. If there is any concern for aspiration, these options should be avoided. Whole bowel irrigation has shown no benefit and may increase absorption.

Fluid resuscitation and serum alkalization will increase salicylate elimination. Hemodialysis can also accomplish this. Indications for hemodialysis include severe acidosis or hypotension despite fluid resuscitation; salicylate levels are greater than 100 mg/dL, mechanical ventilation, or end-organ damage. Common signs of end-organ damage in salicylate toxicity include seizures, rhabdomyolysis, pulmonary edema, cerebral edema, and renal failure. Hemodialysis removes salicylates and lactate, which should improve the patient’s metabolic acidosis.

Seizures should be treated with benzodiazepines. Glucose should also be administered as CNS hypoglycemia may be present. Expect the patient’s metabolic acidosis to be worse following a seizure and consider administering a bicarbonate bolus.

Patients with minor ingestions and minimal symptoms may be discharged home if their salicylate levels are down trending and no metabolic derangements are present. Patients with rising salicylate levels and worsening serum pH require admission to the intensive care unit for further monitoring.