Insulin glargine is a recombinant human insulin analog that binds to insulin receptors (IR). Insulin is necessary to regulate lipid, glucose, and energy homeostasis. It acts mainly on the skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and liver. The IR is a tyrosine kinase receptor with two extracellular alpha domains and two intracellular catalytic beta domains. Upon insulin binding, a conformational change occurs to the beta catalytic domains that activate the tyrosine kinase domains, causing them to auto-phosphorylate the beta subunits. Once activated, the beta subunits can bind docking proteins, which leads to the activation of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3k) and an intracellular signaling cascade, eventually activating protein kinase B (also known as Akt). Akt regulates the activity of the glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) receptor, protein kinase C (PKC), and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK or MAP kinase) pathway.

Insulin glargine has an onset of action of 1.5 to 2 hours. It has a long duration of action of up to 24 hours due to modifications of amino acids, including Asn to Gly at position 21 of the A chain and the addition of two Arg residues and positions 31 and 32 of the B chain. This arrangement allows the insulin to remain soluble at a pH of 4.0, which is the pH of the solution in which it is administered, and then become insoluble at physiologic pH. Once insulin glargine is injected into the body and introduced to the higher pH, the insoluble precipitate that forms slowly releases soluble protein over 24 hours.