To understand the pathophysiology of marasmus, it is important to understand the body's physiological response to a deficiency in calorie intake.

**Physiological Response to Starvation**

There are multiple stages of starvation that occur in a stepwise manner

- Gastrointestinal absorption of a substrate (1 to 6 hours)

- Glycogenolysis (1 to 2 days)

- Gluconeogenesis (1 week)

- Ketosis (3 to 4 days+)

- Increased cerebral ketone use (2 weeks+)

The physiological response during the gastrointestinal stage of starvation is dependent on what was eaten. A high carbohydrate meal will lead to increased blood levels of insulin and reduced levels of glucagon. This leads to increased glycogenesis and reduced gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. However, if the meal is deficient in carbohydrates, this leads to insulin release greater than the basal rate but lower than if a high carbohydrate meal was consumed along with a higher level of glucagon secretion, which causes higher levels of hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.

The body only has enough free glucose to supply one hours’ worth of metabolism.

The stores of glycogen in the liver are only capable of sustaining the energy demands of the body for 12-16 hours. Following this, gluconeogenesis must occur to maintain blood glucose levels. This is mediated by increased activity of glucokinase and reduced activity of glucose-6-phosphatase.

Ketoacid production reaches a maximum by the third day of starvation.

**Susceptibility to Infection**

Severe prolonged calorie restriction causes an increased susceptibility to infection, which occurs due to secondary immunodeficiency.

A breakdown of mucosal barrier integrity in the respiratory and gastrointestinal systems is associated with prolonged calorie restriction.

In particular, infection with Gram-negative organisms is associated with marasmus. Infections of the urinary, gastrointestinal, and respiratory tracts are associated with marasmus; however, patients suffering from marasmus may not present with the typical features of an infection such as fever.

There is also an impaired response to bacterial and viral vaccines.

**Total Body Water**

Marasmus is associated with an increase in total body water compared to body weight; furthermore, there is a direct correlation between weight loss in marasmus and total body water such that children with the greatest degree of wasting have the highest total body water.

**Electrolyte Changes**

Total body potassium decreases of 10-33% may be seen in marasmus.

**Oxidative Stress**

Severe malnutrition and calorie restriction are associated with increased levels of oxidative stress. It is thought that this occurs due to a reduced intake of antioxidants such as glutathione and vitamin E, which is further compounded with reduced glutathione synthesis.

**Gastrointestinal System**

Severe malnutrition is associated with villous atrophy and the subsequent loss of brush border enzymes such as disaccharidases, crypt hypoplasia, and impaired absorption across the gastric mucosa.

**Central Nervous System**

Severe malnutrition can contribute to altered brain function and changes in behavior.

**Endocrine Function**

Severe malnutrition can lead to atrophy of the adrenal and pituitary glands without a significant reduction in endocrinological function. Plasma cortisol levels may be raised due to reduced cortisol binding to albumin secondary to hypoalbuminemia. Insulin secretion in response to glucose loads returns to normal function following 3-6 weeks of treatment. This leads to impaired glucose clearance rates in children suffering from marasmus.

**Cardiovascular System**

Severe malnutrition is associated with thinning of the cardiac myofibrils and impairment in contractile ability. This leads to a reduction in cardiac output, which is proportional to weight loss.

**Refeeding Syndrome**

An unfortunate consequence of uncoordinated initiation of therapy may be the development of refeeding syndrome. In children suffering from marasmus, there are physiological changes that occur, and this includes reduced insulin secretion and increased secretion of glucagon. Furthermore, there is a shift of phosphate, potassium, and magnesium from intracellular spaces to extracellular spaces to maintain serum electrolyte levels. The child may have normal serum electrolyte levels whilst the total electrolyte levels in the body are low.

During the initiation of refeeding, there is hyperglycemia. There is an impairment in insulin secretion in response to raised blood glucose levels. This leads to fluid shifts and the development of dehydration. To facilitate cellular processes, there is a shift of electrolytes into intracellular spaces leading to depletion of serum electrolyte levels. As there is a general shift from the utilization of fatty acids as an energy source to glucose, there is an increased production of adenosine triphosphate. This results in hypophosphatemia from glucose phosphorylation.

Thiamine deficiency occurs as the shift from fatty acid metabolism to carbohydrate metabolism increases thiamine requirements. Furthermore, thiamine is needed in the synthesis of glycogen, proteins, and fats.