# Continuing Education Activity

Awareness under anesthesia is a preventable complication that can lead to significant psychological sequelae, including anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Intraoperative awareness occurs when the depth of anesthesia is inadequate to achieve a state of unconsciousness. The most severe cases of intraoperative awareness occur when patients recall events that occurred while under anesthesia, including pain, paralysis, or feelings of impending death. This activity reviews definitions of intraoperative awareness, incidence, risk factors, and mitigation strategies that interprofessional clinical team members can use to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of intraoperative awareness among surgical patients.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the definitions of awareness under anesthesia. 
- Describe the clinical and psychological consequences of awareness under anesthesia. 
- Review the patient, procedural, and anesthetic risk factors associated with awareness under anesthesia. 
- Explain prevention strategies that can be employed to reduce the risk of awareness under anesthesia.

# Introduction

"The knife is searching for disease, the pulleys are dragging back dislocated limbs, nature herself is working out the primal curse which doomed the tenderest of her creatures to the sharpest of her trials, but the fierce extremity of suffering has been steeped in the waters of forgetfulness, and the deepest furrow in the knotted brow of agony has been smoothed forever."

Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., uttered those words almost 200 years ago, in November of 1846, commenting in a lecture to students at Massachusetts Medical College on the first public demonstration of ether just a month before. The historical event has since become known as "Ether Day." Indeed, when Dr. William Morton, a dentist, successfully anesthetized Mr. Gilbert Abbot with ether for the resection of a tuberculous submandibular lesion in the amphitheater of Massachusetts General Hospital, many shared this belief. Corresponding with Dr. Morton shortly thereafter, Dr. Holmes is believed to have coined the term "anesthesia," stating:

"Everybody wants to have a hand in a great discovery. All I will do is to give a hint or two as to names—or the name—to be applied to the state produced and the agent. The state should, I think, be called "Anaesthesia." This signifies insensibility—more particularly...to objects of touch."

The medical community at large assumed then that humanity's unavoidable suffering through surgical intervention—the "primal curse" of humankind—was relegated to the dustbin of medical history. And yet, in the third decade of the 21st century, intraoperative awareness continues to threaten patients with horror and agony on the operating table, even as expectations for painless surgery have become commonplace and as practitioners of anesthesia continue to minimize both its frequency and relevance.

This review will address incidence, risk factors, monitoring of anesthetic depth, strategies for prevention, and perioperative, team-based management of unintended intraoperative awareness. The topic will conclude with a brief review of the long-term effects of accidental awareness during general anesthesia (AAGA) on both patients and practitioners.

Intraoperative awareness is characterized by the coincidence of both intraoperative consciousness and explicit, episodic postoperative recall of events during a planned anesthetic.

# Issues of Concern

**Risk Factors**

Risk factors for AAGA may be broadly separated into those related to the 1) technical application of anesthetics, 2) surgical procedure and/or context, and 3) inherent patient characteristics.

**Risk Factors Related to Anesthetic Technique**

Among anesthetic technique risk factors, NMB stands out as simultaneously the most significant and modifiable. The vast majority of self-reported cases of AAGA in the 5th National Audit Project for awareness (NAP5) were associated with the use of NMBs (incidence 1:8200 with NMB vs. 1:135900 without NMB); this represents a more than 16-fold increase of reported instances where NMBs were used.

Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) is also associated with an increased risk of AAGA compared to volatile-based anesthetics.

Problems with the technical delivery of anesthetics are a contributor to AAGA, though human error is more often the culprit than the failure of a mechanical or electronic device.

**Risk Factors Related to Surgical Procedure or Context**

Risk factors for AAGA related to surgical procedure and/or context are easily understood when one considers the common characteristics: urgent or emergent procedures, rapid pace from induction to surgical incision, and the attendant objectives that necessitate reduction of anesthetics in one form or another, (e.g., trauma, hypovolemia, depressed cardiac function.) Each of these characteristics is independent of and, in addition to, the added risk when NMBs are employed, as described above.

Emergency surgery, particularly trauma and cesarean section, pose relatively higher risks of AAGA due primarily to the reduction of anesthetic doses that are often required in these situations.

Common to both the emergent trauma and obstetric populations, the potential for difficult airway placement introduces further opportunities for unintended awareness. Intravenous induction agents rapidly redistribute, resulting in lower blood and brain concentrations, while alveolar delivery of inhaled anesthetics is delayed by definitive airway placement, and necessary replacement with IV agents may be delayed amidst the focus on obtaining airway control.

Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) also increases the risk of AAGA. [ref] This increase in risk may be related to the altered pharmacodynamics of bypass physiology.

**Patient-Related Risk Factors**

Patients reporting a history of intraoperative awareness may be at higher risk for subsequent AAGA, as reported by at least one observational study.

While not definitively proven or identified, genetic resistance to anesthetics may contribute to increased requirements and risk of AAGA.

Chronic substance abuse may contribute to acquired resistance to anesthetics. Long-term use of commonly abused substances, including alcohol, opioids, and benzodiazepines, may increase anesthetic requirements, increasing the risk of AAGA.

AAGA is shown to be most common at induction and emergence from general anesthesia.

In addition to acute hemodynamic compromise, patients presenting with chronic cardiovascular conditions such as congestive heart failure or significant valvular disease are also shown to be at higher risk for AAGA, as dose reduction strategies are commonly employed to maintain hemodynamic stability in these settings.

**Monitoring Depth of Anesthesia and Prevention of AAGA**

Monitoring for prevention of AAGA rests upon three primary axes of data: 1) end-tidal anesthetic concentration (ETAC), 2) blockade of the neuromuscular junction with NMB, and 3) brain monitoring with raw or processed EEG. Physiologic responses to surgical stimulation, including heart rate, blood pressure, and purposeful movement, are also monitored as routine components of anesthetic care. However, the reliability of physiologic parameters as an indicator of AAGA is often compromised by variability in sympathetic responses, beta- or calcium-channel blockade, or in the case of patient movement, NMB.

Monitoring ETAC is a basic standard of modern anesthetic delivery.

Monitoring the depth of NMB is critical to avoid unnecessary paralysis intraoperatively and adequate recovery of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) at emergence from anesthesia. Most surgery may be performed with judicious and intermittent use of NMB rather than a persistent state of complete paralysis.

Processed EEG monitors are commonly employed to assess the level of consciousness under GA. One such common monitor, the BIS monitor, translates raw EEG data into frequency bands that reflect a numeric value from 0 to 100. One randomized study demonstrated that patients targeted between a BIS value of 40 and 60 were less likely to experience AAGA. Notably, no studies have demonstrated an advantage of processed EEG monitoring over standard monitoring of ETAC concentration when available, including large meta-analyses.

Raw EEG possesses a significant advantage over processed EEG when monitoring for depth of consciousness. EEG waveforms are altered in consistent and reproducible ways when anesthetics are present at clinically relevant concentrations.

# Clinical Significance

**Management of AAGA**

When AAGA, or indeed any form of awareness associated with patient distress, is suspected or confirmed, a prompt and multi-disciplinary proactive approach to management is the standard of care.

Postoperatively, patients with a suspected awareness event should be interviewed at several intervals to assess and minimize the downstream psychological impact of AAGA. Immediate assessment in the PACU, either in response to a patient report of awareness or when suspected by a clinician, should focus on an open-ended discussion whereby the patient is permitted to relate their experience in detail. Dismissal of related events or justification for awareness from the practitioner at this point is inadvisable, and it is paramount to validate the concerns raised by the patient early in their recovery. Expressing regret for unpleasant experiences is both ethically sound and important for patients to hear. Expression of regret for untoward outcomes, and in many states, even apologizing for them, cannot be used against a practitioner as evidence of negligence in a malpractice claim.

Immediate post-operative interviews should occur in the presence of both surgical and anesthesiology team members to ensure that all parties are informed of events and so that a common understanding and analysis of causative factors may be undertaken. A patient’s recognition of awareness may be delayed by hours or even days. In many cases, patients may hesitate to initiate conversations about unintended awareness until asked.

The Brice questionnaire, first described by Brice, Hetherington, and Utting in 1970, attempts to solicit experiences consistent with awareness by distinguishing explicit recall from dreaming and is open-ended in both format and syntax.

In contrast, only 3 of those 19 individuals were captured on the basic post-operative quality assurance calls, demonstrating that commonly employed follow-up methods are insufficient tools to screen for AAGA. Directed interviews one month out for all surgical patients pose a logistical challenge for healthcare infrastructure, particularly in the current environment of a depleted and overburdened workforce. Herein lies a considerable and persistent challenge in accurately detecting AAGA events.

**Effect of Accidental Awareness on Patients**

Awareness events are commonly associated with psychological sequela. Nightmares, depression, anxiety, and PTSD are reported at significant but variable rates after AAGA.

As such, it is of critical importance to perform a detailed and comprehensive informed consent for the planned anesthetic, including the possibility of awareness and explicit recall, even in the setting of routine preoperative benzodiazepine administration. Indeed, significant gaps in understanding among patients of commonly performed sedation and anesthetic techniques may be identified during a properly informed consent process, thus offering an opportunity to educate the patient and manage expectations for planned consciousness or the lack thereof. Psychiatric and/or psychologic referral and treatment are highly recommended after suspected or confirmed awareness events.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team of anesthesiologists, nurse anesthetists, surgeons, and perioperative nurses must understand the patient, anesthetic, and procedural risk factors predisposing patients to accidental awareness. Risks can be mitigated through avoidance or judicious use of muscle relaxants, depth of consciousness monitoring, and administration of benzodiazepines when clinically appropriate. When patients experience accidental awareness, structured interviews should be performed, and referral for psychological support should be offered. [Level 3]