Harrison and McCormack proposed a histopathological classification of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) based on the arterial layer affected, which was later revised by Stanley. FMD is mainly classified into three types: intimal, medial, and peri-adventitial fibroplasia. These three variants are not mutually exclusive and can co-exist.

**Medial FMD**

This is the most frequent type, occurring in 85% of the cases with alternating ridges of collagen and loss of elastic membrane but preserved internal elastic lamina. The classical “string of beads” appearance on angiography is due to alternating areas of stenosis and dilatations of the renal artery. In contrast to atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis, FMD rarely affects the proximal or ostial section of the renal artery.

Medial FMD is further divided into:

- Medial fibroplasia (60% to 70%)

- Perimedial fibroplasia (15%)

- Medial hyperplasia (1%)

**Intimal FMD**

This is the second most common, accounting for 5% to 10% of the cases with circumforaneous deposition of collagen in the intima, resulting in fragmentation of internal elastic lamina. Angiographic appearance is that of concentric smooth stenosis or narrowing.

**Adventitial FMD**

This is the least common, occurring in less than 1% of the cases with dense deposition of collagen in the adventitia resulting in smooth narrowing appearance on angiography.

Kincaid et al. proposed four angiographic variants of FMD:

- Multifocal: Multiple stenoses with a string of bead appearance usually associated with medial FMD.

- Tubular: Long concentric stenosis greater than 1 cm.

- Focal: Solitary stenosis less than 1 cm in length.

- Mixed Type

The American Heart Association further simplified the classification into focal and multifocal.