An insight into the radiation effects on the developing fetus serves to deliver better care to the expecting mother who is concomitantly undergoing radiotherapy. It helps curate a pre-conceptional, gestational, and post-conceptional radiotherapy planning to provide maximum care to the pregnant mother malignancy while maintaining minimum risk to fetal life.

**Pre-Conceptional Considerations**

- No noticeable risks of transmitting radiation-induced abnormalities to offspring from either irradiated parent's gonads before conception have been identified. Studies involving the atomic bomb survivors' children and grandchildren have not described any heritable effects after parental radiation exposure. Recent studies involving childhood cancer survivors treated with radiation therapy have also not demonstrated transmittable genetic effects on their offspring. The offsprings of fathers who receive testicular radiation do not appear to be at increased risk of adverse outcomes.

- The current recommendation is that women should refrain from becoming pregnant if planning to undergo radiotherapy sessions and several months after terminating the radiation therapy. These recommendations are inferred from mice experiments that showed that mature oocytes were more radiosensitive than immature oocytes. Some authors recommend that if a pre-conception ovarian dose of over 0.5 Gy (500 mGy, 50 rads) is received, pregnancy should be delayed for at least two months. It is noteworthy that most of this is theoretical discussion imparts little value in practical terms. Usually, most patients receiving such high doses have either bulky cancer or cancer-induced significant endocrine dysfunctions, making conception difficult. They are often asked by their physicians to delay possible pregnancy.

- Adolescent girls and young women who underwent pelvic radiation are at increased risk of developing abnormalities related to pelvic vasculature leading to decreased uteroplacental perfusion when pregnant. Various radiation-induced myometrial changes like fibrosis may reduce uterine elasticity, distensibility, and volume; endometrial injury may compromise normal decidualization.

- A study involving female cancer survivors compared to those who did not receive flank and uterus radiotherapy of >5 Gy showed a significantly heightened risk of having a preterm birth (50.0 versus 19.6 percent), low birth weight babies (36.2 versus 7.6 percent), and having a small for gestational age infant (18.2 versus 7.8 percent).

- It is important to note that the heightened risk for these outcomes depends explicitly on the total radiation dose, site irradiated, and the woman's age at the time of irradiation; as described earlier, that prepubertal uterus is more vulnerable.

**Fertility Issues in Radiotherapy Patients**

Cranial or head/neck radiation can damage the hypothalamic-pituitary axis affecting patient fertility since head and neck cancers require high doses in the 40 to 70 Gy range. Direct radiation to the ovaries can also cause early ovarian failure. As described earlier, pelvis radiation may cause structural changes such as reduced uterine volume, lack of endometrial response to estrogen, or impaired uterine artery blood flow, impeding successful embryonal implantation or development.****

**Cancer-Specific Radiotherapy Management**

- Even though intrapartum radiation has been a longstanding issue of discussion. There is evidence from many studies as well see further demonstrating no significant fetal morbidity all while having similar patient outcomes as their non-pregnant peers. However from May 2021 updated guidelines explicitly advise against radiotherapy during pregnancy and recommends only post-partum planning for indicated radiation therapy.

**Breast Cancer**

- The incidence of breast cancer is 1 in 10,000 pregnancies. With the women increasing age for the first pregnancy, incidence keeps rising. Increased incidence of nodal involvement is also seen with gestational breast cancer.

- Primary investigations for breast cancer consist of a physical examination, mammography, breast ultrasonography (USG), and biopsy. Mammography is safe during pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be done only if USG is non-satisfactory since there are concerns regarding using gadolinium contrast. A core biopsy is recommended over a fine needle aspiration since hormonal changes are frequent in pregnancy, so fine needle aspiration can lead to false-positive and false-negative breast tissue results.

- Investigation for staging should be limited to a chest X-ray (CXR) with appropriate shielding, USG liver, and a non-contrast skeletal MRI. A positron emission tomographic (PET) scan should be avoided.

- Delaying radical radiotherapy is commonly advocated by multidisciplinary teams until the end of the postpartum period; however, surgery and chemotherapy are invariably advised starting in the second trimester.

- When considered, adjuvant radiotherapy is usually administered as a hypofractionated dose of 40.5 Gy in 15 fractions to the whole breast and chest wall over three weeks. Radiotherapy is also administered to the supraclavicular fossa if there is a high risk of spread (for example, if metastatic deposits are found in 4 or more axillary lymph nodes).

- A typical boost dose of 10–16 Gy in 4–8 fractions to the tumor bed is recommended if there is an elevated risk of recurrence.

- Palliative radiotherapy can be considered for controlling symptoms in cases where there is imminent skin involvement. There are various regimes; the most commonly used one is 36 Gy in 6 fractions, two fractions each week.

- During breast irradiation, the most critical factors determining the fetal dose are the field size and distance from the radiation field. Prominent studies outline pregnancy outcomes with ongoing radiotherapy:

- Kourinou et al.****calculated the fetal exposure for breast cancer radiotherapy using anthropomorphic phantoms in pregnant patients during the first, second, and third trimester.
- Antypas et al., while treating a 45 yr-old patient with 46 Gy in 20 fractions with six megavolts tangential fields, found her to be pregnant during the second week of her treatment.
- The first trimester is unsafe due to known incidences of severe malformations and mental retardation. During the third trimester, the grown fetus in a growing gravid uterus is also at risk of increased dose due to the reduced distance between the treatment field and the gravid uterus. Hence the fetal exposure increases with the gestational stage as the distance between the radiation field edge and uterine fundus narrows by around a centimeter per week. Thus, it is recommended to evaluate the expected change during radiotherapy while calculating the fetal dose.

- Post-treatment breastfeeding should not be discouraged, except for from the irradiated breast. Most women who have had breast irradiation can produce milk from the affected breast. Still, the amount of milk produced may be less than that of the unaffected breast, especially if the lumpectomy site is in the vicinity of the areolar complex or if many ducts were transected.

- Even if breast milk is produced, breastfeeding from the irradiated breast is not recommended because of fear of developing painful mastitis.

**Gynecological Malignancies**

- Managing gynecological malignancies superimposed with ongoing pregnancy is more complicated than breast cancer, especially if the disease has advanced to stages IIB-IVA. In non-pregnant patients, radiation therapy and simultaneous cisplatin chemotherapy are the recommended standards of care. Postponing definitive chemotherapy and radiotherapy with or without any pretreatment lymphadenectomy can severely affect overall cancer control and the mother's ultimate survival. Patients diagnosed earlier in pregnancy or if pregnancy occurred mid-treatment present a significant challenge. In practice, women diagnosed before attaining week 20 of gestation are recommended to terminate the pregnancy and undergo definitive cancer treatment. Pregnancy termination is a rather appropriate intervention before initiating radiotherapy for many reasons, principally for the patient psychological benefit.

**Cervical Cancer**

- The incidence of abnormal cervical cytology in pregnancy is fairly common, as seen in 1 to 5 women in every 100 pregnancies. However, the incidence of cervical cancer in pregnancy is low at 1 to 12 per 10,000 pregnancies.

- For diagnosis, using colposcopy and biopsy is deemed safe during pregnancy. Staging is possible using a pelvic MRI without contrast. CXR and USG liver can also be utilized. PET scans are contraindicated.

- Laparoscopic lymphadenectomy is safe until 20 weeks of gestation for assessing lymph node status. However, Alouini et al. demonstrated no maternal or fetal complications while performing laparoscopic lymphadenectomies on eight pregnant women between 12 and 32 weeks of gestation.

- Treatment depends on the stage of the disease, lymph node involvement status, and histological subtype. Most cervical cancers are diagnosed during pregnancy at stage 1, where it is limited to the cervix. For stage 1a (depth of stromal invasion <5 mm and extension <7 mm), treatment choices include either postponing treatment until fetal maturity or radical trachelectomy (if there are no involved lymph nodes). Trachelectomy can be successfully carried out on tumors <2 cm, as seen in stage 1b1. The European guidelines recommend either trachelectomy or neoadjuvant chemotherapy for stage 1b1 tumors to limit tumor progression, while the French guidelines recommend delaying treatment but with close monitoring.

- For locally advanced stages, including stage 1B2 tumors (tumors greater than 4 cm), recommended treatment involves radical radiotherapy for 5.5 weeks with 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions with simultaneous chemotherapy followed by intracavity brachytherapy. Such high radiation doses imply that therapeutic radiotherapy and pregnancy are incompatible.

- Some studies have reported neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by delayed surgery or radiotherapy postpartum, but their implication in mainstream cancer management is debatable. The safest option is to terminate the pregnancy and proceed with definitive treatment. In a few instances where the tumor was too large and complicated to terminate the pregnancy surgically, radiotherapy was administered during the pregnancy, resulting in spontaneous pregnancy termination.

**Endometrial Cancer**

- Endometrial cancer incidence in pregnancy is infrequent and is usually discovered at delivery or while doing evacuation of conception products after a spontaneous miscarriage.

- Diagnosis requires a pelvic MRI without contrast, abdominal USG, and CXR. Histological diagnosis is not feasible during pregnancy.

- Definitive treatment includes a total abdominal hysterectomy irrespective of adjuvant radiotherapy, making the treatment incompatible with pregnancy. Infrequently, primary radiotherapy is administered if the patient is unable to undergo surgery.

- Like in cervical cancer, high therapeutic dose radiotherapy would not be possible without inflicting harmful consequences to the fetus. Invariably, the patient and team would need to decide on postponing the treatment or terminating the pregnancy.

**Vulvar Cancer**

- Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia is commonly known to occur during pregnancy. It can be treated with a few topical treatments and surgery.

- The role of radiotherapy is not defined. In a rare instance, if either a primary or adjuvant radiotherapy is required, it would not be feasible during pregnancy. It would need to be delayed until the delivery of the fetus.

**Ovarian Cancer**

- Ovarian tumor incidence in pregnancy is relatively low at 2.4 to 5.7%, and approximately 5% are malignant.

- Diagnosis includes a serum cancer antigen 125 assay, a pelvic/lower abdomen USG, and a biopsy. For screening, an abdominopelvic MRI and CXR are indicated.

- The mainstay of the treatment involves chemotherapy and surgery with limited radiotherapy use if at all.

**Lymphoma**

- The introduction of newer and better effective systemic therapy and numerous clinical trials has shown promising results. Currently, the standard treatment of lymphoma comprises chemotherapy with or without involved field (smaller volume, lower dose) radiotherapy. Typical radiation doses in the adjuvant regimens range from 20 to 30 Gy.

- Only in selective stages, such as low grade I lymphomas or lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, radiation monotherapy can be considered.

- Combination chemotherapy for lymphomas has been administered during pregnancy with reasonably safe and effective outcomes, especially when administered in the second and third trimesters.

- Consensus prevails that a delay of even a few weeks in definitive radiation therapy does not impact overall survival.

**Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma**

- NHL comprises approximately 5-6% of all cancers diagnosed during pregnancy.

- Radiation therapy has a pivotal role in treating NHL lymphomas, including stage I and II low grade, intermediate-grade, or indolent B-cell NHL, which happens to be particularly radiosensitive. In practice, standard treatment options are primary radiotherapy in combination with immunotherapy for lasting remissions.

- Interestingly, NHL diagnosed during pregnancy tends to be more aggressive.

- Patients who either have aggressive NHL or with extensive disease burden present a therapeutic challenge as delaying therapy risks the patient while administering systemic therapy endangers the fetus. In such circumstances, depending on the gestation period, disease site, and staging, the pros of active treatment should be weighed against delaying treatment until post-partum. With low doses administered (25 to 30 Gy) and often in small fields, treatment may be possible with uneventful effects on the fetus.

- If fetal dose calculations are significant, avoiding radiotherapy during pregnancy is the most judicious decision.

**Hodgkin Lymphoma**

- Hodgkin lymphoma incidence is 1 in 1,000 to 6,000 during pregnancy.

- For establishing a diagnosis, clinical history and hematological, biochemical tests, and a neck/chest/abdominopelvic MRI are favored over a CT scan. A lymph node biopsy is confirmatory.

- Current evidence strongly suggests using radiotherapy in the supradiaphragmatic disease commonly in cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy in non-pregnant cases for better outcomes.

- As for pregnant patients, Mazonakis et al. demonstrated fetal radiation exposure while using a phantom to deliver radiotherapy of varying field sizes to the cervical lymph nodes, axilla, mediastinum, and the neck/mediastinum.

- Nuyttens et al. delivered radiotherapy to a 26-year-old pregnant woman with stage IIa Hodgkin lymphoma with cervical lymphadenopathy and mediastinum.

- Cygler et al. also administered supradiaphragmatic radiotherapy of 35 Gy in 20 fractions with a standard mantle field to a 23-week pregnant patient.

- In summary, no significant differences between the babies born to women with Hodgkin compared to those born to healthier mothers compared birth weight, mean gestational age at birth, delivery method, neonatal complications, and resuscitation attempts. Administering radiotherapy in pregnant patients with HL and NHL seems feasible in most circumstances unless the cancer load is massive. Over the last decades, advanced chemotherapy and immunotherapy have decreased radiotherapy volumes, allowing decreased possible fetal exposure to ionizing radiation.

**Melanoma**

- Melanoma is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers during pregnancy, with an incidence of 1:1000 pregnancies.

- Surgery is the primary treatment for non-metastatic melanoma. Adjuvant systemic therapy is indicated depending on risk factors such as depth of invasion and nodal status. Radiation therapy is indicated as an adjuvant in high-risk cases such as melanomas of the head and neck region with positive lymph nodes. Radiotherapy is used as an adjuvant or primary therapy for mucosal melanomas, which has an overall poor prognosis in treating brain metastases, or as a palliative treatment for recurrent/metastatic disease in sites other than the central nervous system.

- Because of the aggressive nature of melanomas, delaying radiotherapy until delivery is felt to be not in the best interest of the patient welfare. Thorough treatment planning to minimize radiotherapy to the fetus should be considered.

**Head and Neck Cancer**

- The incidence of head and neck cancers in pregnancy is significantly low.

- Diagnosis and staging can be safely made using nasal endoscopy and biopsy, MRI, and CXR. CT scans and PET scans are contraindicated.

- Radiotherapy is often given as a primary treatment option; however, depending on the stage, site, and histopathological appearance, it can be administered with either chemotherapy or given after surgery. The radiotherapy dose is usually high, about 60 to 70 Gy, delivered in fractions of 1.8-2 Gy daily over seven weeks. Because of the safe distance between the treatment site and gravid uterus, radiotherapy can be administered during the 2nd and 3rd trimester without compromising fetal outcomes.

- Nuttyens et al. reported administering radiotherapy postoperatively to a patient at 24 weeks of gestation with 64 Gy over 6.5 weeks for her tongue cancer.

- Kourinou et al. demonstrated even lower fetal exposure while treating a patient with nasopharyngeal cancer with reported doses ranging between 0.004 to 0.0171 Gy throughout the three trimesters.

- IMRT is now commonly used for head and neck cancers. This allows better alignment of high dose regions around the tumor; however, it results in large adjacent healthy tissue areas receiving lower but significant radiation doses. Josipovic et al. successfully utilized IMRT when treating a pregnant patient with head and neck cancer and using special shielding to reduce the fetal dose.

**Thyroid Cancer**

- Thyroid cancer is another common cancer commonly seen in women of the reproductive age group.

- Surgery is the primary treatment for well-differentiated thyroid cancers. However, it is prudent to postpone surgery during pregnancy until after delivery and keep a watchful follow-up using ultrasound imaging and thyroid function tests unless progression is evident.

- Thyroid malignancies are not generally treated using external beam radiotherapy. Instead, radioactive iodine (131-I) is often used to ablate residual thyroid tissue after surgery in non-pregnant cases.

- Radioactive 131-I is contraindicated during pregnancy, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission recommends not to breastfeed while being treated with radioactive iodine. For relatively rare occurrences of poorly differentiated or anaplastic thyroid cancer during pregnancy, aggressive therapy is warranted with the patient informed decision-making and constant communication within the multi-disciplinary team.