Once the choice of laterality is determined, NTI may proceed. The first step to performing an NTI is a generous application of vasoconstricting spray bilaterally. A topical anesthetic may be applied via spray or using a lubricant mixed with a local anesthetic. Common options include oxymetazoline hydrochloride 0.05%, phenylephrine hydrochloride 1%, and cocaine 4%. Only the latter has a topical anesthetic effect; therefore, the use of the former two should ideally be accompanied by the administration of 2 to 4% topical lidocaine as well.

After applying a topical anesthetic and a vasoconstrictor, some anesthesiologists advocate using a device to dilate the nasal cavity, commonly a nasopharyngeal trumpet airway. The necessity of dilation before intubation is a topic of debate in the anesthesiology community. Currently, no PubMed indexed papers show benefit from this practice, only increased complications from repeated instrumentation of delicate structures. As of the time of this article, dilation is not a recommended practice.

Before intubation, the patient should be pre-oxygenated with a FiO2 of 1.0 and ventilation assessed before muscle relaxant is administered.

It is important to lubricate the distal end of the nasotracheal tube, with the most common lubricants being either lidocaine or a plain, non-medicated water-soluble jelly. Adequate topical anesthesia and vasoconstriction are particularly important when NTI is performed on an awake patient, such as a patient with developing edema from a blunt laryngeal injury. Topical anesthetic sprayed onto the vocal cords and regional anesthesia of the larynx can also be beneficial. Sensation to the supraglottis is provided by the superior laryngeal nerves, which can be blocked with local anesthetic injections between the greater cornu of the hyoid bone and the superior cornu of the thyroid cartilage.

After insertion into the naris, gentle pressure should be applied to advance the tube with the vector of force directed posteriorly towards the nasopharynx and the operating room table. Some manipulation will be required while passing the tube through the nasal cavity, and some resistance will be encountered along the way.

If the amount of resistance felt is significant, the tube may be repositioned before attempting to advance farther. A smaller-sized ETT may be needed if the anatomy cannot accommodate passage of a standard size tube, as determined by the patient's age and sex. It is important to keep in mind that for a nasal RAE tube, the diameter is proportional to the length of the tube. For this reason, if a tube with a narrow diameter is chosen, it may not be able to advance far enough into the trachea for the balloon to be situated completely in the subglottis. Options, in this case, include switching to a standard ETT, considering orotracheal intubation, or changing sides and approaching the contralateral nostril.

When the ETT has reached the posterior nasopharynx and passed the soft palate into the oropharynx, transoral direct laryngoscopy will be performed, and Magill forceps will be used to advance the tube between the vocal cords and into the trachea. Once the ETT cuff has passed the vocal cords and is inflated, the chest should be auscultated, and end-tidal PCO2 verified to confirm that the end of the tube is positioned in the trachea.

The position of the patient's head should be noted during and after intubation to determine the depth of the ETT insertion. Flexion may advance the tube deeper into the trachea, which is usually of little clinical significance when using a nasal RAE, as the likelihood of endobronchial intubation is low with an appropriately-sized tube. Perhaps more likely is the withdrawal of the tube with extension of the neck. If a narrow nasal passage necessitates using a relatively small tube, extension of the neck can force the balloon against the vocal cords and may lead to injury, balloon herniation, or extubation.