Treatment of PACs depends on the symptomatology, triggers, and associated structural heart conditions. Typically, only patients with symptomatic PACs require treatment. After appropriate identification of triggers or underlying structural cardiac conditions, therapy starts by reassuring patients that PACs are typically benign and can be controlled by avoiding triggers. In patients with persistent symptoms despite avoidance of triggers, further therapy is indicated, starting with medications.

Pharmacologic management can be achieved using:

- Beta-adrenergic blockers at low doses are the relatively safe and first-line treatment in symptomatic patients if conservative measures fail. The role of calcium channel blockers to treat PACs is not well defined.

- Type IA, type IC, and type III antiarrhythmic agents can all suppress the PAC origin and are infrequently used only after careful consideration of their pro-arrhythmogenic nature.

In patients with refractory symptoms despite medical therapy or those with cardiomyopathy and heart failure linked the frequent PACs, and in those patients in whom the PACs trigger atrial arrhythmias like atrial fibrillation, further interventional therapy is indicated. Some interventional options include atrial pacing, catheter ablation thoracoscopic ablation.

Attempts should always be made to control with conservative non-pharmaceutical measures first. Primary healthcare providers may provide initial reassurance and medical treatment; however, refractory cases or use of antiarrhythmic medications should be referred to cardiologists. Percutaneous and surgical interventions are delegated to the appropriate specialists.