Lesions that are away from the optic nerve or macula and less likely to affect vision are generally not treated. Treatment is usually initiated when a lesion is two disc diameters from the center of the fovea or one disk diameter away from the margins of the optic disc.

A recent meta-analysis of all studies that compared available treatments to observation found no significant difference in the visual outcome in immunocompetent patients with acute Toxoplasma retinochoroiditis (TRC). In patients with chronic relapsing TRC, treatment may reduce recurrences. Despite this, treatment is initiated in patients with lesions that are close to the optic nerve or macula combined with vision significantly restricted in the 20/70 range or worse. Initiation of treatment is never taken lightly as studies reveal that over one-fourth of patients experience an adverse reaction to the drugs commonly used in treatment. Treatment during pregnancy carries the additional consideration of the effect on the fetus.

**Treatment of the Immunocompetent Patient with Acute TRC with Oral Medication**

While there is no consensus on what the best treatment for TRC might be, 3 agents have been used for over 50 years. This “classic therapy” consists of 4 to 8 weeks of oral pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and folinic acid combined with high-dose prednisone. Pyrimethamine by mouth twice per day loading dose of 50 mg is followed by 25 mg twice per day.  Sulfadiazine is given as a 2 g orally 4 times a day loading dose, followed by 1 g 4 times a day. Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine interfere with folic acid metabolism. To avoid developing thrombocytopenia and leucopenia, 3 to 5 mg of oral folinic acid supplementation twice a week.  Sulfadiazine has a significant risk of hepatotoxicity and cannot be prescribed to patients with sulfa allergies. Prednisone can be prescribed at 40-60 mg orally for several weeks to 1 month followed by a taper based on the severity of inflammation.

Several other oral antibiotics including clindamycin (300 mg 4 times a day), spiramycin (1 to 4 g once daily), azithromycin (250 mg), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (800/160 mg), and atovaquone (750 mg 4 times a day) have been tried in combination with a classic therapy or in other combinations. Of these, spiramycin was shown to clearly not be beneficial while clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and atovaquone may be of benefit with a significantly reduced risk of adverse drug reactions

Use of adjuvant steroids, while part of the classic triple therapy, has not definitively been shown to be beneficial and its use varies widely.  In one survey of uveitis specialists, 17% used oral corticosteroids in all immunocompetent patients with TRC. The rest of respondents used corticosteroids only in the presence of severe vitreous inflammatory reaction (71%), decreased vision (59%), the proximity of the lesions to the fovea or optic disc (35%), and for large lesions (5%). Prednisone was the corticosteroid used by 97% of respondents in varying doses and schedules. The most popular regimen for the treatment of TRC was a combination of pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and prednisone (29% of respondents). Prednisone is usually started 3 days after the start of antibiotic therapy. While animal studies show the benefit of adjuvant steroid use, several non-randomized studies failed to prove an improved visual outcome convincingly.

**Treatment of the Immunocompetent Patient with Acute TRC with Intravitreous Medications.**

Treatment with intra-ocular steroids alone is contra-indicated as it typically causes extensive retinitis.  Two clinical trials investigated intravitreous clindamycin (1mg) and dexamethasone (0.4 mg) one injection followed by additional injections every two weeks based on clinical course. These studies indicated that intravitreous injections are a reasonable alternative to classic therapy and could even be used as first-line treatment

**Treatments to Reduce the Rate of Recurrence of TRC.**

Initial treatments in which barrier laser was applied surrounding Toxoplasma chorioretinal scars, did not result in a reduction of recurrence of TRC. Atovaquone and azithromycin treatment for 5 to 6 weeks did not reduce the rate of TRC either. However, long-term use of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (800/160 mg) every 3 days for 20 months in patients with a history of recurrent TRC in one trial, as well as a treatment every other day for one year after a 45-day treatment of active TRC was shown to reduce the rate of recurrence of TRC significantly

**Treatment of the Immunocompromised Patient with Acute TRC.**

Under 2% of patients with the human immunodeficiency virus are affected with TRC. Elderly patients with TRC are at risk of developing a more severe retinochoroiditis, likely due to an age-related reduction in cellular immunity. Local immunosuppression has been associated with TRC as well.  In severely immunocompromised patients, TRC can be much more severe and resemble acute retinal necrosis.  In patients with TRC and AIDS, neuroimaging is indicated because central nervous system (CNS) toxoplasmosis lesions have been reported in up to 29%. These patients are at life-long risk that the latent bradyzoite form of Toxoplasma converts to the active tachyzoite form. Treatment includes ongoing suppressive therapy with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine