Clinical practice guidelines recommend protamine sulfate for the reversal of enoxaparin-associated bleeds dependent on the time from the last administration and dose of enoxaparin. Protamine sulfate is a cationic peptide that binds to low molecular weight heparin, forming an ionic complex with no anticoagulant activity.

As with most anticoagulants, bleeding is the major complication with low molecular weight heparin-like enoxaparin. The incidence rate is reported to be less than 3%. Given the subcutaneous administration of LMWH, there is a high risk of minor bruising at the injection site. The subcutaneous injection has a bioavailability of around 100%. In the event of significant bleeding, protamine sulfate can be used to reverse the anticoagulant effects of LMWH partially. Protamine neutralizes about 60% of LMWH anticoagulant activity. For LMWH administered within the previous 8 hours, the recommended dose is 1mg protamine sulfate per 1mg of enoxaparin or 100 anti-factor-Xa units of dalteparin.****

According to the ACCP guidelines, the maximum single dose of protamine sulfate is 50 mg. If bleeding persists, a second dose of 50 mg protamine sulfate can be administered. Smaller doses of protamine sulfate can be administered if the time since LMWH administration is greater than 8 hours.

Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is an infrequent but potentially life-threatening complication of enoxaparin therapy. The development of antibodies against heparin-bound platelet factor 4 (PF4) generally occurs 5–10 days after administration. The antibody-heparin-PF4 complex binds and activates platelets resulting in thrombosis and thrombocytopenia. 4T score (thrombocytopenia, timing of platelet count fall, thrombosis, other causes of thrombocytopenia), serotonin release assay, and anti-PF4/heparin antibodies are used for diagnosis.