Abnormalities that brings about the vanishing of the fetus are usually present from right off the early development as opposed to happening from an intense acute insult.

The vanishing twin may have the following physiologic outcomes:

- Resorption: Even though resorption is the most likely physiologic explanation for the vanishing of the specific proportion of the gestational sac, the valid incidence of resorption is still unknown. Different study results show that resorption can be observed from as early as the seventh week to as late as the twelfth week of gestations. It is evident in any case that resorption of gestational sacs during pregnancy happens without affecting the co-twin. Regardless of the resorption of the vanishing twin, there are excellent chances of the survival of the other twin, as resorption mostly occurs in the first trimester.

- Blighted Ovum: By definition, a blighted ovum is the gestational sacs inside which no embryo can be visualized via ultrasonography. According to some studies, most of the pregnancies that ended up with the vanishing of a fetus were subsequently found to be anembryonic pregnancy co-existing with normal pregnancy. The result could be in the form of vaginal bleeding in the first trimester, indicating the expulsion of the anembryonic sac. It is advisable, therefore, to undergo a thorough ultrasonographic examination before opting for dilation and curettage, as the process of dilation and curettage may end up in the accidental abortion of the other surviving twin.

- Fetus papyraceous: Fetus papyraceous is a mummified, compressed or flattened fetus associated with the other viable fetus. This is very rare and most commonly occurs in multiple gestations. The deceased fetus gets flattened in between the membranes of the other viable fetus and the uterine wall. The demise of the fetus usually occurs right off in the early second trimester. The early demise of the twin may result in complete resorption, but as the pregnancy continues to term, the twin may become macerated and may affect the other viable twin as well, as the pregnancy continues. This course of events can be well observed via regular ultrasonographic examinations.