Prompt diagnosis and treatment are pivotal.

Successful treatment of central nervous system lymphomas requires a collaborative and interprofessional team approach to enhance the patient’s quality of life before, during, and after treatment; this often includes a team of experts in various subspecialties such as:

- Medical oncologists

- Neurologists

- Neuroradiologists

- Pain management specialists

- Physical and occupational therapists

- Psychiatrists

- Neurosurgeons

- Neuropathologists

- Radiation oncologists

- Ophthalmologist

- Social workers

- Spiritual care leaders

- Oncology nurses, and

- Palliative care specialists.

In addition to those listed above, nursing and pharmacy will play crucial roles in managing CNS lymphoma. Nursing will be administering the chemotherapy, which should have input from an oncology specialist pharmacist, who will verify agent selections and verify all dosing while checking against drug-drug interactions, many of which can later therapeutic results, as has been discussed. The nurse should be alert to adverse reactions, as well as noting therapeutic efficacy, and reporting any concerns to the ordering physician. In this way, all these various disciplines can contribute to the collaborative interprofessional team approach to disease management to optimize outcomes. [Level V]

CNS lymphoma has a guarded prognosis; every treatment has significant side effects which add to the morbidity. Even in patients who do respond to treatment, relapse is common. Because of the grim prognosis, a palliative team should have involvement early in the care of these patients. Comfort care and quality of life should not be sacrificed with exhaustive tests and procedures that do not change the prognosis.