Complement is a critical part of the host defense machinery that, together with the contact and coagulation systems and the various branches of innate and adaptive immunity, helps to maintain barrier functions and protect against microbial invasion after injury.

This reactivity and specificity occur via a series of circulating pattern-recognition proteins (PRPs) that sense pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and initiate the complement cascade. The surveillance, immunomodulatory, and effector functions of complement take place through a tightly coordinated network of interactions involving three canonical pathways of activation: the classical pathway, alternative pathway, and lectin pathway. All activation pathways result in the generation of the C3 and C5 convertase enzyme complexes, which cleave C3 into the anaphylatoxin C3a and the opsonin C3b, and C5 into the anaphylatoxin C5a and into C5b, respectively. The deposition of C5b onto a target kicks off membrane attack complex (MAC) formation and target lysis1. The opsonins and anaphylatoxins promote phagocytic uptake of pathogens by scavenger cells and activate neutrophils, monocytes, and mast cells, respectively.

The pro-inflammatory effects of complement are well-acknowledged, but its essential anti-inflammatory properties in immunity are less well appreciated. The anti-inflammatory effects of complement are commonly associated with the lack of complement activation fragment generation, and the recent finding that the absence of anaphylatoxin receptor stimulation during T cell priming induces regulatory T cell development supports this notion.

Beyond its immune-related functions, complement activity also links to non-immune-related pathways, such as development and tissue homeostasis. During normal development, C3a mediates the mutual cell attraction that is necessary for collective cell migration in Xenopus laevis, and collectin 11 (also known as CLK1) of the lectin complement pathway regulates the migration of neural crest cells.