The age of onset of CAE is usually between 4 and 10 years, with a peak between the ages of 5 and 7.

Regarding its clinical presentation, family members and teachers usually describe brief spells in which the patient has a loss of awareness, is unresponsive, and has a behavioral arrest. They describe the patient during these spells as having “a blank stare.”

Oral automatisms can also occur, especially with prolonged seizures or during hyperventilation. Children frequently have mild clonic or tonic movements in the first few seconds of the spell. Pallor is commonly reported.

For JAE, the age of onset is classically between 10 and 19 years, with a peak at 15 years.

Ten to fifteen percent of patients with childhood absence epilepsy have a history of febrile seizures.

On physical examination, hyperventilation can trigger absence seizures. To test this, the examiner asks the child to blow repetitively for more than 2 minutes. Using a pinwheel or paper can be helpful because this encourages the child to cooperate more during testing. If hyperventilation is done successfully, the patient will develop seizures that can be seen clinically and /or on EEG. There is some evidence that absence seizures are more easily provoked when the person is in a sitting position.

Absence status consists of generalized, non-convulsive seizures characterized by impairment of awareness and intermittently has other manifestations such as automatisms or subtle myoclonic, tonic, atonic, or autonomic phenomena. Patients usually have a previous diagnosis of generalized epilepsy. Absence status presents as a non-convulsive seizure lasting between a half hour and several days. It usually ends spontaneously and suddenly but should be treated with anti-seizure medications at the time of diagnosis.