The treatment aims to reduce the pain and discomfort resulting from corns.

- The treating provider should perform a gentle paring of the lesion without drawing blood, utilizing scalpels. Removing the central plug under local anesthesia, if necessary, reduces the pressure on underlying dermal nerves, thus alleviating the pain. Patients should be advised to trim the previously treated lesions weekly, using an emery board or pumice stone, after immersing the feet in warm water for twenty minutes. Patients with diabetes should be very careful if they have peripheral sensory neuropathy causing diminished sensation of their skin: it is advisable for people with diabetes with corns and calluses to have their podiatrist par debride the callus safely, as attempting this on their own in the presence of sensory neuropathy may lead to excessive trimming and ultimately abrasion of the skin.

- Topical keratolytic medications may be applied to the corns, including salicylic acid 12.6% to 40% as a pad or a solution. A randomized control trial comparing standard parring of calluses to 40% salicylic acid plasters found that the salicylic acid treatment group resolved more corns by proportion, delayed the time to recurrence, reduced pain, and reduced corn size over six months than the standard parring treatment group.

- Ablative laser therapy may also be used to treat corns instead of paring them with a scalpel. The carbon dioxide laser has been reported to be efficient by some authors. The 2,940 nm erbium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet laser has been used to treat corns with minimal thermal tissue damage. However, the recurrence of lesions may be observed in some patients, especially if the trigger factors are maintained.

- Any biomechanical abnormalities and/or deformities should be managed with appropriate conservative treatment. This involves proper footwear, orthotics, and soft cushions (silicon sheet, sheepskin), which reduce friction and improve comfort.

Management begins with prevention. Patients should avoid ill-fitting shoes and mechanical trauma to the affected area.

**Surgical**

Surgical management is directed toward the removal of the underlying cause of corns, such as bony prominences. Usually, surgery is indicated in case of failure of other conservative treatment modalities. Heloma durum caused by hammertoe deformities in the foot that have failed conservative measures, such as wider shoes, periodic parring of the callus, and toe crests, are candidates for either an arthroplasty or arthrodesis of the interphalangeal joints of the affected toes. However, on the 5th toe, an arthroplasty, or surgical removal of the head of the 5th proximal phalanx, will release the contracture and alleviate the pressure caused on the soft tissue, thereby decreasing the rubbing and callus formation.

For heloma molle formation in the 4th interspace, the head of the proximal phalanx of one toe is often abutting the base of the proximal phalanx of an adjacent toe, causing the painful, soft corn formation. While toe arthroplasty may be an option to correct a heloma molle of the 4th interspace, a surgical syndactylization is also an option, where the soft tissue of the 4th and 5th toes are fused. Syndactylization is performed by excising the adjacent skin surfaces between the fourth and fifth toes: this helps to maintain the apposition of the two toes, and permanent syndactylism of the 4th interspace is achieved. Thus, the syndactylization will prevent the recurrence of the heloma molle.