The peroneus brevis muscle also referred to as the fibularis brevis muscle, is located in the lateral compartment of the lower extremity below the knee, deep to the peroneus longus muscle. It is a small, relatively short leg muscle originating from the lower two-thirds of the lateral surface of the fibula. Its muscle fibers traverse downwards and form a tendon that runs just posterior to the lateral malleolus, crossing the ankle and inserting on the styloid process of the proximal fifth metatarsal bone.

The peroneus longus and the peroneus brevis are the only two muscles of the lateral compartment of the leg. The peroneus brevis muscle lies underneath the peroneus longus, is shorter, and has a thicker muscle belly than the peroneus longus. The tendon of the peroneus brevis begins at roughly 2 to 4 cm proximal to the tip of the lateral malleolus. It then crosses the ankle, making an anterior turn at the distal fibula, and inserts on the lateral aspect of the fifth metatarsal.

The tendons of the peroneus brevis and peroneus longus muscles are contained in a common synovial sheath which originates approximately 4 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus and extends about 1cm beyond it.

According to cadaveric studies, the average length of the peroneus brevis tendon is 79.6 mm, and the width of the tendon was 4.46 mm and 14.85 mm at its midpoint and insertion at the fifth metatarsal, respectively.

The superior and inferior peroneal retinacula function to prevent tendon subluxation as they secure the tendons of the peroneus brevis and longus in place at the level of the ankle. The superior peroneal retinaculum covers the peroneal muscle tendons with attachments at the distal fibula and lateral calcaneus. The inferior peroneal retinaculum covers the peroneal muscle tendons with insertions at the lateral calcaneus (inferior to the superior peroneal retinaculum). The inferior peroneal retinaculum is contiguous with the inferior extensor retinaculum at the dorsum of the foot.

The ankle joint is relatively mobile and relies on its surrounding ligaments for stability. The structural ligaments of the ankle connect bones to bones and are deep to the muscles and tendons of the ankle. Muscles that cross the ankle joint have a mechanical action on the foot and ankle. The primary movements of the foot and ankle are plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, eversion, and inversion. The peroneus brevis muscle and tendon cross the ankle joint posterior to the fibula. The peroneus brevis muscle assists with the eversion of the foot and, to a weaker extent, plantarflexes the ankle.

Foot eversion is tilting the sole away from the midline, and foot inversion is tilting the sole towards the midline. Foot eversion requires a muscle to have an insertion on the lateral aspect of the foot, such as with the peroneus brevis, which inserts on the lateral foot at the proximal fifth metatarsal. Plantar flexion describes the movement of the foot down towards the sole, and dorsiflexion is moving the foot upwards towards the tibia. Plantar flexion requires the muscle to have an insertion relatively close to the ankle, such as with the peroneus brevis, which inserts on the proximal fifth metatarsal. The ankle joint serves as the fulcrum for both eversion and plantar flexion.