The transesophageal esophagectomy requires an excellent understanding of both gastric and colonic blood supplies as well and thoracic and cervical anatomy. Since the majority of the thoracic dissection is done bluntly and without direct visualization, a surgeon's touch, feel, and knowledge of anatomy is paramount for a successful case. Preoperative planning requires a decision of the conduit that will be presumed as the primary choice. The primary choice for the transhiatal esophagectomy is the gastric tube created on the greater curvature of the stomach. This tube is brought to the neck for cervical esophagogastric anastomosis. The tube's blood supply is through the right gastroepiploic artery, and this needs to be preserved as the rest of the blood supply to the stomach is divided. This provides adequate length for the tube to reach into the neck. In the area of the left gastric artery arises an aberrant left hepatic artery at times, which needs to be sought if present and preserved. On occasion, the gastric tube cannot be used, and the left colon is used as the conduit in an isoperistaltic fashion. The blood supply to the left colon is maintained with the left colic artery, and the middle colic is divided. An antiperistaltic left colon can be used as well based on the middle colic artery but is less preferred. The blood supply to the colon conduit necessitates a patent marginal artery of Drummond and should be assessed prior to isolating the entire colon length.

In the chest, there are critical organs that are in reach of the surgeon's hand. The surgeon, for the transhiatal part, will use the esophagus as a landmark and bluntly take down all tissue attached to the esophagus to free it fully to the superior most extent of the chest cavity. The spine posteriorly guides the surgeon into a plane of thin areolar tissue, and anteriorly the plane is relatively thin until the posterior wall of the trachea and left bronchus is approached. On occasion, the tumor mass may be in this area, and if so, care is taken not to tear the posterior membranous wall of the trachea or bronchus. In this area, there is the azygous vein and its tributaries as well as the vena cava. Bleeding is brisk if these vessels are injured or torn during the blunt portion of this operation, or a massive air leak from the endotracheal tube is present if the trachea or bronchus is torn.

The cervical operation involves a standard incision in front of the sternocleidomastoid and dissection down to the esophagus dividing the omohyoid muscle. This allows access to the esophagus, but nearby in the tracheoesophageal groove are the recurrent laryngeal nerves that must be preserved. The nerve on the side of the dissection is usually visible, but the contralateral nerve needs to be found as the esophagus is encircled. Knowledge of the carotid, the vagus nerves with the recurrent laryngeal nerves, and the jugular and facial veins are critical to success in the small space. The inferior thyroidal artery is at the level of the upper esophageal sphincter and is a useful landmark but is ultimately divided.The goal of the operation is to remove the esophagus and restore intestinal continuity for oral feeding. The gastric tube makes a robust conduit; then, the second choice is a colon conduit. The conduits will lose their peristalsis, and postoperative instructions would be concerned with delayed emptying or poor emptying, so staying upright after oral intake is critical for the patient to avoid aspiration events.