Occasionally, the seminiferous tubules may contain tumor cells in the basal compartment instead of healthy spermatogonia cells. They can be seen on histological sections differing from spermatogonia due to their noticeable larger size, prominent nucleolus, increased glycogen content, and characteristic peripheral border. The presence of these neoplastic cells attribute to carcinoma-in-situ and can lead to hypospermatogenesis. The carcinomatous cells characterize the stem cell population for many and most germ cell tumors. Examples include seminomatous as well as teratomatous tumor types. During active spermatogenesis, the tubules may give rise to sporadic tumor cells. However, spermatogenesis ceases as the cancer cells increase in number, and this results in detachment of the remaining spermatogonia, which then enters the tubular lumen. With the continuous proliferation of the cancer cells, they are also eventually released into the tubular lumen or penetrate the lamina propria of the seminiferous tubules leading to the formation of inter-tubular tumor cell clusters.

Meiosis is a convoluted process that is vulnerable to many faults and defects. Apoptotic spermatocytes can arise in the process and are known to be frequent. Megalospermatocytes, which are very large spermatocytes, can sometimes appear. In these cells, homologous chromosomes fail to pair in a process called asynapsis, causing the cells to become abortive. Moreover, spermatogenesis can come to a halt at the stage of primary spermatocytes, stopping the morphological changes from occurring in the cells. Primary spermatocytes are seen to border the lumen of seminiferous tubules. They will not develop any further, which will lead to the disintegration of the cells and lack of spermatids production.

The structure of the sperm tail closely resembles the motile cilium in that the axoneme has a 9+2 microtubular arrangement. Therefore, genetic defects detected in motile cilia can significantly affect the formation of the sperm tail. A genetic disease called PCD (primary ciliary dyskinesia) due to the malformation of motile cilia causes pulmonary disease, increased risk of infections, and male infertility. Many genes are associated with PCD; however, the exact effect these mutated genes have on spermatogenesis is still investigational.

A study on using testicular histology determining the effects of aging on spermatogenesis showed various alterations, including basal membrane thickening, a decrease in the germinal and Sertoli cell number, as well as an exhibition of individual variations. Upon examination of post-meiotic cells, the aneuploidy rate was higher than average during the arrest of spermiogenesis. However, they concluded that spermatogenesis could still be possible until the male is 95 years old.