Actinic keratoses are predominantly located on chronically sun-exposed areas of the body such as the face, scalp (bald or thinning), back of the arms, and dorsal aspect of the hands, especially in older people who have accumulated decades of sun exposure.

- 
**Increased Age**

AKs increasingly affect the older population due to the high cumulative lifetime exposure to the sun and inadequate sun protection.

- 
**Male Gender**

AK prevalence is higher in men compared to women.

- 
**Fair-skinned Individuals (Fitzpatrick Skin Phototypes I and II)**

Pale or light-skinned individuals have less melanin pigment in the skin and tend to burn easily with sun exposure. Other characteristics of these skin phototypes may include red or blonde hair and blue or light-colored eyes.

- 
**Geographic Location**

Countries located closer to the equator demonstrate higher rates of AKs. For example, prevalence rates of AKs in Australia are close to 60% due to its proximity to the equator (in addition to its sizable White population). In contrast, the prevalence of AKs in a non-equatorial location, such as the United States, is around 20%.

- 
**Immunosuppression**

Individuals with a compromised immune system have an increased susceptibility to develop AKs, such as those observed with chemotherapy, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, immunosuppressive medications (transplant medications), and leukemia.

- 
**History of Actinic Keratosis and/or Previous Skin Malignancy**

This important component of the history may indicate genetic factors associated with increased susceptibility to UV radiation and the chronicity of UV radiation exposure to which the individual has been exposed.

- 
**Excessive and Chronic Sun Exposure**

People with greater cumulative lifetime exposure to UV radiation from the sun are more prone to developing AKs. At-risk individuals include outdoor occupations (e.g., construction, farming) and outdoor activities (e.g., tennis, golf, baseball players).