The evaluation of patients presenting with diabetic ulcers can be divided into a clinical and radiologic assessment.

A clinically pertinent history of the type of diabetes, medication history, comorbidities, symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, and vascular insufficiency should be elucidated. Symptoms of neuropathy include hypoesthesia, hyperesthesia, paresthesia, dysesthesia, and radicular pain. Vascular insufficiency has varying presentations and most patients are asymptomatic. However, they can present with intermittent claudication, rest pain, and healing or non-healing ulcers.

In the examination of the legs and foot, an inspection should be performed in a well-lit room with appropriate exposure. Proper documentation using descriptions of ulcer characteristics with size, depth, appearance, and location performed. Presence of discoloration, necrosis, or areas of drainage are signs of infection, and further care is required. Other abnormalities such as nail discoloration, callus formation, and deformities should be noted. Imbalance in the innervations of the foot muscles from neuropathic damage can lead to the development of common deformities seen in affected patients. Hyperextension of the metatarsal-phalangeal joint with interphalangeal or distal phalangeal joint flexion leads to hammer toe and claw toe deformities, respectively. Charcot arthropathy is a commonly seen deformity. Assessment of footwear is important as it can be a contributing factor to the development of foot ulceration. The presence of callus or nail abnormalities should be noted.

Examine the cardiovascular system, checking popliteal, posterior tibial, and dorsalis pedis pulse. Claudication, loss of hair, and the presence of pale, thin, shiny, or cool skin are physical findings suggestive of potential ischemia. If a vascular disease is a concern, the evaluator should measure the ankle-brachial index (ABI). ABIs can, however, be falsely elevated in patients with diabetes mellitus due to calcification of vessels. More reliable methods of assessing the potential for healing foot ulcers in patients with diabetes mellitus suspected of having peripheral ischemia involve systolic toe pressure measurements by photoplethysmography or measurement of distal transcutaneous oxygen tension.