**Marijuana and Maternal Health**

Pregnant marijuana users are more likely to be underweight, have lower educational and socioeconomic status, and use other drugs like alcohol. There are some reports that marijuana use is associated with depression and anxiety. Women using marijuana during pregnancy have a higher risk of anemia and spontaneous preterm birth.

Similar to tobacco smoking, marijuana smoke also contains respiratory and carcinogenic toxins. Concomitant use of marijuana and tobacco, as compared to tobacco alone, is linked to an increased risk of maternal asthma and preeclampsia.

**Marijuana and Breastfeeding**

Breastfeeding has numerous benefits for the infant and the mother and should be the ideal choice for infant nutrition. It helps to improve mother-child bonding, which is especially important in mothers using drugs. However, breastfeeding by a drug-using mother puts the infant at risk of drug exposure, which can outweigh the benefits of breastfeeding.

Moderate amounts of THC are excreted in human breast milk.

Since an infant’s first few months are an important phase for brain growth, the biological properties of THC can affect the proper development of the brain. As a result, despite a lack of clear and convincing data, groups like ACOG, AAP, and the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine recommend against the use of marijuana while breastfeeding. These mothers use should be encouraged to breastfeed but strongly recommended to abstain from its use.

**Childhood and Adolescence**

School-aged children often show gaps in problem-solving skills and memory. They may have increased depressive and anxiety symptoms and decreased attention span.