Acneiform acne can be classified into the following:

**Drug-induced acne**

This acne can occur due to corticosteroids, anticonvulsants like phenytoin, antidepressants, the antipsychotics olanzapine and lithium, antituberculosis drugs like INH, thiourea, thiouracil, disulfiram, corticotropin, antifungals like nystatin and itraconazole, hydroxychloroquine, naproxen, mercury, amineptine, chemotherapy drugs, and epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors.

Antibiotics like penicillins and macrolides cause acute generalized pustular eruption without comedones. Patients are febrile with leukocytosis, Other antibiotics causing it include co-trimoxazole, doxycycline, ofloxacin, and chloramphenicol.

Steroid acne presents as monomorphous papulopustules located mainly on the trunk and extremities, with less involvement of the face. Characteristically,  lesions appear after the administration of systemic corticosteroids. Topical corticosteroids may also cause acneiform eruption over skin under which the topical preparation is applied or in around the nose or mouth in the case of inhaled steroids.

**Occupational acne**

Due to occupational exposure from Chloracne. Chloraphthalene, chlorophenyl (used as conductors and insulator), and chlorophenols (used as insecticide and fungicide) can cause acneiform eruptions. Lesions are mainly comedones without inflammation. Exposure by inhalation, ingestion, or direct contact of contaminated compounds or foods induces a cutaneous eruption of polymorphous comedones and cysts which is called as chloracne. Associated skin findings include xerosis, and pigmentary changes are also seen. Internal organs like eyes, central nervous system and liver may also be affected. Some chloracnegens can be oncogenic.

Chemicals that contain iodides, bromides, and other halogens can also induce an acneiform eruption similar to steroid acne, but iodide-induced eruption are more severe. All patients should be investigated for ophthalmic, neurologic, hepatic, and lipoprotein abnormalities.

**Chemical acne
**

Chemical like heavy oils, waxes, cutting oils, heavy coal tar derivatives like pitch and creosote, vegetable oil in cosmetics, and cheap pomade oils causes acneiform eruptions.

**Mechanical acne
**

Pressure and friction induce acneiform eruptions over the neck of violin players, under arm bands, bra straps and in orthopedic cases prolonged immobilization.

Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis is a disease of allergic hypersensitivity. It appears as a recurrent pruritic papulopustular eruption on the face, trunk, and extremities.

Rosacea appears similar to acne vulgaris with papulopustules on the face but also has facial flushing and telangiectasias. Is commonly seen in the white population. It is more common in women in the third and fourth decades of life. Associated eye changes include blepharitis, conjunctivitis, iritis, iridocyclitis, hypopyon iritis, and keratitis. Weather extremes, hot or spicy foods, alcohol, ingestion of a high-dose vitamin B6 and Demodex folliculorum mites can trigger the condition.