Ultrasound imaging is a quick, non-invasive, and cost-effective imaging technique to assess the eye. It is routinely used to assess intraocular structures when the ocular media is not clear for fundus examination, as in the case of a vitreous hemorrhage or hyphema. It may also be used in cases of suspected retinal pathology; if, for example, a patient complains of flashes, floaters, or curtains. Pathological processes that may be visualized using ultrasonography include vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment, intraocular foreign bodies, damage to the extra-ocular muscles, and scleral rupture.  Ultrasound should be used cautiously if a ruptured globe is suspected and is typically deferred if a ruptured globe is confirmed.

**Retinal Detachment**

Detachments of the retina may occur spontaneously or after blunt trauma to the eye. Clinical history that raises suspicion for the presence of a retinal detachment is sudden onset flashing lights in the vision or a curtain over the vision. A retinal detachment on ultrasound imaging appears as a bright, continuous, free-floating membrane within the vitreous (Fig 9). Total, or “funnel,” retinal detachments may have a triangular shape with attachments at the optic disc and the ora serrata. Multiple prospective and retrospective studies have shown that point-of-care ultrasound of the eye performed by emergency physicians can accurately detect retinal detachments in the emergency room setting.

**Carotid Cavernous Fistulas**

Carotid cavernous fistulas are defined as an abnormal connection between the carotid artery and branches of the cavernous sinus, leading to reverse blood flow. It is usually a result of trauma, though some cases can be spontaneous. Clinically, patients may have symptoms of proptosis and diplopia. A dilated superior ophthalmic vein is best visualized on CT angiography, but this finding may also be seen on ultrasound as an anechoic superior orbital mass.  Color Doppler may show high-velocity turbulent flow within the mass.