# Continuing Education Activity

Lipoid pneumonia is a rare form of lung disease due to aspiration or inhalation of exogenous or endogenous lipid-containing products. In the past, this disease has usually been an incidental postmortem finding associated with severe respiratory compromise. Currently, there are no specific evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of this lung disease. This activity reviews the evaluation of a patient with lipoid pneumonia and highlights the role of interprofessional team members in collaborating to provide early identification of this disease process as well as education to patients of the risk factors for this rare form of pneumonia.

**Objectives:**
- Review the risk factors for developing exogenous and endogenous lipoid pneumonia.
- Describe the characteristic imaging findings associated with lipoid pneumonia.
- Identify the common physical exam findings associated with lipoid pneumonia.
- Explain the importance of educating the interprofessional team on lipoid pneumonia to prevent as well as expedite the diagnosis of this deleterious respiratory disease and the detrimental effects it has on patients.

# Introduction

Lipoid pneumonia is a rare form of lung disease first defined in 1925 by Laughlin.

# Etiology

Exogenous lipoid pneumonia is caused by aspiration or inhalation of lipid-containing products. In the past, the most common agents included mineral oil-based laxatives and nasal decongestants. Other causes include inhalation of petroleum jelly used as a lubricant, i.e., tracheostomy care.

Endogenous lipoid pneumonia, also known as "cholesterol pneumonia," was first discovered by Mcdonald et al. in 1949, which he termed "obstructive pneumonitis" in the setting of lung neoplasm.

# Epidemiology

Given the unrecognized nature of lipoid pneumonia, the precise incidence is unknown; however, in past autopsy series, the incidence has been reported as 1% to 2.5%.

# Pathophysiology

The underlying pathophysiology of exogenous lipoid pneumonia is due to a prolonged foreign body reaction to fat. The offending agent reaches the lungs by inhalation or aspiration of substances that do not induce the cough reflex. Fat is taken up by macrophages in the alveoli and cannot metabolize the substance; therefore, the alveoli are repeatedly exposed to the agent after the death of the macrophage leading to a granulomatous reaction.

# Histopathology

Definitive diagnosis is made with histologic features showing lipid-laden macrophages in respiratory secretions obtained by bronchoalveolar lavage or lung biopsy.

# History and Physical

Lipoid pneumonia is largely a diagnosis of exclusion. It can mimic several diseases; therefore, history plays a crucial role in the diagnosis given there is no specific clinical feature linked to the disease. Onset can be acute, insidious, or chronic. This should always be a differential diagnosis for patients presenting with generalized symptoms such as cough, dyspnea, hypoxemia, and less commonly hemoptysis and fever, as well as bilateral infiltrates on imaging and may have diffuse crackles on lung exam.

# Evaluation

A high level of suspicion should be kept in diagnosing lipoid pneumonia, especially in patients with acute severe lung disease without other comorbid conditions. Imaging is an integral part of diagnosis; this includes a chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax, which shows common characteristic findings. In 1996 one retrospective multicenter study of exogenous lipoid pneumonia completed in France by Gondouin et al. emphasized, in particular, the diagnostic importance of computed tomography scan.

Arterial blood gas can be used to assess pH, acid-base status, and oxygenation.

Bronchoscopy allows clinicians to obtain respiratory samples via alveolar lavage that can be sent for specific histological and cytological stains.

Blood and sputum cultures can help to rule out underlying infection.

# Treatment / Management

Currently, there is no standard of care for the treatment of lipoid pneumonia. In all cases of exogenous lipoid pneumonia, stopping the offending agent is imperative to prevent further damage. In both types, many case reports show improvement with corticosteroids given their anti-inflammatory nature, but further research is needed to determine the ideal dosing and duration of treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

Following are some important differential diagnoses that need to be considered whilst dealing with lipoid pneumonia:

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome

- Bacterial pneumonia

- Viral pneumonia

- Fungal pneumonia

- Aspiration pneumonia

- Lung neoplasm

- Pulmonary fibrosis

- Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis

# Prognosis

Prognosis varies based on the underlying etiology of lipoid pneumonia and how quickly the diagnosis is made as well as the age of the patient and underlying comorbidities.

# Complications

- Respiratory failure

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome

- Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage

- Cor pulmonale

- Superimposed infection

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Education involving the general public as well as health care professionals is pertinent for early diagnosis and prevention. At present, there is an outbreak in the U.S. of children and young adults using substances that put them at risk for exogenous pneumonia; therefore, education geared towards children and parents would be beneficial.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Lipoid pneumonia, although rare, is becoming more common in the present generation. Primary care providers need to be educated on the possible adverse effects of common causes such as "vaping" and the use of mineral oil as laxatives, especially in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease or with difficulty swallowing.