**Preventative Techniques**

The main method of preventing Frey syndrome from developing is to create a barrier at the time of surgery that hinders aberrant nerve regeneration between the parasympathetic secretomotor fibers and the sweat glands in the parotid region. Several techniques have been described in the literature; all have associated risks and disadvantages, including creating a donor site, prolonged operative time, variable efficacy in preventing Frey syndrome, wound infection, rejection, and postoperative complications.

- Thick skin flap. Increasing the thickness of the skin flap raised over the parotid gland during surgery by including fat and superficial musculoaponeurotic tissue can theoretically protect the sweat glands and their nerve fibers from being exposed. Because the sweat glands reside at the level of the hair follicles, a thickened flap reduces the chance of their exposure to aberrantly regenerating parasympathetic axons. While some recent studies have shown that increased flap thickness does not appear to lower the incidence of Frey syndrome significantly, there was a trend towards a decrease in the total skin surface area affected and the overall severity of the symptoms.

- Acellular dermal matrix (ADM): Acellular dermal matrix is an extracellular connective tissue graft generated via a decellularization process wherein the cellular components of the dermis are removed. ADMs can function as biological barriers between the parotid bed and the overlying skin. Zeng et al. utilized an ADM as a barrier between the skin and the operated parotid gland, resulting in a reduction of Frey syndrome by 85% on objective starch-iodine testing and 68% on subjective assessment of symptoms.

- Autologous fat implantation. This technique is commonly used to ameliorate postsurgical contour defects and improve cosmesis in many parts of the body. Some studies investigating the effect of abdominal fat implantation on the prevention of Frey syndrome have shown it to be successful, whereas others have failed to substantiate its usefulness.

- Superficial muscular aponeurotic system (SMAS) flap: The SMAS is a fascial layer that interdigitates with the facial muscles and protects the facial nerve. During a parotidectomy, the SMAS flap can be elevated separately from the underlying parotid fascia and the overlying dermis, then sutured tightly to the auricular perichondrium and sternocleidomastoid muscle to act as a physical barrier to aberrant innervation of the sweat glands. It can also help improve contour deformities resulting from loss of parotid volume. Bonanno et al. found this technique effective in preventing Frey syndrome.

- Temporoparietal fascia (TPF) flap: This is a vascularized fascial flap supplied by branches of the superficial temporal artery. The prophylactic placement of a TPF flap between the skin and defect aims to serve as a physical barrier to the development of Frey syndrome. Sultan et al. found that the use of the TPF flap reduced the contour deformity after parotid surgery and decreased the incidence of Frey syndrome from 17% to 4%.

- Sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) flap: The SCM is supplied by the occipital, superior thyroid, and suprascapular arteries.

**Medical Treatment**

Medical therapies for Frey syndrome have included topical antiperspirants and local injections using alcohol, atropine, scopolamine, glycopyrrolate, or botulinum toxin A (BTA).

- Topical antiperspirants have been shown to be ineffective in completely controlling gustatory sweating. Studies have shown that less than 50% of patients report any benefits, and for those who do, the duration of improvement is less than a day.

- Injection of alcohol to the otic ganglion has historically been employed but can result in anesthesia to the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve, which can cause even more bothersome symptoms than Frey syndrome.

- Currently, botulinum toxin is the most widely used agent for local injection, with dosing between 1.9 and 2.5 U/cm2 in the involved area.

**Surgical Treatment**

After its onset, surgical management of Frey syndrome is rarely indicated and is reserved for refractory cases where conservative or medical therapies are no longer effective. Options for surgical management include transection of the auriculotemporal nerve, tympanic nerve, glossopharyngeal nerve, or greater auricular nerve, the placement of a barrier, and excision of the affected skin with grafting for the defect.

Sectioning of the auriculotemporal nerve in a previously operated field can be technically challenging. In addition, the auriculotemporal nerve is capable of regeneration, which may ultimately reduce any initial benefits obtained.

Dai et al. reported a study of 17 patients with Frey syndrome who underwent SCM and temporalis fascia transposition, with 53% of patients showing complete resolution on starch-iodine testing and a reduction in the affected skin surface area from 12.80 cm2 to 1.32 cm2.

Jacobson’s neurectomy, which involves resectioning the tympanic nerve (a branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve), can be performed by raising a tympanomeatal flap inferiorly and identifying Jacobson’s nerve as it emerges from the inferior tympanic canaliculus, coursing across the promontory anterior to the round window. The nerve is sectioned, and the canaliculus is obliterated to prevent the regeneration of the nerve fibers.