Surgical correction of cerebral aneurysms was first introduced in the 1930s, and by the 1990s, coiling and clipping became popular as less-invasive treatment options for patients with SAH. The International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms (ISUIA) has established prognostic data for patients with a history of a prior subarachnoid hemorrhage or patients who were found to have an aneurysm as an incidental finding on brain imaging. They have concluded that aneurysms smaller than 10 mm or an aneurysm that has never bled are unlikely to have a SAH and may not require surgical repair as a preventative measure.

The first step in managing a SAH is stabilizing the patient and getting an emergent neurosurgical evaluation.

Once the diagnosis of a SAH is made, most patients will be admitted to a neurosurgical intensive care unit, as up to 15% of these patients may have worsening bleeding during admission.

Patients with a large hematoma, decreased level of consciousness, or any focal neurological deficits may require surgical removal of the blood and/or occlusion of the bleeding site.

Aneurysms of the middle cerebral artery tend to be amenable to clipping, whereas those of the basilar artery and posterior cerebral artery are typically more accessible by endovascular coiling.

Early predictors of rebleeding include high systolic blood pressure, hematoma within the brain or ventricles, poor Hunt-Hess grade, posterior circulation aneurysms, and any aneurysms greater than 10 mm in size.

Calcium channel blockers such as nimodipine or verapamil are often used to prevent vasospasm.