As discussed previously, surfactant is necessary to prevent alveolar and distal airway collapse. Therefore, any process that interferes with the production, function, or metabolism of surfactant can have disastrous consequences on pulmonary function. The disease first attributed to surfactant deficiency is neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, most commonly seen in premature neonates. In these infants, lung immaturity results in inadequate production of surfactant. As such, their alveoli and distal airways cannot remain open during expiration, and they cannot effectively exchange oxygen for carbon dioxide. For many years, the only hope at survival was to administer 100% oxygen until the neonate's lungs mature and produce sufficient surfactant.

Other diseases that may be caused by or lead to abnormalities in surfactant production or function include adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), alveolar proteinosis, obstructive lung diseases such as asthma and COPD, interstitial lung diseases including pulmonary fibrosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis, infectious lung processes such as pneumonia, AIDS, and in patients who smoke.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome or ARDS is another disease where the concept of surface tension becomes relevant. In ARDS, a widespread inflammatory process affects the lungs leading to rapid respiratory failure. The condition is usually triggered by acute pancreatitis, pneumonia, trauma, or sepsis. In ARDS, Alveolar and capillary damage allow fluids and proteins to leak into the alveoli. These proteins interfere with the function and composition of surfactant, thereby decreasing its vital role in counteracting the effects of surface tension. The result would be alveolar collapse and abnormalities in gas exchange.