Pathophysiology varies depending on the cause.

- Drepanocytes or sickle cells: Seen is sickle cell disease due to hemoglobin S (HbS) by substituting valine in place of glutamic acid at position 6 of beta-globin of HbA. It has an autosomal recessive inheritance. There are many variants like hemoglobin SC disease, hemoglobin S beta thalassemia disease, etc.

- Spherocytes: Seen most commonly in hereditary spherocytosis due to mutations in genes that code for the red blood cell membrane proteins spectrin (alpha and beta), ankyrin, band 3 protein, protein 4.2, and other red blood cell membrane proteins that cause erythrocytes to change shape.

- Target cells (codocytes): Most commonly seen in thalassemia due to impaired hemoglobin production (Hb). Normal Hb has two alpha and two beta chains, a decrease in alpha chains is alpha-thalassemia, and a decrease in beta chains is beta-thalassemia.

- Schistocytes are fragmented RBCs seen most commonly in hemolytic anemias, hemolytic disorders, DIC, pre-eclampsia, B12 deficiency, HIV, BMT, mechanical heart valves, and COVID infection, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome.

- Echinocytes or Burr cells can be found in a myriad of clinical situations, including burns, uremia, malnutrition, hepatic cirrhosis, pyruvate kinase deficiency, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia, hemodialysis, parenteral fish oil and sometimes in long-distance runners.

- Acanthocytes, or spur cells, are found in disease entities like myelodysplasia, pyruvate kinase deficiency, alcoholic cirrhosis, hypothyroidism, anorexia nervose, drug-induced forms (e.g., statins, misoprostol), neuroacanthocytosis, and abetalipoproteinemia

- Dacrocytes or teardrop cells / lacrymocytes are erythrocytes that have been remodeled into a 'teardrop formation.'

- Elliptocytes or ovalocytes are best exemplified by hereditary elliptocytosis (>25% of cases) and hereditary pyropoikilocytosis. They are both autosomal, the former dominant while the latter is recessive. Other entities that can present with elliptocytes include iron deficiency anemia, thalassemia, myelofibrosis, and myelodysplasia.

- Degmacytes or Bite cells derive their name, colloquially, from the fact that their physical structure gives the impression of a "bite" mark in the membrane. The "bite" occurs as the spleen removes damaged hemoglobin from the cell. This represents a common endpoint to a variety of causations. Diseases involved with this finding include G6PD deficiency, unstable hemoglobins, (congenital) Heinz body anemia, fava beans, and drug-induced oxidative hemolysis.

- Stomatocytes are derived from genetic defects in membrane proteins leading to the "leakiness" of cations and fluid.