Evaluation begins with a thorough history and physical, as discussed previously. Those findings will guide the next steps of assessment that consider options utilizing laboratory testing, imaging, visualization, and biopsies. Sometimes the cause of malabsorption is clear, and additional workup may be unnecessary or tailored more quickly to the specific diagnosis highest on the differential.

**General Evaluation for Malabsorption Syndromes**

When the history and physical raise suspicion for malabsorption syndromes without strongly supporting a diagnosis requiring more specific testing, general testing may begin. An example is the non-specific symptoms of unintentional weight loss, ongoing diarrhea, or poor wound healing.

Laboratory testing is used to support the diagnosis but is not diagnostic.

Blood tests

- Comprehensive metabolic panel - electrolyte disturbances, hepatic function, renal function

- Complete blood cell count - contributes to evaluating anemia.

- Albumin

- Magnesium

- Zinc

- Phosphorous

- Vitamins (e.g., vitamin B12, folate, vitamin D)

- Iron panel (includes serum iron, total iron-binding capacity, ferritin)

Fecal tests: most sensitive for fat malabsorption syndromes

- Fecal fat - fecal fat is measured from a single specimen; if the test is positive or there remains high clinical suspicion of fat malabsorption syndrome, then testing proceeds to a 72-hour fecal fat excretion evaluation

- 72-hour fecal fat excretion - the gold standard for steatorrhea diagnosis; performed on a 72-hour stool collection, accurate interpretation of fecal fat depends on patient’s successful adherence to testing instructions

- Sudan III stain - performed on a spot stool sample, sensitive

- Acid steatocrit

- Near-infrared reflectance analysis (NIRA) - comparable accuracy to a 72-hour fecal fat excretion analysis but faster; it also measures nitrogen and carbohydrates while measuring fecal fat.

**More Specific Evaluation of Malabsorption Syndromes**

When the history and physical make the diagnosis fairly clear, general evaluation is not necessary. Clinicians can select other modalities for assessment based on the suspected/most likely malabsorption diagnosis. Such examples include a patient’s history of recurrent pancreatitis and alcohol use or abdominal discomfort resolved with gluten avoidance.

Breath tests:

- Carbohydrate malabsorption syndromes

- Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) - positive glucose or lactulose breath test, but breath tests are not considered reliable for diagnosis.

Jejunal aspirate culture:

- The gold standard for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth

Computed tomography (CT):

- Pancreatitis

Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP):

- Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

Magnetic resonance (MR) elastography

- A non-invasive method to ascertain the stiffness of an object. In the case of liver stiffness, MR elastography is useful to diagnose liver fibrosis, hepatic amyloidosis, and other conditions that increase liver stiffness.

Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP):

- Pancreatic insufficiency (i.e., history was positive for pancreatitis and alcohol use, or high fecal elastase) - magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), followed by endoscopy if MRCP is negative

Endoscopy with biopsy (indicated for diagnoses that require both visualization and biopsy):

- Crohn disease - visualized duodenal mucosa cobblestoning.

- Celiac disease - visualized reduced duodenal folds or mucosal scalloping.

- Jejunoileitis

Colonoscopies and biopsies:

- Ulcerative colitis

Acid-fast stains:

- Acid-fast stains serve to differentiate Tropheryma whipplei vs. Mycobacterium avium because they appear virtually indistinguishable on biopsy.

Example of an evaluation for specific conditions:

- Celiac disease: A child presents with diarrhea, delayed growth, and abdominal discomfort within the first 24 hours of life. Symptoms worsen when cereals get introduced to the diet. Additional symptoms may include pallor. Untreated symptoms evolve into short stature, delayed puberty, and nutrient deficiencies (e.g., iron, vitamin D). Iron deficiency anemia and rickets are present in those patients. Some patients develop symptoms in adulthood, but symptoms could be mild. Celiac disease must be a consideration if history includes unexplained iron-deficiency anemia (the most common symptom). Folate deficiency may also yield megaloblastic anemia, vitamin D deficiency may yield hypocalcemia, and vitamin K deficiency may yield coagulopathy. Diagnosis depends on a combination of tests. Duodenal or jejunal mucosal biopsy (best diagnostic test), serologic studies, and a gluten-free diet are subsequent steps. Histology will show blunted villi or increased intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs). Villous blunting so severe as to result in totally flattened mucosa. IELs can extend beyond the intestine and affect the stomach causing lymphocytic gastritis. The presence of IELs is not specific to celiac disease. Serological studies often include gliadin antibodies and tissue transglutaminase (TTG) antibodies. Anti-TTG historically had been seen as the most sensitive test for celiac disease. Symptom improvement with dietary removal of gluten (contains gliadin) also supports the diagnosis of celiac disease. In some cases, gluten removal can resolve the histological abnormalities of celiac disease.

Trials of eliminating certain types of foods or ingredients can be both diagnostic and therapeutic. This elimination testing is often useful in carbohydrate malabsorption syndromes such as lactose intolerance or fructose intolerance.