**Intrauterine growth restriction**(IUGR) is a condition in which fetal growth is less than the tenth percentile of the predicted weight for gestational age. IUGR can lead to fetal morbidity and mortality. The restriction of growth can be the result of maternal, fetal, and placental causes. Most fetuses develop IUGR secondary to maternal causes like preeclampsia, poor nutrition, drug addiction, alcohol use, and tobacco use. Retardation occurs symmetrically in all organs with fetal causes like chromosomal abnormalities, congenital malformations, and congenital infections. Additionally, abruptio placentae, placental infarction, and a single umbilical artery (instead of two) cause asymmetric growth retardation, which is also known as “head sparing.” The common factor among these risk factors is that blood flow to the fetus is compromised either through vasoconstriction or loss of blood. Diagnoses of IUGR is difficult in utero. Therefore, the detection of highly associated conditions like unexplained oligohydramnios (about 85% of IUGR infants also have oligohydramnios) should warrant further evaluation. Assessment for IUGR includes doppler sonography as well as analysis of estimated fetal weight, the volume of amniotic fluid, and mother’s blood pressure status.

**Choriocarcinoma**is a germ cell malignant tumor of the cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast cells. The tumor cells mimic placental tissue; however, there are no villi to exchange nutrients. Choriocarcinoma can develop into a small hemorrhagic tumor and can easily invade maternal blood vessels leading to early hematogenous spread throughout the circulation. Patients usually present with a uterus larger than expected for gestational age. The evaluation includes ultrasound which shows a “snowstorm appearance.” Blood tests typically show elevated beta hCG, which is produced by syncytiotrophoblast. High levels of hCG can lead to thecal cysts in the ovary. Treatment is dilation and curettage with follow-up monitoring with beta-hCG levels. This germ cell tumor usually responds poorly to chemotherapy; however, there are some cases in which chemotherapy after resection may result in a successful outcome.

**Preeclampsia**, usually arising in the third trimester, is pregnancy-induced hypertension by increased total peripheral resistance but the pathogenesis is poorly understood. Literature provides evidence for an imbalance of angiogenic and anti-antigenic factors as well as defective spiral artery remodeling, which eventually leads to the former hypothesis. This disproportion favors anti-angiogenic factors leading to endothelial dysfunction in the maternal organs. In terms of diagnosing pre-eclampsia, hypertension couples with one of the following: elevated liver enzymes, reduced liver or kidney function, or pulmonary or cerebral edema. Preeclampsia resolves with delivery and removal of the maternal-fetal vascular interface. Methyldopa and magnesium sulfate are the recommendations for control of hypertension.

- HELLP syndrome refers to preeclampsia with thrombotic microangiopathy concerning the liver by hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets. Like eclampsia, this warrants immediate delivery.

- Eclampsia is preeclampsia with seizures. Like HELLP, this warrants immediate delivery.