The disorders encompassed within impulse control disorder (ICD) are identified as externalizing disorders, as these individuals express hostility and resentment externally, made manifest by conflicts with others; whereas, those with internalizing disorders direct their distress inwardly onto themselves, ego-dystonically.

Patients will often reveal a history of physical or verbal abuse towards others, representing underlying impaired inhibition. Providers will unveil an evolving tension transpiring just before the deviance, followed by subsequent relief and catharsis. The patient may feel like a hapless bystander, victim to his impulses. Most importantly, these behavior patterns are extreme and inappropriate when contrasted with those of similar biological and developmental age, resulting in severe psychosocial and functional impairments.

Children with oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) are best described as disagreeable and disruptive. Often these children have an irritable disposition. Their behavior is defiant, but it does not cross the threshold of delinquency. Usually, defiant behavior occurs within the household when prompted to complete chores or obey a curfew.

Intermittent explosive disorder (IED) is defined as a low tolerance for frustration and adversity. Between explosive episodes, these children will demonstrate appropriate behavior; however, upon exposure to minimal adversity, these patients will respond with violent, disproportionate tantrums, which may seem “out of character.” Incidentally, the rapidity of the escalation is mirrored, temporally, by the de-escalation. The explosive outbursts have no impetus for secondary gain.

The quintessential feature of conduct disorder (CD) is a persistent violation of social rules and the rights of others. Additional salient features include the destruction of property, deceitfulness, and illegal activity. Those with CD have often been characterized as callous, manipulative, and unemotional.

Patients with pyromania engender pleasure in the setting of fires, as well as in the observance of the aftermath. This could be an expression of impulsive behavior without a secondary gain.

Patients with kleptomania experience a similar urge to pyromaniacs and will steal “unnecessary” items of trivial to no value. Patients with kleptomania often ascribe limited value to the items they steal and may discard the stolen goods or even return them. This disorder is most commonly seen in females.