Age-related macular degeneration has been classified into two clinical forms dry or non-neovascular and wet or neovascular.

Vision loss is gradual if it occurs in the early or intermediate dry stage of ARMD. The examination of fundus reveals yellowish subretinal deposits or drusen and RPE hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentary changes. Drusen can be hard (definite boundaries) or soft (indistinct boundaries), or they may confluence into larger drusen and may evolve into drusenoid RPE detachments (PED). Atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium occurs in the advanced stage of the disease known as Geographic atrophy. Geographic atrophy on involving the center of the macula leads to significant visual loss.

The disease has been staged into four groups based on clinical examination of the macula:

- **Group 1 (no ARMD)**: no drusen or 5–15 small drusen (<63 microns in diameter) in the absence of any other stage of ARMD.

- **Group 2 (early-stage ARMD)**: more than 15 small drusen or less than 20 medium-sized (63-124 micron in diameter) indistinct soft drusen or pigment abnormalities but not geographic atrophy.

- **Group 3 (intermediate stage)**: the presence of at least one large druse ( >125 microns in diameter), or presence of numerous medium-sized drusen (approximately 20 or more drusen with indistinct boundaries and 65 or more drusen with distinct boundaries) or presence of non-central geographic atrophy i.e., atrophy not involving the fovea.

- **Group 4 (advanced stage)**: central geographic atrophy that involves the fovea or presence of neovascular ARMD.

**Geographic Atrophy**

It is the advanced stage of dry ARMD. It is defined as a sharply delineated round or oval area of hypopigmentation or depigmentation or absence of the RPE. The choroidal vessels are more visible than in surrounding areas, and the atrophic patch must be at least 175 µm in diameter.

Most commonly, drusen precede geographic atrophy. Larger drusen, confluent drusen, refractile deposits with hyperpigmentation have been documented to evolve into geographic atrophy. Geographic atrophy may also occur due to the collapse of drusenoid PED. The RPE and photoreceptors overlying the area of drusen progressively undergo degeneration.

**Neovascular ARMD**

Neovascular ARMD is characterized by a choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM) and related features like PED, RPE rip, or disciform scarring. On fundus examination, CNV is seen as a grayish-green tissue below the retina along with fluid or blood in the intraretinal or subretinal plane.

Degenerative changes in the Bruch's membrane weaken its integrity. Proangiogenic growth factors stimulate the growth of abnormal vascular networks from the choriocapillaris, which perforate the Bruch's membrane and disrupt the normal RPE-photoreceptor complex. A fibrovascular complex forms, which either lies completely below the RPE ( Type 1 CNVM) or breaches the RPE and lies in the subretinal plane (Type 2 CNVM). This complex can exude fluid or blood into the subretinal and intraretinal space. This fluid or blood can also accumulate beneath the RPE, causing pigment epithelium detachment. This complex progresses to a fibrotic disciform scar in the worst-case scenario.

Symptoms noticed by the patients include blurring of vision and distortion, especially for near vision. Decreased vision, micropsia, metamorphopsia, or scotoma are other presenting complaints.

On fundus examination, pigment epithelial detachment is seen as a sharply demarcated dome-shaped elevation of the RPE. Overlying neurosensory detachment, lipid or blood, and sub RPE blood is a sign that a CNV is underlying the PED. Rarely, this blood can pass through the retina into the vitreous cavity, causing vitreous hemorrhage.

There are four types of PEDs. Serous, fibrovascular, drusenoid, and the fourth variant is hemorrhagic PED, which is characterized by the blood beneath the RPE.

Serous PED is defined as an area of smooth, sharply demarcated dome-shaped RPE elevation. On fundus evaluation, a reddish halo of subretinal fluid can be seen. The presence of blood or pigment at the dependent part of the PED or a notched configuration of the PED raises the suspicion of the presence of an underlying CNVM. The notch is the area where the CNVM adheres to the RPE and causes it to detach from the Bruch's membrane. Fibrovascular PED, in contrast to serous PED, is an area of irregular elevation of the RPE. Its name is derived from the underlying vascular and fibrous components. Drusenoid PED is a detachment of the RPE caused due to the confluence of soft drusens.