Management of intracerebral hemorrhage begins with securing the airway, breathing, blood pressure control, and maintaining circulation using pressors. Patients with a Glasgow Coma Scale less than 8 often require intubation and ventilation. An anticoagulation reversal would follow this if the patient were on any pertinent medications. The risk of rapid deterioration in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage is maximum in the first 24 hours and requires intensive care unit monitoring.

The blood pressure should be lowered cautiously in these patients. For patients with initial systolic blood pressure between 150 and 220 mm Hg, without contraindications to acute lowering of blood pressure, the target systolic blood pressure should be between 140 mm Hg and lower. For patients with systolic blood pressure over 220 mm Hg, the blood pressure goal should be between 140 to 160 mm Hg. However, lowering blood pressure must be balanced with maintaining adequate cerebral perfusion pressure, and blood pressure should be monitored closely (every 5 minutes) in these patients. Appropriate antihypertensives include nicardipine, clevidipine, labetalol, esmolol, enalaprilat, fenoldopam, and phentolamine.

After stabilization of the patient, a neurosurgical consult is necessary to evaluate for intracranial hypertension. Short-term intravenous mannitol boluses, hypertonic saline, or hyperventilation could be considered in acutely worsening cerebral edema to maintain cerebral perfusion greater than 70 mm Hg. Surgical procedures such as decompressive craniectomy for intracerebral hemorrhages merit consideration for two purposes, firstly to decrease the mass effect of the hematoma, thereby improving cerebral perfusion, and second, to halt the inflammatory processes caused by the breakdown of blood. In patients with lobar hematomas of 10 to 100 mL located within 1 cm from the brain surface and without intraventricular hematomas or coma, early surgical intervention has a favorable outcome at six months.

Lastly, the management of concomitant intraventricular hemorrhage and obstructive hydrocephalus with ventriculostomy and external ventricular drainage is warranted in patients with enlarging ventricles on CT scan and neurological deterioration. If the patient is experiencing seizures or has cortically located lobar hemorrhages, seizure prophylaxis with anti-seizure medications such as phenytoin can be administered.

Other important therapeutic interventions include:

- Elevating the head of the bed to 30 degrees

- Avoiding hyperthermia

- Treating hypoglycemia with 50% dextrose and hyperglycemia (serum glucose over 200 mg/dl) with insulin

- Continuous cardiac monitoring

- Bladder catheterization if urinary incontinence or retention has occurred, as well as to monitor urine output

- Maintaining the patient nil per oral and maintaining adequate tube feeds with a nasogastric tube.

- Prevention of deep vein thrombosis

- Prevention of bedsores

- Mild sedation as needed for comfort

In summary, the key to management is stabilizing the patient, cautious lowering of blood pressure, and maintaining adequate cerebral perfusion while actively managing complications as they arise.