Despite the small surface area of the eyelid, it serves an important role in protecting the eyeball. Skin on the eyelid has no subcutaneous fat and is the thinnest skin found in the body.

The term papilloma refers to a group of various benign epithelial proliferations that can affect the eyelid skin. These lesions are not necessarily associated with the papillomavirus. These lesions are not dangerous but can cause mild irritation or be cosmetically unfavorable for the patient. Also, it is important to be able to differentiate a benign lesion like a papilloma from a potentially malignant lesion on the eyelid. The lesions which fall into this classification include, but are not limited to seborrheic keratosis, pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, inverted follicular keratosis, verruca vulgaris, squamous papilloma (acrochordon/skin tag), basosquamous acanthoma, and squamous acanthoma. Some types of papillomas are described below.

**Squamous papilloma**

Squamous papilloma is also known as acrochordon or skin tag. This is a soft, flesh-colored lesion that is smooth, round and/or pedunculated.

**Seborrheic keratosis**

This is a benign proliferation of cells. Classically has a “stuck on” appearance and can have varying degrees of pigmentation. Lesions tend to vary from a pink or flesh color to dark brown. These lesions are well circumscribed and are usually slightly elevated. Normally these lesions are benign, but the sudden appearance of multiple seborrheic keratoses in a region of the body could indicate a paraneoplastic process. These lesions often have an inflamed base. This is called Leser-Trelat sign.

**Pseudoepitheliomatous Hyperplasia**

These lesions are often reactive processes in response to trauma, wound, burn, pharmaceutical agents, etc. that can appear similar to basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma. These lesions are usually elevated on the skin with an irregular surface and occasionally ulceration or crusting.

**Inverted Follicular Keratosis**

This is normally a solitary lesion affecting the eyelid margin. It may or may not be pigmented and has been described as either nodular or papillary in appearance.

**Verruca vulgaris**

This is flesh-colored skin growth caused by human papillomavirus. This lesion is rare on the eyelid.