Abdominoplasty is a major procedure and can be associated with serious complications. One significant complication is wound infection, which can prolong admission, worsen cosmesis and lead to an increase in healthcare costs. Thus it is imperative to identify risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient prior to any surgery, and to refrain from such elective procedures until patients are at their medical optimum.

- Pulmonary and cardiology evaluation to optimize lung and heart function

- Instruction in incentive spirometer use, often with a nurse educator

- Evaluation by the anesthesiologist to ensure that the patient is fit for general anesthesia

- Psychological evaluation to ensure the patient has realistic expectations regarding surgical and aesthetic outcomes, particularly in post-weight loss patients

- Nutritionist consult to maintain healthy eating habits postoperatively

**Evidence-based Approach**

An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to postoperative care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. If a surgical wound infection occurs, the role of the diagnostic laboratory cannot be understated, allowing culture and antibiotic susceptibility to be accurately determined. If the patient is to be discharged home with a drain, consultation should be made with a social worker and community nurses who can monitor the patient as needed at home while the drain is in place, and educate them on the care of the drain before discharge.

Collaboration, shared decision making, and communication are key elements for good patient outcomes. The inter-disciplinary care provided to the patient must use an evidence-based approach to pre- and post-operative planning and evaluation.