**Acute Poisoning**

Acute poisoning can occur by inhalation of cadmium fumes or ingestion of cadmium salts.  Cadmium pneumonitis can occur and look strikingly similar to metal fume fever.  Within six hours of soldering with cadmium alloys, patients may experience fever, chills, cough, and respiratory distress.  Patients may appear well on initial presentation but can progress from pneumonitis to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).  Death can occur in 3-5 days.  Survivors may suffer from lifelong restrictive lung disease.

Acute ingestions occur more rarely than inhalational injury.  After ingestion, patients may develop gastrointestinal injury.  In high concentrations, it produces hemorrhagic necrosis of the gastrointestinal tract and multiorgan system failure.

**Chronic Poisoning**

Nephrotoxicity

Most commonly, permanent proteinuria is seen after chronic cadmium exposure.  More specifically, beta-2-microglobulinuria is found in these workers.  Renal function has been reported to continue to deteriorate in some patients even after removal from cadmium contact

Pulmonary toxicity

The research is not clear on whether chronic cadmium inhalation causes pulmonary toxicity.  It is, however, agreed upon that exposure causes lung cancer.

Musculoskeletal toxicity

Usually occurring after environmental exposure, painful osteomalacia has been seen mostly in postmenopausal women.  There appears to be a gender and age difference to those that are at risk.  This may account for the lack of occupational exposures as these workers tend to be younger men.

Other organ systems

Hepatotoxicity is not reported with cadmium exposure likely because cadmium forms a complex with metallothionein which renders it inactivate.