# Continuing Education Activity

Discitis is a serious but uncommon medical diagnosis. It is an infection of the intervertebral disc space. The role of the intervertebral discs is to separate and cushion the spinal segments from each other. An infection, and thus inflammation of these discs can cause much pain and discomfort. What makes the condition uncommon is also what makes it difficult to treat: the relatively scarce blood supply to these segments. This activity explains when this condition should be considered in a differential diagnosis, articulates how to properly evaluate for this condition, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the causes of discitis.
- Outline the presentation of a patient with discitis.
- Summarize the treatment options for discitis.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by discitis.

# Introduction

Discitis is a serious but uncommon medical diagnosis. It is an infection of the intervertebral disc space. The role of the intervertebral discs is to separate and cushion the spinal segments from each other. An infection, and thus inflammation of these discs can cause much pain and discomfort. What makes the condition uncommon is also what makes it difficult to treat: the relatively scarce blood supply to these segments. Treatment consists of a prolonged antibiotic course, but will usually result in uncomplicated resolution of symptoms; however, delay in treatment or misdiagnosis can lead to significant morbidity and mortality.

# Etiology

In the majority of cases, discitis stems from one of three inciting events: direct inoculation, hematogenous spread, or less commonly contiguous spread.Staphylococcus aureus.Staphylococcus, Escherichia coli,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Salmonella spp.

Hematogenous spread of disease, such as systemic infection, or bacteremia, can lead to seeding of the vertebrae first, followed by the disc, causing subsequent infection.

Spinal arteries supply blood to vertebrae and eventually to the intervertebral discs. In children, the blood vessels extend from the cartilaginous endplates into the nucleus pulposus, whereas in adults these vascular supplies degenerate, and only extend into the annulus fibrosis.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of discitis in the United States is around 0.4 to 2.4 per 100000 people each year.

# History and Physical

As always, history and physical examination are paramount in making an accurate and timely diagnosis. The symptoms will depend on the age of the patient, and early diagnosis can prove to be difficult. Reports exist of delays of up to 6 months in diagnosis.

The physical exam should elicit point tenderness over the disc of involvement, with the lumbar region most commonly affected.

# Evaluation

Early diagnosis tends to be difficult primarily due to the unremarkable nature of the laboratory and initial imaging tests. Significant laboratory findings in discitis included elevations in ESR and CRP.

# Treatment / Management

Experts do not agree on the specific treatment of discitis. Treatment options range from immediate broad-spectrum antibiotics to awaiting cultures for sensitivity before administering antibiotics, to spinal bracing alone without antibiotics.

The antibiotic should be specific to the causative agent once known.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses for discitis including common causes of back pain and less common infectious causes. These include but are not limited to:

- Osteomyelitis

- Spinal tumors

- Spinal epidural abscess

- Spinal fracture

- Muscle or tendon injury

- Disc herniation

- Inflammatory spondyloarthropathies

# Prognosis

Overall, reports of mortality from discitis run from 2 to 11%.

# Complications

Complications from discitis include spinal deformity, segmental abnormality, and less commonly neurologic deficits.

# Consultations

The consultants usually contacted for the diagnosis and successful treatment of discitis include:

- Radiology

- Infectious disease

- Orthopedic surgery

- Neurosurgery

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Deterrence of discitis is difficult. Infections can often start elsewhere and spread to the disc space. Preventing and treating infections in other areas of the body would be of importance. Infection prevention is vital in diabetics and the immune-compromised, especially, as the disease is most prevalent in these populations.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Discitis is a serious but uncommon cause of back pain

- It is more common in children than adults, has a male predilection, and targets diabetics, and immune-compromised patients

- Diagnosis is often delayed due to the commonality of back pain and unremarkable lab and imagining tests

- MRI is the gold standard of diagnostic testing

- It is usually bacterial

- Treatment consists of antibiotics, immobilization, and less commonly surgery

- Although complete resolution is the most common outcome, neurology deficits can complicate the disease process

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There are few studies on discitis and other infections of the spinal column due to the rarity of the disease and usually delayed diagnosis. Early recognition is ideal and provides patients the best outcome. Healthcare providers including nurse practitioners, emergency department physicians, orthopedic surgeons, and rheumatologists must, therefore, be aware of the broad differential of back pain, and presentations of different age groups, including children and neonates, given the predilection of disease in that age group. Appropriate consultations should be ordered, especially when systems persist without a confirmed diagnosis. Overall management includes all of the above specialists in an interprofessional team approach, along with specialty-trained nursing for pediatric and infectious disease as appropriate, and infectious disease pharmacy specialists. [Level V]