Adverse events associated with the influenza vaccine include the following:

- Injection site reactions

- Fever

- Irritability

- Drowsiness

- Myalgia

- Nasal spray 

- Upper respiratory symptoms
- Fever, headache, vomiting
- Lower respiratory symptoms

- Rare 

- Allergic reaction
- Urticaria/anaphylaxis

- Inactivated flu vaccine and pneumococcal vaccine administered at the same time may show an increased risk for febrile seizures.

**Drug Interactions**

Influenza antivirals can decrease the efficacy of LAIV4 (Quadrivalent Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine) if administered before or after LAIV4. Therefore, individuals who have been prescribed antivirals should be revaccinated with an age-appropriate RIV4 or IIV4. Recommendations for the use of antivirals are given below. It is important to note that period may be prolonged in the presence of renal insufficiency, which delays the clearance of the drug.

- Oseltamivir and zanamivir 48 hours before to 2 weeks following LAIV4

- Baloxavir 17 days before to 2 weeks following LAIV4

- Peramivir 5 days before to 2 weeks following LAIV4

**Administration with other vaccines**

- IIV4s and RIV4 may be administered concurrently/sequentially with other inactivated/live vaccines. However, injectable vaccines given at the same time should be administered at separate anatomic sites.

- Clinicians should refer to the latest CDC/ACIP recommendations/guidance for COVID-19 vaccines and administering influenza vaccines.

- LAIV4 vaccine may be administered simultaneously with other live or inactivated vaccines. If not given simultaneously, administer ≥4 weeks apart between the administration of LAIV4 and another live vaccine.

- The safety and immunogenicity of simultaneous or sequential administration of two vaccines containing non-aluminum adjuvants have not yet been studied.