The initial evaluation of patients with orthostatic hypotension requires a thorough medication reconciliation. Medications, including vasodilators, diuretics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, and dopaminergic drugs, commonly precipitate orthostatic hypotension. Patients with no apparent cause should have a thorough cardiac evaluation beginning with an ECG and a laboratory evaluation to look for findings of anemia, dehydration, diabetes, alcohol use disorder, or heart failure. One must also consider neurodegenerative diseases, primarily diagnosed by history and physical exam.

It is essential to obtain orthostatic vital signs to diagnose orthostatic hypotension. Allow the patient to rest supine while obtaining the blood pressure and heart rate. After five minutes of lying supine, the patient should be asked to stand quietly for two to five minutes, and vital signs should be retaken. One can diagnose orthostatic hypotension if there is a 20 mmHg drop in systolic blood pressure or a 10 mmHg drop in diastolic blood pressure.

Providers must also ask about the nature of symptoms, the onset in relation to postural changes, and if they are recurrent/persistent or isolated. Factors such as food intake, diurnal variability, hydration, ambient temperature, deconditioning, and prolonged recumbency can alter symptoms. Seek to identify the underlying cause of postural hypotension, which could be multifactorial. History of medications is essential, particularly if symptoms appear after starting a drug.

Clinical examination should be tailored to identify features relevant to symptoms and probable etiology. For instance, the presence of a murmur in a patient with palpitations may indicate a structural abnormality of the heart. A patient having slowness of movement and tremors could be having hypomimia and rigidity, suggestive of Parkinson disease.

Serial home orthostatic blood pressure measurements in the morning and evening, either by patients or their carers, could be considered if practical and the patient is mobile. However, it may be inappropriate where the patient is at high risk of falls or has severe symptoms and cannot be supported while taking blood pressure readings.

It is important to note fluctuations in heart rate when taking lying and standing blood pressure readings. If orthostatic hypotension is observed, an accompanying rise in heart rate of fewer than 15 beats per minute may indicate a neurogenic cause, and a rise in heart rate of more than 15 beats per minute may indicate a non-neurogenic cause.