**Coronary Artery Disease and Congestive Heart Failure**

As mentioned, SCUBA is a physically taxing sport that can increase myocardial oxygen demand and induce ischemia in patients with heart disease. Ninety percent of deaths while diving occur in the 50+ age range, and consequently, Diver Alert Network recommends that all patients above the age of 40 be evaluated for coronary artery disease through an inventory of risk factors and electrocardiography.

In patients with a known history of myocardial infarction or therapeutic catheterization, it is recommended that divers abstain from SCUBA for at least 6 to 12 months. Beyond this observational period, fitness to dive should again be based on the patient’s exercise tolerance.

Reduced ejection fraction is a relative, but not an absolute contraindication to diving. Due to the hemodynamic changes from submersion, patients should be aware that diving can precipitate acute pulmonary edema. Consequently, it is recommended that patients with a history of congestive heart failure exacerbations refrain from diving. Of note, due to these hemodynamic changes, pulmonary edema has been reported in otherwise healthy divers; however, this finding does warrant further evaluation for heart failure with echocardiography.

**Diabetes Mellitus**

In addition to being a cardiac risk factor, diabetes mellitus carries its own considerations for diving. As it would be difficult to manage neurological symptoms from blood glucose extremes underwater, current guidelines recommend that divers should not have had any episodes of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia in the past 12 months. For patients dependent on insulin, their regimen should be stable before diving. Additionally, current guidelines recommend divers maintain a hemoglobin A1c below 9%.

**Patent Foramen Ovale and Septal Wall Defects**

Patent foramen ovale (PFO), atrial, and ventricular septal defects create a right-to-left shunt in the heart. Thus, these findings theoretically increase the risk for DCS by creating a pathway for nitrogen bubbles to enter the systemic circulation while bypassing the lungs. In practice, epidemiological studies find the association to be somewhat rare. As a result, it is generally recommended not to screen specifically for PFO in the general diving population. In patients with a history of major decompression symptoms without provoking factors, transesophageal echocardiography may be performed to assess for the presence of a PFO or septal defect.

**Valvulopathy**

Valvular disease is a relative contraindication; however, individuals with normal hemodynamics and asymptomatic exercise tolerance may be fit to dive. Despite this, patients with aortic or mitral stenosis and a valve opening < 1.5 cm2 should not dive.

**Cardiac Dysrhythmias and Pacing Devices**

As in diabetes, the relative contraindication of cardiac dysrhythmias with diving stems from the difficulty in managing an incapacitated patient in the water. Patients with pre-excitation disorders, such as Wolf-Parkinson-White, may be permitted to dive if they have never experienced symptoms or cardiac arrhythmias stemming from their pre-excitation. Patients who have experienced paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia are absolutely contraindicated in diving.

Patients with pacing devices may be able to dive depending on the model; however, it is essential to check the barometric rating for the device.

**Obesity**

In addition to being a risk factor for coronary artery disease, obesity has been found to be associated with higher grades of nitrogen microbubbles in tissues as nitrogen has a higher solubility in fat.

**Hypertension and Medication Management**

While breath-holding is discouraged, it may occur at times while diving and is associated with an increase in blood pressure. Current guidelines recommend that blood pressure be controlled for at least 3 months before clearance for diving. It should be noted that some agents should be avoided in divers, particularly beta-adrenergic blockers, as these can induce bradycardia when combined with the increase in vagal tone from the diving reflex.