# Definition/Introduction

According to Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), a German philosopher, deontology is an ethical approach centered on rules and professional dutiesdeont, which refers to that which is binding

# Issues of Concern

Kant divided his deontological beliefs between hypothetical and categorical
imperatives

Another example of a categorical imperative, or moral law, according to Kant, is the requirement never to treat people solely as a means to an end

Utilitarianism directly focuses on the consequences of actions while considering the risks and benefits of taking appropriate steps. The basic premise of utilitarianism is that efforts should provide the most benefit for the most people; however, utilitarianism does not consider the overall distribution of burdens and benefits to others. Some unethical research conducted in the past drew on utilitarian principles to suggest that unethical research served the greater good of society by advancing scientific knowledge for generations to come. According to Kantian deontology, these beliefs of the “greatest good” do not place value on individual dignity and worth, which results in a violation of Kant’s categorical imperative

# Clinical Significance

How can healthcare providers apply deontological ethical therapy to practice situations, and is deontology the best fit in a complex healthcare environment? There are many applications of deontology for research purposes. For example, consider a research study involving children who have not met the legal age of consent. A typical ethical research practice involves obtaining parent or guardian consent and the child’s assent if the child is cognitively able to understand details about the research study

A clinical-based application of Kant’s ethical theory to client care involves disclosing medical errors to clients. Many barriers surround disclosing errors to clients, including fear of litigation, shame about the error, and lack of training on how to discuss errors with clients

While healthcare providers do have certain duties inherent in their practice, there are situations when Kant’s deontological ethical theory may not provide answers to guide practice. Misselbrook offers the example of relatives asking a provider if a recently deceased loved one suffered much at the end of his life

One final example of deontological shortcomings exists in the realm of triage or public health. In a disaster situation, Kant’s principles lead us to believe that providers have absolute moral duties to provide care to every patient

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The application of Kant's categorical imperative can be useful in all professional settings. Deontological values--e.g., treating patients as ends in themselves--will help obviate potential maleficence and potentiate beneficence, justice, and autonomy. Furthermore, applying these principles will bolster interprofessional relationships, as well.