The general function of the great vessels is the supply of blood to the right atrium (inferior and superior vena cavae), supply of blood from the right ventricle to the lungs (pulmonary arteries), supply of oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left atrium (pulmonary veins), and the passage of oxygenated blood from the left ventricle to the arterial system (aorta). The structure of all vessels consists of the inner layer of endothelial cells, a middle smooth muscle layer, and an outer fibrous layer. These are termed the intima, media, and adventitia, respectively and are present in both arteries and veins, although the arterial wall is significantly thicker

**Vena Cavae**

The vena cavae are the terminal parts of the extensive venous networks throughout the periphery returning deoxygenated blood to the heart.

The inferior vena cava carries deoxygenated blood from the tissues below the diaphragm. It passes through the diaphragm via the caval opening at the level of T11, the most superior of the diaphragmatic openings. In the thorax, it becomes invested within the pericardial sac to drain into the posteroinferior part of the right atrium.

The superior vena cava is valveless and drains the upper limbs, thorax, head, and neck. It originates from the right and left brachiocephalic veins at the level of the right first intercostal space, and enters the right atrium variably at the level of the third, fourth, or fifth intercostal space, by this point having become invested in fibrous pericardium

**Pulmonary Arteries**

The pulmonary trunk, or main pulmonary artery, is the direct continuation of the right ventricular outflow tract carrying deoxygenated blood to the lungs and is separated from it by the pulmonary valve. The pulmonary trunk is about 5cm long and has a diameter of approximately 3cm

The right and left pulmonary arteries have slightly different relationships with their neighboring structures as they enter their respective lung hila. The left pulmonary artery lies superior to the left main bronchus and left pulmonary vein in the left lung hilum. By contrast, the longer right pulmonary artery lies anterior and inferior to the first division of the right main bronchus, which occurs just before entering the lung hilum. The right pulmonary veins still lie inferiorly within the hilum.

**Pulmonary Veins**

The pulmonary veins, as discussed above, lie within the inferior part of their respective lung hila

**Ascending aorta and aortic arch**

The ascending aorta begins at the aortic valve, approximately at the level of the third costal cartilage, as the continuation of the left ventricular outflow tract, and is usually up to 2.1cm wide

The apex of the aortic arch is where its three branches are given off: the brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery, and, latterly, the left subclavian artery. Just anteriorly to these near vertical branches, the left superior intercostal vein is draped obliquely across the aortic arch. As it travels horizontally from posterolateral to anteromedial, it first crosses over the left vagus nerve, then under the left phrenic nerve, before draining into the left brachiocephalic vein.