Certified phlebotomists are required to perform blood donation. They are trained in the appropriate screening of potential blood donors, sterile collection methods, and management of the blood donation process. Adverse reactions are rare incidences in blood donation. The most common complication is the development of a local traumatic hematoma when the needle is removed from the vein. Holding local pressure and application of ice or cold compresses to the area can help to prevent the development or progression of hematomas. These hematomas are usually small and do not cause major problems, but rarely they can progress to cause damage to neighboring structures and tissue. Monitoring the hematoma for development of local damage is important.

Perhaps the second most common adverse side effect of blood donation is syncope, which is most often vasovagal in nature. During syncopal episodes associated with blood donation, systolic blood pressure usually falls as does the pulse. The blood donor may endorse symptoms of weakness, sweating, dizziness, or pallor. Supportive measures should be immediately taken, and the donation paused or discontinued completely. Syncope may also occur post-donation and can be avoided by requiring the donor to sit in a reclined position for a few minutes, and when able, slowly moving to the upright position and moving to an area where they should be given something to eat and drink. Increased fluid intake and avoidance of alcoholic or caffeinated beverages should be encouraged over the few hours following donation to aid replenishing lost fluid volume.

One study showed that first-time donor status, young age, and female gender were associated with increased risk of adverse events. Although transient syncopal events may not be dangerous themselves, injuries sustained from falls due to syncope may result. Requiring resting and sitting while donating blood and after the donation is finished is vital to preventing these injuries. Unfortunately, donors who suffer an injury during their donation may be less likely to return for a repeat donation.

Nausea and vomiting are reported infrequently with blood donation. If encountered, supportive measures should be taken, and the donation should be paused. Overall, blood donation is a safe practice which many people view as an altruistic service they take great pride in. With little cost to themselves, they can benefit others' health care and even save lives.