The primary personnel for a cesarean section consists of:

- The surgeon

- The surgeon’s assistant

- The anesthesiologist or anesthetist

- A scrub nurse or technician

- A circulating nurse

- Someone to care for the neonate

Before any surgery is possible, the patient should have analgesia. Except for rare emergencies, the anesthesia team will provide this. On this team may be an anesthesiologist and/or a nurse anesthetist. In some institutions, obstetric anesthesia is the responsibility of a dedicated team. In others, anesthesia providers care for patients in all surgical suites, including the main operating room and the labor floor. In addition to analgesia, the anesthesiologist and/or anesthetist are crucial in the management of the patient’s airway and monitoring vital signs, surgical blood loss, and urine output. If the administration of additional medications or blood products is necessary or blood needs to be drawn for laboratory testing, it is the anesthesia staff that often performs these tasks.

The primary surgeon during a cesarean may vary by hospital and region. In many hospitals, the primary surgeon is an obstetrician/gynecologist. In other hospitals, especially in rural settings, a general surgeon may be the one performing cesarean sections. Family practitioners who practice obstetrics may also perform cesarean sections.

The surgeon’s assistant may also vary. It may be another physician, such as a practice partner or an obstetric hospitalist. It may be a trained nurse or a certified nurse-midwife. It could be a resident physician or fellow. The scrub nurse/technician’s role is traditionally to provide the surgeon with the necessary instruments, but the scrub could also assist the surgeon if necessary.

The circulating nurse is a non-sterile member of the team. As such, he or she can retrieve additional equipment or supplies that may be needed. He or she can chart or document as indicated and play a role in the safety of the patient. The circulating nurse often works in conjunction with the scrub nurse to ensure that counts of surgical instruments, needles, and sponges are correct.

A nurse, nurse practitioner, or physician can assume care of the neonate after delivery. He/she performs the initial resuscitation of the newborn, including assessment and warming. If the neonate is expected to be significantly preterm or need specialized care (birth defects, drug exposures, etc.), additional staff to care for the newborn is often required. This care may include nurse practitioners or physicians from the neonatal intensive care unit. In some practice settings or scenarios, the primary surgeon or anesthesiologist may be called upon to assist in the care of the newborn.