The procedure is performable under general anesthesia. Anesthesia is also possible via a peri or retrobulbar block. If needed, an eyelid block can be an option, as well. The patient should be draped in a sterile manner, just as with any surgical procedure. An eyelid speculum should be placed to keep the eye open. This process allows the surgeon to visualize the intraocular instrumentation and use lenses to see the fundus with indirect ophthalmoscopy or through the microscope. Trocar and cannulas are introduced through conjunctiva and sclera at the 2 o’clock, 10 o’clock, and inferotemporal regions, around 3-4 mm from the corneal limbus.

The infusion cannula gets inserted in the cannula inferotemporally. Visualization is most commonly through a non-contact wide-field system. However, in some macular pathology, a contact lens is placed on the cornea to visualize the fundus. The surgeon can now proceed to the vitrectomy.

The parameters should be set on the vitrectomy machine based on the instruments used and the surgeon’s preference. The core vitreous is removed. When removing vitreous near the posterior pole, a posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) may need to be induced if the posterior hyaloid is still attached to the macula and optic nerve. This process is possible by using high suction with the vitrector over the optic nerve. Steroids can help with visualization if this is difficult. If these fail, then the PVD is made using the bimanual techniques with the vitrectomy and a lighted pick. The peripheral vitreous is removable, but care must be made to avoid damage to the posterior lens in phakic patients. Scleral indentation is a technique used to help with visualization of the peripheral retina. The entire retina should be visualized to find any breaks, holes, tears, or detachments. This scrutiny includes the sclerotomy sites, which is very important to avoid iatrogenic breaks that may lead to later retinal detachment. Now that the vitrectomy is complete, the retina is accessible for additional interventions according to the pathology.

PPV is a common choice for a non-clearing vitreous hemorrhage. In this case, the vitrectomy removes the blood that is obstructing the visual axis. After clearing the retina for any other pathology like detachments, breaks, tears, or holes, the PPV is essentially over. In the case of retinal vascular diseases causing neovascularization, additional interventions like pan-retinal photocoagulation or intravitreal anti-VEGF injections will be necessary. If due to systemic disease like diabetes mellitus, then better glycemic control is needed.

PPV is also an option for retinal detachments. The ensuing steps differ based on the type of detachment. For rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, subretinal fluid is removed to flatten the retina. Any retinal breaks or tears that caused the detachment must be sealed with laser, cryotherapy, and gas or silicone added for tamponade to keep the retina attached until chorioretinal adhesion takes place.

In the case of PPV performed for endophthalmitis, the vitrectomy helps with source control in aggressive infections where antibiotic penetrance alone is insufficient. A vitreous biopsy is also needed to culture the infectious agent and determine sensitivities to antibiotics or anti-fungal medications. After PPV, intravitreal injections of antibiotics or antifungals follow. For bacterial endophthalmitis, it is recommended to use vancomycin and ceftazidime for broad-spectrum coverage until culture data has returned.

When performed for penetrating ocular trauma, an interprofessional approach is required to treat additional defects such as corneal perforations, lens dislocations, or raised intraocular pressures. Blunt trauma may also be associated with additional defects that need repair. The vitreoretinal surgeon must remove any intraocular foreign body. Those that may cause further chemical or electric burns require removal emergently. Any retinal trauma such as breaks, tears, or holes should be treated to prevent future retinal detachments. Any retinal detachment should have prompt repair.

When performed for a dropped lens during cataract surgery, the crystalline lens carefully gets removed. A new lens is placed, if possible, according to the remaining capsular support. If not, intraocular lenses can be sclerally fixated, or an anterior chamber lens can get implanted. In the case of subluxation or dislocation of an intraocular lens, the process is a little bit more complicated. Any vitreous that is adherent to the lens requires removal first. A decision is necessary about how to ensure the lens now stays in place. Either that same lens gets used, or it is removed and replaced by a new lens as above.

If performing PPV for a diagnostic sampling of an ocular tumor, then the tumor can be sampled following removal of the vitreous. As stated before, care must be taken not to cause the spread of the tumor. This process typically occurs by fine-needle aspiration. Non-adhering tumors such as retinoblastoma usually aren’t biopsied due to the fear of this severe complication. The rest of the retina can be examined to see any insults that need repair.

Finally, once all of the therapeutic interventions of the vitrectomy have taken place, the operating surgeon can remove the cannulas. The instruments should be removed from inside the eye. Any vitreous that prolapses outside the sclerotomy sites can be cut with the vitrectomy probe or Westcott scissors. The incisions are most commonly closed with polyglactin sutures if needed, but plain gut sutures are also an option.