Biotransformations occur by mechanisms categorized as either phase I (modification), phase II (conjugation), and in some instances, phase III (additional modification and excretion.)

Phase I modifications alter the chemical structure of the drug, usually by oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, cyclization/decyclization, and the removal of hydrogen or the addition of oxygen. In some instances, this process will change an inactive prodrug into a metabolically active drug.

Oxidation typically results in metabolites that still retain some of their pharmacological activity. For example, the common anxiolytic drug diazepam is transformed into desmethyldiazepam and then to oxazepam by phase I modification. Both of these metabolites produce similar physiological and psychological effects of diazepam itself.

Phase II modifications involve reactions that couple the drug molecule with another molecule in a process called conjugation. Conjugation usually renders the compound pharmacologically inert and water-soluble, so that the compound can easily be excreted. Mechanisms of conjugation include methylation, acetylation, sulphation, glucuronidation, and glycine or glutathione conjugation. These processes can occur in the liver, kidney, lungs, intestines, and other organ systems. An example of phase II metabolism is when oxazepam, the active metabolite of diazepam, is conjugated with a molecule called glucuronide such that it becomes physiologically inactive and is excreted without further chemical modification.

Following phase II metabolism, phase III may also occur, where the conjugates and metabolites can be excreted from cells.

A critical factor in drug metabolism is enzymatic catalysis of these phase I and phase II processes. The type and concentration of liver enzymes are crucial to the efficient metabolism of drugs. The most important enzymes for medical purposes are monoamine oxidase and cytochrome P450. These two enzymes are responsible for metabolizing dozens of biogenic and xenobiotic chemicals. Monoamine oxidase, as the name suggests, catalyzes the processing of monoamines such as serotonin and dopamine. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) are used as antidepressants as they increase CNS concentrations of serotonin and dopamine. Cytochrome P450 catalyzes the metabolism of many psychoactive drugs, including amphetamines and opioids.