The clinical significance of sonography span across multiple medical specialties and fields. Equally important is the training and education surrounding ultrasound, as it is a heavily user-dependent skill and tool. A poor sonographer with the highest quality ultrasound can produce inadequate images. Competent training and experience are crucial. There are three regulatory organizations for sonographic certification; Cardiovascular Credentialing International, the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists, and the American Registry for Diagnostic Medical Sonography. Formal training takes 12-18 months and is combined with written and practical knowledge.

Outside of ultrasound technician training, medical residents and fellows study ultrasound. Specifically, cardiology fellows focus on the cardiac application, nephrology on renal images, and formal fellowships for using ultrasound for emergency medicine residents and attendings. Lastly, radiology residency has formal training in obtaining and interpreting sonographic images.

As described above, the training to properly utilize medical ultrasound has many different pathways. Collectively, technicians, nursing staff, and clinicians benefit from the information obtained from sonography. The coordination subsequently increases patient care and eventual outcomes.

In summary, from the foundation of Lazaro Spallanzani’s research of sonography in bats to Ian Donald extrapolating its use from iron welds to the field of obstetrics, ultrasound is now an immediately available and safe diagnostic and therapeutic tool. The utility and applicability of ultrasound span across outpatient obstetrical offices to obtaining critical information within intensive care units. As technology develops, ultrasound machines are becoming smaller and more portable. The future of ultrasound utility continues to expand and will likely span across almost all medical specialties.