There is a stepwise sequence of events to successfully perform an osteochondral autograft that should take place to ensure the best results. There are a few tips and principles that can be useful when pre-operatively planning. It is important to remember that remaining perpendicular to the joint surface that is being restored is a priority. Many of these injuries are located posteriorly on the femoral condyles, so maintaining the ability to hyper-flex the knee is crucial for visualization.

The procedure should begin with a diagnostic arthroscopy, evaluation of all joint surfaces, ligaments, menisci, and medial/lateral gutters. Any loose bodies or chondral fragments should be removed. As mentioned earlier, the visualization of the chondral defects is crucial. Being able to access the defect through portal placement is equally as important. A spinal needle can be used to “trial” correct portal placement to guarantee perpendicular access when placing the new cartilage plug.

When the location of the accessory portal has been established, the defect should be debrided, and the borders of the defect should be defined. If there are loose chondral flaps, those should be removed. Next, the defect is measured, and the decision to utilize one versus multiple bone plugs (mosaicplasty) can be made. The defect is then drilled with a drill bit, which will correspond to the size of the graft that is being placed. The defect needs to be drilled perpendicular to the articular surface. Many of the drill bits have numbers on the sides that measure the depth of the defect. The depth is measured off of the drill bit and where it corresponds to the neighboring cartilage height. Once the defect has been prepared, and the depth of the defect has been established, the focus is then turned to graft harvesting. The donor site is selected based on contact pressure; common locations for graft are the medial and lateral trochlea.

It is common to have a concomitant ACL injury, so many surgeons prefer to harvest from the lateral intercondylar notch, as this area is obliterated while performing a notchplasty in ACL reconstruction. Depending on the system being used, a harvesting tool is impacted into the donor site and driven into the appropriate depth, which corresponds to the depth the recipient site was drilled to. It is essential to insert the harvesting tool perpendicular to the joint surface to prevent graft prominence. The graft is then removed from the donor site and transferred into the delivery system.

The delivery system is used to insert the graft into the defect. Several studies focus on graft insertion protocol and how to ensure that the graft is not damaged upon insertion. Most authors agreed that the insertion force remains under 400N and that the graft is not prominent more than 1 mm or recessed more than 1 mm.