Prehospital Clinical Diagnosis by EMS personnel does not require a thermometer to recognize an infectious disease. Many other signs and symptoms can lead to the diagnosis of fever and associated infectious disease: chills, rigors, sweats, altered mental status, or patient's history of fever or associated symptoms. Concerning symptoms specific to the infected body system (a cough in a lung infection, a rash in a skin infection, abdominal pain in diverticulitis, etc. ) should lead the EMS provider to suspect infection and include it on the differential diagnosis.  High suspicion of an infectious disease can improve patient treatment as well as protect the providers from possible infectious exposures. Although universal precautions should be taken with all patients, significantly better protocol adherence is achieved when EMS personnel have a high suspicion of infectious disease. Proper assessment of patient history, presentation, and physical exam can add to the appropriate suspicion of infectious disease.

Baseline vital signs in EMS certainly include pulse, respirations, skin color, skin temperature and skin condition, and blood pressure. These vital signs comprise an important part of the physical assessment in EMS.  It may also be argued that these vital signs should include skin temperature to touch (or with a thermometer if available).  Does the skin feel cool/normal or warm/hot to the touch? The clinical evaluation of tactile temperature has been shown to be at least as accurate as topical (e.g., temporal) thermometry, even in untrained personnel (e.g., mother's of sick children, etc.). Certainly, trained EMS personnel will use this technique, as part of their careful clinical assessment when evaluating a possible infectious disease. Many other historical clues and physical findings may aid the EMS provider.