The pathophysiology of cervical spine degenerative disc disease is comparable to the thoracic and lumbar spine. Typically, physiologic changes occur within the nucleus pulposus first, followed by progressive degeneration of the annulus. This normal degenerative process may lead to extrusion of the nucleus components. The segments begin to become hypermobile leading to additional degenerative arthritic changes and instability. Unlike the lumbar spine, these hypertrophic changes mainly occur at the uncinate process, which forms the ventral wall of the foramen (uncovertebral joint). The facet joints and vertebral bodies also eventually begin to experience these hypertrophic changes due to altered loads. As aforementioned, these changes lead to stiffness and a decrease in motion of the cervical spine.

Once an HNP occurs, pain, which is the most common finding in CDD, is dependent upon the level affected and the location of the herniation. However, HNP's may also be asymptomatic. Most herniations occur posterolaterally given the AF's thinner and weaker structure in this area due to the PLL (posterior longitudinal ligament not covering this area as thickly. Given the posterolateral location of the nerve root, the HNP can produce pain in two ways; one is if the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) becomes compressed, the presenting symptoms will typically follow a dermatomal pattern. However, if the HNP is directly posterior, the second way is that spinal cord compression can occur, with symptoms distal to the injury.