Because of the benign nature of pearly penile papules, as well as their possible resolution with age, treatment is not indicated. However, some patients feel distressed or have important cosmetic concerns. Furthermore, about a half of males who are reassured of the benign nature of their pearly penile papules want to remove them. Some of them may use inappropriately over-the-counter topicals for common warts, which may cause injuries and scarring.

Pearly penile papules removal is based on physical treatments, namely, cryotherapy and laser therapy.

Studies having assessed cryotherapy are scarce. Two sessions of liquid nitrogen induced good cosmetic results with no pigmentation in a few patients.

Practitioners may also use ablative lasers. Carbon dioxide laser vaporization leads to complete removal of pearly penile papules. This procedure is painful and requires local anesthesia. The vascularization of the penis may cause bleeding during laser sessions but also makes the reepithelialization faster, so that wound healing is achieved within a week. The post-procedure wound management may be inconvenient for patients. Furthermore, there is a risk of scarring and/or pigmentary changes.

Unlike continuous-wave and pulsed modes, fractionated carbon dioxide laser causes less tissue damage with fewer adverse effects, but it may require more than one treatment to achieve acceptable cosmetic results.

One to six sessions of ablative 2940 nm erbium YAG laser cleared pearly penile papules in 45 males. Wounds healed within two weeks. No recurrence, no scarring, and no residual pigmentation were noted at the one-year follow-up.

Fractional nonablative 1550 nm erbium laser is less painful than ablative devices and produces only microscopic skin damage which heals rapidly. Up to five treatment sessions were reported to be necessary to obtain a good cosmetic result.

Pulsed dye laser may be indicated in pearly penile papules treatment, as it is reported to give good aesthetic results, with a few side effects after one to three sessions.