While the morbidity and mortality associated with electricity are often related to workplace-related injuries, the healthcare team can play a critical role in reducing the prevalence of electrical shocks in both the healthcare setting and non-workplace settings.

Children are particularly prone to electrical shock, so maintaining a safe environment for pediatric patients and educating parents/guardians on strategies to keep access to electrical sources is an important way to reduce shocks. This would include using and education on covering electrical outlets, close monitoring while using electrically powered devices, and removing connections to power sources, such as extension cords, from areas they may be. Educating adults on electrical safety is also essential as they will be more likely to be working with electricity during tasks like home maintenance and using powered devices. Within the hospital, continued monitoring for any damage to electrical devices or sources should be performed to limit exposures.

Water is also of concern via spills and inpatients after showers, so drying the excess water should be completed as soon as possible to reduce electrical shock risk. Outside of the hospital, small changes like turning off the lights while changing a light bulb, switching the circuit breaker off while working in an area of their home, and not using devices in or around water can limit shocks.

This education should be carried out by any member of the healthcare team during scenarios that may increase the risk of exposure, such as when having a child, moving homes, building or reconstructing a home, beginning a new profession, or working in a high-risk profession. In particular, the medical and nursing teams may do this in the clinic, and the physical therapy, occupational therapy, and social work teams may do this when visiting a patient’s home or assessing home safety and logistics.