Thyroid imaging: ultrasonography is the gold standard for initial thyroid imaging. Additional imaging modalities such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging are utilized in select cases to define the extent in advanced disease. Positron emission tomography can be utilized in the presence of aggressive thyroid cancer such as anaplastic carcinoma or advanced or recurrent papillary thyroid carcinoma. A chest CT scan can be useful in determining the likelihood that a sternotomy approach would be required in the event of thyroid extending below the thoracic inlet. Factors associated with the need for sternotomy include the extension of the nodule beyond the aortic arch or into the posterior mediastinum, presence of mediastinal nodal disease, capsular calcification (implying difficult soft tissue dissection), and conical shape to the goiter. Even with these risk factors, sternotomy is very rarely needed.

Laboratory testing: All patients require a serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level to determine preoperatively whether the patient is euthyroid, hyperthyroid, or hypothyroid. In patients with serologic evidence of hyperthyroidism, thyrotropin receptor antibodies (TRAb) should be obtained to evaluate for Graves disease.

Laryngeal examination: injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) during thyroid surgery can result in vocal cord paresis or paralysis. Pre-operative assessment of the voice is recommended, with consideration given to dedicated, flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy if voice abnormalities are identified.

The patient is then positioned with the neck hyperextended, a shoulder roll may be placed to facilitate this position. Depending on the surgeon's preference, the head may be secured to the bed with tape/padding. Extending the neck and placing the head on a donut cushion will also help with operative exposure. The neck is palpated for the identification of anatomic landmarks, including the thyroid cartilage, cricoid cartilage, thyroid lobes, and sternal notch. The anatomic midline is marked using the sternal notch and the mandible as landmarks. The cricoid cartilage and thyroid notch are marked. A surgical incision is marked in a natural skin crease, if possible, approximately 2 centimeters above the sternal notch.

A recurrent laryngeal nerve monitor is connected to the leads from the ETT and confirmed to be functioning if such monitoring technology is being used. The ETT provides EMG feedback from the vocalis muscles in order to monitor the function of the RLN. The monitor may alarm when changes in nerve output to the vocalis muscles change or when the surgeon uses a nerve probe to stimulate the RLN.  83% to 85% of patients with loss of signal intraoperatively will have postoperative vocal cord paresis or paralysis.