A skin biopsy is necessary for clinical confirmation of BCC. A shave, punch, or excisional biopsy are all options, taking care to include some portion of the dermis in the specimen to differentiate between superficial and other invasive histologic subtypes of BCC.  It should be noted that punch and shave biopsy techniques are about 80% accurate in diagnosing the various subtypes of basal cell carcinoma.

A qualified practitioner should perform a complete skin examination since individuals with one finding of skin cancer often have additional cancers or pre-cancers at other sites and have an increased risk of developing malignant melanoma. Documentation of the location of the lesions with photographs or digital images is a recommended procedure. There is a low threshold for obtaining skin biopsies in these patients. Preoperative imaging studies may be necessary when there is suspicion of parotid gland, muscle, deep soft tissue, orbital, bone involvement, or perineural invasion. Patients with a history of BCC should have long-term, even lifetime, follow-up, particularly those with multiple or high-risk tumors.

Dermoscopy can be beneficial to the experienced clinician, aiding in the diagnosis of non-pigmented and pigmented BCCs. The hallmark of BCC on dermoscopy is the presence of well-focused arborizing vessels. Additional findings include multiple blue-gray globules, leaf-like structures, large blue-gray ovoid nests, and spoke-wheel areas. There is no pigment network, as one would see with dermoscopy of pigmented lesions.