Arterial cannulation can provide invaluable information in the care of critically ill patients. However, it is not without risks, often overlooked as a significant patient care problem. Any time the integrity of the skin is violated, the risk of infection exists. This is especially true in procedures involving the placement of plastic cannulas into vessels where they may stay for extended periods. In the United States, an estimated 80,000 catheter-related bloodstream infections occur each year. While cannulation of a radial artery may not be as serious as cannulation of a major vessel like those in the neck or groin, both have the potential for catheter-related bloodstream infection, and this risk is not insignificant. This is especially true considering that the patient population in whom an arterial line is indicated are more likely to be critically ill and with multiple comorbidities. In these patients, a catheter-associated infection can be catastrophic. Therefore, it is vital that any time an arterial line is placed, meticulous care is taken to minimize infection during placement and for the duration of the time that the line is in situ. Multiple studies have been conducted to compare the rates of bloodstream infection between different intravascular devices. While the location of the catheter and duration of catheter placement affect infection rates, the resounding conclusion is that infection rates from arterial catheters are comparable to those of central venous catheters.

Several guidelines exist to prevent intravascular catheter-related infections. One is available through the CDC. Emphasis is placed on choosing sites with lower rates of infection. In adults, this would be the radial, brachial, and dorsalis pedis. In children, it is more appropriate to use the radial, dorsalis pedis, posterior tibial arteries. Other points of emphasis are clinician attire of mask and cap, proper hand hygiene, adequate cleansing of patient skin, and placement of drapes to create a sterile field.

One aspect that cannot be overlooked is the importance of nursing care in managing catheter-associated infections. While nurses are typically not placing these catheters, they are at the front-line when it comes to infection prevention. This is because they are usually the ones accessing the ports for lab draws in addition to performing dressing changes and routine skincare. Through proper education of nursing staff on how to maintain sterility of arterial pressure monitoring circuit and continued care of the skin around the cannulation site, the infection rate associated with arterial catheters can be minimized.

Lastly, it should be everyone's responsibility to ensure that lines are not kept for longer than necessary as there is a direct relationship between the duration of a line and the infection risk. There should be open communication between nursing staff and ICU providers to discuss removing any lines in place but are no longer required for patient care. When a patient no longer has an indication for arterial pressure monitoring, the catheter should be removed, and the area should be dressed to allow the cannulation site to heal.