- Hypotension (2-5%) is the most common manifestation of overdose, but the incidence of excessive hypotension remains relatively rare. Incidence increases with use in severely salt or volume-depleted persons, such as patients treated with diuretics or patients on dialysis. Before initiating therapy with enalaprilat, consider eliminating or reducing the diuretic dose. In the event of hypotension, place the patient in the supine position and infuse IV normal saline.

- Headache (3%)

- Nausea (1%)

- Myocardial infarction (< 1%)

- Cough (< 1%)

- Constipation (< 1%)

- Rash (< 1%)

- Fever (< 1%)

- Hypersensitivity reactions or anaphylactoid reactions

These adverse reactions may also be associated with enalapril because enalapril undergoes biotransformation to enalaprilat.

**Warnings and Precautions**

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding Considerations:**Enalaprilat is pregnancy Category C in the first trimester and Category D in the second and third trimesters. All ACE inhibitors can cause injury and even death to the fetus when used in pregnancy during the second and third trimesters. Hypotension, neonatal skull hypoplasia, anuria, and renal failure can also occur with use in pregnancy.

**Geriatric Considerations:**In elderly patients, dose selection should be modest and initiated at a low dose. Enalaprilat undergoes substantial excretion by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions may be higher in elderly patients with impaired renal function. For patients with severe heart failure whose renal function depends on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activity, ACE inhibitor therapy may be associated with oliguria, progressive azotemia, acute renal failure, or death. In the absence of pre-existing renal vascular disease, it is still possible to develop increases in blood urea and serum creatinine.

**Hyperkalemia:**In some hypertensive patients, hyperkalemia or elevated serum potassium greater than 5.7 mEq/L may occur. Additional risk factors for the development of hyperkalemia include renal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, and the concomitant use of potassium supplements or potassium-sparing agents.