Estrogen hormone therapy may be prescribed in the following combinations as either estrogen-only medication or estrogen and hormone combination medication to treat symptoms of menopause, prevention of osteoporosis, prevention of pregnancy, hypoestrogenism, and metastatic breast and advanced prostate cancers.

**Available Estrogen Preparations**

**Oral**

- Estrogen: Conjugated may be prescribed in the dosage of 0.3 mg, 0.625 mg, 0.9 mg, and 1.25 mg tablets

- Estradiol may be prescribed in the dosage of 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 2 mg tablets

- Norethindrone/ethinyl estradiol 1.5 mg/30 mcg tablets for oral contraception

**Vaginal Ring**

- Combination estrogen-etonogestrel/ethinyl estradiol hormone vaginal ring for contraception: 0.12 mg/0.015 mg per day.

- Estradiol only vaginal ring for vulvovaginal atrophy: 7.5 mcg per day

**Intramuscular Injection**

- Estradiol valerate administered as an intramuscular injection in the dosage of 10 mg per mL, 20 mg per mL, and 40 mg per mL for vasomotor symptoms of menopause, vulvovaginal atrophy,  and hypoestrogenism.

- Estradiol cypionate is administered as an intramuscular injection in the dosage of 5 mg per mL to treat moderate-to-severe symptoms of menopause.

- Recommendations for IM or SC palliative treatment for advanced prostate cancer depend on the precise formulation used and whether it is accompanied by concomitant oral therapy.

**Transdermal**

Available as a topical cream, topical spray, vaginal cream, vaginal tablet insert, and transdermal patch

- Estradiol topical gel (0.006%): 0.52 mg per pump

- Estradiol topical spray applied to the inner surface of the forearm: 1.53 mg per actuation.

- Estradiol hemihydrate tablet for vaginal insert may be prescribed at the following dosage: 10 mcg, 25 mcg tablet.

- Estrogen, conjugated vaginal cream: 0.625 mg per gram applied intravaginally.

- Estradiol transdermal patches may be prescribed at the following dosages: 0.025 mg, 0.05 mg, 0.075 mg, or 0.1 mg per day.