**Macroscopy:**

Medullary carcinoma is well circumscribed and moderately firm. The cut surface is fleshy and gray-tan and may appear lobular or nodular. Foci of hemorrhage, necrosis, and even cystic degeneration are not unusual. These tumors tend to be smaller than 3 cm, with a median size of 2 to 3 cm.

**Histopathology:**

The histologic criteria for medullary carcinoma were first clearly defined by Ridolfi and associates in 1977,

The diagnosis of medullary carcinoma in the majority of cases is established based on H&E sections using histologic criteria without the need for ancillary studies.

Medullary carcinoma should meet all of the following five morphologic criteria as defined by the WHO

- Syncytial growth pattern in more than 75% of the tumor

- No glandular or tubular structures, even as a minor component

- Moderate to marked diffuse lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in the stroma

- Moderate to marked nuclear pleomorphism

- Complete histologic circumscription

Mitoses are numerous, and atypical giant cells may be present.

The terms ''atypical medullary carcinoma'' and ''carcinoma with medullary features'' have been proposed for tumors that do not fulfill all these criteria.

2012 WHO recommends grouping classic medullary carcinoma, atypical medullary carcinoma, and invasive carcinoma of no special type with medullary features, within the category of carcinomas with medullary features.

**Immunoprofile:**

Medullary carcinomas are most often negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors and HER2 and variably express keratins 5/6 and 14, smooth muscle actin, EGFR, P-cadherin, p53, and caveolin-1. They have a high Ki-67 proliferation index.

P53 mutation occurs at an increased level in medullary carcinoma and is considered a biological marker for this tumor type.