Phentermine is a sympathomimetic amine anorectic. It has a similar mechanism of action as amphetamine in that it is an agonist at the trace amine-associated (TAAR1) receptor site, stimulating the release of norepinephrine and epinephrine. It is a central nervous system stimulant.

Topiramate is an anticonvulsant lowering the seizure threshold stabilizing membrane by acting on high-voltage-activated calcium channels and voltage-gated sodium channels and its augmenting effect on GABA-A receptors. Topiramate is also a weak carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, and it also antagonizes glutamate receptors. Topiramate augments appetite suppression and satiety enhancement based on the combination of the mechanisms above.

**Pharmacokinetics**

According to product labelling, phentermine/topiramate pharmacokinetics is approximately dose-dependent from 3.75 mg/23 mg to 15 mg/ 100 mg.

**Distribution**

Phentermine is 17.5% plasma protein-bound, while topiramate is 15 - 41% plasma protein-bound when the blood concentration range is 0.5 to 250 µg/mL. The plasma protein binding decreases as blood topiramate increases.

**Metabolism**

Phentermine has two metabolic pathways; hydroxylation and oxidation. Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 primarily metabolizes phentermine. Topiramate does not show extensive metabolism. Topiramate is primarily metabolized by hydroxylation, hydrolysis, and glucuronidation. Topiramate inhibits CYP2C19 enzymes and induces the CYP3A4 enzymes.

**Excretion**

70 to 80% of a dose is excreted as unchanged phentermine in urine. The phentermine terminal half-life is about 20 hours. Similarly, about 70% of an administered topiramate dose is excreted unchanged in urine when given independently. The mean topiramate half-life is about 65 hours.