The ileocolic artery is of major clinical significance for the following reasons:

**Ileocecal Intussusception:**Occlusion of the ileocolic artery can occur as the terminal ileum enters the cecum. As one layer of the bowel telescopes within the other, the blood supply can become compressed. This compression can be significant enough to occlude the artery leading to ischemia in the distribution of the ileocolic artery. The extent of ischemic bowel associated with intussusception depends on where exactly the artery gets compressed, e.g., proximally, distally, or one of the named branches. Anywhere from a small portion of the bowel up to the entire distribution of the ileocolic artery can become ischemic. With continued intussusception, whether repetitively occurring or occurring for long durations of time, ischemia can lead to necrosis and ultimately perforation both of which can result in an acute abdomen/surgical emergency. Intussusception most commonly occurs in young children, generally 2 to 3 years of age. The patients may present with a combination of intermittent abdominal pain, vomiting, a right upper quadrant mass, and bloody stools. In young children, a lead point is rarely identified, while commonly present in older children and adults. Potential lead points include both benign and malignant neoplasms. Drummond can be performed with water-soluble contrast or air enema in most cases of young children without complication or need for surgery. However, a surgeon should be on standby in case of perforation. Reports exist of recurrence rates as high as 30%.

**Ischemia status post superior mesenteric artery thromboembolism:**Occlusion of the SMA can lead to ischemia in the distribution of the SMA in its entirety. Additionally, smaller thromboemboli may lodge in a more distal branch of the SMA, to include the inferior terminal branch, the ileocolic artery. In a like manner to intussusception, depending on the exact location of the occlusion, the extent of ischemia and/or necrosis can vary.

**Surgery:**A thorough understanding of the vascular anatomy and anatomic variations of the right colon is essential for successful surgical intervention to include but not limited to jejunum treatment of appendicitis, Meckel diverticulitis, inflammatory bowel disease, colon cancer and symptomatic benign neoplasms of the bowel or mesentery. Knowledge of anatomy is important to ensure proper hemostasis as well as healing of the bowel anastomosis. The areas of surgical anastomosis in the colon are at higher risk for ischemia in tumor/bowel resection surgery. Anastamosis is critically important, ensuring adequate blood supply to the colon, especially in elderly or diabetic patients. Adequate blood supply ensures the normal healing of colic anastomosis.

**Trauma:**There are rare reports of isolated rupture of the ileocolic artery in the setting of blunt abdominal trauma.