One such mechanism is the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Initial insult to the heart via any one of the mechanisms listed in the previous section may result in a decreased systolic blood pressure. Hypotension acts to release renin in the kidney, which cleaves the prohormone angiotensinogen, producing angiotensin I. This protein is released into circulation, where it is converted by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II has strong vasoconstrictive properties, raising arterial pressure. Angiotensin II acts on the kidney to reduce the excretion of salt and water, increasing arterial pressure further. This mechanism occurs over a span of approximately 20 minutes.

Another mechanism is the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), whereby systolic blood pressure is rapidly regulated. The sympathetic nervous system measures systolic blood pressure via baroreceptors located in large systemic arteries, specifically in the internal carotid artery and the wall of the aortic arch. When this occurs, the central nervous system acts to constrict peripheral vessels. Regarding the heart, a specific region of the brain stem transmits sympathetic nervous system impulses to the heart, increasing heart rate and contractility (positive chronotropic and inotropic effects). These effects are accomplished primarily via the release of epinephrine (from adrenal glands) and norepinephrine (released from sympathetic nerves near the heart).

Another mechanism is the release of atrial natriuretic peptides (ANPs) from the atria. As heart failure produces increased atrial stretching via decreased cardiac output, Atrial natriuretic peptides are released from the atria. The second type of natriuretic peptide is known as brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). These peptides act to promote water and salt loss in the kidneys, as well as inhibit the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, promoting overall fluid loss, and decreasing the work of the failing heart. Additionally, both atrial natriuretic peptides and brain natriuretic peptide serve as a sympatholytic, promoting a downregulation of the sympathetic nervous system.

Each of the above mechanisms fails or undergo changes in heart failure, resulting in a low cardiac output state.

As mentioned previously, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is down-regulated when brain natriuretic peptides and atrial natriuretic peptides are released in heart failure. Overall, this promotes more fluid and salt retention in the kidneys, increasing the workload of the heart.

The means by which the sympathetic nervous system acts to promote heart failure is through the uncoupling of beta-1 adrenergic receptors from actual cardiomyocytes. Though beta-2 adrenergic receptors and alpha-1 adrenergic receptors do function to maintain inotropy, it is the beta-1 receptors that play a key role in the progression of heart failure.

Ultimately, blood return to the right atrium is slowed. As blood return slows, this results in a damming up of blood in the pulmonic circulation. As blood remains stagnant, capillary hydrostatic pressure increases, becoming greater than both the interstitial hydrostatic and interstitial osmotic pressures. This produces filtration of plasma out of the alveolar capillaries and into the alveoli themselves, filling them with fluid.