**Medical History**

The patient’s age indicates the dentition’s eruptive stage, which helps to identify an altered passive eruption. Gingival hyperplasia may be seen in patients taking anticonvulsants, calcium channels blockers, or immunosuppressive drugs after organ transplant.

**Facial Analysis**

The face must be evaluated in the frontal and lateral plane to identify any anomalies or vertical maxillary excess.

**Lip Analysis (static and dynamic)**

When the cause of the gummy smile is in the lips, it can come from a short lip, a hypermobile lip, or both.

The upper lip length corresponds to the distance between the subnasale to the upper lip stomion (lower border of the upper lip). The average length is 20 to 24 mm in young adults and rises with age.

A hypermobile lip (also known as hyperactive lip) results from increased activity of the upper lip elevator muscles when smiling.

**Display of the Upper Central Incisors at Rest**

It must be 3 to 4 mm for young women and 2 mm for young men; however, it decreases with age.

**Interlabial Distance at Rest**

The normal interlabial distance at rest ranges from 0 to 4 mm.

**Smile Line**

The smile line is defined as the upper lip position concerning the upper incisors and gingiva during a natural full smile.

**Periodontal Examination**

The periodontal examination includes measuring the width and thickness of the attached gingiva, the clinical and attachment level, the crestal bone level concerning the CEJ, and probing depths.