**Central Tolerance**

The central regions of maturation for T-lymphocytes and B-lymphocytes are in the thymus and bone marrow, respectively. Therefore, mechanisms of tolerance present in these locations are referred to as central tolerance.

**T-cell Central Tolerance**

The process for immature T-cells begins when they arrive in the thymus from the bone marrow and encounter proteins bound to major histocompatibility complexes (MHC).

The central tolerance process begins in the cortical epithelial region of the thymus. Endogenous proteins are bound either to MHC I or MHC II molecules, which then interact with immature double-positive T-lymphocytes that express both CD4+ and CD8+. T-lymphocytes that bind with an intermediate affinity are signaled to survive and mature into single-positive lymphocytes, thus creating lymphocytes that are either CD4+ or CD8+. This is known as positive selection. These cells then move to the corticomedullary junction region, where each CD4+ or CD8+ T-lymphocyte becomes exposed to MHC molecules that are bound to self-peptides. If binding at this stage is of high affinity, the respective T-cell will undergo death by apoptosis. This is known as negative selection.

Central tolerance is the initial way in which autoreactive T-cells are prevented from making it out into the systemic circulation. This is an effective process largely due to the medullary epithelial cells in the thymus. To present a comprehensive array of self-peptides found in all organs of the body, these cells express autoimmune regulator transcription factors (AIRE) that cause increased expression of tissue-restricted antigens found in other parts of the body. Expression of tissue-restricted antigens aids with efficient negative selection. Autoimmunity can develop in cases where mutations arise in AIRE, causing less expression of tissue-restricted antigens. An example of this is the disease autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (APECED), characterized by at least two of the following three conditions: candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison disease.

**B-cell Central Tolerance**

The central tolerance process for immature B-cells occurs in the bone marrow. B-cells play a significant role in the immune response to various pathogens through the production of antibodies, also known as immunoglobulins. These antibodies are glycoprotein molecules with a heavy chain and a light chain that bind to antigens, such as those of microbial origin, and facilitate their destruction. There are five classes of immunoglobulins- IgG, IgM, IgA, IgE, and IgD- which play various roles in protecting the body against acute and chronic infections and from pathogens of various types, including bacteria, viruses, parasites, and fungi.

Activation of the B-cell occurs via interaction of the membrane-bound form of its antibody with the antigen present on the antigen-presenting cell. When this interaction occurs, the B-cell differentiates into a plasma cell and secretes large quantities of specific immunoglobulins targeted to attack the antigen. This process is vital in protecting from foreign antigens. However, when B-cells recognize and destroy self-antigens, autoimmunity arises. Similar to T-cells, there are tolerance mechanisms in place to prevent this from occurring.

Clonal deletion and receptor editing are two main central tolerance mechanisms in B-cell development. To discuss these mechanisms, a brief overview of B-cell development from the immature stage follows.

The common lymphoid progenitor cell gives rise to pro-B cells in the bone marrow. The pro-B cell does not have any membrane-bound immunoglobulin on its surface. Expression of recombination-activating genes (RAG1 and RAG2) leads to rearrangement and expression of the IgM heavy chain (H-chain) on the immature B-cell. The pro-B cell becomes a larger pre-B cell when this initial IgM heavy chain receptor is expressed on its surface.

The heavy chain locus is composed of smaller gene regions known as the V (variable), D (diversity), and J (joining) gene segments. Rearrangement of these segments, known as VDJ recombination, leads to the generation of unique antigen recognition sites on the immunoglobulin. Pre-B cells then express the immunoglobulin light chain (L-chain) segments, that together with the H-chain, form the initial surface IgM molecule capable of detecting antigens. The antigen detecting site spans over both the heavy chain and light chain. At this stage, central tolerance mechanisms come into play.

Immature B-cells with surface IgM expressing the H-chain and L-chain are exposed to broadly expressed housekeeping antigens expressed by stromal cells of the bone marrow. If a B-cell binds to self-antigen too strongly, it can undergo receptor editing of the B-cell receptor, the surface IgM molecule. Receptor editing involves VDJ recombination described earlier. If the BCR remains self-reactive after receptor editing, negative selection occurs, and the cell dies by apoptosis. However, if receptor editing leads to the production of a B-cell that is not self-reactive, positive selection occurs, and the immature B-cell is permitted to leave the bone marrow. Therefore, receptor editing is a mechanism that can alter the BCR's specificity before entering the peripheral circulation.

Another mechanism of central tolerance is that of clonal deletion. Certain immature B-cells may encounter antigens in the bone marrow that cross-link surface immunoglobulins with very high avidity. This interaction causes subsequent downregulation of surface immunoglobulins, which triggers deletion of the B-cell by apoptosis. Aberrations in either clonal deletion or receptor editing can lead to leakage of self-reactive B-cells in the periphery. While peripheral tolerance mechanisms are present that can prevent the development of autoimmunity, most of these mechanisms are reversible. Therefore, central tolerance is key in preventing the development of autoimmunity.

**Peripheral Tolerance**

After T-lymphocytes and B-lymphocytes leave the thymus and bone marrow, they enter peripheral immune organs and tissues such as the spleen and lymph nodes. In these regions, peripheral tolerance mechanisms prevent autoimmunity from arising in the case that autoreactive lymphocytes made it through all central tolerance processes. There are many different types of peripheral tolerance, and the main subtypes will be discussed here.

Anergy is the first main peripheral tolerance mechanism. Anergy refers to a lack of immune response due to the absence of costimulatory signals. This process in T-lymphocytes is as follows. Mounting an immune response requires not only the MHC: T-cell receptor interaction but also a second signal delivered via costimulatory molecules. There are many costimulatory pathways, but one major axis is that of CD28:B7. CD28 is a receptor present on the T-lymphocyte, which binds B7, a ligand present on the antigen-presenting cell. The MHC: TCR and CD28:B7 interaction together promote growth and survival of the T-lymphocyte via production of the cytokine interleukin-2. Therefore, if the second costimulatory signal is not given, the immune response will not proceed further.

Two proteins that aid in maintaining anergy are cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4) and programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1). CTLA4 is a receptor present on T-lymphocytes, and it binds to B7 with greater affinity than CD28. When a T-lymphocyte recognizes a self-antigen, CTLA4 will bind B7 and cause clathrin-mediated removal of B7, thus preventing the costimulatory signal from occurring. PD-1 works similarly. It is expressed on various classes of T-cells and recognizes the ligands PD-L1, and PD-L2 found on antigen-presenting cells. The binding of PD-1 with either of its ligands causes phosphorylation of tyrosine motifs present on PD-1 with the ultimate downstream effect of downregulation of TCR signaling. Any aberration in the peripheral tolerance process can result in autoimmunity.

Clonal ignorance is another mechanism of peripheral tolerance. This is the process in which autoreactive T-lymphocytes ignore self-antigen through various mechanisms. The ignorance can be due to a physical barrier, such as the blood-brain barrier, preventing lymphocytes from reaching self-antigens. It can also be due to lymphocytes not being presented with a sufficient quantity of self-antigen to result in an autoimmune response.

In other cases, peripheral tolerance occurs via apoptosis. The association of autoreactive T-cells with self-antigen complexes triggers activation of the Fas-Fas ligand system. Both Fas and its ligand are found on T-lymphocytes, and their interaction induces cell death of the T-lymphocyte by triggering the caspase cascade. Therefore, a mutation in the Fas gene can lead to both autoimmunity and lymphoproliferative disorders. This is the pathogenesis of the condition autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS).