The nail unit is relatively vascular. It receives vascular supply from both the volar and dorsal proper digital arteries. The merge together around the distal interphalangeal joint. They give small branching vessels called the arcades that provide the proximal nail fold, matrix, and nail bed. Between the arcades are small arteries running parallel along the nail bed longitudinally. Because of the orientation of these vessels, it is essential if possible, to biopsy longitudinally.

The digit gets its supply by two dorsolateral and two ventrolateral arteries that lack an internal elastic lamina. They have a tortuous route and morphology that helps withstand the various movements and flexions without damage. Between these branches, numerous communications provide the digit with a blood supply in multiple directions, which ensures continued blood flow in the events of trauma and any hand positioning that decreases delivery from ventral vessels.

The proximal nail folds have dermal capillaries that form hairpin loops. Dermoscopy examination of the proximal nail bed can help asses for the microvascular status of the proximal nail bed. Patients with autoimmune diseases such as lupus erythematous can demonstrate dilated, tortuous capillaries with a typical density of the proximal nail fold. Patients with scleroderma or dermatomyositis can present with decreased capillary density with avascular areas alternating with dilated capillaries in the proximal nail fold.

A unique feature of the nail unit is a vascular unit called the glomus bodies. These function as organs for thermoregulation. They are afferent and efferent vessels with vascular lumina and innervated glomus cells with contractile function. These units are through to be the origin of a type of hamartoma that can present on the nails called glomus tumors. Glomus tumors typically show as painful lesions on the nails.