Zolpidem is rapidly absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract and has a short half-life in healthy patients. Zolpidem oral formulation is available as a tablet and an extended-release tablet. Zolpidem is also available as an oral spray, which is sprayed into the mouth over the tongue, and a sublingual tablet to place under the tongue. It is administered in 5 mg or 10 mg tablets orally, depending on the patient's sleep quality. Zolpidem is then converted to an inactive metabolite and excreted by the kidneys. Tablets are not scored. Ingestion with or immediately after food intake may slow the effects of this drug.

Elderly patients must receive a 5 mg dosage as their concentrations were found to be higher than young adults during clinical trials. The recommended initial dose is 5 mg for women and either 5 or 10 mg for men, taken only once per night immediately before bedtime, with at least 7 to 8 hours remaining before the planned time of awakening. Zolpidem clearance is lower in women.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Dosage should be changed in patients with hepatic impairment as the half-life of zolpidem was found to be a multitude of times larger than in patients with normal health.

**Renal Impairment**

Patients with end-stage renal failure undergoing dialysis do not need dosage adjustments, as they were not significantly different from patients with renal impairments. Zolpidem concentrations, however, should be closely watched on a daily basis.

**Pediatric Patients**

Pediatric patients should not be given zolpidem as its effectiveness has not been found yet. In addition, the research found that hallucinations might occur in a small percentage of pediatric patients who received zolpidem.

**Pregnant Women**

As zolpidem can cross the placenta, maternal use of zolpidem in the third trimester of pregnancy or during labor could lead to respiratory depression and sedation in neonates upon birth. Therefore, it is recommended to monitor and manage neonates exposed to maternal zolpidem or during labor for signs of hypotonia, excessive sedation, and respiratory depression. However, published data from post-marketing surveillance, observational studies, case reports, and birth registries on the maternal use of zolpidem during pregnancy has not concluded a clear association between zolpidem use and major congenital disabilities. There are limited moderate to severe cases of respiratory depression reported after birth in neonates who required intratracheal intubation or artificial ventilation. However, most of these neonates recovered within hours to a few weeks after birth once treated.

**Breastfeeding Consideration**

Limited published literature reported that zolpidem is excreted in human milk and lacks information on its effects on milk production. There are reports of excessive sedation in infants exposed to zolpidem through breast milk. The health and developmental benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical requirement for zolpidem and any potential adverse reactions on the breastfed infant from zolpidem or the underlying maternal condition. Infants exposed to zolpidem through breastmilk should be monitored for hypotonia, excess sedation, and/or­­ respiratory depression. To minimize exposure to a breastfed infant, a lactating woman may consider temporarily interrupting breastfeeding and discarding breast milk during treatment and for 23 hours (approximately five elimination half-lives) after zolpidem intake.