There is no evidence of organ damage or neuropsychological deficits, even at very high doses. Rarely, non-medical use may result in clinically distressing and persistent perceptual hallucinations, although they have not been observed in clinical research. The biggest concern is that dangerous and erratic behavior will result from intense subjective experiences with LSD.

One patient was documented as having myocardial infarction with concurrent use of LSD and amphetamine. In that patient, aside from tobacco smoking, there were no other known cardiovascular risk factors. Most acute medical problems related to recreational drug toxicity do not have links to LSD. In the emergency department, the most common presentation of LSD intoxication would be psychosis.

**Mental Effects**

The mental effects of LSD are the most pronounced, but they are unpredictable. They occur because of the interruption of the normal interaction between the brain cells and serotonin.

- Delusions

- Visual hallucinations

- A distorted sense of time and identity

- An impaired depth and time perception

- Artificial euphoria and certainty

- A distorted perception of objects, movements, colors, sounds, touch, and the user’s body image

- Severe, terrifying thoughts and feelings

- Fear of losing control

- Fear of death

- Panic attacks

**Visual Effects**

Visual changes are very common. Patients can become fixated on the intensity of specific colors. Sensations can also have a cross-over phenomenon. Patients who use LSD can reportedly have feelings of “hearing colors” and “seeing sounds.”

**Behavioral and Emotional Effects**

Behavioral and emotional dangers are very noticeable. Severe anxiety, paranoia, and panic attacks often occur at high doses. These are colloquially called “bad trips.” Usually, these bad experiences are attributed by users to the environment and people surrounding their use at the time. Extreme changes in mood from a “spaced-out bliss” to “intense terror” can occur. The changes can be frightening, triggering panic attacks.  Some people never recover from these bizarre psychoses.

LSD demonstrably produces these emotions:

- Feelings of happiness

- Trust of and closeness to others

- Enhanced explicit and implicit emotional empathy

- Impaired recognition of sad and fearful faces

LSD-enhanced participants desired to be with other people and increased their prosocial behavior; this is theoretically due to the increased plasma oxytocin levels that appear to contribute to the empathogenic prosocial effects.

**Physical Effects**

The physical effects of LSD occur via the stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system. Patients commonly have the following physical symptoms:

- Dilated pupils

- Higher or lower body temperature

- Sweating or chills

- Loss of appetite

- Sleeplessness

- Dry mouth

- Tremors

LSD use can lead to hypothermia, piloerection, tachycardia with palpitation, elevated blood pressure, and hyperglycemia.

The autonomic reactions listed above are not as significant as the mental and behavioral effects of LSD on the body. Actions on the motor and the central nervous system can lead to increased activity of the monosynaptic reflexes, an increase in muscle tension, tremors, and muscular incoordination.