Filgrastim is available as a clear colorless preservative clear liquid in single-dose vials(300 mcg/ml or 480 mcg/1.6ml) or single-dose prefilled syringes(300 mcg/0.5ml or 480 mcg/0.8ml), which is administered subcutaneously or intravenously.

**IV Compatibility**

- Compatible: 5% dextrose; 5% glucose; 5% dextrose plus albumin (human); 5% glucose plus albumin (human)

- Incompatible: Saline

It should NOT be administered 24 hours before and after receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy. The safety and efficacy of the simultaneous use of filgrastim and cytotoxic chemotherapy have not undergone evaluation.

**In Cancer Patients Receiving Myelosuppression****Therapy/Adults with AML**

Recommended starting dose is 5 mcg/kg/day‚ administered as a single daily injection by SC bolus injection‚ by short IV infusion (15 to 30 minutes) ‚ or by continuous SC or IV infusion.

Doses can be titrated by 5 mcg/kg/day for each chemotherapy cycle, depending on the duration and severity of cytotoxicity.

The recommendation is to administer filgrastim for up to 2 weeks or until ANC is 10000/mm^3. Discontinue drug if ANC>10000/mm^3.

**Patients with Non-myeloid Malignancies Undergoing Myeloablative Therapy following Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT)**

Starting dose is 10 mcg/kg via short IV infusion (over 15 to 30 minutes) or continuous IV infusion administered at least 24hrs after BMT or cytotoxic chemotherapy. Dosage adjustment for neutrophil recovery Following BMT via short IV infusion (over 15 to 30 minutes) or continuous IV infusion:

- When ANC >1000/mm^3 for 3 consecutive days: reduce to 5 mcg/kg/day

- If ANC >1000/mm^3 for an additional 3 or more consecutive days: Discontinue this drug.

- Then if, ANC < 1000/mm^3: resume at 5 mcg/kg/day

If ANC <1000/mm3 while receiving 5 mcg/kg/day: Increase to 10 mcg/kg and repeat the above dose adjustment steps.

**Patients Undergoing Peripheral****Blood Progenitor Collection (PBPC) and Therapy**

The recommended dose of filgrastim for the mobilization of PBPC is 10 mcg/kg/day subcutaneously‚ either as a bolus or a continuous infusion.

The recommendation is to give filgrastim for at least 4 days before the first leukapheresis procedure and continued until the last leukapheresis.

**Patients with Severe Chronic Neutropenia**

Confirm diagnosis before starting****treatment.****

Congenital Neutropenia:

- The recommended starting dose is 6 mcg/kg BID via subcutaneous injection.

Cyclic/Idiopathic Neutropenia:

- Recommended starting dose is 5 mcg/kg once a day

In the severe chronic neutropenia post-marketing surveillance study, the median daily dose was:

- Congenital neutropenia: 6mcg/kg

- Cyclic neutropenia: 2.1 mcg/kg

- Idiopathic neutropenia: 1.2 mcg/kg

Doses administered via subcutaneous injection

**Patients with Radiation-Induced Neutropenia**

- 10 mcg/kg via subcutaneous injection once a day.

**Pediatric and Pregnant Female Population**

Pharmacokinetics in pediatric patients after chemotherapy is the same as adults with weight-based adjusted doses. There are safety and efficacy studies that have been conducted on the severe chronic neutropenia and PBPC population, revealing no significant adverse effects.

The drug is pregnancy category C. There are very few studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of the drug in pregnant women. Observational studies reported no association between filgrastim use and pregnancy outcomes, neonatal complications, or infections. The clinician should weigh the benefits and risks before administering the drug to these patients.