Observing significant changes in mixed venous oxygen saturation indicates worsening prognosis in critically ill patients and should be one of the parameters used to assess adequate tissue perfusion. [Level I] Enhancing health outcomes for these patients who need venous monitoring is best accomplished through an interprofessional team-based approach, which includes clinicians, nursing staff, radiologists, and pharmacists. They all perform essential roles in sepsis, perioperative management, critical care, and heart failure by detecting sudden increases or decreases in oxygen delivery and extraction, and they must document their interventions while maintaining open lines of communication with other team members should they note any concerns. This interprofessional approach will yield optimal patient results. [Level 5]

When there is a clinical indication for mixed venous oxygen monitoring, the central line and swan catheter should be inserted under strict aseptic precaution. The site should be monitored daily to ensure it's clean and sterile. Only providers credentialed per institutional guidelines should be allowed to insert catheters since risks are significant and can be life-threatening. Once placed position should be confirmed, and the device should be secured and continuously monitored for misplacement. The clinical utility of the catheters is proven by providers trained to interpret data and waveforms. Finally, risks to benefits must be weighed for each patient, and like with any other invasive monitoring; PA catheter should be discontinued when no longer indicated in the management of the patient.