The diagnosis of meningioma is based on history, physical examination, and radiological investigations. A head contrast-enhanced CT scan can be useful for patients who are not fit for MRI, to visualize hyperostosis, or in cases of calcified meningiomas.

The best radiological method to diagnose meningioma is a brain MRI with contrast. It can help to distinguish extra-axial from intra-axial lesions as they have a homogenous enhancement with a feature called the dural tail. Brain MRI also helps to evaluate venous sinus involvement. Brain MRI also helps to find cystic lesions in meningiomas, which may show a sign of a mushroom-like appearance. This sign explains the tumor invagination in the brain parenchyma.

Calcifications and peritumoral brain edema, which is usually of a vasogenic type, might be present. Brain edema commonly occurs due to the disruption of the blood-brain barrier. It causes the extracerebral protein-rich fluid to accumulate in the cerebral parenchyma leading to vasogenic edema.

White matter buckling sign is one of the useful features to distinguish an extra-axial lesion from an intra-axial lesion. It can be seen on a head CT scan or brain MRI and is demonstrated as an inward compression or buckling of the white matter, preservation of the grey-white junction even in the presence of edema. White matter buckling sign is usually associated with extracerebral fluid collection in extra-axial lesions such as meningioma.

MRI spectroscopy can be used to detect malignant meningiomas. It compares the metabolic and chemical contents of the healthy neuronal tissue with the malignant tumor. MRI spectroscopy measures the biochemical features associated with the tumor by analyzing different metabolites. Some meningiomas show increased levels of choline and decreased levels of creatinine.

Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is used to demonstrate the feeding arteries of a meningioma and to distinguish between pial and dural blood supply.

Positron emission tomography scan is another radiological method that can be used for surgical planning and post-operative follow-up. It can help demarcate and define the vasculature and the tumor-brain interface.

Some molecular cytogenetic abnormalities can be detected through genetic karyotyping studies. Mutations in chromosome 22 for neurofibromatosis 2, as well as the absence of copy in chromosomes 1,10, and 14, are identified in some cases of meningiomas. Other genetic alterations reported in the literature include SUFU, AKT1, PIK3CA, SMO, TRAF7, KLF4, PRKAR1A, and POLR2A.

A sign that can differentiate spinal meningiomas from schwannomas is the ginkgo leaf sign. This sign is better seen with contrast-enhanced brain MRI on T1-weighted imaging. The leaf, which represents the spinal cord, is distorted and pushed to one side by the meningioma, with the streak representing the stretched denticulate ligament.