# Continuing Education Activity

Pelvic injuries are the result of high energy trauma; they frequently have associated injuries. The injuries can be life-threatening and lead to life-long disability. This article reviews the evaluation and management of traumatic pelvic injuries. All healthcare professionals need to have a basic understanding of the management and potential complications of these complex injuries. This will also review the importance of an interprofessional team approach to patients with pelvic fractures.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the epidemiology of pelvic trauma medical conditions and emergencies.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of pelvic trauma.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for pelvic trauma.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance pelvic trauma and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Traumatic injuries can range from minor wounds to major, complex injuries causing shock and multi-system organ dysfunction. Trauma is the leading cause of death of patients between the ages of 15 and 24. It accounts for approximately 30% of all ICU admissions annually.

The pelvis is a ring structure composed of bone. It consists of the sacrum, coccyx, and the innominate bones: the pubis, ischium, and ilium. The innominate bones join to form the acetabulum. The innominate bones join anteriorly at the pubic symphysis. It contains blood vessels, nerves, urogenital organs, and the rectum.

The pelvis is anatomically associated with a number of vascular structures. The aorta divides into the common iliac arteries at about the L4 level. The common iliac arteries then further divide into the internal and external branches at the sacroiliac joint. The superior gluteal artery is the most commonly injured vessel in pelvic trauma; it branches from the internal iliac artery and exits the pelvis at the sciatic notch. Other intrapelvic arteries that are associated with injuries include the inferior gluteal artery, rectal arteries, obturator artery, and the vesical artery. Veins accompany the arteries and are also prone to injury. The proximity of the veins and arteries accounts for the high incidence of combined injury. The seriousness of pelvic fractures comes from the association of other injuries, as well as the potential for hematoma and hemorrhagic shock.

Nerve injuries are less common than vascular injuries with pelvic trauma. Lumbosacral plexus injuries account for the majority of nerve injuries after pelvic trauma. The plexus is in close proximity to the sacroiliac joint and the acetabulum, two of the more common pelvic injury locations. Root avulsion is possible and is typically only seen in more severe pelvic trauma. The lumbar plexus can be injured, though this is less common. Usually, injury occurs from traction or compression from a retroperitoneal bleed.

# Etiology

The pelvic ring is a very solid structure, requiring a great force to disrupt the complex. Therefore pelvic fractures are relatively uncommon. The majority of pelvic fractures result from motor vehicle collisions (MVCs), falls from height, or a pedestrian or cyclist struck by a vehicle.

# Epidemiology

Pelvic fractures make up about 10% of fractures in blunt trauma patients. Over 16% of patients with pelvic fractures have at least one associated injury.

Pelvic nerves and vascular lesions are also relatively common.

# Pathophysiology

Disruption of the pelvic ring causes an increase in the internal volume of the pelvis. The increased volume will decrease the tamponade effect of the retroperitoneal space, allowing increased blood loss.

There are two main classification systems of pelvic fractures: the Tile and the Young-Burgess classification systems. Tile et al. described three types of underlying mechanisms for pelvic fractures. Type A is a rotationally and vertically stable fracture. Type B is rotationally unstable but vertically stable. Finally, type C is both rotationally and vertically unstable.

The Young-Burgess and Tile classification both classify pelvic fractures on the anatomic classification of injuries but fail to consider hemodynamic stability. The World Society of Emergency Surgery (WSES) created a classification that is based on anatomic classification as well as the hemodynamic stability of the patient; this helps with consideration of a treatment algorithm. The WSES classification divides pelvic injuries into three categories: mild, moderate, and severe.

- Minor: WSES grade I; the fracture is stable, and the patient is hemodynamically stable

- 
              
- Grade I: APC I and LC I fractures

- Moderate: WSES grade II and grade III; the fracture is unstable, but the patient is hemodynamically stable

- 
              
- Grade II: APC II, APC III, and LC II, LC III fractures 
              
              
- Grade III: VS and CM fractures

- Severe: WSES grade IV: the fracture is either stable or unstable, but the patient is hemodynamically unstable.

- 
              
- Grade IV: any fracture pattern in a hemodynamically unstable patient

Minor injuries are typically treated with nonoperative management. Moderate injuries are given a pelvic binder in the field, and then should be considered for angioembolization if a blush is seen on CT scan. Severe injuries require more intense intervention. A pelvic binder should be placed in the field. Upon arrival, the patient should be treated with preperitoneal packing, resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA), or angioembolization.

# History and Physical

The initial approach to any trauma patient is described in the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) course; it is a structured and standardized approach. The approach is meant to recognize and stabilize life-threatening injuries first. It is important to note an initial detailed history is not essential to begin evaluating a patient with acute injuries. The emergency medical system (EMS) personnel bringing the patient to the trauma/resuscitation area of the emergency department (ED) will provide a brief history of present illness. After the initial evaluation and stabilization of the patient, a detailed history can be obtained. A few useful facts include the mechanism of injury, whether the patient was ambulatory at the scene, bowel or bladder incontinence, and any numbness or weakness. In an awake trauma patient, the history and physical exam are highly sensitive for pelvic trauma.

# Evaluation

The initial evaluation of the trauma patient is the primary survey. The mnemonic ABCDE is a helpful way to remember the order of the evaluation.

- A: Airway and cervical spine protection. An easy way to assess the airway is to have the patient speak. Ask them their name.

- B: Breathing. Listen for bilateral breath sounds and look at the chest wall motion during the respiratory cycle

- C: Circulation. This helps determine whether the patient is in shock.

- D: Disability. This is the Glasgow coma scale (GCS)

- E: Exposure and environmental control. Here the examiner undresses the patient the provide head-to-toe evaluation for injury.

The secondary survey follows the primary survey.

Laboratory markers are often useful in traumatic settings. Sensitive markers for hemorrhage include serum lactate level and a base deficit, which can both be obtained from an arterial blood gas. Serum lactate and base deficit can also be used to monitor resuscitation. It is important to remember hemoglobin or hematocrit levels are not sensitive for identifying acute traumatic hemorrhage.

Multiple imaging modalities can be useful in evaluating pelvic trauma. An ultrasound can be used to perform a Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) exam while in the trauma/resuscitation area. A FAST exam is used to identify free fluid. It cannot differentiate bowel contents from blood.

X-ray, while useful for quick evaluation in an unstable patient, is still inferior to computed tomography (CT) for the evaluation of fractures.

A urethrogram can help diagnose a urethral injury. As urethral injuries alone are not life-threatening, any vascular or visceral injury should be managed prior to undergoing urethrogram. In the trauma setting, a urethrogram should be performed in a fluoroscopic suite by a trained radiologist. In an ascending study, a 6-8 French Foley catheter is inserted into the fossa navicularis, which is just beyond the meatus. The foley balloon is filled with 2 to 3 mL of water. A C-arm is brought over the bed and is rotated to either the left or right 30 degrees to an anterior oblique position. The patient then elevates his left side to the same degree. 30 mL of iodinated contrast is slowly injected into the foley catheter until the contrast is visualized within the bladder. A descending study fills the bladder with 400 mL of contrast. The patient is then asked to micturate into a bottle in a standing oblique position. An injury is visualized as contrast extravasation. A complete urethral transection typically requires both an ascending and descending urethrogram to estimate the length of transection.

# Treatment / Management

Pelvic fractures, no matter the grade, have the potential to become life-threatening. Treatment for pelvic fractures starts with the ABCs (airway, breathing, and circulation) during the primary survey. Adequate resuscitation is crucial in any trauma patient. Two large-bore IVs should be placed in all patients arriving at the trauma bay. Hypotension should be addressed with aggressive fluid resuscitation, followed by blood products if the patient remains hypotensive.

Pelvic binders should be placed when there are signs of pelvic ring disruption in either stable or unstable patients. The binder acts in two ways to decrease bleeding. It compresses the bleeding from the bones, but they also decrease the volume within the pelvis. By decreasing the volume, it promotes a tamponade effect. Pelvic binders are a temporary measure until a more definitive repair can occur. The pelvic binder is only useful if it is applied correctly; The binder must be placed around the greater trochanter and pubic symphysis to adduct the legs and decrease pelvic volume correctly.

**Hemodynamically Stable Pelvic Fractures**

Evidence of arterial bleed on CT should go directly for angioembolization. Pelvic angiography is usually performed by interventional radiology (IR). Angioembolization is successful in 85% to 100% of cases.

Patients with hemodynamic stable pelvic fractures should be admitted to the hospital for observation.

**Hemodynamically Unstable Pelvic Fractures**

Generally, patients will go for immediate laparotomy if they remain unstable with concern for injury. However, many authors argue angioembolization should be done prior to going to the operating room (OR). The basis of the argument is there is a high likelihood of finding an arterial bleeding source, and because there is a strong correlation between time to embolization and survival as stated above.

Preperitoneal packing (PPP) involves putting packing up against the peritoneum to create a tamponade effect. It is less time consuming than angioembolization. Preperitoneal packing is useful for hemodynamically unstable patients at centers without IR. It can also be used as a bridge to more time-consuming procedures, such as angioembolization, at level 1 trauma centers. Another important use is in patients that are hemodynamically unstable and require other life-saving surgical intervention. Packing is performed through a vertical midline incision of 6 to 8 cm or Pfannenstiel incision. Dissection continues down to fascia; fascia is then incised in the midline to access the preperitoneal space. Ringed forceps are then used to put three surgical pads into the space, with the first being pushed all the way to the sacrum. The same is performed on the contralateral side. Six surgical pads are typically enough to complete the packing. The fascia is then quickly closed over the surgical pads, and the skin is closed in a running fashion.

Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) is an alternative to cross-clamping the aorta. REBOA has emerged in recent years at trauma centers around the world. It uses a balloon catheter to occlude the aorta in an attempt to minimize life-threatening hemorrhage. It has been speculated that REBOA can be useful in pelvic trauma. Literature has shown zone III (infra-renal) occlusion is useful in pelvic trauma as it has little visceral organ insult.

Unstable pelvic fractures require surgical fixation. Early fixation has been shown to improve pain, improved fracture reduction, earlier mobilization, and control of bleeding from fractured bones.

Definitive repair, if needed, is undertaken once the patient has been adequately resuscitated and stabilized. Patients that are hemodynamically stable or “borderline” can be safely taken for definitive repair within 24 hours of injury. Physiologically deranged polytrauma patients should not be taken for definitive repair until they are stable. Studies show post-injury complication rates are increased if definitive repair is completed within four days of injury in polytrauma patients. Complications decreased when surgery was delayed until six to eight days post-injury.

Associated bladder injuries may require repair. The location of the injury dictates the management. Generally, extraperitoneal bladder injuries are treated nonoperatively; intraperitoneal bladder injuries require surgical repair. A foley catheter remains in place for about 14 days. A repeat cystogram should be performed prior to catheter removal.

Sigmoid and intraperitoneal rectal injuries should be debrided and primarily repaired when able. An injury comprising less than 50% circumference is eligible for primary repair. This has been shown to reduce complications. For injuries that cannot be primarily repaired, resection with primary anastomosis is usually performed with or without fecal diversion.

Vaginal laceration treatment is dependent on the degree. First-degree injuries generally only require gauze packing. Second and third-degree injuries require surgical repair, typically by a gynecologist.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acetabular pelvic fracture

- Bladder injury

- Hip fracture

- Hip dislocation

- Urethral transection

- Open book pelvic fracture

- Rectal injury

- Sigmoid injury

- Urethral transection

- Vertical shear pelvic fracture

# Prognosis

Unstable pelvic fractures have a mortality of about 8%. Patients that are in hemorrhagic shock at presentation have increased mortality. Patients that present with an open pelvic fracture have a mortality risk of up to 45%. As noted earlier, the seriousness of pelvic fractures stems from the associated injuries; the risk of death from isolated pelvic fracture ranges from 0.4% to 0.8%.

# Complications

The associated injuries with pelvic fractures make prognostic measurements difficult. One study showed that over 60% of patients with traumatic pelvic fractures experience chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pain is associated with depression and anxiety. External fixation is associated with pin site infections that can be treated with PO or IV antibiotics +/- debridement of site. Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve injury can also occur from external fixation.

Urogenital injuries can be associated with sexual dysfunction, such as dyspareunia, erectile dysfunction, and restricted motion. Urinary and fecal incontinence are also possible. Urethral strictures have been reported in 31% to 69% of complete urethral transections.

Urinary incontinence is initially treated conservatively. Pelvic floor strengthening and biofeedback are used initially. Duloxetine, a selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor is used in combination with physiotherapy successfully in many patients.

Similarly, fecal incontinence starts with nonoperative management. Dietary changes and fiber supplements can optimize stool consistency and limit urgency. Medications can be used to slow the bowels. Examples include the antidiarrheals Imodium and Lomotil, the bile acid binder cholestyramine, and medications the reduce the reflexive relaxation of the sphincter, such as amitriptyline. Physical therapy and biofeedback have been used successfully to strengthen the pelvic floor. If conservative treatments fail, a sphincteroplasty can be performed. Other options include implanting artificial anal sphincters or magnetic anal sphincters. Sacral nerve stimulators can also be successful.

It is important to note a pelvic binder itself can cause complications. A pelvic binder should not be placed for more than 24 hours. The binder can cause skin necrosis and pressure ulcers as soon as 2 to 3 hours after placement.

Complications from angioembolization occur in up to 5% of cases. Complications can occur at the access site and include hematoma, pseudoaneurysm, dissection, or thrombus. Pelvic tissue necrosis can be a life-threatening complication and requires exploration and repair. Patients can have a reaction to the contrast itself or develop contrast nephropathy and an acute kidney injury.

Potential REBOA complications are numerous and mainly involve vessel injuries. The balloon can cause an arterial rupture, perforation, or dissection. The catheter itself can create lower extremity ischemia and subsequent reperfusion injury and compartment syndrome. Balloon occlusion also leads to distal ischemia. Prolonged occlusion leads to organ ischemia, which can be irreversible. Organ reperfusion can lead to multiorgan dysfunction or failure, including acute kidney injury, liver failure, intestinal ischemia, spinal cord infarction, and death. Access site complications can be treated with patch repairs, arterial reconstructions with native or artificial tissue, or bypasses. If these measures fail, then the limb would require amputation. Aortic injuries from REBOA are generally life or limb-threatening. Multiorgan dysfunction is generally treated medically.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Cell phone use while driving causes an estimated 1.6 million car crashes annually. About 1 in 4 crashes are related to texting while driving. Drivers should always obey the speed limit, avoid driving under the influence, and should not be distracted while driving. Pedestrians should always be aware of the traffic around them. It should not be assumed a car will see them or give the pedestrian the right of way.

It is important to set patients’ expectations. The patient will need extended rehabilitation and physical therapy from a complex pelvic fracture. They should be educated on the possibility of chronic pain and should receive information on pain management options, as well as options for the possible depression and anxiety that may follow. Patients with colostomies from colonic injuries should receive ostomy training. The possibility of sexual dysfunction should be addressed with appropriate referrals to OB/GYN or urology.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Pelvic injuries are associated with high mortality, associated internal injuries, and significant bleeding.

- A plain pelvic x-ray is quick; however, a CT scan is the gold standard for fractures. A scan ideally should be performed with IV contrast with an arterial phase, a portal phase, and a delayed phase.

- Obtain consults to orthopedics and urology, if needed, early for optimal care and timely management of the patient.

- Early involvement of physical and occupational therapy are crucial for recovery.

- It is essential to counsel patients on potential complications and to set recovery expectations.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing traumatic pelvic fractures requires an interprofessional team approach. The emergency medicine and trauma surgery teams should recognize the risk factors for pelvic fractures and involve the orthopedic teams early when fractures are identified. Potential complications should be common knowledge for the teams involved, allowing for early detection. Physical and occupational therapy should be involved early. Pelvic trauma patients truly do require an interprofessional team to achieve the best results.