As a specialized connective tissue, bone is comprised of mainly type 1 collagen fibers and inorganic salts. Type 1 collagen is a non-calcified matrix designed to resist the tension experienced by the weight-bearing functions of bone. It forms from osteoblasts, the main cellular component of bone.

Osteoblasts function in the production, transport, and arrangement of the osteoid matrix. Furthermore, they initiate and regulate matrix mineralization and control the neighboring bone cells activities.  Osteoblasts morphology is closely related to their metabolic status. They are spindle-shaped when quiescent. When active, they are polyhedral, with abundant basophilic cytoplasm intimately in contact with the bone. They have a conspicuous nucleolus and a prominent perinuclear halo (developed Golgi apparatus).

Once the osteoid is mineralized, the precursor cells get surrounded by organic intracellular substances called lacunae to become fully developed and matured into osteocytes. The mineral content is chiefly hydroxyapatite crystals composed of mainly calcium and phosphate ions but can occasionally have sodium and carbonite as well.

Osteocytes have a widespread distribution. Their cell processes are fundamental to allows osseous tissue to be responsive to the mechanical and metabolic organism constraints. Histologically, they have long and delicate cytoplasmic processes and small nuclei, not always visible in every plane of section. Their number, size, shape, and position vary according to bone type. In fact, in woven bone, they are numerous, large, and disorganized, whereas, in lamellar bone, they are fewer in number, smaller, spindle-shaped and architecturally regular.

The osteon, anatomically, is represented as the single functional unit of bone tissue. It is arranged with concentric lamellae of collagen fiber orientations around a central canal consisting of osteocyte’s arterial, venous, and nerve supply, is known as the Haversian canal. This system also consists of the canaliculi and Volkmann canal which allow for communication between neighboring osteocytes and communication between neighboring osteons, respectively.

With a mechanism responsible for building up bone, osteoclasts are the large, multinucleated cells on the surface of bones in pits called Howship lacunae responsible for removing calcium from bone by secreting proteolytic enzymes and hydrogen ions to dissolve the calcium hydroxyapatite crystals.

On average, osteoclasts have 12 nuclei, though the number may range from 2 to as many as 100. In their cytoplasm, interconnecting actin filaments produce a clear area between the cell membrane and the nuclei.

Architecturally, bone categorizes into two subtypes: cortical and trabecular bones. Similarly, the primary mechanical determinants of the strength of bone are specific for the subtype as described: width and porosity for cortical bone, and shape, width, connectivity, and anisotropy for trabecular bone.

- Cortical Bone: consists of about 80% of the total bone in the body and is much stronger than trabecular bone. It is very resistant to bending, torsion, and compression and is much more dense with a minimal role in metabolism. It is seen mostly in the shaft of long bones like the femur and the tibia as well as in the outer shell of trabecular bone.

- Trabecular Bone: consists of only 20% of the total bone but has ten times the surface/volume ratio of cortical bone. It responds eight times faster to changes in load making it far more dynamic. It occurs in areas that more subject to compression such as the vertebral body, pelvis, and the metaphyses.