**PAPVC**

Clinical presentation, similar to ASD, widely varies based on the degree of left to right shunt and associated cardiac defects.

PAPVC is also commonly associated with other cardiac anomalies, often ASD. The incidence of PAPVC is higher in patients with Turner’s syndrome.

**PAPVC Associated with an Atrial Septal Defect**

Patients with a small degree of the shunt are usually asymptomatic, and a murmur can incidentally be found on physical exam. Moderate to large shunt leads to symptoms during childhood, but commonly these patients present with dyspnea, exertion, and other symptoms of heart failure by third to fourth decade. In late adulthood, if left untreated, a minority of patients may develop significant pulmonary hypertension leading to a reversal of shunting and development of cyanosis.

On physical exam, the findings are similar to atrial septal defects like a wide split fixed S2 and an ejection systolic murmur best heard at the left sternal border with radiation to both upper lungs. This is due to the increased flow across the pulmonary valve. There is an absence of a pulmonary systolic ejection click, unlike pathological pulmonary valve defect.

**Isolated PAPVC**

One anomalous pulmonary vein usually is not clinically significant. In patients with multiple anomalous veins, clinical presentation depends upon the degree of left to right shunt and is similar to the presentation of ASD, and PAPVC with ASD.

**TAPVC**

**TAPVC Without Pulmonary Venous Obstruction**

Patients can be asymptomatic at birth. Symptoms due to pulmonary over circulation usually begin in the first few days of life. Infants can have dyspnea, feeding difficulties, and failure to thrive. The degree of cyanosis is variable, and some patients may have mild, clinically inapparent cyanosis.

Later on, patients develop right ventricular hypertrophy and features of right ventricular failure.

Physical exam findings include fixed split S2, systolic ejection murmur, and cyanosis. Features of right ventricular hypertrophy and/or failure like right ventricular heave, loud P2, hepatomegaly, and third heart sound may be present.

**TAPVC with Pulmonary Venous Obstruction**

Patients with obstructed TAPVC usually present with severe respiratory distress and cyanosis in the newborn period.

Physical exam findings can include hypoxia, hypotension, and tachypnea. This is one of the common differentials for persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborns. These neonates are usually sick and require urgent surgeries.

TAPVC usually occurs as an isolated cardiac lesion, but it can also be associated with other congenital heart defects. The incidence of TAPVC is higher in patients who have heterotaxy with polysplenia or asplenia.