Surgery is the mainstay of treatment of Hurthle cell tumors. Multiple reports and case series have found thyroid lobectomy and total thyroidectomy to have similar outcomes in matched populations for non-invasive Hurthle cell tumors.

Radioactive iodine (RAI) is commonly used in the adjuvant setting for high-risk features like tumor size >2 cm, cervical lymph node metastases, positive margins, microvascular invasion, or postoperative thyroglobulin levels are more than 1 ng/mL. It is estimated that only around 10% of patients with Hurthle cell carcinoma lesions take up radioiodine; hence responses to treatment with RAI are much lower in these patients when compared to other types of thyroid carcinomas.

For patients with de novo or residual cervical disease, neck dissection can be considered if feasible. If surgical resection is not possible or contraindicated, then External beam radiation therapy or intensity-modulated radiation therapy can be considered.

For metastatic Hurthle cell carcinoma, patients that are asymptomatic with well-differentiated tumors and indolent disease, observation is an acceptable option as long as they do not have brain metastases. For patients with symptoms or rapidly growing metastatic with iodine avid tumor, RAI is a preferable option. If the patient's tumor is not amenable to RAI, systemic therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) like lenvatinib or sorafenib is considered.

Molecular analysis of these cancers can be helpful as there is data for non-specific use of larotrectinib or entrectinib in cancers with NTRK fusion and pembrolizumab in patients with high tumor mutation burden regardless of the type of cancer.

Most of the patients with RET fusions in the study were medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, but the data can be extrapolated to Hurthle cell carcinomas with RET fusion. Cytotoxic chemotherapy has been used in small studies but has not been reported to significantly benefit patients with Hurthle cell carcinoma and is used as a last option.