A cyst is an epithelial-lined cavity. The epithelial lining of odontogenic cysts arises from the odontogenic epithelium, which includes reduced enamel epithelium (REE), the epithelial cell rest of Serres, and the epithelial cell rest of Malassez (ERM).

Periapical cysts are inflammatory and are the most common odontogenic cysts. They develop at the root apex of a non-vital tooth due to inflammation caused by dental caries or trauma.

Residual cysts are very similar to periapical cysts as they both have an inflammatory etiology. Residual cysts are a result of inadequate removal of the periapical cyst at the time of extraction. Microscopically, residual cysts are identical to periapical cysts.

Paradental cysts are odontogenic cysts with an inflammatory etiology. Depending on the tooth and the location, they may be given such terms as a buccal bifurcation cyst or mandibular infected buccal cyst. These cysts occur at the crown or root of a partially or fully erupted tooth. They are located on the buccal, mesial, or distal aspects of the tooth. Paradental cysts result from inflammation of the junctional epithelium within the gingival sulcus of an erupting or erupted tooth. The associated tooth frequently has a buccal enamel extension, which is generally the initiator of an inflammatory reaction.

Dentigerous cysts are developmental in origin. They occur when fluid accumulates between the tooth crown and enamel epithelium, dilating the tooth follicle. Consequently, this ultimately prevents the tooth from erupting.

Eruption cysts are developmental cysts and are considered the soft tissue variant of the dentigerous cyst. They are caused by a lack of separation of the dental follicle from an erupting tooth.

Lateral periodontal cysts are developmental cysts that arise from the rest of the Serres.

Odontogenic keratocysts (OKC) have a developmental etiology and arise from the rest of the Serres.

Orthokeratinizing odontogenic cysts have a developmental etiology and arise from the rest of the Serres.

Glandular odontogenic cysts have a developmental etiology and arise from the rest of Serres or ERM.