**Antiprotozoal Agents**

Chloroquine – Although generally well tolerated, some patients experience pruritis and gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances such as nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and abdominal pain with chloroquine. Rarely, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficient patients experience hemolysis. Other rare side effects of chloroquine include agranulocytosis, hypotension, seizures, psychosis, blurring of vision, QRS widening, and T wave abnormalities. Long-term use may also lead to ototoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, and retinopathy.

Amodiaquine is related to chloroquine and may be used to replace chloroquine in resistant areas. It rarely has adverse effects, but some patients may experience agranulocytosis, hepatotoxicity, and aplastic anemia. This drug is not available in the USA but sees extensive usage in Africa.

Atovaquone has adverse effects such as headaches, insomnia, fever, rash, and GI disturbances such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.

Artemisinins such as artemether are well tolerated but may cause symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting. Rarely, patients may exhibit neutropenia, hemolysis, and elevated liver enzymes. They are well tolerated in pregnancy.

Lumefantrine can be combined with artemether. The use of this combination can lead to GI disturbances, pruritis, dizziness, and headaches. It can also cause QTc interval prolongation on rare occasions.

Primaquine also has adverse effects of GI disturbances, including abdominal cramps, nausea, and epigastric pain. It can also cause hemolysis or methemoglobinemia especially in patients with G6PD deficiency.

Mefloquine may lead to adverse effects such as behavioral disturbances, insomnia, GI disturbances, rash, and dizziness. It can also lead to arrhythmias, bradycardia, and other cardiac conduction abnormalities.

Doxycycline also causes GI symptoms, and it also leads to photosensitivity and candida vaginitis.

Iodoquinol rarely may lead to adverse effects such as diarrhea, anorexia, nausea rash, and pruritis. Taking it with meals can prevent GI effects. Iodoquinol can also lead to an increase in serum iodine that is bound to proteins, leading to a decrease in measured I uptake.

Paromomycin leads to GI disturbances. It can accumulate in the kidneys of those with renal insufficiency and cause renal toxicity.

Metronidazole commonly leads to a metallic taste in the mouth, headache, nausea, and dry mouth. Other rare adverse effects of metronidazole include thrush, vertigo, neutropenia, pancreatitis, and toxicity in the central nervous system leading to seizures and encephalopathies. Tinidazole has a similar side effect profile to metronidazole but is better tolerated.

Albendazole causes GI disturbances, alopecia, an increase in liver enzymes, headaches, and pancytopenia. It is typically well-tolerated and usually has no significant side effects.

Benznidazole has adverse effects such as GI disturbances, myelosuppression, peripheral neuropathy, and rash.

Nifurtimox also has adverse effects, which include GI disturbances, rash, seizures, neuropathies, and insomnia.

Pentamidine is a very toxic drug that, when rapidly administered through IV, may cause hypotension, dyspnea, and tachycardia. If inhaled, it may cause bronchospasms and lead to difficulties in breathing. It leads to pancreatic toxicity and can cause hypoglycemia. It may also lead to renal insufficiency. Other side effects include an unpleasant taste in the mouth, gastrointestinal disturbances, hallucinations, and cardiac arrhythmias.

Eflornithine may cause GI disturbances as well as reversible thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and seizures.

Suramin causes nausea, vomiting, and fatigue early on, and as time progresses can lead to severe signs and symptoms like agranulocytosis, hemolytic anemia, chronic diarrhea, neuropathies, and renal abnormalities amongst others. This agent is not FDA-approved for use in the USA.

Melarsoprol is a highly toxic drug and most commonly causes reactive encephalopathy, which manifests as seizures, coma, edema, and death. It also causes renal and cardiac diseases.

Sodium stibogluconate causes myalgias, arthralgias, and GI symptoms. T wave changes and QTc prolongation may also occur; thus, electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring is recommended when a patient is on sodium stibogluconate. This agent is only available from the CDC and Military bases.

Amphotericin B can cause infusion reactions and can also lead to renal insufficiency. Acutely, it can lead to hypertension, hypotension, nausea, vomiting, and fever.

Pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine has cutaneous side effects such as Steven-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and erythema multiforme. Because it contains a sulfonamide, this medication may also cause renal insufficiency, gastrointestinal disturbances, central nervous system disorders, and dermatologic disorders.

Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) causes symptoms due to antifolate and sulfonamide activity. Antifolate side effects include megaloblastic anemia, granulocytopenia, and leukopenia, while symptoms due to sulfonamides include GI disturbances, central nervous disturbances, and renal toxicity.

**Antihelminthic Agents**

Praziquantel causes symptoms, including GI disturbances, skin rashes, arthralgia, myalgia, and low-grade fever. In cases of neurocysticercosis, the damaging of the parasites may lead to CNS disturbances such as seizures, mental changes, meningismus, hyperthermia, intracranial hypertension, nausea, and vomiting. However, this is avoidable by the use of corticosteroids.

Pyrantel pamoate has GI side effects such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. It is also associated with dizziness, rash, headaches, weakness, and drowsiness. It has been observed to cause a mild increase in liver enzymes. Therefore, patients with liver disease require close monitoring.

**Ectoparasiticides**

Permethrin causes side effects such as pruritis, burning, and stinging.

Lindane may lead to neurotoxicity and hematotoxicity; therefore, it should be avoided in pregnancy and children.