Adequate vascular supply to the spinal cord is vital in maintaining the integrated function of the central nervous system. Supply to the cord is highly complex and interconnected to maintain the tissue’s metabolic needs.

Acute central cord syndrome is the most common type of spinal cord injury, accounting for over two-thirds of all incomplete cervical spinal cord injuries. Its predominant etiology is from cervical spine hyperextension trauma that compresses the spinal cord. Trauma to the cord often results in centro-medullary hemorrhage and edema. Characteristic symptoms are upper extremity weakness, sensory deficits, and bowel, and bladder dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is vital for diagnosing central cord syndrome and other complications such as hemorrhage and spinal column instability. Treatment specifics vary based on severity, but ensuring spinal column stability is always paramount. Surgical approaches are necessary in severe cases with marked instability and neurological impairment.

Spinal cord infarction (SCI) results from an interruption in spinal cord blood supply and can lead to acute spinal syndrome. Though the development of SCI is rare (comprises only 1% of stroke), infarct of the anterior spinal artery and/or the artery of Adamkiewicz is overwhelmingly more common than infarct of a posterior spinal artery. Lesions of the anterior supply lead to clinical presentation characterized as an anterior spinal syndrome. Symptoms will depend on the location and severity of the infarct but include sudden back pain progressing to sensation deficits, extremity weakness or paresis, and bladder or bowel dysfunction. Onset is typically sudden, with peak symptoms arising within 30 to 45 minutes. In the typical ASA infarct, the anterior two-thirds of the cord are affected, leading to bilateral weakness, progressive sensory loss, and potential autonomic symptoms. An infarct of a PSA will typically cause unilateral symptoms. Diagnosis is made via detection on MRI, often after visualization of the trademark “owl’s eye” hyperintensity appearance on T2 axial images. Underlying etiology is wide-ranging; thus, a range of treatment methods exist.

Similarly, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) of spinal origin is uncommon but has received coverage in the literature. Spinal SAH is attributable to either arteriovenous fistula or malformation, as well as a spinal aneurysm. Symptoms usually include sudden onset neck or back pain and extremity weakness with signs indicating spinal cord compression. Again, computed tomogram (CT)/computed tomogram angiogram (CTA) and MRI are important for urgent diagnosis. Treatment varies depending on severity, location, and size, but both conservative treatment and endovascular or surgical management have proven effective.