Familial combined hyperlipidemia, the most commonly reported genetic dyslipidemia, increases the risk of early atherosclerosis expression.

FDA-approved treatments include HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), fibric acid derivatives (fibrates), bile acid sequestrants, PCSK9 inhibitors, adenosine triphosphate-citrate lyase inhibitors (bempedoic acid), niacin and ezetimibe.

**Statins**

- Atorvastatin

- Fluvastatin

- Lovastatin

- Pravastatin

- Rosuvastatin

- Simvastatin

- Pitavastatin

Statins exert their mechanism of action by inhibiting the HMG-CoA reductase enzyme in the hepatocytes, further causing the decreased intracellular synthesis of cholesterol. HMG-CoA reductase is the rate-limiting step in the mevalonate pathway responsible for cholesterol synthesis.

The majority of cholesterol in circulation is produced by internal hepatic synthesis relative to dietary intake, making statins a prevalently used agent in hyperlipidemia and dyslipidemia. The primary therapeutic goal of statins is to lower levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), very-low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C), triglycerides (TG), apolipoprotein B (apo-B) lipoprotein, and total cholesterol, while simultaneously increasing levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C).

**Fibrates**

- Gemfibrozil

- Fenofibrate

- Fenofibric acid

Fibric acids exert mechanistic effects by stimulating peroxisome proliferator-activated alpha (PPAR-a) receptors. Following the binding of the ligand to its target transcriptional factor PPAR-a receptors, it further causes downstream effects and activation of multiple biological processes. The therapeutic action of fibrates is mainly through the beta-oxidation of fatty acids and the metabolism of lipids in circulation, making it effective in hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia. This further reduces TG particles and aids in the breakdown of VLDL. This helps decrease the atherosclerotic burden and plaque buildup in coronary vessels from dyslipidemias, further reducing CHD incidence.

**Bile Acid Sequesterants**

- Cholestyramine

- Colestipol

- Colesevelam

Bile acid sequestrants exert their mechanistic effects by decreasing LDL-C absorption in the gastrointestinal tract, further causing its excretion in feces. The sequestrants create an insoluble complex that is not digestible or can be reabsorbed, further depleting bile acids from circulation. The excretion of bile acids initiates more cholesterol in the liver to be converted to bile acids, upregulating LDL receptors in the liver and decreasing plasma LDL-C in circulation.

**PCSK9 Inhibitors**

- Evolocumab

- Alirocumab

- Inclisiran

Proprotein convertase subtilisin/Kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a vital regulator of cholesterol. Mutations in PCSK9 result in a gain of function action, further increasing cholesterol in circulation and etiology for autosomal dominant familial hypercholesterolemia. PCSK9 inhibitors exert their mechanism of action by inhibiting PCSK9 receptors, which reduce LDL-C. The role of PCSK9 is to inhibit LDL receptor recycling which further increases LDL-C in circulation.

Inhibiting the PCSK9 protein halts the inhibitory LDL receptor recycling effect, increasing hepatic LDL receptors, further increasing cholesterol uptake from circulation, and decreasing plasma LDL-C levels. When patients fail to achieve LDL-C targets despite receiving statin and ezetimibe therapy at maximum doses, PCSK9 inhibitors should be considered an additional treatment option.

**Adenosine Triphosphate-citrate Lyase (ACL) Inhibitor**

- Bempedoic acid

Bemploic acid exerts its mechanism of action by inhibiting adenosine triphosphate-citrate lyase. The agent is a prodrug that acts in the liver once recognized by the enzyme acyl-CoA-synthetase-1 and converted to its active form, bempedoyl-CoA, further inhibiting ACL. It is FDA approved for heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and patients with ASVD who require additional management for decreasing LDL-C.

**Others**

- Niacin

- Ezetimibe

- Omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil)

- Lomitapide