Adverse effects are dose-dependent and differ between epilepsy and migraine patients in trials as the trials used different doses based on the condition.

The most common adverse effects in epilepsy trials included the involvement of the central nervous system (paresthesia, fatigue, cognitive problems, dizziness, somnolence, psychomotor slowing, memory/concentration difficulties, nervousness, confusion), endocrine/metabolism (weight loss, anorexia), respiratory (infection), miscellaneous (fever, flushing).

The most common adverse effects in trials involving migraine patients were paresthesia and dysgeusia.

Serious adverse drug reactions include:

- Acute myopia and secondary angle-closure glaucoma

- Oligohidrosis and hyperthermia: uncommon and reversible with cessation of the drug.

- Metabolic acidosis: due to inhibition of carbonic anhydrase isoenzymes, topiramate can lead to metabolic acidosis secondary to type II renal tubular acidosis, elevated urine pH, reduced urine citrate, hypercalciuria, calcium phosphate stone formation, bone mineralization defects.

- Suicidal behavior and ideation

- Cognitive/neuropsychiatric adverse reactions: influence of topiramate on the hippocampus-related memory processes influence spatial memory but does not significantly affect the learning process.

- Fetal toxicity: Exposure during pregnancy is associated with congenital malformations and developmental delay. Increased risk of recurrent malformations in future pregnancies.

- Hyperammonemia and encephalopathy: one case report describes a young patient developing metabolic encephalopathy with hypoxic respiratory failure, most likely due to concurrent use of valproic acid and topiramate. Clinicians should be cautious of possible hyperammonemia encephalopathy in patients taking these medications presenting with impaired consciousness and cognitive decline.

- Kidney stones: long term topiramate administration could induce urolithiasis; therefore, blood testing for acid-base balance, urinary pH, and citrates is recommended in patients with kidney stones.

- Paresthesia: is the most common cause of discontinuation of the drug.

- Adjustment of dose in renal failure: dose adjustment is necessary for patients with moderate-to-severe renal impairment.

- Hepatotoxicity: A literature review indicates that <1% of subjects have increased serum aminotransferase levels during long-term topiramate treatment. The pathophysiology of hepatotoxicity is believed to be due to the formation of a toxic intermediate metabolic. Cases with lactic acidosis and hyperammonemia may be caused by mitochondrial dysfunction.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Topiramate increases the oral clearance of estrogen in an oral contraceptive at high dosages and can lead to contraception failure (>200 mg/day).

- Clearance of topiramate may be reduced when used with amitriptyline. Use with caution.

- Concurrent administration of topiramate with carbamazepine requires dose adjustments due to reduced topiramate concentrations.

- Concurrent use of topiramate and metformin increases the risk of metabolic acidosis.

- Concurrent use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors like acetazolamide and dorzolamide brinzolamide with topiramate may increase the risk of metabolic acidosis and nephrolithiasis. Avoid combination.

- Concurrent use of topiramate with benzodiazepines, alcohol, thalidomide, and bromperidol can cause sedation and excessive CNS depression.