There are two main histologic variants of gastric adenocarcinoma based on Lauren's histopathologic classification. The most frequent is the "intestinal type," so-called because of its morphologic similarity to adenocarcinomas arising in the intestinal tract. The less common diffuse-type gastric cancer is characterized by a lack of intercellular adhesions, which disrupt the formation of glandular structures.

In patients with an inherited form of diffuse-type gastric cancer, the absence of intercellular adhesions is caused by a germline mutation (HDGC) in the cell adhesion protein E-cadherin (CDH1). HDGC is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with high penetrance, highly invasive, late presentation (average age 38), and poor prognosis. CDH1 asymptomatic carriers may warrant prophylactic gastrectomy before age 30, and women are also at risk of early breast cancer. The diffuse type has no clear precancerous lesions. One model for the "intestinal-type" of gastric cancer describes a progression from chronic gastritis caused by H. pylori, pernicious anemia, or high-salt diets leading to a loss of parietal cells, therefore, reducing acid production causing chronic atrophic gastritis. Atrophic gastritis compensatory hypergastrinemia induces chronic inflammation resulting in intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia, and, eventually, adenocarcinoma. It was estimated that approximately 1 in 39 patients with intestinal metaplasia (hazard ratio [HR] 6.2, 95% CI 4.7-8.2) and 1 in 19 with dysplasia (HR 10.9, 95% CI 7.7-15.4) would develop gastric cancer within 20 years. As opposed to the diffuse-type cell lines, the intestinal-type cancer cell lines are significantly more sensitive to 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin but more resistant to cisplatin.

Results from several studies have demonstrated an approximately sixfold increase in H. pylori infection in patients with gastric cancer, particularly adenocarcinoma of the distal stomach, including both intestinal and diffuse types. As mentioned above, H. pylori trigger inflammation, resulting in stomach atrophy and subsequent metaplasia culminating in carcinoma. Moreover, most patients with H. pylori infection develop ulcers and not a malignancy. No definitive evidence of bacterial virulence (vacAs1-, vacAm1-, and cagA-positive) or widespread mass eradication could increase or reduce gastric cancer incidence. As per current guidelines, screening and treatment of H. pylori infections are recommended.