The management of atrioventricular septal defects can be divided into medical and surgical treatment.

**Medical Treatment**

It includes diuretics and vasodilators to reduce the preload and afterload to relieve the symptoms associated with pulmonary congestion and heart failure. Associated feeding problems and failure to thrive are managed by tube feeding and providing extra calories. In atrioventricular septal defects, medical treatment is usually directed at optimizing the condition of the patient for surgery.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical correction is the ultimate treatment of atrioventricular septal defect. Atrioventricular septal repair is a complex surgical procedure and carries operative mortality of more than 3% even in the contemporary era of advanced surgical techniques.

Assessment of pre-operative imaging and hemodynamic data is essential for the optimal selection of surgical procedures to reduce the requirement of recurrent surgery and postoperative complications.

In complete AVSD, surgical closure should be performed in early infancy to reduce the pulmonary vascular disease, whereas, in incomplete atrioventricular septal defect, a repair can be slightly delayed if the patient is not symptomatic.

For partial AVSD, the primary repair is preferred with patch closure and atrioventricular valvuloplasty.

For balanced complete AVSD, early primary repair with two patch closure techniques is preferred over one patch closure, as one patch closure is associated with an increased rate of recurrent procedures due to patch dehiscence and residual shunt. Pulmonary artery banding is no longer used as a routine procedure in complete AVSD repair.

For unbalanced complete AVSD, repair technique may include single ventricle palliation with the staged biventricular repair or primary biventricular repair.