Thyroid cancer, as discussed, can have highly varied manifestations, from a clinically indolent low-risk disease that can be managed with only active surveillance to a highly aggressive metastatic disease that needs extensive surgical resection with or without systemic chemotherapy.

Hence, managing a patient with thyroid cancer is a highly individualized process taking into account the patient's risk of recurrence and preferences (after being educated about the different treatment strategies and risks vs. benefits of each). A close collaboration between all interprofessional team members, including but not limited to the thyroid surgeon, the endocrinologist, the pathologist, the radiologist, and possibly the oncologist, plays a vital role in providing the most appropriate treatment for the patient while avoiding overtreatment at the same time. Nursing staff should ensure the patient is involved and comfortable every step of the way, from pre-operative planning to treatment and postoperative monitoring. When pursuing chemotherapy, a specialized oncology pharmacist is also a valuable addition to the interprofessional team. Interprofessional teamwork relies on open communication channels between all team members, and the maintaining of meticulous records so that all professionals involved in the case have access to the same updated patient information and can reach out to other team members if they see anything that requires their attention. This type of interprofessional care coordination combined with open information sharing will yield the best patient outcomes. [Level 5]