**Verbal Communication Barriers**

Word choice when asking questions or explaining a diagnosis or treatment plan may contribute to discord within the doctor-patient relationship. Physicians may use complicated medical terms that patients may not understand. Patients come from different socioeconomic backgrounds and therefore have different literacy levels. If confronted with a word or phrase not understood, patients will often avoid the embarrassment of not knowing the medical term by affirming to a yes or no response, which can be unreliable during interviews.

Studies have shown that physicians do not disclose enough pertinent information to patients, which can impact a patient’s involvement in their care.

**Non-verbal Communication**

Non-verbal language, including facial language, body posture, and paralanguage, influence a patient’s perception of a physician. For example, a patient may interpret a negative facial expression and a raised voice as feelings of annoyance.

**Physician Attitudes**

Medical school, residency, fellowships, and long careers often take both an emotional and physical toll on physicians.

**Patient Anxiety**

Patients may hesitate to provide accurate information because they feel distressed or distrust. They may worry about the violation of their security or autonomy. They may feel anxious about being in an unfamiliar environment such as a hospital, clinic, or outpatient facility and worry about the next steps in their medical intervention. It is helpful to remember that patients sense negativity and disinterest with both facial expressions and nonverbal gestures.

****Irritable Patients****

Angry, irritated, or combative patients may not only lead to frustration but also biased treatment. It is crucial to identify the reason for the patient’s frustration. Educational background, socio-economic status, and other patient-level characteristics may lead to untruthfulness. Practitioners should avoid spontaneous judgments and assume a neutral position. Understanding the spectrum of responses a patient can have will allow for appropriate follow-up. Identify the cause of dissatisfaction and properly address it. Physicians can respond to frustration by validating a patient's unhappiness and then providing a solution.