Minimally invasive laparoscopic procedures have increased in popularity and, in many cases, have superseded traditionally open surgical procedures. Patients should be assessed via preoperative medical evaluation to determine cardiopulmonary risks and anticipate possible complications. [Level 5] Additionally, it is important to foster a “speak up” culture where all interprofessional team members feel comfortable communicating potential concerns related to patient safety.

An alternative to using the Veress needle technique is to apply the Hasson technique for establishing pneumoperitoneum.

Further, reducing the insufflation pressure can reduce the risk of CO2 embolism. In a randomized trial of 498 patients undergoing endoscopic saphenous vein harvesting, the incidence of CO2 embolisms was significantly higher in the high insufflation pressure group (15 mg Hg CO2) compared to that of the low insufflation group (12 mg Hg CO2).

The healthcare team, including clinicians and nurses, must coordinate to prevent CO2 embolism by preventing gas entry into circulation during laparoscopic surgery. Correct positioning of the Veress needle should be verified with a negative aspiration of blood before insufflation with low flow rate and low-pressure setting, or alternative modes of entry and pneumoperitoneum creation should be utilized. Operative specialty trained nurses assisting in surgery can identify issues and call the surgeon's attention to them. Perioperative nurses monitor patients and provide feedback to the team. [Level 5]