The transformation of normal rectal or colonic epithelium to a precancerous lesion (adenomas) and ultimately to invasive carcinoma requires an accumulation of genetic mutations either somatic (acquired) and/or germline (inherited). The theory of colorectal carcinogenesis features a clonal mutation evolution that gives a cell survival-immortality advantage and allows for the development of more mutations providing for cancer hallmarks such as proliferation, invasion, metastasis, and others.  Clinical evidence has shown that colorectal cancer frequently arises from adenomatous polyps that typically acquire dysplastic changes over a 10 to 15 year period, leading to invasive carcinoma development. Thus, early detection and removal of polyps reduce the incidence of CRC. Alternative new evidence has demonstrated that hamartomatous and serrated polyps (in addition to adenomatous polyps) could lead to CRC.

There are three major molecular pathways linked to CRC. These are chromosomal instability, mismatch repair, and hypermethylation. The chromosomal instability pathway is an accumulation of mutations unbalancing oncogene and tumor suppressor equilibrium. This is seen in diseases such as FAP with mutations in the tumor suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). Cells with deficiency of DNA mismatch repair (dMMR) genes, commonly MLH1 or MSH2, accumulate errors within the genome at a more rapid rate due to the inability to correct the base mismatch. This leads to high levels of microsatellite instability (MSI-H), a hallmark of Lynch syndrome.

CpG hypermethylation of DNA could activate or silence the expression of certain genes, BRAF and MLH1, respectively. Sporadic oncogenes somatic mutations (RAS, SRC, MYC) have been implicated in CRC, RAS haveing the most clinical relevance. On the other hand, tumor suppressors genes require bi-allelic loss (“2-hit model”) and are described in loss of APC 5q21 gene (80% sporadic), TP53 17p gene (50% to 70% sporadic), and DCC/SMAD2-4 18q gene (73% sporadic). Specific MMR gene mutations could occur in hMSH2, hMLH1, hPMS1 and hPMS2, hMSH6, and hMLH3; each can interact with MLH1 and approximately found in 15% of all sporadic CRC, causing a Lynch-like syndrome with MSI-H calling for universal testing. MUTYH defects have a recessive inheritance pattern requiring bi-allelic second hit or in conjunction with APC gene mutation. Cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and peroxisome proliferator–activating receptor (PPAR) genes have been implicated in CRC tumorigenesis currently under investigation for chemo-protection.