The mainstay of diagnosis for retroperitoneal hematoma is a contrast-enhanced CT-scan. The hallmark feature of retroperitoneal hematomas, both traumatic and nontraumatic, is their occult nature. The physical examination is commonly nondiagnostic at best, and they are not readily detectable on plain film imaging or ultrasonography.

Patients who are victims of significant blunt and penetrating trauma will likely undergo extensive CT scanning as part of their trauma workup. These scans will commonly reveal evidence of retroperitoneal hematoma, with sensitivities reportedly approaching 100%. The bedside focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) exam is notoriously unreliable at detective presence of a retroperitoneal hematoma.

Evaluation of patients with no history of trauma becomes more difficult. As discussed above, history and physical examination is a poor indicator of underlying retroperitoneal hematoma. In these patients, a high degree of clinical suspicion is necessary to cinch the diagnosis. Again, a CT scan is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice.

CT scan serves to identify presence, location, and to guide therapy of retroperitoneal hematoma potentially. The presence of intravenous contrast extravasation has been shown to be an independent predictor of the need for interventional radiology or surgical intervention.

The remainder of the evaluation of patients with retroperitoneal hematoma should include a full set of lab work commensurate with the patient’s overall presentation including but not limited to:  complete blood count to assess for anemia, a metabolic panel to check for renal or electrolyte abnormalities, liver function tests to evaluate for hepatic dysfunction, coagulation studies to determine bleeding risk (especially for those receiving anticoagulation), and a type and screen for transfusion requirements. In trauma patients suffering blunt abdominal injuries, a serum amylase may be elevated in pancreatic injury. Additionally, in symptomatic patients suffering blunt trauma, the presence of hematuria on a urinalysis may indicate underlying kidney injury.