Physical activity in the form of exercise induces a coordinated response of multiple organ systems.

**Musculoskeletal System**

The musculoskeletal system is at the forefront.

Three types of muscle fibers have different characteristics.

Higher myosin ATPase activity is directly proportional to faster muscle contraction speed while higher oxidative capacity relates to fatigability.

Type-I fibers are known as slow-twitch fibers. These fibers have abundant mitochondria and myoglobin with great vascular supply.

- They have low myosin ATPase activity, High oxidative, Low glycolytic capacity.

- Resistant to fatigue

- These fibers are predominant in postural muscles as they provide low force but don’t fatigue as easily as the others.

Type-IIa fibers are known as fast-twitch oxidative fibers.

- They have high myosin ATPase activity, high oxidative, high glycolytic capacity.

- Relatively resistant to fatigue

- These fibers are recruited for power activities that require sustained effort, such as weight lifting for multiple repetitions.

Type-IIa fibers are the middle-ground type of fiber, between the slow but fatigue-resistant type-I fibers and the fast but fatigue-prone type-IIb fibers.

Type IIb fibers are known as fast-twitch glycolytic fibers.

- They have high myosin ATPase activity, low oxidative, high glycolytic activity.

- Rapidly fatigue

- These fibers are recruited for high intensity, short-duration exercises such as full effort sprints.

With the introduction of progressively overloading exercise training, we can expect skeletal muscle fibers to hypertrophy, meaning they increase in diameter and volume.

Muscle contraction acts upon the skeleton and initiates movement. When a progressive force is applied to the muscles over time, they will adapt to the increasing load.

Satellite cells play a role in this repair and growth process. The process of exercise, whether through long-distance running or powerlifting, places a burden of stress on muscle fibers and bones, which causes micro-tears and trauma. In response to this, satellite cells are activated and mobilize to regenerate damaged muscle tissue. This process is made possible by the donation of a daughter nuclei from the satellite cells after multiplication and fusion. Bones will increase its mineral density over time to manage this increasing load.

**Circulatory System**

The circulatory system plays a critical role in maintaining homeostasis during exercise.

To accommodate the increased metabolic activity in skeletal muscle, the circulatory system must properly control the transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide, as well as help to buffer the pH level of active tissues. This action is accomplished by increasing cardiac output (increased heart rate and stroke volume) and modulating microvascular circulation. Also, the action of local vaso-mediators such as nitric oxide from endothelial cells helps to ensure adequate blood flow.

Blood flow is preferentially shunted away from the gastrointestinal (GI) and renal systems and toward active muscles through selective constriction and dilation of capillary beds. This increased skeletal muscle blood flow provides oxygen while facilitating the removal of carbon dioxide. The increased metabolic activity increases carbon dioxide concentrations and shifts the pH to the left, which further facilities erythrocytes (RBC) to extract carbon dioxide (CO2) and release oxygen (O2). On a mechanical level, RBCs that have been in circulation for a long time tend to be less compliant than younger RBCs, meaning that during exercise, older RBCs can be hemolyzed intravascularly when passing through capillaries in contracted muscles. This activity leads to an average decrease in RBC age since the younger RBCs have more favorable rheological properties. Younger RBCs also have increased oxygen release compared to older RBCs. Exercise increases erythropoietin (EPO) levels, which cause an increase in RBC production. Both of these factors improve the oxygen supply during exercise. Over time, vascularization in muscles also improves, further improving gas exchange and metabolic capacity.

**Respiratory System**

The respiratory system works in junction with the cardiovascular system. The pulmonary circuit receives almost all of the cardiac output. In response to the increased cardiac output, perfusion increases in the apex of each lung, increasing the available surface area for gas exchange (decreased alveolar dead space).

With more alveolar surface area available for gas exchange, and increased alveolar ventilation due to increased frequency and volume of respiration, blood gas and pH balance can be maintained.

Going into more detail, CO2 is one of the metabolic products of muscular activity.

CO2 is carried away from peripheral active tissues in various forms. The majority is transported in the form of bicarbonate, but a portion also travels as dissolved CO2 in plasma and as carbaminohemoglobin on RBCs.

CO2 readily dissolves into the cytosol of erythrocytes, where it is acted upon by carbonic anhydrase to form carbonic acid. Carbonic acid then spontaneously will dissociate into a hydrogen ion and bicarbonate.

After being transported to the lungs, a high oxygen environment (Haldane effect), this reaction is catalyzed in the opposite direction to reverse itself and produce CO2, which is exhaled and removed from the body.

In exercise of higher intensity, the volume of carbon dioxide (VCO2) eliminated per unit of time is sustained by the effect of the decreased alveolar dead space and increased tidal volume, as mentioned before.

**Endocrine System**

- Plasma levels of cortisol, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine increase with maximal exercise and return to baseline after rest. The increase in levels is consistent with the increase in the sympathetic nervous system activation of the body.

- Growth hormone is released by the pituitary gland to enhance bone and tissue growth.

- Insulin sensitivity increases after long-term exercise.

- Testosterone levels also increase, leading to enhanced growth, libido, and mood.