**Effects on Pregnancy**

EC is considered generally safe in pregnancy. This resulted in the change that no prescription is required for LNG in the U.S. and for UPA in some European countries. Reassuring data is now available from a meta-analysis of 12 prospective studies on the Yuzpe regimen, including 6000 women, which concluded no increase in fetal malformations. Due to limited pregnancy after UPA and LNG use and voluntary termination of these unintended pregnancies, data are limited to analyze their effects on pregnancy. Postmarketing surveillance data on UPA from over one million women showed no increased risk of miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, or anomalies among babies exposed to UPA.

**Effects on Breastfeeding**

Women taking oral contraceptives are encouraged to continue breastfeeding due to its safety, and the same applied to the LNG only method. UPA is relatively new and lipophylic, with theoretical concerns on its excretion in breast milk. The manufacturer recommends discarding breast milk for 7 days after UPA use, which is endorsed by WHO and United Kingdom (UK) guidelines. In the US, guidelines advise on breastfeeding is to discard milk for 24 hours after taking UPA.

**Safety on Repeated Use**

Enough data are not available on safety on repeated use. Since EC pills prevent pregnancy by delaying ovulation, pregnancy will eventually happen in case of further UPSI. Hence the recommendation is to repeat EC in case of UPSI beyond 24 hrs after last use as LNG and UPA have a half-life range of 24 to 32 hrs. A study on LNG-EC as the only method of contraception reported a pregnancy rate of 11 per 100 women-years with tolerable side effects. Another study with weekly use of UPA at 30 mg dose for 8 weeks showed that ovulation was delayed but eventually happened in most women. Women are at risk of exposure to higher levels of total hormones than they would with regular methods and would have more adverse effects, including irregular bleeding and abdominal cramps.

**Follow-up**

As per the ACOG practice bulletin on EC, no scheduled follow-up is required. Women using EC should be provided with information about effective ongoing contraception and appropriate STI testing if indicated. As some delay in the expected periods is inevitable due to delay in ovulation with hormonal methods, it is important to counsel women to return for medical review and exclude pregnancy in case of delay in the cycle for more than 7 days. Consider clinical evaluation if women reports lower abdominal pain or persistent irregular bleeding as these may be due to ectopic pregnancy or a spontaneous pregnancy loss.