Risk and benefits of observation versus open bypass with interposition graft repair versus endovascular stent-graft repair were considered. The decision was made to perform surgical intervention using open bypass repair.

After a full assessment, under general anesthesia, the popliteal artery was repaired by an open surgical posterior approach with an interposition non-reversed saphenous vein graft from the ipsilateral leg (bottom left). After the aneurysm was exposed, it was noted that one of the paired popliteal veins was chronically thrombosed secondary to compression. Care was taken to avoid injuring the median sural, tibial, and peroneal nerves as they were gently retracted. Once control was first achieved distally, then proximally, the aneurysm was opened along its length, and small collateral branches were ligated. The vein graft was sewn into position proximally, and then the vein valves were cut with a valvulotome. The distal anastomosis was completed with flow restored to the foot (bottom right). Doppler auscultation was performed to confirm triphasic flow below the bypass. Recovery was uneventful. Post-operative arterial duplex US of the repair demonstrated good flow and exclusion of the aneurysm.

Clinically, the focal DVT in one of the paired popliteal veins was felt to be chronic, so post-operative anticoagulation was not initiated.  Before discharge, a follow-up venous duplex ultrasound was performed to confirm the stability of the presumed chronic DVT, and no propagation or acute DVT was identified.