Military aviation began in the early 1900s, and the capabilities and limitations of the platform continue to be tested and expanded. In the 1950s, U.S. Naval aviation began to track their mishap rates. Data released by the U.S. Navy shows that during the first half of the 1950s, naval aviation class A mishap rates were greater than 50 mishaps per 100,000 flight hours. With the implementation of several safety features, protocols, and improved technology the mishap rate since the 1990s has been less than five mishaps per 100,000 flight hours.

However, spatial disorientation continues to be the most common cause of human-related aircraft accidents. Analysis of Naval Aviation mishap causes rank spatial disorientation is one of the leading cause of Class A mishaps. On review of data from the NAMI Safety Center, in Class A mishaps, including spatial disorientation as a causal factor, from 2000 through 2017 the rate of crew fatality was 38% (other resources site much higher fatality rates). Some reports cite spatial disorientation as contributing to 25% to 33% of all aircraft mishaps.

Spatial disorientation is a phenomenon that has been described since this beginning of aviation; however, the complex mechanisms of the process have remained indefinable. Loss of spatial orientation is almost always a result of a breakdown in the basic operator control loop. There is a distraction which causes a breakdown of the conscious center's ability to process sensory input information accurately. This can be secondary to a breakdown in the cockpit scan, task saturation which exceeds the brain's limit of tasks that can be processed, or another outside source. This breakdown is caused by a visual, vestibular, proprioceptive, or cognitive discrepancy which can lead to a perception difference between the actual and perceived aircraft orientation. However, just having a mismatch does not necessarily mean that there will be an illusion. If the crew is aware of a sensory mismatch, they can consciously or unconsciously disregard that sensory input and, instead, rely on their flight instruments. Mishaps and fatalities occur when the crew is unable to overcome the internal sensory inputs or when they are unaware that any perceptual confusions exist.

**Spatial Disorientation Mitigation**

Personal experience of spatial disorientation is one of the best ways to quickly recognize when it is happening during flight. Tools like the Barany chair or Virtual Reality Spatial Disorientation Demonstrator simulate sensory illusions and give a pilot first-hand experience before they occur. Before a crew leaves for a flight, they should brief terrain, features and know the size and shape of the major objects they will be flying over. Tools that can be used in the cockpit during flight include maintaining an effective instrument scan. Continuous cross-check of instruments will help determine the aircraft's true orientation even if the pilot is experiencing an illusion. Additionally, maintained crew coordination and communication between the crew and the tower will improve situational awareness and share task loading to make spatial disorientation less likely. Finally, a pilot who begins to feel the effects of spatial orientation should trust the instruments over the conflicting signals coming from their body. If two pilots are in the aircraft, transfer control of the aircraft to the pilot who is not experiencing sensory illusions.

More research, training, and technology is needed to better define and understand aviation-related spatial disorientation, to measure spatial disorientation events, and to prepare aircrew to successfully mitigate its effects.