The patient's clinical presentation with genitourinary tuberculosis may vary from asymptomatic to non-specific symptoms related to the organ involved. The patient may come from a high prevalence region or have a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. The involvement of any part of the urogenital system can present with constitutional symptoms and signs, including fever, night sweats, anorexia, and weight loss. TB should also be considered in the case of recurrent urinary tract infections which do not respond to standard antibiotic therapy.

**Renal TB:**It is the most common form of GUTB.

**Ureteric TB:**The lower third of the ureters are most commonly affected, followed by the ureteropelvic junction. TB of the ureters is almost always associated with renal TB.

**Bladder TB:**This usually occurs due to renal TB with the bacilli entering the urine and subsequently the urinary bladder.

**Prostatic TB:**Usually occurs as a result of hematogenous spread from a primary focus. In the beginning, patients may be asymptomatic. This can be followed by non-specific voiding symptoms. In the later stages, there may be dysuria, nocturia, or pollakiuria due to prostatic enlargement.

**Scrotal TB:**TB epididymo-orchitis can present as unilateral or bilateral involvement with acute or chronic painful or painless scrotal swellings. Patients may have oligozoospermia or azoospermia due to destruction or obstruction of the vas deferens or epididymis.

**Penile TB:**Penile TB can present as single or multiple swellings or ulcers on the penis, which may or may not be painful. It can also present as papules, nodules, or cold abscesses with inguinal lymphadenopathy.

**TB of the vulva, vagina, or cervix:**The presentation can be non-specific, and symptoms depend on the lesion site. Dyspareunia, post-coital bleeding, pelvic pain, and infertility are frequently reported. Long-standing illness can also cause fistulae that can involve multiple organs.

**Uterine TB:**Symptoms are frequently non-specific. Patients may experience irregular menstrual beeling, dysmenorrhea, and vaginal discharge. They may also complain of abdominal masses and abdominal pain unrelated to menstruation.

**Ovarian and fallopian tube TB:**Patients are frequently asymptomatic.