The American Society of Hematology describes 5 phases of HIT

- Suspected HIT is when a patient is thought to have HIT based on clinical evidence only.

- Acute HIT is when the diagnosis is confirmed with a positive SRA.

- Subacute HIT A usually occurs around day 7 after stopping heparin: platelet counts have already recovered, but if a functional assay were to be obtained, it would return positive, meaning that antibodies are still present and able to activate platelets in the presence of heparin.

- Subacute HIT B is the interval after the functional assay becomes negative but before the immunoassay becomes negative. During this phase, antibodies are still present but are no longer pathological. Functional assays become negative at a median of 50 days after heparin is stopped.

- Remote HIT: Finally, once antibodies are no longer detectable by immunoassay, at a median of 85 days, the patient is said to have remote HIT.

The management of suspected and acute HIT is reviewed in detail above. Absolute contraindications during the acute period include the use of UFH, LMWH, warfarin, and platelet transfusions. When warfarin is first initiated, the natural anticoagulants, protein C and S, whose synthesis is vitamin K-dependent, will be depleted first, while the vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors remain in circulation, leading to a hypercoagulable state. If warfarin is administered at the onset of a HIT, protein C and S depletion can severely worsen coagulation and increase the risk of thromboembolic complications, particularly skin necrosis. If recently started, warfarin must be stopped and reversed with phytonadione to replete protein C and S stores.

Warfarin can be started once 2 criteria have been met. First, the platelet count has made a substantial resolution and reached a stable plateau, ideally a platelet count of at least 150,000 cells/microliter or the patient's baseline, if the baseline was below 150, 000 cells/microliter. Second, the patient must be therapeutically anticoagulated with argatroban or fondaparinux before the initiation of warfarin, and the two agents must overlap for at least 5 days before switching to monotherapy with warfarin.

Platelet transfusions are contraindicated during the acute phase, as transfused platelets can bind to IgG and become activated and release PF4, thus worsening the hypercoagulable state.

Subacute HIT A and subacute HIT B can be further broken down into 2 categories: isolated HIT and HITT (HIT with Thrombosis). In patients with HIT and no thrombosis, anticoagulation for 1 month should be considered as the risk of thromboembolic complications persists for up to 30 days after stopping heparin. In the case of HITT patients, who develop new thrombosis due to HIT, 3 months of anticoagulation is suggested, given that HIT is considered to be a reversible provoking risk factor. During this phase, the guideline now recommends DOACs over warfarin in patients without contraindications to DOACs.

Following an episode of HIT, IgG antibodies may remain in the system for up to 100 days (median of 85 days); if the patient receives any amount of UFH or LMWH during this period, platelet counts can drop in as little as 12 hours. If this 100-day period has passed, heparin products can be used **with caution**if necessary, at the lowest dose and for the least amount of time possible. Ideally, and if time permits, an SRA should be obtained, ensure it is negative before using heparin. If unable to obtain the SRA, then the use of a direct thrombin inhibitor or fondaparinux should be considered. Bivalirudin would be the drug of choice in patients undergoing PCI or CABG.