Treatment of patients with abdominal gunshot injury begins with the initial contact of personnel who arrive at the scene of injury, such as paramedics. In penetrating abdominal injury due to a gunshot wound, initial treatment can be paramount for the prognosis and survival of the victim. The most important task for the initial assessment is to assess the airway, breathing, and circulation of the patient and stop the bleeding. Once a clear airway is established, the cervical spine must be protected if indicated by the mechanism of injury. Assessment of breath sounds is essential as the location of the wound on the abdomen does not rule out injuries to structures outside of the abdomen. Efforts to obtain hemostasis before arriving at the emergency room may entail pressure on the wound. Depending on materials available, gauze, shirts, towels, and any other fabrics can be applied with pressure to aid in coagulation. A tourniquet may be utilized if a professional can apply to the area affected, but this is less likely with abdominal gunshot wounds than extremity wounds. If, when assessing vital signs, the patient is no longer breathing or loses pulses, the protocol of CPR should be initiated immediately. For patients with hemodynamic instability, aggressive fluid resuscitation should be initiated, and blood should be typed and screened. O negative blood should be made ready for an emergency transfusion, with it being the lower risk of causing serious adverse transfusion reactions.

All patients with abdominal gunshot wounds who have signs of peritoneal hemorrhage, peritonitis, active bleeding, or deteriorating clinical signs must immediately undergo diagnostic and potentially therapeutic laparotomy.

Once hemodynamic stability has been achieved, it is imperative that abdominal gunshot wound patients be closely monitored for any signs of vital sign changes. Medical professionals should also perform a serial physical examination, and blood analysis to trend hemodynamic features return to baseline.