Differential diagnosis of scrofula is extensive, including lymphomas, metastatic cancer, and other infections that involve lymph nodes. It is challenging to extricate scrofula from lymphoma on clinical grounds because both cases involve weight loss with other constitutional symptoms and infectious lymphadenitis.

**Lymphoma**

Lymphoma is the neoplastic proliferation of lymphoid cells that forms a mass, may arise in lymph nodes or extranodal tissue. Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas are the major types of lymphomas that may involve the cervical lymph nodes, mimicking the tuberculous lymphadenitis. Contrast-enhanced CT can differentiate tuberculous lymphadenopathy and lymphoma. Tuberculous lymphadenopathy shows peripheral enhancement with frequent multilocular, and non-treated lymphomas show homogenous attenuation.

**Kikuchi Disease**

It is an idiopathic self-limiting histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis that has strong mimicry with tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis. In the past, steroid therapy was given to cervical lymphadenitis, assuming Kikuchi disease was not responding, and later on, surgical exploration confirmed TB. So only surgical exploration and microscopy helps in diagnosis.

**Fungal Diseases**

Fungal diseases, likely histoplasmosis, cryptococcus, Coccidioidomycosis, etc., have high chances of developing tuberculosis as opportunistic diseases in HIV-infected people. Histopathology of fungal infected lymph nodes shows caseous necrosis with granuloma (chronic) formation.

**Bacterial Adenitis**

Bacterial lymphadenitis is caused by varieties of bacteria such as staphylococcus, streptococcus, catch-scratch disease (Bartonella), listeriosis, syphilis, etc. To date, a cat-scratch disease caused by Bartonella henselae is most often encountered adenitis. Histological evaluation, culture, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have revolutionized the diagnosis.

**Kimura Disease**

It is a rare idiopathic chronic inflammatory disease characterized by subcutaneous swelling in the head and neck region common in young Asian males usually associated with lymphadenopathy.

**Castleman Disease**

Castleman disease is a generalized lymphoproliferative disorder of a poorly understood mechanism.

**Miscellaneous**

Sarcoidosis (noncaseating granuloma), carotid body tumor, lymphosarcoma, toxoplasmosis, lymphosarcoma, neurofibroma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, salivary gland abscess, branchial cyst, aberrant thyroid glands, metastatic cancer, etc. in the neck upset the correct diagnosis of scrofula.