Managing drug overdose and toxicities relative to chemotherapy regimens requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including nurses, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several clinicians in different specialties. Without proper management, the morbidity and mortality from these regimens (i.e., methotrexate, 5-FU) would significantly increase. Careful monitoring of gastrointestinal complications by nurses and abnormal lab values by clinicians should prompt a coordinated care effort that includes the following:

- Ordering hematologic studies (CBC with differential) and parameters indicating renal function (BUN, creatinine).

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of neurological decline, gastrointestinal complications such as diarrhea/stomatitis, and anemia.

- Consult with the pharmacist about the use of chemotherapeutic agents with a precise record of timing and dosage.

- Consult with the intensivist about ICU care and monitoring if the patient becomes hemodynamically unstable.

Managing malignancies and immunologic disorders is not a process that stops with the oncologist. Careful monitoring and care from the primary care team and nursing are imperative. A thorough record of drug administration is vital to identify and manage cases of overdose or toxic effects quickly. Nursing will often be at the front line for observing toxic effects and promptly report these to the rest of the clinical team. In addition to dosing and administration, the pharmacists must conduct thorough medication reconciliation and report any concerns to the healthcare team. Only by working as an interprofessional team can these detrimental outcomes be avoided. Several studies over 20 years have outlined the importance of folinic acid in chemotherapy. With many more studies currently ongoing, maintaining an up-to-date approach to patient care is necessary.

Folinic acid therapy requires stringent dosing and administration timing to be effective. This precision necessitates an interprofessional team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, PAs, NPs), specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]