Leading causes of agitation from a general medical condition include head trauma which may accompany symptoms of headaches, loss of consciousness, acute mental changes, and somnolence.

Delirium is a common cause of agitation and can be attributed to many medical issues most commonly caused by infections or metabolic/electrolyte derangements. Delirium is characterized by waxing and waning cognition leading to spontaneous agitation in confused states. Speech, attention, orientation, and level of consciousness all vary during the episode. Hallucinations, mostly auditory in nature may accompany delirium.

Dementia leads to gradual, or rarely, sudden changes in memory, intellectual abilities, and cognition, leading to increased confusion and agitation. Ongoing medical causes leading to delirium can complicate this. In most cases, the course is progressive, and accurate history from collaterals can be useful. It is helpful to do a mental status exam on a regular basis, and in some cases where dementia or delirium is severe, doing these mental exams 2 to 3 times a day as a patient's cognition tends to vary throughout the day. Having multiple data sets from mental exams will give clinicians a better picture of how the patient is doing.

Psychosis can be from a myriad of related mental or postpartum disorders, certain medications, illicit drugs, sleep deprivation, and medical conditions. Psychosis in psychiatry is seen as a symptom of personality disorders, schizo-spectrum disorders, severe depression, or bipolar disorder. Patients may have delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech or behavior, and negative symptoms such as anhedonia, apathy, blunted affect, isolation, and impaired attention. It is interesting that patients with acute psychosis are usually fully alert and oriented, but actively psychotic.

Drug intoxication or withdrawal will cause acute severe agitation that is usually short-lived. Patients respond well to treatment in these cases, but drugs like PCP can induce a mania-like state that is difficult to manage. Obtaining a urinary drug screen (UDS) and blood alcohol level is useful in suspected cases of synthetic or designer drug use. A conventional UDS will be negative; therefore, a clinician should obtain an extended UDS which covers most designer drugs.