With age-related changes in the skin, malignant eyelid lesions may go unrecognized.

The incidence of all cutaneous malignancy is increasing worldwide and varies with geography and race. Patients with Fitzpatrick skin types I-III are generally more susceptible to sunburns, which can increase the chance of skin cancer. Early diagnosis and treatment remain the gold standard to improve the overall outcome and better cosmesis. For example, approximately 40% of patients who have had one BCC will develop another lesion within five years.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) remains the most common periorbital skin cancer, followed by squamous cell, melanoma, and sebaceous carcinoma. Basal and squamous cell carcinomas most commonly occur in the lower lid and medial canthus. In contrast, sebaceous carcinoma occurs more commonly in the upper eyelid due to the preponderance of Meibomian glands.

Melanoma can occur in any location around the eye, including the lids, conjunctiva, cornea, uvea, and orbit. Any periorbital skin malignancy, if neglected, can invade the orbit, resulting in significant morbidity to achieve control of the disease. The rate of orbital invasion is 2 to 4% in BCC, with risk factors including large tumor size, multiple recurrences, infiltrative histological subtype, perineural spread, medial or lateral canthus localization, and increased age.

Education on UV avoidance, access to skin and ophthalmic examinations, and public education on the appearance and treatment of abnormal skin lesions are critical to diagnosing and curing periorbital cutaneous malignancies. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach to managing these lesions with all members communicating openly about the patient's condition and sharing in the patient education duties will yield the best outcomes. [Level 5]