**Who writes the most medical abbreviations?**

The limited publications show physicians are responsible for writing the vast majority of medical abbreviations. In private practice, it is usually the physician who writes medical abbreviations, but in large teaching hospitals, the medical and surgical residents write the most medical abbreviations since they are the ones tasked with the writing of orders. However, other healthcare professionals who also regularly write medical abbreviations include dietitians, nurses, occupational and physical therapists, and social workers, albeit not in great numbers.

One of the biggest problems leading to medical errors is the failure to communicate, and this is made worse with the use of medical abbreviations, which can have multiple meanings. Further communication lapses are often the result of using medical abbreviations, especially when writing medication orders for junior staff. The staff responsible for reading, interpreting, and processing the medication order may misconstrue the abbreviation or may not even recognize it, leading to an erroneous meaning. For example, one very commonly reported misinterpretation of dosing is the use of a decimal point after a dose. For example. 5.0 is often mistaken for 50; if the dot is not seen, this can result in ten times the dose.

**How common is medical abbreviation usage?**

The exact number of healthcare professionals who use medical abbreviations or the frequency of usage is unknown, but the numbers are numerous. Pick up any medical chart or a drug prescription in any healthcare institution, and one will see at least one abbreviation per page in the patient’s medical chart. But is the use of medical abbreviation really dangerous, and how many patients have actually suffered an adverse event because of it?

The National Medication Error Reporting program is run by the US pharmacopeia MedMarx. This program permits subscribing healthcare institutions to report and track medication errors in a standard format. From 2004 through 2006, there were 643,151 medication errors reported to MedMarx from 682 facilities, of which 4.7% (29,974) were attributed to the use of medical abbreviations.

From these data, the most common medical abbreviation error was the use of QD (once daily), accounting for 43.1% of all errors, followed by U for units, cc for ml, and other decimal errors. The most common drug abbreviation name that led to an error was the use of MS or MS04 for morphine sulfate. At least 81% of the errors were noted to occur at the time of ordering the medication, while errors at the transcribing and dispensing area occurred at a lower frequency. The administration, procurement, and monitoring processes were associated with less than 2% of the total errors. Overall, it appears that the three most common errors due to medical abbreviations were errors in prescribing, improper dose/quantity, and incorrect preparation of the medication. However, the consequences of using these medical abbreviations were not completely reported.

But irrespective of whether medical abbreviations are causing harm, no one argues that they can result in miscommunication because the other healthcare staff who are responsible for reading and processing orders may not be familiar with or even recognize these abbreviations, which can result in gross errors in dispensing or administration of a medication or a test. Several studies have looked at critical incidents and adverse events in hospitals. In many cases, it was observed that some medical abbreviations were dangerous, resulting in inappropriate dose administration or frequency.