As a non-invasive technique, dermoscopy is essentially free of complications. The only issue is the minimal possibility of cross-infection between patients, especially with contact dermoscopy. Many tricks can obviate the possibility of cross-infection:

1) Use of polarized non-contact dermoscopy.

2) Disinfection of the lens (in case of contact dermoscopy) or the rim of the USB video-dermatoscope with isopropyl alcohol after examining each patient.

3) Use of disposable transparent lens shielding material like a cling film or soft plastic caps over the device; the latter are now being provided complimentary with most of the high-quality dermatoscopes - for use in both hand-held and USB video-dermatoscopes.

**Minor issues worth consideration**

1) One should be aware of **artifacts of dermoscopy**that may suffer from incorrect interpretation.

2) **Inter-device color difference in images**: Different dermatoscopes tend to give images with a mildly skewed color balance. One must be aware of that and interpret results accordingly

3) **Differences in different Fitzpatrick skin types**: It is now amply clear that many features that are easy to appreciate in Fitzpatrick types I-II skin, are either not seen or are obscured in darker skin types. Honeycombing in the scalp is considered suggestive of androgenetic alopecia (AGA) in Fitzpatrick skin phototypes I to III but is a normal finding in the scalp of individuals with darker skin types. The colors (black, brown, gray, and blue) that have their basis in the histological level are neither easy to observe nor interpret in dark skin. Brown pigmented structures are often seen on dermoscopy of various disorders in ethnic skin due to the propensity of post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, and thus warrant careful interpretation.

4) **Lack of 'dermoscopic nomograms'**: To master the interpretation of histopathology, one must be thoroughly conversant with the normal histology, taking into account expected physiological variations due to a particular part of the human body, age, and gender. For example, the normal mucoscopic images from buccal mucosa reveal plentiful vessels, which should not be confused as a pathological feature. There is an urgent need to have an image bank of such site-specific, and skin type-specific dermoscopic nomograms to minimize errors in the interpretation of dermoscopic structures.