# Continuing Education Activity

Weight loss can be achieved through several different strategies. Most people starting a weight loss plan experience rapid weight loss initially. However, they often reach a period where they experience a plateau, and their weight loss appears stagnant. This activity describes the physiology of what happens during a weight loss plateau and strategies to overcome this phenomenon.

**Objectives:**
- Review the physiology of weight loss.
- Identify different weight loss strategies.
- Explain how and why weight loss plateaus occur.
- Describe strategies used by interprofessional to overcome weight loss plateaus.

# Introduction

Weight loss can be accomplished through various strategies, ultimately coming down to a net caloric deficit. Frequently people who are new to exercising and/or dieting experience relatively rapid weight loss in the initial few weeks of starting. However, as your body adjusts, people frequently experience a weight loss plateau that can be frustrating to overcome. In addition, the psychology of seeing a rapid reduction of weight initially and then seemingly remaining stagnant despite efforts to restrict caloric intake can be very frustrating.

Studies comparing different diets have shown that a similar degree of weight loss can be achieved in an 8 to 12 week period, as long as a caloric deficit is achieved.

A misconception to beginners attempting to lose weight is that the process is linear. Therefore, one can expect that weight loss will occur more rapidly in the early stages. Still, then in the coming weeks, the weight may stay steady or even slightly increased despite maintaining the established calorie deficit. Understanding why this plateau occurs can help individuals remain consistent with their weight loss efforts and continue progressing instead of regressing. Identifying these challenges and considering various strategies to overcome plateaus will ultimately lead to a greater degree of individuals successfully achieving and maintaining their weight loss in the long term.

# Function

Weight loss cannot be achieved without a caloric deficit.

Several factors are assessed when creating a weight loss plan. One of the first things calculated is a total daily energy expenditure (TDEE), which is largely based on basal metabolic rate (BMR). This is also known as resting energy expenditure (REE). The remaining portion is made up of the non-resting energy expenditure (NREE), which is subdivided to exercise activity thermogenesis (EAT), non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), and thermic effect of food (TEF). Using TDEE maintenance, calories are calculated, the total calories per day to maintain your current weight.

Delving further into the microscopic level, several hormones play prominent roles concerning energy expenditure. Two hormones directly linked to hunger are leptin and ghrelin. High levels of leptin are associated with satiety and energy expenditure. Ghrelin elevations are related to hunger and stimulating appetite. Triiodothyronine (T3) elevations are related to metabolic rate. Insulin regulates macronutrient metabolism and inhibits muscle protein breakdown.

There are many theories as to why weight loss plateaus occur. One popular theory is the "set point" theory. This theory suggests biological control of body weight is regulated by feedback loops from peripheral organs and tissue, such as leptin secretion from adipose tissue, back to the central nervous system to rebalance and maintain homeostasis. Another theory is a "settling point," which reflects metabolic adaptations to energy imbalance without specific feedback control.

Several studies confirm this phenomenon exists, and more research is needed to understand better why exactly on a micro-level. A leading theory on the biological level is that BMR decreases when you lose weight; lowering the TDEE is a greater amount than expected relative to the loss of body mass.

On a metabolic level, a series of chemical reactions occur to derive ATP. This process involves uncoupling proteins (UCPs), where energy substrate oxidation occurs along with oxygen consumption. This process contributes to energy expenditure and is thought to be a considerable portion of BMR. Hormonally, anabolic, anorexigenic, and thermogenic hormones are decreased with decreased energy intake, while orexigenic and catabolic hormones are increased. Ultimately this leads to decreased energy expenditure and increased hunger.

# Issues of Concern

To achieve weight loss, people reach a point where their energy expenditure is lower than it used to be. Research shows that people who lose weight secrete higher levels of ghrelin, a hormone known to increase hunger, opposite of the effect of the hormone leptin involved in satiety. These hormones can also impact and increase fatigue.

The combination of increased hunger, increased fatigue, and stalling in weight loss can be very discouraging for people, leading them to quit their diet. Not only is the diet terminated, but the increase in hunger often leads to regaining weight. The weight loss plateau period can be an important period where hormone levels and/or metabolic rate are readjusted.

It is essential to be mindful of the hormonal and psychological impact of this plateau. If weight loss is not accomplished in a calculated manner, a large amount of lean mass may be lost compared to fat loss. An increase in hunger and an increase in ghrelin can cause rapid weight gain. Although an individual may return to their original starting weight, they could have more fat and less muscle mass than starting if weight loss is not accomplished in a safe calculated way. This can lead to a detrimental effect where hunger levels increase, fatigue increases, weight is regained, and individuals are left feeling worse psychologically and gain weight compared to their starting point.

# Clinical Significance

It is important to understand the weight loss process and where an individual may be in that journey. If someone complains of worsening fatigue and has lost a large amount of muscle mass, they may need a "recovery phase" to increase or regain lost muscle mass. An increase in lean muscle mass has a positive impact on improving metabolism.

Another factor to consider is non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT). NEAT is the energy expended from daily activities throughout the day, such as walking to work, typing, and even fidgeting.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Understanding stages of weight loss is vital for both healthcare providers and patients themselves. It can be easy to become frustrated throughout the process and fail to reach one's goals, particularly through a weight loss plateau period. Unfortunately, research has no clear indication of how long this period can last, ranging from weeks to even months.

Many challenges can occur during this process, including hormonal changes and psychological impact. Interprofessional teams, including a physician, a dietitian, and a psychologist, can be very beneficial to understand the process better and educate patients through their journey. Although it may be recognized that these specialists may be able to assist, research has shown that this does not occur often enough. A study was conducted showing challenges in interprofessional availability, the number of referrals, role perception, and messaging.

Studies have shown that an interprofessional approach can be effective in weight loss. However, there is no "one-size-fits-all" approach.