There are over 40 species of funnel-web spiders, with 3 genera restricted to Australia, including the Hadronyche, Illawarra, and the Atrax.  Of all Australian spiders, one species of the Atrax genera, the Atrax robustus, is implicated in the most human fatalities. The Atrax robustus is known as the Sydney funnel-web spider and is native to eastern Australia. Funnel-web spiders are medium to large in size and are dark in color, ranging from black to brown. Funnel-web spiders get their name from their funnel-shaped burrows they spin to trap prey. These spiders reside in cool and relatively sheltered habitats. They are often found under rocks or in rock gardens, in various shrubberies, or under logs. Some funnel web spiders even reside in trees, sometimes several meters in the air. The bite of the Sydney funnel-web spider is potentially deadly, but since the development of the antivenom in 1981 and the advancement of modern first aid techniques, there has been only 1 death associated with this spider's bite and was likely a result of a delayed presentation.

Funnel-web spiders have powerful, sharp fangs that have been known to penetrate fingernails and soft shoes. They are known to be the most dangerous spiders in the world. The silk entrance to the burrow of a Sydney funnel-web spider has a "vestibule-like" structure, and the spider sits just within the vestibule and senses vibrations along the silk "trip lines" and reacts to inject venom into its prey. The tree-dwelling funnel-web spiders can reach 4 to 5 cm in length, with the largest species being the Northern Tree Funnel Web Spider.