History and physical should focus on any history of urinary retention and symptoms involving the lower genitourinary tract. The symptoms can be discomfort with urination, hematuria, urethral discharge, foul-smelling urine, urgency, a feeling of incomplete emptying, or lower abdominal pain. Discomfort and lower abdominal pain are more likely to be associated with acute retention, while chronic retention may be asymptomatic or have more subtle symptoms such as a general feeling of a reduced urge to void, a sensation of incomplete emptying, a slow or intermittent urinary stream (unusual in females), stranguria, or hesitancy. Patients with urinary retention may also present with overflow incontinence which is present in <1% of women presenting lower urinary tract symptoms.

The patient should be asked about previous trauma, surgeries, or radiation to the pelvic and genitourinary area. A history of back pain, fever, IV drug use, or other neurological symptoms could point to possible causes of urinary retention. All medications, including OTC, prescription, and herbal, should be reviewed to determine whether side effects of these could be causing or exacerbating urinary retention.

The physical exam should include at least a lower abdominal palpation and a focused neurological examination. A rectal and pelvic exam should also be performed. On palpation of the lower abdomen, there may be some discomfort, or the bladder may be palpable. On the rectal exam, note any masses, fecal impaction, perineal sensation, and sphincter tone. The pelvic examination will detect atrophic vaginitis, tumors, urethral diverticula, prolapse, cystoceles, and rectoceles. A focused neurological exam may reveal deficits that may suggest a neurogenic etiology.

An attempt should be made to identify potentially curable causes of female urinary retention such as a retained or ill-fitting pessary, urinary tract infection, pelvic organ prolapse, urethral diverticula with a stone, fibroids, mesh erosion from prior pelvic surgery, etc.

A post-void residual urine volume should be obtained, preferably within 10 to 15 minutes of voiding, and a urinalysis should be done.