Tuberculosis is an infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and spread through the air by coughed or sneezed contaminated droplets. It primarily affects the lungs but can affect other organs as well. Tuberculosis can be fatal which is why screening is so important. Treatment is available and effective.

People in close contact with someone diagnosed with tuberculosis, immunosuppressed, starting an immunosuppressive therapy, or if working in the healthcare field, jails, prisons, or homeless/ refugee centers should be screened for tuberculosis.

There are two tests to screen for tuberculosis: (1) a skin test called Tuberculin skin test, and (2) a blood test called the interferon gamma-release assay. A positive test does not necessarily mean that you have an active disease. However, further studies are needed to rule it out (e.g., chest x-ray, sputum cultures).

A positive test means a person was exposed to the mycobacteria, and the immune system reacted to it by:

- Fighting and removing the bacteria.

- Controlling the bacteria and keeping it dormant, also called latent tuberculosis because it does not show any symptoms or spread. For these cases, treatment and prevention are possible.

- Not being able to control the disease which has symptoms is called active tuberculosis and requires immediate treatment.

- A positive test also can be a false positive test. For this, the doctor will reassess the patient and the past medical history.

A negative test can mean that there is no infection, or that it is a false negative test. Depending on the patient's risk factors, the doctor will decide whether to retest.