Professor Tullio was the director of the Laboratory of Experimental Physiology in Bologna during the early twentieth century. He was inspired by the work of Frenchman Jean Flourens, who had discovered that pigeons would make sudden and impetuous movements in the same plane as an injured semicircular canal.

Tullio’s first experiments were made observing the movements of water on tuning forks, followed by particle currents in vibrating water. He then began introducing particles into the endolymph and perilymph of pigeons and observed the current movement in response to sounds. These currents were seen to wave rhythmically against the ampulla, generating a movement in the pigeon's head in the plane of the canal. As Tullio increased the sound's intensity, the current would begin to oscillate, and the head of the animal would demonstrate nystagmus at a frequency corresponding to the oscillation of the current. Sounds stimulating the ear affected all three canals simultaneously; however, the difference in the intensity of the currents distributed through these canals generated head movement. When opening a semicircular canal, its current will dominate the other two canals, leading to observable movement of the open canal.

Tullio later analyzed pigeons' head movements after opening each canal by attaching a lever to the beak to create a graphic of the reflexes made in response to the sound stimuli. He found that the pigeons would move their heads in the same plane as the opened canal. Tullio would then apply cocaine to the osseous openings, which would paralyze the nerve endings, and the pigeon would not move to further stimulation. After opening all three canals, the heads would remain motionless from the fenestrations neutralizing each other. Tullio was able to produce head rotation around an anterior-posterior axis with the head turning toward to unaffected ear. This is due to utricle excitation and persisted after the ampullae of all three canals had been paralyzed. In later experiments, Tullio recreated the lesions induced by Flourens and concluded that irritative stretching of ampullae nerves causes labyrinth ataxia. This is now known as Flourens syndrome.

After 20 years of research, Tullio presented his findings in the work Some Experiments and Considerations on Experimental Otology and Phonetics in 1929. His work was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1932.

After Tullio’s work and its implications with labyrinthine fistula, a number of investigators have reported the phenomenon occurring in other conditions. Initially, the presence of the Tullio phenomenon in humans was considered to be an indication of congenital syphilis where patients developed osteomyelitis of the labyrinth, with miliary gumma in the endosteum capable of creating labyrinthine fistulas, and was considered to be an indication of congenital syphilis.

Kacker and Hinchcliffe reported a positive Tullio sign in two patients with Meniere syndrome with negative fistula tests and one patient with a history of trauma where the stapes was found to have subluxed into the vestibule. In all three cases, serologic testing for syphilis was negative.

The high incidence of the Tullio phenomenon in healthy subjects and patients with various cochleovestibular disorders suggests that, when properly monitored for, sound-induced vestibular stimulation can be observed. Parker examined the physiologic response in the vestibular system to acoustic stimulation and found that either pressure changes or high-intensity sound caused a measurable displacement of the stapes paralleling changes in the perilymph pressure, as well as measurable changes in the rates of vestibular neuron firings. It demonstrated that ontologically normal patients exhibited nystagmus and other vestibular symptoms in response to intense pressure or audio frequency stimulation. Treatment of the Tullio phenomenon is unique to each particular cause.