Cultural background influences how patients make pain and palliative care decisions. Some cultures place a substantial value on the community, while others encourage individual independence. Some let the family make decisions, while others help each patient to make their own decision. Some cultures discuss pain and end-of-life decisions as a family, while others may leave the choice to the patient and possibly a spouse. In some cultures, the decisions regarding the care of the elderly are left to the children. Many countries are a melting pot of different cultures, and it becomes necessary for the health care practitioner to develop an understanding of the various influences that guide patient and family decisions.

**Pain Management**

Religious and cultural beliefs should guide health professionals in how, when, and, sometimes, even if a patient’s pain should be treated. Unfortunately, many cultures do not accept or encourage the use of opioids, which are commonly used for pain relief.

There are many beliefs and myths regarding opioid use that should be dispelled.

- Many patients and families believe that the use of opioid pain medication is the equivalent of euthanasia. Several studies have shown that opioids may prolong survival. Opioids in the context of severe pain also allow the patient to communicate with family and be considerably more comfortable.

- Patients may also falsely believe that the use of opioids means death is imminent.

- Patients may believe that the administration of opioids early in the development of pain will decrease options for treatment in the future. The family and patient should be educated that opioids have no maximum dosage and can be increased as needed to provide pain relief.

- Patients may refuse opioids due to fear of addiction. Given that the patient has a terminal illness, this is a false fear.

**Alternative Pain Management**

Health practitioners should be aware of some alternative pain relief techniques that may be used safely in conjunction with opioids. These include acupuncture, herbs, cupping, coining, and moxibustion. Sometimes the patients may request the use of a spiritual healer that may use medicinal herbs. Whenever possible, health professionals should allow traditional remedies for pain palliation, providing they are not harmful to the patient. The provider should evaluate the herb to make sure it does not contain an active ingredient that will interact with the prescription medications. Pharmacists and prescribers should collaborate to ensure the safety of alternative therapies, especially when combined with prescription medications.

**Family Involvement**

One method to improve pain management and implement palliative care is to involve patients and families in decision-making processes regarding patient care. Many families want to be involved in daily care activities. Health professionals should allow this request as long as it does not place the patient at undue risk. Risk can be mitigated by instructing family members how to bathe, position, and assist in transfers. Some families are so involved that they provide all the care, and health professionals’ involvement is limited to medication administration. Involving the family may increase the acceptability of palliative care.

**Language Barriers**

One of the difficult challenges of palliative care is when the patient communicates in a different language.

The patient may be experiencing significant pain, and yet, due to misinterpretation, the level of pain may not be understood, resulting in under-treatment. Language barriers often result in inadequate pain assessment and treatment because the provider cannot communicate the treatment risks and benefits. If a patient’s English skills are limited, an interpreter should be arranged. The use of professional interpreters will decrease communication errors, improve clinical outcomes, and increase patient satisfaction.

**Communication and Accommodation**

Many patients and families may be reluctant to discuss religious and cultural issues affecting their care. They may consider it inappropriate to ask for pain medications and assume the provider would suggest it if it were an option. Patients may rely on the health professional to bring up pain treatment options. Further, requesting pain medicine may be considered a sign of weakness, particularly in some cultures that believe pain is part of the dying process and must be accepted and tolerated without complaint. In addition to pain, patients near the end of life often have spiritual needs. Many patients will rely on prayer to ease and treat pain. As a result, health professionals must be aware of the cultural and religious customs and rituals near death.

**Summary of Pain and End-Of-Life issues by Culture**

Although the following descriptions of various cultures may be generally correct, individual patients may differ, depending on personal history, family background, and education. Also, there may be gender differences within cultures. Communication with each patient and their family is crucial in understanding issues of cultural importance. “Two people, with the same faith tradition and cultural upbringing, may have different end-of-life issues that create pain, challenge, or distress. This may be because of the choices made in their lives and/or the circumstances that surround them.” (Spiritual Care in a multi-religious context. Lunn JS, Journal of Pain & Palliative Care Pharmacotherapy, 2003)

Also, even when a patient is from a culture that avoids discussing death, difficult topics can often be broached in the context of a caring therapeutic relationship with a trusted medical practitioner.

**African-American Culture**

- Death: Tend to display grief openly. Family and relatives usually present.

- Pain: May avoid the use of pain medicine due to fear of addiction. Pain scales are often helpful.

- Palliative care: Generally accepting of end-of-life care if educated on appropriate forms of pain management.

**Amish Culture**

- Death: Death carries a great deal of spiritual meaning.

- Pain: Very high pain tolerance.

- Palliative care: May accept palliative care.

**Arab Culture**

- Death: May avoid discussions of impending death.

- Pain: Very expressive

- Palliative care: Usually not willing to accept Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders.

**Cuban Culture**

- Death: Everything possible should be done.

- Pain: Maybe stoic regarding pain and thus reluctant to accept pain medication

- Palliative care: May be reluctant to accept palliative care.

**East Asian Culture**

- Death: Reluctant to talk about death.

- Pain: May be stoic; look for non-verbal signs.

- Palliative care: May believe dying at home may bring bad luck. Will accept palliative care.

**East Indian Culture**

- Death: Death should be discussed with family first, who may not inform the patients.

- Pain: Will accept pain medicine for severe pain.

- Palliative care: May accept palliative care.

**Filipino Culture**

- Death: A loud grieving process is typical. May avoid discussing.

- Pain: Often expressed as “cold” or “hot.”

- Palliative care: Will accept palliative care and pain control.

**Egyptian Culture**

- Death: Avoid discussions of death.

- Pain: Will accept pain medications but require being alert near death.

- Palliative care: May accept care but no euthanasia.

**Iranian Culture**

- Death: Avoid discussions with the patient.

- Pain: Tend to express pain loudly

- Palliative care: May accept pain medications

**Jamaican Culture**

- Death: Maybe very emotional with crying and mourning typically

- Pain: Highly variable

- Palliative: Will seek health care but may believe in a possible cure despite terminal illness. Generally, accept end-of-life care.

**Japanese Culture**

- Death: May avoid discussion

- Pain: Maybe very stoic

- Palliative: May take assistance, often at home

**Ghanaian Culture**

- Death: Telling a patient they are going to die is unacceptable. More culturally acceptable to say, “It is time to put your home in order.”

- Pain: Often described as emotional or spiritual.

- Palliative care: Usually, they prefer to die at home with little or no medical assistance.

**Haitian Culture**

- Death: Maybe very vocal regarding pain

- Pain: Acceptable of pain medicine.

- Palliative care: Usually, they die at home.

**Hispanic Culture**

- Death: A large number of family members may be present. The family may not want to inform the patient of the end-stage of a terminal illness.

- Pain: May not complain of pain and may only provide nonverbal clues.

- Palliative care: May have reservations regarding accepting end-of-life care.

**Indonesian Culture**

- Death: Grief may be filled with emotion.

- Pain: May request no pain medicine near death.

- Palliative care: Commonly wish to die at home.

**Kenyan Culture**

- Death: Generally, desire life to be preserved at all costs.

- Pain: Usually, they avoid pain medicine.

- Palliative care: Commonly wish to die at home.

**Korean Culture**

- Death: Mourning and crying.

- Death: Maybe stoic. May accept pain medicine as well as herbal medicines.

- Palliative care: Usually, they prefer to die at home.

**Libyan Culture**

- Death: Tend to be very emotional.

- Pain: May accept pain medicine up until nearing death when they prefer to be alert.

- Palliative care: May accept palliative care.

**Native American Culture**

- Death: May avoid contact with dying. Verbal grieving may include wailing.

- Pain: Maybe under-treated and only expressed privately to family or friends.

- Palliative care: May not be willing to discuss terminal status as it is thought to hasten death.

**Native Hawaiian Culture**

- Death: Tend to celebrate life rather than death.

- Pain: May only accept treatment for severe pain. Nonverbal cues may be the only way to appreciate pain levels.

- Palliative care: May prefer to have family present when discussing an unfavorable prognosis. Accepting of palliative care.

**Roma Culture**

- Death: May involve wailing and calling out to God.

- Pain: Accepting of pain medicine.

- Palliative care: May not be accepting of institutional care.

**South African Culture**

- Death: Avoid the discussion as they believe talking about it will make it happen.

- Pain: accept pain medicine.

- Palliative care: Usually, die at home with limited involvement of health professionals.

**Vietnamese**

- Death: Will have a difficult time discussing death and DNR. These subjects stir deep emotions.

- Pain: Maybe very stoic.

- Palliative care: Will probably accept palliative care and pain medicine.