The FDA-approved indications for dexmedetomidine are sedation of intubated and mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) and peri-procedural (or peri-operative) sedation of non-intubated patients. Over time, usage has expanded to off-label uses, including treatment and prevention of delirium, adjunctive analgesia, therapy for insomnia in the ICU, and treatment of alcohol withdrawal. This expanded list of indications is because it commonly produces a sedated state allowing patients to be comfortable and cooperative during mechanical ventilation. Additionally, it does not require stoppage to accomplish extubation and is safe to use in non-intubated patients because it does not produce significant respiratory depression. Given THAT inherent analgesic properties are rare with most sedatives, dexmedetomidine produces an opioid-sparing effect.

ICU sedation with dexmedetomidine has been demonstrated to decrease the incidence and duration of delirium and delay the onset of delirium compared with other sedatives.

Dexmedetomidine is commonly used in anesthesia practice as well. It is used for procedural sedation for a variety of operations. It is also used frequently for sedation during the performance of awake intubation. It is ideally suited for this indication for the reasons stated above. Dexmedetomidine is also an adjunct infusion during general anesthesia. There is evidence that dexmedetomidine decreases postoperative pain, postoperative opioid usage, and nausea.