Following are the critical steps in the utilization of glucose at the cellular level-

- 
Transport of glucose through the cell membrane

For glucose to be utilizable in most tissue cells, it needs to be transported across the cell membrane into the cytoplasm. Glucose cannot readily diffuse through because of the high molecular weight. Transport is made possible through protein carrier molecules; this is known as facilitated diffusion, and it takes place down the gradient from high concentration to low concentration.

There is an exception for the gastrointestinal tract and renal tubules. Here, glucose is transported actively by sodium-glucose co-transport against the concentration gradient.

- 
Role of insulin in glucose metabolism

The rate of glucose/carbohydrate utilization is under the control of the rate of insulin secretion from the pancreas. Normally, the amount of glucose that can diffuse in the cells is limited except for liver and brain cells. This diffusion is significantly increased by insulin to 10 times or more.

- 
 Phosphorylation of glucose

As soon as glucose enters the cell, it becomes phosphorylated to glucose-6-phosphate. This reaction is mediated by glucokinase in the liver and hexokinase in most other cells. This phosphorylating step serves to capture glucose inside the cell. It is irreversible mostly except in liver cells, intestinal epithelial cells, and renal tubular epithelial cells where glucose phosphatase is present in these locations, which is reversible.

This glucose can then either be utilized immediately for the release of energy through glycolysis, a multi-step procedure to release energy in the form of ATP, or can be stored as glycogen(polysaccharide). Liver cells and muscle cells store large amounts of glycogen, for later utilization to release glucose by glycogenolysis, i.e., breakdown of glucose.