The workup required depends on the severity of the patient's condition.

- Glucose - liver disease due to alcoholism may reduce glycogen stores, and ethanol impairs gluconeogenesis. As a consequence, patients in alcohol withdrawal develop anxiety, agitation, tremor, seizures, and diaphoresis, all of which can occur with hypoglycemia.

- Arterial blood gas (ABG) - mixed acid-base disorders are common and often result from alcoholic ketoacidosis (AKA), volume-contraction alkalosis, and respiratory alkalosis.

- Complete blood count (CBC) - long-term alcohol ingestion causes myelosuppression, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. Megaloblastic anemia occurs with dietary deficiency of vitamin B-12 and folate; increased mean corpuscular volume suggests this condition

- Metabolic panel - look for acidosis, dehydration, concurrent renal disease, and other abnormalities that can occur in chronic alcoholism. Calculate anion and delta gaps, which are helpful in differentiating mixed acid-base disorders. A low BUN value is expected in alcoholic liver disease. Expect an elevated lipase level if pancreatitis is suspected. Obtain the blood ammonia level if hepatic encephalopathy is suspected.

- Magnesium, calcium, and liver function tests (LFTs) - may be indicated because patients with chronic alcoholism usually have a dietary magnesium deficiency and concurrent alcoholic hepatitis. Alcoholic pancreatitis may cause hypocalcemia.

- Urinalysis - check for ketones, as patients may have associated alcoholic ketoacidosis (AKA). Ketonuria without glycosuria to exclude alcoholic ketoacidosis and the ingestion of isopropyl alcohol. Myoglobinuria from rhabdomyolysis may be suspected when hematuria is noted on urinalysis.

- Cardiac markers - elevated creatine kinase (CK) and cardiac troponin levels may indicate myocardial infarction. Elevated CK level may be from rhabdomyolysis, which may be associated with adrenergic hyperactivity from alcohol withdrawal or myonecrosis if immobile.

- Prothrombin time - useful index of liver function; patients with cirrhosis are at risk for coagulopathy.

- Toxicology screening - consider measuring serum osmolality and screening for toxic alcohols if severely acidaemic. Other recreational drugs may be present as well.

- Imaging - chest radiography to evaluate for aspiration pneumonia, cardiomyopathy, and chronic heart failure.

- Head computed tomography (CT) - risk for intracranial bleeding because of cortical atrophy and coagulopathy.

- ECG - a prolonged QTc interval has been described in patients with an alcohol withdrawal syndrome.

- Lumbar puncture - to rule out meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage.

- Blood cultures may also be indicated if sepsis or endocarditis is suspected.