The management of carcinomatous meningitis is complex and involves a combination of multiple treatment modalities. The goal of treatment is to improve the quality of life, prolong survival, and stabilize neurological deterioration while minimizing iatrogenic toxicity. The therapeutic options depend on ‘good risk’ versus ‘poor risk’ disease and are determined by the patient’s KPS score, tumor grade, systemic disease burden, and neurological status.

The KPS (Karnofsky performance score) and ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) are the two common performance status scoring systems to document the functional status of patients with cancer. Palliative care is recommended for patients with low KPS and high ECOG scores, as the risks associated with treatment outweigh potential benefits. Evaluation of treatment response and toxicity is also essential during every stage of treatment.

Guidelines on the management of patients with CM have been formulated by NCCN and ESMO. The three primary therapeutic modalities are:

- Radiation therapy

- Intrathecal chemotherapy

- Systemic chemotherapy

**Radiation Therapy**

Radiation therapy of CM includes focal radiation to nodular plaque-like deposits of malignant cells in meninges or diffuse radiation therapy to linear leptomeningeal contrast-enhancement lesions. It is usually targeted to sites of symptomatic or bulky disease.

Cranial irradiation is helpful in isolated cranial neuropathies and obstructive hydrocephalus. Focal spinal irradiation is helpful for lower extremity weakness and bladder or bowel involvement. Even though the neurological deficits may not improve, it decreases radicular pain. The dose used for cranial and spinal irradiation is typically 30 Gy in 10 daily fractions.

Whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) is helpful in patients with hydrocephalus secondary to CM. It decreases the ICP by breaking down adhesions caused by tumor cells and minimize the requirement of ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt. It enables intrathecal chemotherapy to work effectively by restoring CSF flow. WBRT is also helpful in bulky tumors and can be used in patients with low KPS scores, multiple metastatic lesions, severe systemic illness, and reduced survival. The dose is 30 Gy in 10 daily fractions.

Radiosensitive tumors include hematological malignancies, gynecological tumors, pediatric gliomas, and rhabdomyosarcomas.

**Chemotherapy**

Chemotherapy options in CM include both intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy.

**Intrathecal Chemotherapy**

Intrathecal chemotherapy (IT) is the mainstay of treatment for CM due to the selective BBB that limits the therapeutic efficacy of most systemic chemotherapy agents. It cannot be used with a VP shunt in place as it leads to toxic drugs entering the peritoneal cavity. IT is done either by injecting the drug into the subarachnoid space after performing an LP or by using an Ommaya catheter. Ommaya catheter is a small circular device placed beneath the scalp and drains into the lateral ventricle by a tube, thereby facilitating access to the CSF in the ventricles for the introduction of chemotherapy agents.

Lumbar puncture (LP) is easy to perform but has certain limitations. The requirement of frequent LPs increases the risk of bleeding with severe thrombocytopenia, and an unpredictable path of drug distribution in the brain after the spinal tap. As compared to LP, the Ommaya reservoir offers several merits. Drug administration is relatively painless and can be performed frequently. It ensures a uniform drug distribution in the subarachnoid space. However, it can be a source of infection that can prove dangerous in an already immunocompromised patient and requires surgery, which may not be possible in some patients. The intraventricular approach has been noted to have a better response than the intralumbar method and also offers a survival benefit.

Conventional drugs for the intrathecal route (IT) include methotrexate, cytarabine, and less commonly, thiotepa. Methotrexate is the most common agent and can cause myelosuppression and neurological complications, including aseptic meningitis. Hematological malignancies are more responsive to IT. Early studies have described therapeutic efficacy with intrathecal administration of monoclonal antibodies, including trastuzumab in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive breast cancer and rituximab in lymphoma.

**Systemic Chemotherapy**

Systemic chemotherapy helps treat leptomeningeal disease as well as a systemic disease. As the BBB may only be partially disrupted in CM, agents used must be safe at high doses or lipid-soluble, so that therapeutic levels can be attained in CSF.

It is convenient for high-risk surgical patients as it does not require Ommaya reservoir placement, and practical in cases of CSF flow obstruction. It may also provide uniform drug distribution in CSF. Several agents can be used, and the choice depends on the primary tumor. High dose systemic methotrexate along with leucovorin rescue, is used as an alternative to IT. Capecitabine, an oral 5-fluorouracil drug, is effective in breast cancers with CM.

Some examples of targeted therapy effective in CM include:

- Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) are used in lung cancers with EGFR mutations.

- HER2 TKI is used in breast cancers. Lapatinib and tucatinib are examples.

- BRAF inhibitors like vemurafenib have shown good clinical response and improved survival with leptomeningeal metastasis in patients with melanoma.

- Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors are used in lung cancers with ALK rearrangements. Drugs include crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib, and lorlatinib.

A combined multimodality approach may improve clinical outcomes.

Refer to Figure 4: Management of Carcinomatous Meningitis