Half-life in the context of medical science typically refers to the elimination half-life. The definition of elimination half-life is the length of time required for the concentration of a particular substance (typically a drug) to decrease to half of its starting dose in the body. Understanding the concept of half-life is useful for determining excretion rates as well as steady-state concentrations for any specific drug. Different drugs have different half-lives; however, they all follow this rule: after one half-life has passed, 50% of the initial drug amount is removed from the body. The characteristic decreases of drugs over time have long been studied in a field known as pharmacokinetics and are depictable by basic differential equations. Most clinically relevant drugs tend to follow first-order pharmacokinetics; that is, their drug-elimination rates are proportional to plasma concentrations.

Half-life elimination is graphically represented with elimination curves that track the amount of a drug in the body over time, typically with time on the independent axis and drug plasma concentration on the dependent axis, as shown in Figure 1. Total drug exposure over time is represented in these graphs as the integral area under the curve (AUC).**k**. An alternative half-life equation exists that relates half-life to other pharmacokinetic parameters known as the volume of distribution and clearance (Equation 3).

- Equation 1: ln[Ao]/[A]=**k**t

- Equation 2: t-half= 0.693/**k**

- Equation 3: t-half= 0.693*Vd/CL, where Vd is the volume of distribution and CL is clearance

It is also worth discussing the relationship between the percentage of drug eliminated and the number of half-lives. Assuming no administration of additional drug after an initial dose, ignoring any drug-drug interactions, and assuming a physiologically healthy individual, certain quantitative constants apply to all drugs exhibiting first-order pharmacokinetics. For example, 90% of a given drug will have undergone elimination after approximately 3.3 half-lives. Even further, 94 to 97% of a drug will have been eliminated after 4 to 5 half-lives. Thus, it follows that after 4 to 5 half-lives, the plasma concentrations of a given drug will be below a clinically relevant concentration and thus will be considered eliminated. Conversely, the accumulation of a drug can reach a steady-state during an infusion. When administering a drug at regular intervals or a constant amount (such as an infusion), the drug achieves a given steady-state concentration after approximately 4 to 5 half-lives without any further accumulation in the body with repeated doses.