A reflex arc is an involuntary pathway by which the stimulus to a tendon elicits a muscle response. It is considered a monosynaptic reflex as only two neurons are involved; a sensory and a motor neuron, with a single synapse between them. The sensory neuron provides the afferent component and consists of a cell body that lies in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and innervates the muscle or Golgi tendon organ associated with the muscle. The motor neuron provides the efferent component and consists of an alpha motoneuron located in the anterior horn of the spinal cord. The pathway initiates in the muscle spindle, a proprioceptive organ. The muscle spindle comprises intrafusal fibers engulfed by a connective tissue capsule responsible for detecting muscle stretch. The muscle spindle is present within the muscle in between the extrafusal fibers.

The mechanism of eliciting a deep tendon reflex in a patient involves tendons, muscles, and the reflex arc. Tapping the appropriate tendon causes passive stretch of the associated muscle. The stretch of the muscle fiber is detected by the muscle spindle located within the muscle fibers. The muscle spindle is a sensory proprioceptor responsible for identifying the length of the muscle fibers, composed of intrafusal fibers that do not contract. The Ia afferent sensory fibers in the muscle spindles produce action potentials in response to the stretch. These Ia afferent fibers go to the spinal cord at the dorsal root and monosynaptically stimulate the alpha motor neuron that goes to the homonymous muscle extrafusal fibers. Glutamate is the neurotransmitter at the central synapse. The extrafusal muscle fibers then generate a contraction to resist this stretch. When the muscle contraction occurs, the muscle spindle decreases the action potential firing frequency, and the reflex is extinguished.

The antagonistic muscle is inhibited during the reflex while the agonist muscle contracts.