# Introduction

The proximal radio-ulnar joint (PRUJ) along with the humeroulnar and humeroradial joints form the articulating elements of the elbow.

# Structure and Function

The radial notch of the ulna articulates with the medial side of the radial head to form the PRUJ.

The annular ligament attaches anteriorly to the radial notch, courses around the radial head, and attaches posteriorly to the radial notch, stabilizing the joint during rotation.

The lateral collateral ligamentous (LCL) complex consists of the annular ligament in addition to the radial- and ulnar-components of the LCL complex.  The LCL complex has contiguous fibers that also insert and become confluent with the annular ligament.  The LCL complex originates on the lateral humeral epicondyle near the axis of elbow rotation. The LUCL attaches distally to the supinator crest.

The quadrate ligament limits the rotation of the radial head by attaching the radial neck to the inferior portion of the radial notch. There is also a minimal limitation of supination from the oblique cord, a cord of fibrous tissue that runs from the ulnar tuberosity to just inferior of the bicipital tuberosity.

# Embryology

The upper limb bud starts forming 26 days after fertilization and is regulated by the secretion of Shh by the notochord.

The lateral plate mesoderm of the bud forms the components of the joint (bone, cartilage, tendon). The mesenchyme then condenses into a blastema in the limb bud core, and these cells differentiate into chondrocytes and osteoblasts. At 36 days, the chondrification of the upper limb starts proximally. At sites of future joints, chondrification becomes repressed. Research has found that these interzones to express proteins WNT1, WNT14, and GDF5. The proximal radioulnar joint interzone and annular ligament form 51 days after fertilization.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The brachial artery supplies blood to the upper extremity and bifurcates into the radial and ulnar arteries at the proximal cubital fossa.

The radial and middle collateral arteries, from the profunda brachii artery, anastomose with the radial recurrent artery and the interosseous recurrent artery to form the lateral arcade.

The deep lymphatic vessels of the forearm, the radial and ulnar lymphatic vessels (RLV, ULV), drain lymph from deep lymphatic vessels in the palm.

# Nerves

As the PRUJ shares a joint capsule with the humeroulnar and humeroradial joints, it also shares their innervations. The innervation of the elbow capsule divides into an anterior and posterior capsule.

A small branch of the musculocutaneous nerve travels through the brachialis muscle to the central portion of the anterior capsule.

The lateral portion of the posterior capsule receives innervation from a branch of the radial nerve as it travels down the lateral head of the triceps. It then travels through the supinator muscle to also innervate the anterior capsule. Joint branches of the ulnar nerve arise just above the cubital tunnel and innervate the medial portion of the posterior capsule around the medial epicondyle and olecranon. Overlapping innervation from the radial and ulnar nerves supply the central portion of the posterior capsule.

# Muscles

The primary movements of the PRUJ are pronation and supination, which occur in conjunction with the distal radioulnar joint.

The primary pronators of the forearm are the pronator teres and the pronator quadratus.

The biceps brachii and supinator muscles are the primary supinators of the forearm. The biceps brachii covers two joints with the long head and short head originating from the supraglenoid tubercle and coracoid process, respectively. The heads then insert onto the anterior capsule and the medial portion of the radial tuberosity through the bicipital aponeurosis and distal biceps tendon, respectively.

# Clinical Significance

Dislocation of the radial head with a concurrent fracture of the ulna is known as a Monteggia fracture.

Monteggia fractures classify into four types. The injury commonly occurs through forced pronation of the forearm, such as falling on an extended and pronated upper limb.

Dislocation of the radial head without a concurrent fracture, nursemaid’s elbow, can also occur and is also seen in children.

Classically, pediatric patients will present with the arm held in slight flexion and slight pronation.  Reduction techniques include either the supination and hyperflexion maneuver with the thumb reduction force applied over the radial head or the hyperpronation technique.  Recurrence is uncommon but can occur, especially in patients younger than three years of age.  Immobilization is not necessary for first-time events. If recurrence is noted multiple times within a short period, cast immobilization merits consideration with the arm held in flexion and neutral to slight forearm supination position.