For a standard median sternotomy, the anterior chest is exposed with the patient in a supine position. A roll is placed in the interscapular region to provide better access to the sternum. After general anesthesia induction and intubation, the median sternotomy is performed. The IMA is harvested either directly or as a pedicle. Left IMA is commonly harvested as a pedicle, whereas the right IMA is generally skeletonized because a right IMA pedicle usually interferes with sternal wound healing. To harvest IMA, endothoracic fascia is incised first by using electrocautery. Once the fascia is pulled down with the help of forceps, under-surface of the internal mammary vein is exposed till IMA becomes visible. The cautery tip is used to separate the vein and IMA. Then the trunk of IMA is separated from the chest wall, which allows us to expose and cut the perforating branches. Then IMA is pulled down using curved DeBakey forceps, and surrounding tissue is separated from the IMA. Mediastinal branches are divided, and the skeletonized extra-pleural IMA is then harvested from its origin from the subclavian artery.in situ to preserve a certain degree of vascularisation of the sternum.

After harvesting the conduit, the patient is put on cardiopulmonary bypass (in on-pump CABG) by cannulating the aorta and right atrium. Aorta is cannulated at the soft and nonatherosclerotic area after giving unfractionated heparin and lowering systolic blood pressure below 100mmHg. Once the aortic cannula is in place, it is made air-free and connected to the arterial pump tubing. Then venous cannula is inserted into the right atrial appendage. Aorta is clamped distal to the cannula, and cardioplegia is infused via the aortic cannula.

After starting the cardiopulmonary bypass, the distal coronary bypass targets on the disease native coronary arteries are identified. The left IMA is usually anastomosed to the left anterior descending artery (ramus intermedius, diagonal branches), and right IMA is anastomosed to either left circumflex or right coronary artery (also ramus intermedius, obtuse marginal, posterior descending and right posterolateral). An incision is given in the distal coronary artery, and then the conduit ostium is sutured around the full circumference of the anastomosis using a 7-0 or 8-0 polypropylene suture. Grafting is done sequentially. Hemostasis is confirmed before the release of the aortic clamp. The chest wound is closed, and a drain is usually placed. The patient is monitored in the immediate postoperative period in the cardiothoracic intensive care unit.