The development of HAPE occurs as a response of the pulmonary vasculature to hypoxia. At altitude, the body responds to hypoxia by hyperventilation. This is known as the hypoxic ventilatory response (HVR). This response varies between individuals and has a genetic component. High altitude adaptation is an interesting phenomenon that regularly applies to individuals living at altitude for long periods of time but is not usual for those visiting altitude. Understanding the principles of tissue oxygen delivery, however, is useful when considering the effects and adaptations of those coming from higher barometric pressures to the lower pressures of high elevation. The concentration of oxygen in 1 liter of air at sea level is 21%. This concentration is the same at 4000 meters (~13,200 feet), but due to the decreased barometric pressure at this altitude, only 63% of the number of available oxygen molecules remain as compared to sea level. Thus, to adequately deliver oxygen to the tissues, particularly those that are most in need of oxygen for aerobic metabolism (brain, heart, lungs, kidneys), certain adaptations must occur.

There are four potential adaptations to overcome the constraints of high altitude hypoxia: (1) resting ventilation, (2) hypoxic ventilatory response, (3) oxygen saturation of arterial hemoglobin, and (4) hemoglobin concentration. Studies of populations in the Andes and Tibetian ranges and ranges have shown different adaptive changes between groups despite being at the same altitude. Those from Tibet had mean 0.5 standard deviations above that of the Aymara people of the Andes for the first two traits and a full standard deviation below for the latter two traits. This research suggests a genetic predisposition to how different groups of people at the same altitude may adapt to high altitude stress. For those traveling to a high altitude for a short period, minute-ventilation tends to be the mechanism by which trekkers from low altitude will acclimate. In general, it takes as much as 1 to 2 weeks for erythropoietin levels to increase enough to cause hematopoiesis and increased circulating hemoglobin. As one enters higher elevations, minute-ventilation increases almost immediately and respiratory alkalosis ensues. This causes a shift in the oxygen-dissociation curve to the left (increased affinity of oxygen by hemoglobin). In response to this mechanism, the kidneys begin increasing proton reabsorption which stabilizes the blood pH. RBC 2,3-DPG levels which begin to increase on days 2 and 3. Then, the Hgb-O2 dissociation curve shifts to the right (decreased affinity for O2 by hemoglobin). This allows for a more adequate delivery of oxygen to the tissues, particularly muscle tissues that may be under greater levels of stress due to exertion with climbing and/or trekking. If the HVR is blunted, due to genetic predisposition or sedatives, it will lead to further hypoxia causing a non-uniform, exaggerated hypoxemic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV). This pulmonary vasoconstriction then results in increased perfusion to affected alveoli, causing increased hydrostatic stress/pressure and thus increased mechanical stress on the blood-gas barrier. Damage to the blood-gas barrier results in increased capillary permeability and subsequent non-uniform pulmonary edema. This edema formation impedes oxygen transport, resulting in more widespread and worsening HPV. Sympathetic stimulation and circulating vasoconstrictors from the HPV response result in vasoconstriction, worsening pulmonary hypertension, and increasing capillary pressures. If an individual lacks innate adaptation to these organ level changes or the condition is not recognized and treated, the disease condition will persist and continue to worsen.