Small bowel cancer is one of the least commonly identified cancers of the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore the number of studies completed to guide therapy is overall limited compared to other cancers of the GI tract. Each type and case is evaluated on a case-by-case basis and considers the patient’s comorbidities and limitations to tolerate certain therapeutic agents. Most commonly used agents include capecitabine, oxaliplatin, 5-FU, leucovorin, and irinotecan.

Despite the unclear outcomes of adjuvant medical therapy for small bowel adenocarcinoma, enrollment in the clinical trials for all the patients with locoregional and metastatic adenocarcinoma is recommended. Selected patients with primary unresectable adenocarcinoma might be offered neoadjuvant therapy. The first prospective trial, Trial Investigating the Potential Benefit of Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Small Bowel Adenocarcinoma (BALLAD), in its third phase, is willing to explore the potential effect of adjuvant therapy with either 5-FU/leucovorin or 5-FU/leucovorin accompanied by oxaliplatin with observation in patients with local and locoregional small bowel adenocarcinoma. Former retrospective trials regarding the efficacy of utilizing adjuvant therapy in any form of either chemotherapy or chemoradiation for small bowel adenocarcinoma have demonstrated equivocal results. Specifically, the data supporting the survival benefit of adjuvant chemoradiotherapy in a local and locoregional duodenal adenocarcinoma is lacking, and recommended the adjuvant therapy is only for a limited group of patients.