Treatment of enteroviral infections is largely supportive and symptomatic, as the diseases are self-limiting. Over the counter medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, and cough syrup, and nasal decongestants may address mild symptoms.  Wheezing, bronchospasm, and associated asthma exacerbations should also be treated according to standard treatment protocols. Severe respiratory symptoms may require supplemental oxygen and positive pressure ventilation. Patients with paralytic or other CNS disease require close monitoring.

There are no antivirals approved by the FDA for use against enteroviruses. Several antiviral medications have made it to clinical trial stages, but have failed to receive FDA approval for reasons including drug interactions and drug resistance and safety concerns. The antiviral pleconaril has been utilized clinically in rare cases. While it also failed to gain approval, it did demonstrate some clinical efficacy and has been extensively studied, becoming a base for future antiviral development.

Fluoxetine is the only FDA-approved drug demonstrating significant activity against the 2014 EV-D68, in a mechanism independent of SSRI activity. The activity was demonstrated in vitro and requires further clinical investigation.

Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, utilizing neutralizing (IgG) immunoglobulins, is being investigated for prophylaxis and treatment.

Folk remedies of echinacea preparations and vitamin C may modestly reduce symptom duration or severity of rhinovirus infections; studies on this are mixed. Zinc supplementation within twenty-four hours of cold symptom onset may reduce both duration and severity of symptoms in a Cochrane review. First-generation, but not non-sedating antihistamines, reduce rhinorrhea and sneezing but do not help other symptoms.

Co-infections with bacterial or fungal pathogens should be treated with pathogen-specific antimicrobial therapy, whenever possible, and pre-existing conditions such as diabetes should be strictly controlled.

The development of vaccines against enteroviruses is hindered by the large number of distinct viruses, limited cross-reactivity, and difficulty predicting epidemiological patterns specific to serotypes. To date, only the poliovirus has an effective vaccine. Maintenance of adequate titers requires repeated boosters.