The transition from periumbilical pain to lower right quadrant pain is seen in appendicitis and is explainable due to the autonomic nerve supply to the visceral peritoneum and the somatic innervation to the parietal peritoneum. Initially, the patients may complain of generalized epigastric pain. This sensation is due to the irritation of visceral peritoneum. As the inflammation progresses, the parietal peritoneum is irritated, leading to localized pain in the right lower quadrant area at the McBurney point.

This concept also presents in the level of abdominal pain after eating fatty foods, which suggests a biliary origin of pain. The release of cholecystokinin leads to contraction of the gallbladder, and if the gallbladder is unable to empty bile due to obstruction from a gallstone, the distention of the gallbladder stretches the visceral peritoneum. This state of affairs leads to the classic right upper quadrant or epigastric pain. The right upper quadrant pain can be combined with scapular pain because the scapular pain arises from the phrenic nerve, as the gallbladder and the scapula share the same cutaneous dermatome.

The difference between somatic and visceral pain is of clinical significance because somatic pain is due to peritoneal irritation and thus is well localized. On the other hand, visceral pain is more challenging to localize as a result of stretching of the visceral organs.

As suspected, the pelvic muscles are under tremendous strain during childbirth. Afterward, women are advised to perform Kegel exercises to help strengthen the pelvic floor muscles. If symptoms are refractory to less invasive treatment, surgery might be the solution. During childbirth, women can experience perineal trauma, such as lacerations. To prevent this, some obstetricians make a small incision, called an episiotomy, to potentially avoid spontaneous traumatic tears due to limited space for the baby to emerge.