HNC affects many Americans yearly, primarily due to tobacco use, alcohol abuse, and HPV.

- Localized tumor only: 77% to 92%

- Regional metastasis: 38% to 60%

- Distant metastasis: 20% to 39%

HPV-associated HNC in young patients has a better 5-year survival of 85-90%.

HNC is ideally diagnosed based on a physical exam.  When this is not possible, then CT with IV contrast can detect most tumors due to disturbance in normal tissue size and density. MRI can add additional sensitivity for detecting inflammatory changes that do not result in tissue size or density changes. However, PET-CT retains roles in multiple circumstances for diagnosis:

- When a primary lesion cannot be discerned despite lymphadenopathy (unknown primary)

- When one or more lymph nodes have abnormal morphology, but suspicion for cancer is low.

- When there is suspicion that metastatic disease is present that is not detected by other imaging modalities.

Despite PET-CT having limited specificity for distinguishing cancer from other inflammatory processes, it may still aid in the plan for biopsying a lesion that offers the best and safest route for obtaining a tissue diagnosis.

PET-CT's primary utility is in sparing unnecessary radical, modified radical, or selective neck dissections, which involve the following measures:

- Radical neck dissection: excision of the ipsilateral lymph nodes in levels I-V, the sternocleidomastoid muscle, internal jugular vein, and cranial nerve XI.

- Modified radical neck dissection: excision of the ipsilateral lymph nodes in levels I-V ± cranial nerve XI.

- Selective neck dissection: excision of selective ipsilateral lymph node groups.

When PET-CT use is limited to appropriate clinical scenarios (following NCCN guidelines), the percentage of PET-CTs that add no diagnostic information compared to what could have been obtained from other less expensive means can be reduced.