Sodium oxybate appears to be a safe drug, with the most common side effects being minor gastrointestinal upsets such as nausea and vomiting. More dangerous side effects have been attributed to illicit use, often taking a more significant dose than therapeutic.

**Clinical Features**

- Depressed consciousness may fluctuate rapidly between a confusional, agitated, combative state with ataxia and coma.

- Emesis

- Blurred vision

- Myoclonus

- Seizures

- Respiratory depression-Cheyne-stokes respiration and apnea.

- Bradycardia

- Hypothermia

- An increasing depth of coma has at higher doses.

**Management**

- There is no antidote to sodium oxybate. Naloxone or flumazenil doesn't reverse the CNS depression induced by sodium oxybate.

- General symptomatic and supportive care should be instituted immediately, and gastric decontamination may be considered if co-ingestants are suspected.

- Emesis may occur in the presence of obtundation, place the patient inappropriate posture (left lateral recumbent position).

- Although the gag reflex may be absent in deeply comatose patients, even unconscious patients may become combative to intubation, and rapid-sequence induction is sometimes required.

- Administer atropine to reverse the bradycardia associated with overdose.

- Patients detoxifying from an overdose might experience withdrawal syndrome. Symptoms include insomnia, confusion, tachycardia, and hypertension. Benzodiazepine administration seems to be the first-line treatment, while baclofen or propofol is an option as a second-line treatment.