# Introduction

The feelings of appetite and satiety involve complex interactions between hormones from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract to the hypothalamus and subsequent feedback. Within the hypothalamus are specific regions where hormones interact to produce sensations of appetite and satiety, leading to food consumption or a feeling of fullness. Through the interactions of ghrelin and leptin, the hypothalamus can regulate the sensation of hunger and satiety, leading to energy homeostasis. Ghrelin, termed the "hunger hormone," was initially discovered through its receptor, the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R), before explaining its role as a growth-hormone-releasing peptide.

Leptin was discovered primarily as a signal in regulating body weight.

# Issues of Concern

Knowing the actions of ghrelin and leptin has led to many therapeutic advances. With the rise of obesity in the past 50 years, researchers have attempted to find methods to treat and prevent this public health problem associated with many secondary diseases.

Understanding the roles of these hormones and the hypothalamic nuclei where they act has been crucial in developing potential treatments for multiple disorders. An imbalance or decreased sensitivity to ghrelin or leptin can lead to problems with anorexia or excessive eating. Specific pathophysiologies (discussed in a later section) can arise due to an imbalance of these two hormones. Therefore maintaining appropriate levels of ghrelin and leptin is critical in maintaining homeostasis. As the worldwide health problem of obesity increases, potentially leading to secondary diseases, therapeutic effects such as managing leptin levels are under investigation.

# Cellular Level

Researchers have explored the effects of ghrelin and leptin since their discovery. From knowing that ghrelin was a growth hormone and leptin's effects in regulating body weight, many studies have explored their subsequent actions and effects. Studies have shown that their primary action lies in the various nuclei of the hypothalamus in regulating appetite and satiety.

Ghrelin is a 28-amino acid peptide synthesized from the human ghrelin gene, GHRL, on chromosome 3.

The obese (ob) gene, located on chromosome 7, produces leptin, which is primarily found in adipose tissues. Leptin is an adipocyte-derived hormone existing as a 167 amino acid peptide with a highly preserved form across species.

Subjects with a higher BMI and corresponding percent of body fat have demonstrated a marked increase of leptin in the circulating blood plasma. Besides regulating energy storage levels, leptin release also depends on factors such as food intake, gender, age, exercise, and circulating glucose.

# Development

Maintaining homeostatic balance in appetite and satiety control via hormones such as ghrelin and leptin would not be possible without the hypothalamus coordinating the various hormonal inputs. The three zones of the hypothalamus divide into periventricular, medial, and lateral. The majority of the hypothalamic nuclei are located in the medial region leading to further subdivisions such as the preoptic area, anterior (supraoptic) region, the middle (tuberal) region, and the posterior (mamillary) region.

The development of the hypothalamus and its regions is critical in maintaining homeostasis. Morphogens such as Wnt8 are responsible for the anterior-posterior patterning of the induced neural plate.

# Organ Systems Involved

Signals from the gut and adipose tissue are important in regulating sensations of appetite and satiety, respectively. The gut produces ghrelin, while leptin derives from adipose tissue. The hypothalamus integrates the signals from these two locations to regulate the body's energy homeostasis—circulating ghrelin and leptin act on the hypothalamus, allowing the body to adapt to energy demands. Ghrelin acts on the lateral hypothalamus, while leptin acts on the arcuate nucleus within the middle (tuberal) region. The lateral hypothalamus has also been shown to form and store memories associated with predicting food availability within an environment due to its interaction with ghrelin.

Within the gut are short-acting signals such as cholecystokinin (CCK) and gut distension, promoting "fullness" and satiety.

# Function

The function of various hormones in regulating appetite and satiety is to maintain energy homeostasis. Multiple hormones such as ghrelin, leptin, cholecystokinin, and other peptides all relay peripheral signals to the hypothalamus. Any imbalance of these hormones leads to various pathologies that this article will explore in another section. As such, this section will examine the functions of several hormones in appetite and satiety control. The two hormones most closely associated with energy homeostasis leading to sensations of hunger and satiety are ghrelin and leptin. Any shift in the delicate balance between ghrelin and leptin drastically affects our body's ability to regulate energy demands and storage, leading to pathophysiology.

**Ghrelin.**Originally, ghrelin was discovered as a growth hormone-releasing peptide that acted on the hypothalamus. Subsequent studies then showed that levels of ghrelin increased before meals and had a role in increasing body weight, thus earning the name "hunger hormone."

**Leptin.**Leptin is perhaps best understood as the opposite of ghrelin, acting as the body's satiety signal. Together with ghrelin, leptin exists in balance to regulate energy homeostasis. The ventromedial region of the hypothalamus is responsible for satiety and is stimulated by leptin. Furthermore, leptin inhibits stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus to inhibit the effects of ghrelin. As an adipocyte-derived hormone, leptin sends signals to the medial hypothalamus regarding energy storage within the body. However, leptin also has many other roles within the body, such as reproduction, blood pressure, and vast effects on the immune system.

# Mechanism

Activation of key receptors within the pathways is crucial for producing the desired regulatory effect between appetite and satiety. As such, the communication between the GI tract and the hypothalamus requires hormones that act on the appropriate receptors within the central nervous system (CNS). Ghrelin is derived from the GI and targets regions of the hypothalamus to provide the sensation of hunger. Sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways each play significant roles in signaling our brain when to eat. As such, ghrelin acts on the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR-1a) to promote feelings of hunger and food anticipation.

The mechanism by which leptin regulates energy homeostasis and blood glucose levels has yet to be fully understood. Expression of the leptin receptor, LepRb, is higher in the CNS, with studies showing that leptin acting on the CNS is sufficient to lower blood glucose.

Leptin stimulates POMC and inhibits AgRP causing these neurons to project to the ventromedial hypothalamus. POMC activates alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH), which then acts to inhibit food intake. Research has also shown that leptin receptors exist in the hippocampus, impacting cognitive function and plasticity.

# Pathophysiology

A balance between ghrelin and leptin is essential in maintaining adequate energy homeostasis. Furthermore, the interactions of these signals between the GI tract and adipocyte storage allow the appropriate signals to be sent to various nuclei within the hypothalamus to exert the desired effect. An imbalance causes diverse pathophysiology related to weight imbalance and improper energy homeostasis.

**Obesity:**With the prevalence of obesity continuing to rise, secondary diseases associated with obesity continue to rise, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, liver disease, stroke, and myocardial infarctions. Furthermore, the social stigma related to obesity is associated with unemployment and social disadvantages.

**Eating Disorders:**Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are both eating disorders associated with irregular eating patterns and concerns with body shape and weight. Many of these disorders have a psychological component and were long thought to be psychiatric disorders. However, new data has shown that individuals with anorexia nervosa have higher plasma ghrelin levels than normal individuals. Similarly, research has shown that individuals with bulimia nervosa have elevated fasting plasma ghrelin levels compared to individuals of similar BMIs.

**Prader-Willi Syndrome:**Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a genetic form of obesity, with deficits in ghrelin-signaling due to deficits in the expression of chromosome 15q11.2-q13. Hyperphagia is a typical symptom shown at a very young age. Children typically present with hypotonia, narrow forehead, developmental disability, almond-shaped eyes, small hands and feet, and short stature.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis:**Besides regulating weight, leptin also has pro-inflammatory effects, especially within the joints. Research has demonstrated that patients with rheumatoid arthritis have elevated levels of leptin in the bloodstream.

**Mood Disorders:**Ghrelin and leptin play an essential role in energy homeostasis, and pathophysiology related to energy imbalance drastically affects mood disorders. While ghrelin is mainly known as the hunger hormone, it is also involved in the reward and motivation signaling pathways, which link to stress, anxiety, and depression.

# Clinical Significance

Ghrelin and leptin exist as key hormones with regulatory effects of clinical significance in treating various disorders. In cancer cachexia, ghrelin has already shown promise as a therapeutic option with its anti-inflammatory action on cancer cells. Through its effects on muscle catabolism, anti-apoptotic mechanism, and reducing the adverse effects of chemotherapy, ghrelin may help treat cancer cachexia.

Synthetic ghrelin-receptor agonist analogs like Anamorelin have shown beneficial effects.