Drainage of the abscess and antibiotic treatment are the cornerstones of treatment.

Drainage is needed and can be done under the US or CT. Needle aspiration (at times repeatedly) might be all that is required for abscesses less than 5 cm, but a catheter placement might be warranted if the diameter is more significant than that.

Empiric antibiotic coverage is essential when the organism is unknown. The antibiotics should cover Enterobacteriaceae, anaerobes, streptococci, enterococci, and Entamoeba histolytica. Such antibiotic regimens include cephalosporins plus metronidazole, Beta-lactam Beta-Lactamase inhibitor plus metronidazole, or synthetic penicillins plus aminoglycosides and metronidazole. Alternatively, fluoroquinolones or carbapenems can be substituted for cephalosporins or penicillins in case of allergy or unavailability. Metronidazole should cover Entamoeba histolytica. The duration of treatment varies but is usually from two to six weeks. After initial intravenous treatment, the oral route can be used safely in most cases to complete the course. Culture results help narrow down the organism, so empiric treatment is no longer needed, as it can lead to antibiotic resistance. Anaerobes are hard to culture, so sometimes they should be treated for the entire course empirically. For stable patients, antibiotics can be given post-drainage to increase culture yield for proper treatment. Empiric antifungal treatment is crucial in immunosuppressed patients with a risk for chronic disseminated fungemia. Occasionally if the patient is too sick for drainage, antibiotics are used solely for treatment, but this is a less desirable method.

If the source is Echinococcus, treatment includes a benzimidazole, such as albendazole. This therapy may last for several years. Although most cases are uncomplicated and can be treated with an antiparasitic drug, complicated cases must be treated delicately. In most complicated cases, drainage is necessary. Surgeons must take caution to inject the hydatid cysts before draining them, as sometimes the rupture can cause the patient to go into shock rapidly.

In a study by Abbas, the mean duration of hospital stay for those with pyogenic liver abscesses was 13.6 days. Antibiotic therapy used for them was approximately 34.7 days. One patient expired. On the other hand, patients with amebic liver abscesses had a mean hospital stay of approximately 7.7 days, with a mean duration of treatment of 11.8 days, where all patients were cured.