Eye pain is thought to be due to irritation of the ciliary nerves and ciliary muscle spasms. Photophobia is caused by irritation of the trigeminal nerve from the ciliary spasm.

Uveal inflammation behaves similarly to inflammation in other body tissues, i.e., having a vascular and cellular response. But due to excessive vascularity and looseness of uveal tissue, there is heightened vascular response. Pathophysiologically, the uveal inflammation is subdivided into purulent (suppurative) and nonpurulent (non-suppurative) types.

**Wood’s Classification of Non-Suppurative Inflammation**

- Non-granulomatous

- Granulomatous

**Suppurative Uveitis**

It results from exogenous infections from pyogenic microorganisms. It is a part of the spectrum of endophthalmitis or panophthalmitis and is caused by Staphylococci, Streptococci, Pseudomonas, Pneumococcus. In suppurative inflammation, there occur outpouring of purulent exudates and an increase in polymorphonuclear cells. The uveal tissue increases in size, becomes thickened, and demonstrates necrosis and pus formation in the cavities.

**Non-granulomatous Uveitis**

In non-granulomatous (NG) uveitis, diffuse inflammation is characterized by dilatation and increase in permeability of vasculature, blood-aqueous barrier breakdown, increase in exudates, increased infiltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells and, macrophages.

**Granulomatous Uveitis**

In granulomatous uveitis, there is increased infiltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells, epithelioid cells, and giant cells resulting in nodule formation. The nodules may be seen at the pupillary border, such as Koeppe's nodules) and nodules may be seen at the back of the cornea as mutton fat KP's. This may be followed by necrosis, gliotic and fibrotic areas which result in adhesions, scar formation, and eventual destruction of uveal tissue.