There are three agents of choice in the fibric acid drug class: fenofibric acid, fenofibrate, and gemfibrozil. All of these agents are administered orally as either tablets or capsules. Fenofibric acid and fenofibrate are both marketed under several different trade names and are available in various strengths. Regarding the difference between the two, fenofibrate is the choline salt of fenofibric acid. Fenofibric acid is more hydrophilic and has better bioavailability than its choline salt counterpart.

**Gemfibrozil**

- The recommended adult dose is 1200 mg administered as two divided doses 30 minutes before morning and evening meals.

Worsening renal insufficiency is an issue upon adding gemfibrozil therapy in patients with a baseline serum creatinine of 2.0 mg/dl.

For Severe Renal Impairment: Contraindicated

**Fenofibrate**

For Hypercholesterolemia or Mixed Dyslipidemia:

- The initial dose is 145 mg once daily.

For Severe Hypertriglyceridemia

- The starting dose is 48 to 145 mg once daily.

- Doses should be individualized according to patient response and adjusted if necessary following lipid determinations at 4 to 8-week intervals.

For Mild to Moderate Renal Impairment: Dose should be initiated at 48 mg and increased only after evaluating the effects on renal function and lipid levels.

For Severe Renal Impairment: Contraindicated

**Fenofibric Acid**

Co-administration Therapy with Statin for the Treatment of Mixed Dyslipidemia

- The dose is 135 mg once daily, taken simultaneously as a statin.

For Severe Hypertriglyceridemia

- The initial dose is 45 to 135 mg once daily.

For Primary Hyperlipidemia or Mixed Dyslipidemia:

- The dose is 135 mg once daily.

For Mild to Moderate Renal Impairment: Dose should be initiated at 45 mg and increased only after evaluating the effects on renal function and lipid levels.

For Severe Renal Impairment: Contraindicated