# Continuing Education Activity

Hyperacusis is a rare hearing disorder characterized by a decreased tolerance to sound where patients report excessive loudness or pain, often leading to sound avoidant behavior. This activity reviews the background, evaluation, and treatment of hyperacusis, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in providing optimal care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the current understanding of the etiology and pathophysiology of hyperacusis.
- Identify and describe the typical presentation of a patient with hyperacusis.
- Describe the most appropriate treatment options for individual patients with hyperacusis.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by hyperacusis.

# Introduction

Hyperacusis is a rare disorder of loudness perception, where sounds that are ordinarily considered innocuous become intolerable.

Although a definitive cure is yet to be identified, research in this field is accelerating, and there has been a 10-fold increase in the number of peer-reviewed studies on the condition in the past four decades.

# Etiology

Although there are many associations, a direct underlying cause for hyperacusis is rarely found.

Those that suffer from hyperacusis are more likely to be comorbid. Psychiatric conditions, functional diseases (i.e. fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome), and joint and back disorders are particularly common.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of hyperacusis amongst children and adolescents is estimated to be between 3.2% to 17.1%, with the large variability accounted for by differences in age and hearing status.

Fully understanding the prevalence of hyperacusis is challenging. The presentation is highly subjective and therefore relies upon a carefully defined set of screening questions.

# Pathophysiology

Measured in decibels (dB), loudness discomfort level (LDL) describes the point at which a subject perceives a sound as being uncomfortably loud. In patients with hyperacusis, LDL is decreased by 16–18 dB compared to the general population, in whom the average LDL is around 100 dB.

There are several other proposed mechanisms. The prevalence of hyperacusis in those suffering from Williams syndrome led to the theory that 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) dysfunction increases auditory sensitivity, however, the high rate of otitis media in Williams syndrome may be more contributory.

# History and Physical

The subjectivity of hyperacusis has given rise to several definitions in the literature, the simplest of which separates the presentation into four categories: loudness, annoyance, pain, and fear.

Phonophobia and misophonia present similarly (and indeed the terms are often used synonymously), however, an important distinction must be made between these conditions. Hyperacusis is sound sensitivity arising from within the auditory system, and therefore can be triggered by any generic, low-intensity sound.

A full neurotological examination is essential in detecting any associated or underlying causes of hyperacusis, some of which are reversible.

**Hyperacusis vs. Tinnitus**

Hyperacusis is almost exclusively bilateral and rarely intermittent and not commonly associated with somatic modulation. Percept is vivid and salient and the impact of self-help is unknown.

Tinnitus is often unilateral and intermittent and associated with somatic modulation. Percept can be formless or primitive and self-help can be effective.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of hyperacusis usually involves determining LDL using pure-tone audiometry and using questionnaires to determine disease severity.

Based on the history and physical examination, clinicians may decide to undertake further investigations if an alternative underlying cause is suspected, such as serological tests for Lyme disease or high-resolution computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the brain for those cases with facial paralysis.

For the evaluation of psychological problems in paitnets who present iwht hyperacusis the following questionnaires are recommended

- Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 item scale (GAD-7)

- Short Health Anxiety Inventory (SHAI)

- Mini-Social Phobia Inventory (Mini-SPIN)

- Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory-Revised (OCI-R)

- Penn State Worry Questionnaire-Abbreviated (PSWQ-A)

- Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9)

# Treatment / Management

Treatment for hyperacusis can broadly be categorized into those which target the physical symptoms, and those which aim to reduce the psychological burden of the condition.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is one of the most effective components of hyperacusis therapy alongside counseling and education.

Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) involves educating the patient about their condition alongside gradual sound enrichment, and its use in hyperacusis is becoming increasingly popular.

Surgery may be indicated in select cases, including those refractory to the above treatments or in conductive hyperacusis secondary to superior semi-circular canal dehiscence syndrome.

Alternative treatments often are given special attention for chronic pain and may include supplements and vitamins, acupuncture, exercise, yoga, meditation, massage, relaxation therapy, and hypnosis.

# Differential Diagnosis

The main differential diagnoses to consider in a patient presenting with a decreased tolerance to sound are misophonia and phonophobia.

The underlying conditions that need to be excluded are:

- Bell palsy

- Ramsay-Hunt syndrome

- Migraine

- Lyme disease

- Neurosyphilis

- Williams syndrome

- Post-traumatic stress disorder

- Depression

- Superior canal dehiscence syndrome

- Autism

- Cri-du-Chat syndrome

- Tay–Sach disease

- Temporomandibular disorders

- Fibromyalgia

# Prognosis

The prognosis ultimately depends upon the etiology. Those that suffer from hyperacusis have varying levels of distress. Patients with hyperacusis are often more impaired than those with tinnitus. Patient forums suggest that for some, hyperacusis is a long-term condition (although it is worth noting that those who no longer suffer are unlikely to continue posting on forums).

# Complications

In those cases where an underlying cause is identified, complications will depend on the etiology.

Hyperacusis alone will not lead to further physical complications. Nevertheless, the psychological burden can result in significant morbidity.

Some patients communicate suicidal or self-harm ideations.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Education forms a significant part of the treatment plan for hyperacusis. Education can be delivered in isolation, or as part of CBT or TRT. Patients should be informed about their illness and test outcomes, basic physiology, coping strategies, and relaxation techniques.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Hyperacusis is a difficult condition to manage. The lack of formal clinical guidelines reinforces the importance of working closely with the interprofessional team, and clinicians are encouraged to collaborate with researchers to advance the understanding of hyperacusis and improve patient outcomes.

Successful patient outcomes rely on input from a large interprofessional team with an effective professional-patient relationship. Many patients are successfully managed in the community, however, for those with especially troubling symptoms, a referral may be made to an otolaryngologist. The otolaryngologist will be involved in the initial evaluation of the hyperacusic patient and will work closely with several other professionals, including audiologists, specialist nurses, and clinical psychologists. In select cases, radiologists, neurosurgeons, and maxillofacial surgeons may be involved in the care of a patient with hyperacusis. These professionals rely on having an accurate and comprehensive workup by the otolaryngologist. The audiologist is an expert in audiometric testing, namely pure-tone audiometry, which is vital for diagnostic purposes. Specialist nurses are often used for education and information provision, and the clinical psychologist is essential for the delivery of CBT.