The presence of clinical features such as proximal muscle weakness associated with areflexia and autonomic dysfunction should prompt an evaluation for Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. The diagnosis of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome can be confirmed by the presence of P/Q-type VGCC along with electrodiagnostic studies.

**Serology**

Antibodies against the P/Q-type VGCC detected in a radioimmunoassay are present in approximately 85% to 95% of patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. However, the presence of P/Q- type VGCC is not specific to Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome as it has been associated with a number of neurological conditions and other autoimmune disorders. Less frequently (30% to 40%), antibodies against N-type VGCC are seen in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. In addition, 64% of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome patients with SCLC also were found to have antibodies against SOX1, an immunogenic tumor antigen in SCLC with a 95% specificity.

**Electrodiagnostic Testing**

The initial findings on electrodiagnostic testing described by Eaton and Lambert were a low CMAP (compound muscle action potential) amplitude at rest, a decremental response at low rates of repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS), and an incremental response at high-rate stimulation. These findings have largely been reproducible however varying findings have also been described.

Following high-frequency RNS or post-exercise, a significant incremental response up to greater than 100% in CMAP amplitude is seen, however up to a 60% to 99 % increase is considered diagnostic.

Needle EMG can demonstrate unstable action potentials.

Single fiber electromyography (SFEMG) often shows significant jitter and transmission blocking that is characteristically improved at higher firing rates. SFEMG is more sensitive than RNS. However, RNS is more widely available and is useful in distinguishing between myasthenia graves and Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome by demonstrating the post-exercise facilitation.

**Screening for Malignancy**

Due to the strong affiliation with malignancy, the diagnosis of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome should prompt an immediate and extensive search for underlying malignancy. A CT or MRI of the chest is the initial recommended imaging study. PET scan is also used for initial screening if CT  is negative. If the initial evaluation is negative, screening for cancer should continue every 3 to 6 months for at least 2 years. Screening every 3 months is indicated for those patients who are at high risk whose DELTA-P score greater than 2 or with positive SOX antibodies which are associated with SCLC-LEMS. The Dutch-English LEMS Tumor Association Prediction (DELTA-P) score consists of variables such as the age of diagnosis and smoking history and is used to risk stratify the association with SCLC in patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome and guide the screening for underlying malignancy.