Linezolid is a synthetic oxazolidinone antimicrobial drug. It is indicated for gram-positive infections and approved for the treatment of bacterial pneumonia, skin and skin structure infections, and VRE infections, including infections complicated by bacteremia. Linezolid does not have approval for the treatment of gram-negative infections, catheter-related bloodstream infections, or catheter site infections.

Linezolid’s primary place in therapy is an alternative to vancomycin in inpatient settings. Vancomycin remains a standard treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection. However, vancomycin-resistant isolates of S. aureus have emerged, and there are increasing reports of vancomycin-resistant isolates worldwide. Alternative treatment agents merit consideration before using linezolid in outpatient settings, as inappropriate use has led to an increase in linezolid-resistant vancomycin-resistant enterococci.

Linezolid has activity against a broad range of antimicrobial susceptible and resistant gram-positive bacteria, including activity against MRSA with intermediate resistance to glycopeptides like vancomycin.

Linezolid is a recommended empirical therapy option for MRSA in hospitalized adult patients with complicated skin and soft tissue infection, for community-associated MRSA skin and soft tissue infection, and MRSA-associated purulent and nonpurulent cellulitis. Linezolid is also an alternative option for MRSA in hospitalized pediatric patients.

Non-FDA uses include anthrax, bone and joint infections, brain abscess, febrile neutropenia, infectious arthritis, meningitis, orthopedic device-related infection, osteomyelitis, sepsis, subdural empyema, and ventriculitis.

Linezolid has demonstrated activity against most strains of the following microorganisms: Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Pasteurella multocida, Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA and MSSA, i.e., methicillin-sensitive), Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus haemolyticus, Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococci), Streptococcus pneumonia, Streptococcus pyogenes (group A beta-hemolytic streptococci), and viridians group streptococci (S. mutans, S. salivarius, S. anginosus, S. mitis, S. sanguinis, and S. bovis).