The hip acts as a multi-axial, ball-and-socket joint upon which the upper body is balanced during stance and gait. The balance and stability provided by the hip joint allow motion while supporting forces encountered during daily activities. The congruity of the femoral head with the acetabulum allows the rotational motion required to perform these tasks without any detectable translational motion which would destabilize the joint and increase the risk of dislocation. The inherent stability provided by the osseous anatomy of the joint coupled with the stabilizing forces of the fibrous capsule and neuromuscular anatomy defines the absolute limits of motion of the hip joint before the occurrence of bony impingement.

- Flexion – 120 degrees

- Extension – 10 degrees

- Abduction – 45 degrees

- Adduction – 25 degrees

- Internal Rotation – 15 degrees

- External rotation – 35 degrees

Ischiofemoral ligament: It attaches to the posterior surface of the acetabular rim and labrum and courses circumferentially around the joint to its insertion on the anterior aspect of the femur. The ischiofemoral ligament limits internal rotation and hip adduction with flexion.

Iliofemoral ligament (Y Ligament of Bigelow): It is a triangle-shaped ligament that attaches along the intertrochanteric line of the femur and converges into its attachment on the anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS).  This is the strongest ligament in the body. The iliofemoral ligament limits extension and external rotation of the hip and assists in maintenance of a static erect posture with minimal muscular activity. Biomechanical analysis has concluded that the iliofemoral ligament is the strongest of the three-ligament complex.

Pubofemoral ligament: Located on the anterior aspect of the hip joint, this ligament extends from the anterior portion of the pubic ramus to the anterior surface of the intertrochanteric fossa often blending with the inferior fibers of the iliofemoral ligament. The pubofemoral ligament limits hip abduction and extension.

Zona orbicularis (annular ligament): Not visible externally, it encircles the femoral neck like a buttonhole and acts as a biomechanical locking ring wrapped around the femoral neck. The zona orbicularis forms a locking ring around the femur which resists distraction forces on the hip.

Ligamentum teres: Located deep in the hip, it has a pyramidal shape with a broad origin from nearly the entire transverse acetabular ligament attaching to the ischial and pubic bases by two bundles, with the posterior bundle being stronger than the anterior bundle. The ligamentum teres’ function prior to puberty has been well-described as it provides a secondary blood supply to the head of the femur. However, its function in adulthood is a subject of debate. In a recent meta-analysis of several cadaveric studies, O’Donnell, et al. concluded that the ligamentum teres acts as a secondary stabilizer to supplement the work of the capsular ligaments.

Acetabular labrum: This is a fibrocartilaginous rim, composed of circumferential collagen fibers, that spans the entirety of the acetabulum and is continuous with the transverse acetabular ligament. The labrum contributes approximately 22% of the articulating surface of the hip and increases the volume of the acetabulum by 33%. The acetabular labrum limits the extreme range of motion and deepens acetabulum to assist in the dissipation of the large forces across the hip with stride in athletic activities. It also provides a sealing rim around the joint, enabling increased hydrostatic fluid pressure to facilitate synovial lubrication and resistance to joint distraction.

A thick layer of highly organized type II collagen fibers and hydrophilic glycosaminoglycans make up the hyaline cartilage that covers the articular surfaces of the joint. This cartilage acts synergistically with the subchondral bone to absorb shock and appropriately distribute the high forces generated across the joint. The hydrophilic glycosaminoglycans trap water in the substance of the cartilage, resulting in additional stress-shielding properties. The cartilage is thickest at the ventral-cranial surface of the acetabulum and ventrolateral surface of the femoral head with cartilage density decreasing concentrically from these points.