The propensity of an individual to misuse a controlled substance is multifactorial, taking into account life experiences (notably stressors), especially in childhood, in conjunction with the specific neurobiology of the individual. It is well known that the dopamine reward system is implicated in addiction. However, specific gene sequences and transcription factors are also involved in addiction phenotypes.

This concept brings up the principle of supply and demand, and demand is high for controlled substances, whether legal or otherwise. The two ways supply is available are straightforward; unregulated (i.e., drug cartels) vs. regulated (pharmaceutical companies). Both create significant burdens for federal organizations such as the FDA and DEA in limiting ease of access to the general public.

To prescribe a scheduled medication, certain rules must be followed at the clinician level. These rules are most strict with Schedule II drugs and are monitored at the state and federal levels through various means, such as prescription drug monitoring programs.

There are a few scheduled drugs with an exception to the 30-day rule. The 30-day exception applies to Schedule III, IV, and V drugs. A healthcare provider may prescribe a patient up to a three-month supply of Schedule II to V medications for certain approved medical conditions and a six-month supply of Schedule III medications.

- Code A is related to patients with panic disorders

- Code B is for patients with minimal brain dysfunction

- Code C is for chronic debilitating neurologic conditions

- Code D is for the relief of pain in chronic and incurable patients

- Code E is related to patients with narcolepsy

- Code F is related to patients with a hormone or gonadotropin deficiency and those with metastatic breast cancer

Healthcare providers authorized to prescribe controlled substances must have a DEA number and include it with prescriptions for scheduled medications. The DEA registration number is a computer-generated sequence that allows other healthcare providers, such as pharmacists, to verify the validity of the prescription to prevent fraudulent dispensing of controlled medications.

Although triplicate prescriptions were previously the only means to prescribe schedule II drugs, the 2010 Controlled Substances Act introduced a revised rule called the "Electronic Prescriptions for Controlled Substances" (EPCS) which provides the prescriber with the option to send any scheduled medication (except Schedule I) prescription digitally.

Due to these different state regulations, if a scheduled drug prescription from an out-of-state healthcare provider were dispensed by law, the prescription would fall under the rules and regulations of the dispensing state.