The goal of the management of patients with xeroderma pigmentosum is to decrease the number of malignant tumors the patient develops, early detection and treatment of malignant tumors, and to improve the patient’s quality of life as much as possible. The most effective method of decreasing the number of malignant tumors in patients with XP is strict sun avoidance and protection. Patients and their caregivers should be educated on all strategies to keep UV radiation exposure to a minimum. Patients should avoid going outside of their homes during daytime hours. If they must go outside during the day, patients should be covered head to toe with sunscreen. Broad-spectrum sunscreen requires application every two hours. Patients should also use a lip balm with sunscreen. Patients should wear sun-protective clothing with long sleeves and pants. They should also wear a hat and sunglasses with side shields. All windows of the home, car, and school should have a covering with a UV-blocking film. Patients should also avoid exposure to fluorescent, metal halide, and halogen lighting, which can emit UV radiation.

Given the strict sun protection and avoidance, patients should take vitamin D supplementation regularly. Patients can also obtain vitamin D by consuming vitamin D-rich foods such as fish, eggs, mushrooms, and fortified foods.

Regular total body skin exams should be performed by a dermatologist as well as by caregivers. Patients should see a dermatologist at a minimum every three months throughout the patient’s life. Caregivers should perform daily skin exams at home and receive education on changes to bring to the attention of the patient’s dermatologist. Actinic keratoses should be treated as early as possible after the presentation to decrease progression to squamous cell carcinoma. These precancerous lesions are treatable with cryotherapy in the dermatology office. A shave biopsy should be a consideration for any lesions that are changing, new, or clinically suspicious. Basal cell carcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas, and other non-melanoma skin cancers typically get treated with Mohs micrographic surgery or excision. Radiation therapy is to be avoided in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. Malignant melanoma should have treatment with wide local excision with possible sentinel lymph node biopsy. Patients with metastatic disease should obtain a referral to hematology/oncology for further workup and treatment.

In a small study of five patients with XP, high doses of oral 13-cis retinoic acid (isotretinoin) was shown to decrease the number of skin cancers these patients developed dramatically. Patients received 2 mg/kg/day of oral isotretinoin. All patients developed xerostomia and xerophthalmia. Some patients developed side effects such as elevated triglycerides and liver function tests and even skeletal abnormalities. Despite multiple side effects of the medication, this study demonstrated the significant benefit of chemoprevention of oral retinoids for patients with xeroderma pigmentosum.

Ophthalmologic manifestations of XP are almost as common as the skin manifestations. Symptoms are progressive and often include photophobia and conjunctival injection. Patients may develop cataracts, conjunctivitis, blepharitis, pigmentary changes of the eyelids or conjunctiva, ectropion, corneal vascularization, xerophthalmia, and corneal scarring. Patients may also develop skin lesions of the eyelid, which may include benign lid papillomas, basal cell carcinomas, and malignant melanoma. Patients have also been found to develop melanomas of the anterior chamber of the eye. Patients should be followed regularly by an ophthalmologist for eye exams and management of ophthalmologic manifestations of XP.

For patients with XP that develop neurologic manifestations, they should obtain a referral to a neurologist for workup and management. Unfortunately, neurologic symptoms are progressive and not slowed by sun protection.