Initial management of an abused child involves stabilization, including assessing the patient's airway, breathing, and circulation. Once ensured that the patient is stable, a complete history and physical examination are required. With the suspicion for any form of child abuse, CPS needs to be informed. The involvement of a child abuse specialist is important for optimal evaluation and management. If the patient is seen in an outpatient setting, transfer to an emergency department for laboratory and/or radiologic evaluation, and the appropriate continuation of care may be indicated. If a child is transferred to another physician or facility, the initial physician caring for the patient has the responsibility of reporting the case to CPS. It is the responsibility of the physician to recognize potential abuse, not to identify the perpetrator. The physician should continue to advocate for the child, ensuring that the patient receives the appropriate follow-up care and services.

Victims of sexual abuse should have their physical, mental, and psychosocial needs addressed. Baseline sexually transmitted infection (STI) and pregnancy testing should be performed, and empiric treatment for HIV, gonorrhea, chlamydia, trichomonas, and bacterial vaginosis infection for the adolescent victims should be offered. Also, emergency contraception to prevent unwanted pregnancy is most effective if given within 72 hours but may be offered up to 5 days after unprotected intercourse. Prepubertal patients are not provided with prophylactic treatment due to the low incidence of STIs in this age group. Urgent evaluation can prove extremely beneficial for patients needing prophylactic STI treatment, emergency contraception, managing anogenital injury, collecting forensic evidence, urgent child protection, or urgent care for suicidal ideation.