The most common adverse effects following nalbuphine administration are sedation, sweating, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, vertigo, dry mouth, or a headache.

The following are less common adverse effects that have been reported at an incidence of less than 1%:

- **Central nervous system**: Nervousness, depression, restlessness, crying, euphoria, floating, hostility, unusual dreams, confusion, faintness, hallucinations, dysphoria, a feeling of heaviness, numbness, tingling, or unreality.

- **Cardiovascular**: hypertension, hypotension, bradycardia, or tachycardia.

- **Gastrointestinal**: cramps, dyspepsia, or bitter taste.

- **Respiratory**: depression, dyspnea, or asthma.

- **Dermatologic**: itching, burning, or urticaria.

- **Allergic Reactions**: anaphylactic, anaphylactoid, or severe hypersensitivity reactions have been reported with nalbuphine use, and care should be given providing immediate supportive medical treatment should they occur.

**Black Box Warning**

Concomitant use of nalbuphine with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants, including alcohol, may result in critical sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death.

Concomitant prescribing should only be used in patients for whom alternative treatment options have proved inadequate; dose and duration should be limited to the minimum required, and follow patients for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and sedation.

**Cautions**

Because of altered pharmacokinetics and clearance in elderly, debilitated, or cachectic patients, caution should be used when administering nalbuphine to these patient populations because life-threatening respiratory depression can result. The respiratory depressant effects of nalbuphine can result in carbon dioxide retention, which can further increase intracranial pressure in patients with baseline elevated intracranial pressure, head injury, or intracranial lesions, as well as possibly confound the ability to obtain and follow an accurate neurological examination due to sedative properties. Therefore, nalbuphine should be used with extreme in these clinical scenarios.

Like other commonly used opioid medications, nalbuphine can alter normal mental or physical abilities required to perform potentially dangerous tasks, including driving or operating heavy machinery. Patients counseling regarding these risks prior to the administration of this medication is indicated.

Nalbuphine has been used for obstetrical analgesia, and there are reports of severe fetal bradycardia in laboring women. In one study, fetal heart rate flattening occurred in 53% of the cases.

Due to antagonist action at the µ-opioid receptor, caution should be used in nalbuphine administration to patients on sustained-release opioids because withdrawal symptoms are possible.

Even though nalbuphine is a µ-opioid receptor antagonist, it still provides drug liking properties and has abuse potential.