In the assessment of ASCVD risk factors, measuring the lipid profile (LDL-cholesterol), plasma glucose, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) (in certain instances) is reasonable. Ultrasound of the abdomen to screen for an abdominal aneurysm is indicated in the elderly especially with other ASCVD risk factors. In screening for peripheral artery disease (PAD), a Doppler device is used to obtain the ankle-brachial index (normal 1.0 to 1.40) and is a very useful, cost-effective test to rule out PAD. It needs to be emphasized that PAD is a marker for ASCVD in other beds (coronary artery disease [CAD], cerebrovascular disease, among others). Also, sonography of the carotids to rule out stenosis if a patient has a carotid bruit. An electrocardiogram (ECG) may be useful if indicated, for example, stress ECG. To confirm ASCVD, a reasonable test is the calcium score by electron beam computed tomography (EBCT). It needs to be interpreted according to age. It establishes plaque burden.

Angiography is considered as the primary method for imaging atherosclerotic lesions in the coronary circulation and provided a good measure of the coronary silhouette. However, it is an invasive procedure and should be performed in high-risk patients or those with symptomatology and is not a screening test.

For the noninvasive assessment of ASCVD, computed tomography (CT) angiography is evolving as a promising approach. Moreover, CT angiography can be used to detect the presence of low-attenuated plaques and in predicting future acute coronary events. In addition to CT angiography, new imaging techniques like cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (cardiac MRI) may prove useful in certain patients. However, cost needs to be balanced with need given the burgeoning increasing healthcare costs.