Caring for a patient with pulmonary hypertension during the perioperative period is a team effort. The operating room is a high-stakes environment that forces people together from various training backgrounds and specialties. Multiple physicians, including the surgeon, anesthesiologist, pulmonologist, cardiologist, and intensivist, need to discuss the short-term and long-term care goals for the patient as well as potential challenges and complications. If the surgery is not emergent, it is ideal for the team to optimize the patient for surgery and begin patient education to help manage the disease long term. Although there may be patient frustrations about surgical delays, the medical team must maintain an open dialogue and assure the patient that their overall health and safety are of the utmost importance.

When developing an anesthetic plan, talk with the pharmacist about the potential medications you may need during the surgery as they may not be easily accessible in the operating room or even available at the hospital. On the day of surgery, there needs to be clear communication between the anesthesia technicians, nursing staff, and anesthesiologist about special needs during the procedure, such as arterial blood gas draws. The nurses in the recovery unit should be reminded to watch for signs and symptoms of complications such as heart failure and respiratory compromise.

Overall, communication is important to ensure preparedness amongst all providers and patient safety.