The successful endoscopic brow lift requires the surgeon to utilize careful operative techniques, adhere to anatomic dissection planes, and directly visualize specific anatomic structures at key points in the procedure. Herein we present safe and reliable endoscopic brow lift techniques.

The surgeon makes midline and paramedian incisions through all layers of the scalp, down to the cranium. The temporal incisions only proceed down to the fascia of the temporalis muscle (deep temporal fascia).

Using a curved periosteal elevator, the midline and paramedian ports are used to perform blind dissection (without the endoscope) to develop a full-thickness subperiosteal pocket between the temporal lines. Blind dissection proceeds anteriorly to a point 1 to 2 cm cephalic to the supraorbital rims and anterolaterally along the lateral orbital rims to the lateral canthus.

The 30-degree endoscope (inserted through the midline port) and endoscopic instruments (inserted through the paramedian ports) are used to fully release the arcus marginalis while taking care not to violate the supraorbital neurovascular bundles.

With the completion of periosteum elevation, resection or ablation of the frontalis, corrugators, and procerus muscles may follow if desired, a maneuver typically reserved for patients with deep forehead and glabellar rhytids.

A curved elevator is then introduced via the temporal port to dissect the tissue plane between the temporoparietal fascia (superficial temporal fascia) and the temporalis fascia (deep temporal fascia) that overlies the temporalis muscle. Entering this plane is best performed under direct visualization. The entirety of the superficial temporal space is released anteriorly, posteriorly, and inferiorly to approximately 1 cm above the zygomatic arch to avoid injuring the facial nerve as it crosses the zygoma. The sentinel vein, usually identified 1 cm lateral to the frontozygomatic suture line, should not be cauterized if possible so as to decrease the risk of facial nerve injury. While the vein may appear large on the monitor, the caliber is typically on the order of 1 mm; therefore, if the vein is injured, direct pressure is generally sufficient to stop the bleeding. If cautery is necessary, bipolar forceps on a low setting, such as 10 watts, may be employed, taking care to cauterize only the deep surface and stay away from the temporoparietal fascia.

The lateral and the central dissection cavities are then connected by sharply dividing the zone of adhesion at the superior temporal line, typically accomplished most easily by passing an elevator from lateral to medial. Similarly, the conjoint tendon is then opened above the supraorbital rim and posteriorly until there is a complete connection between the lateral and central dissection pockets.

Fixation is usually accomplished first at the temporal ports and then at the paramedian ports. A large permanent or semi-permanent suture (e.g., 0-0 nylon or polydioxanone) is utilized to affix the temporoparietal fascia to the deep temporalis fascia in a vector that follows a line running from the ala to the lateral canthus. Fixation at the paramedian incision is then performed, which can be accomplished via numerous techniques. Absorbable tissue fixation devices are commonly employed. Holes are drilled in the skull through the paramedian incisions to place the devices bilaterally. The frontal scalp flap is then lifted off the bone and suspended superiorly onto the device prongs with the help of an assistant. This maneuver holds the periosteum in place and sets the height and arch of the brows. Note: In general, approximately 5 mm of vertical relapse should be anticipated depending on the thickness and redundancy of the preoperative forehead. Tunnels may be drilled into the frontal bone, and sutures passed through them to anchor the scalp in a more superior position as well. Some surgeons prefer to place screws at the superior extent of the paramedian incisions and then staple the incisions closed such that the staples pull the scalp back and are held in place against the screws. The screws can then be removed in the clinic six weeks post-operatively.

Scalp incision closure is performed with either skin staples or sutures, and petrolatum or antibiotic ointment is applied. Drains are usually not necessary, and one may use a light forehead wrap placed as a pressure dressing, taking care to avoid placing downward traction on the forehead, which may reduce the amount of lift achieved.

Lastly, if planning a concurrent upper blepharoplasty, the blepharoplasty should only be performed after completing the brow lift because the brow lift decreases upper eyelid skin redundancy and reduces the amount of skin that needs to be excised during blepharoplasty.