The soft palate has five muscles that receive innervation by the pharyngeal plexus of the vagus nerve, except for the tensor veli palatini muscle, which is innervated by a branch of the trigeminal nerve called the medial pterygoid nerve. The muscles that make up the soft palate include the palatoglossus, palatopharyngeus, tensor veli palatini, musculus uvulae, and levator veli palatini muscles.

The tensor veli palatini muscle attaches to the palatine aponeurosis from its origin at the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid. The tensor veli palatini muscle functions to tense the soft palate during swallowing, preventing the entry of food into the nasopharynx.

The levator veli palatini muscle emerges from the eustachian tube and the petrous temporal bone before attaching to the palatine aponeurosis, this muscle functions to elevate the soft palate during swallowing to prevent the entry of food into the nasopharynx.

The palatoglossus muscle arises from the palatine aponeurosis. It travels inferiorly, anteriorly, and laterally to attach into the side of the tongue—the palatoglossus muscle functions to pull the soft palate towards the tongue and initiates the act of swallowing.

The palatopharyngeus muscle emerges from the hard palate and the palatine aponeurosis and attaches to the superior border of the thyroid cartilage. The palatopharyngeus muscle tenses the soft palate and draws the pharynx superiorly and anteriorly during the act of swallowing.

The palatopharyngeus muscle closes the laryngeal airway during swallowing to prevent the aspiration of food.

The musculus uvulae muscle derives from the palatine aponeurosis and the posterior nasal spine and attaches to the mucous membrane of the uvula. The musculus uvulae muscle functions to shorten the uvula. Ipsilateral contraction of the musculus uvulae muscle draws up the uvula on the same side.