Complications are either early or late after liver transplantation:

**Early Complications**

- Primary non-function of the liver allograft

- Hepatic artery thrombosis

- Acute cell rejection

- Biliary complications

- Infection

In the first week, the abnormal liver enzymes usually trend down towards normal, and the liver graft starts to regenerate.

The most serious complication post-liver transplantation is the primary non-function of the allograft. This immediate complication presents with either the lack of bile production or the production of clear bile, associated with worsening liver enzymes and bilirubin. This immediate complication requires a new graft for the patient to survive.

The first 48 to 72 hours post-liver transplant usually shows abnormal liver enzymes and indicates injury to the graft secondary to cold and warm ischemia during removal and implantation into the recipient. However, it is crucial to exclude hepatic artery thrombosis post-liver transplantation, and a Doppler ultrasound should be done.

Acute cell rejection is common, and it occurs in up to 50% of patients post-liver transplantation. The majority of cases occur in the first 2 months post-liver transplantation, and most patients respond to corticosteroids. In the case of corticosteroid-resistant rejection, anti-thymocyte globulin is needed. A liver biopsy should be performed for a definitive diagnosis. Long-term outcomes are favorable.

The biliary anastomosis is the most common site of biliary strictures. This can be managed with endoscopic dilation, stenting, or, less commonly, surgical revision. Non-anastomotic or ischemic strictures can also develop secondary to hepatic artery thrombosis, ABO incompatibility, long graft ischemia time (warm or cold), or grafts donated after cardiac death.

Immunosuppression post-liver transplantation increases the risk of opportunistic infections such as CMV (most common viral infection), Candida infections (most common fungal infection), Pneumocystis carinii, Aspergillus, Nocardia, and Cryptococcus. Neurologic and renal impairment and the development of hyperglycemia can occur due to the use of tacrolimus and cyclosporine.

**Late Complications**

- Complications related to immunosuppression

- Recurrent disease post-liver transplantation

- De novo malignancy

Late complications are mainly attributed to the toxic effects of immunosuppressive drugs. The most common being chronic kidney disease (CKD), HTN, DM, and dyslipidemia. Calcineurin inhibitors, in combination with CKD and HTN present before transplant, contribute to the development of renal failure post-liver transplantation. This is managed by strict control of BP and dose reduction or discontinuation of calcineurin inhibitors.

Immunosuppressive drugs increase the risk of cardiovascular disease due to an increase in its risk factors such as DM, HTN, obesity, and dyslipidemia. This is in combination with a high-risk lifestyle in patients that leads to a marked increase in atherosclerosis.

Osteoporosis risk is increased due to the use of corticosteroids in the long term, in addition to malnutrition and vitamin D deficiency related to liver disease. Recently this complication was reduced due to the successful treatment with bisphosphonates and reducing corticosteroid doses.

Neurologic impairments, most commonly tremors in addition to insomnia and paresthesias, are due to calcineurin inhibitors.

Recurrent disease post-liver transplantation includes recurrent hepatitis C or B infections. Both can be well-managed post-liver transplantation. Other chronic liver diseases can recur, including NASH, PBC, PSC, AIH, and HCC.

Malignancies arise de novo and are a major cause of death in liver transplantation recipients in the long term.