**Organum Vasculosum Laminae Terminalis (OVLT)**

The OVLT neurons exist within a thin layer of neuroepithelium towards the anterior wall of the third ventricle called lamina terminalis, which is embryologically positioned medial to the preoptic aspect of the anterior neural plate. The proper development of OVLT is managed by various signaling centers surrounding the lamina terminalis. When the neural tube closes during the early embryonic life, a commissural plate forms by the folding anterior neural border. This folding places the lamina terminalis between the fibroblast growth factor (FGFs) secreting signaling center and sonic hedgehog (SHH) secreting the prechordal plate. To keep this domain of FGF and SHH signaling within the limits of normal development, a cross-regulation occurs with the bone morphogenic proteins (BMP) and wingless-related integration sites (WNT) from the dorsal midline. In addition to these domains, Puelles and Rubenstein discovered a central strip of neuroepithelium connecting the anterior ends of the roof and floor plates, called the acroterminal hypothalamic domain (ATD) in 2015. One may note that the OVLT, neurohypophysis, and the median eminence originates within this ATD.

**Subfornical Organ (SFO)**

In a fully developed adult brain, the SFO is in the dorsoanterior end of the third ventricle in the roof plate. Based on this location, the precursor cells to the SFO are expected in the roof plate near to the eminentia thalami. With the border between the diencephalon and the telencephalon on one side and the mid-diencephalic zona limitans intrathalamica on the other, a subdivision of the neural tube here differentiates to form the eminentia as mentioned above limitans. It also bears mention that the paired box/homeobox gene Pax2, a marker of the eminentia thalami, is also expressed in the SFO.