When a patient is suspected of having PVE due to clinical manifestations, workup should always be started with obtaining blood cultures. The presence of bacteremia in a febrile patient with a history of prosthetic valve replacement raises the probability of the PVE. Three blood cultures from different sites are required. A transthoracic echocardiogram TTE should follow this.

The modified Duke criteria (DC) are accepted criteria to establish the diagnosis of PVE.

The use of transesophageal echo TEE is recommended when TTE fails to make the diagnosis.

Other diagnostic modalities may be required as part of the workup for patients with PVE; a chest X-ray can be ordered to evaluate for lung infiltrates, and an electrocardiogram to evaluate PR prolongation and possible AV blocks.

Cardiac computed tomography angiogram CTA can be used to diagnose PVE if the TEE fails to provide the diagnosis, cardiac CT is better than TEE to detect perivalvular abscess, CTA can be used as next step in diagnosis for patients who have negative TTE and have contraindications to perform TEE.

18F-FDG PET/CT can be used to diagnose PVE if TTE/TEE fails to make the diagnosis, and there is a high probability of the infection. It improves the diagnostic accuracy of the modified DC and yields high diagnostic performance.

Magnetic resonance imaging MRI of the brain is considered the best diagnostic tool when septic emboli to the brain are suspected. CT of the chest and abdomen can also be considered when septic emboli are suspected.