**Epidural Hematoma**

An epidural hematoma can either be arterial or venous in origin. The classical arterial epidural hematoma occurs after blunt trauma to the head, typically the temporal region. They may also occur after a penetrating head injury. There is typically a skull fracture with damage to the middle meningeal artery causing arterial bleeding into the potential epidural space. Although the middle meningeal artery is the classically described artery, any meningeal artery can lead to arterial epidural hematoma.

A venous epidural hematoma occurs when there is a skull fracture, and the venous bleeding from the skull fracture fills the epidural space. Venous epidural hematomas are common in pediatric patients.

**Subdural Hematoma**

Subdural hemorrhage occurs when blood enters the subdural space which is anatomically the arachnoid space. Commonly subdural hemorrhage occurs after a vessel traversing between the brain and skull is stretched, broken, or torn and begins to bleed into the subdural space. These most commonly occur after a blunt head injury but may also occur after penetrating head injuries or spontaneously.

**Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**

A subarachnoid hemorrhage is bleeding into the subarachnoid.  Subarachnoid hemorrhage is divided into traumatic versus non-traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. A second categorization scheme divides subarachnoid hemorrhage into an aneurysmal and non-aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage occurs after the rupture of a cerebral aneurysm allowing for bleeding into the subarachnoid space. Non-aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage is bleeding into the subarachnoid space without identifiable aneurysms. Non-aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage most commonly occurs after trauma with a blunt head injury with or without penetrating trauma or sudden acceleration changes to the head.

**Intraparenchymal Hemorrhage**

Intraparenchymal hemorrhage is bleeding into the brain parenchyma proper. There is a wide variety of reasons due to which hemorrhage can occur including, but not limited to, hypertension, arteriovenous malformation, amyloid angiopathy, aneurysm rupture, tumor, coagulopathy, infection, vasculitis, and trauma.