General pearls, as they relate to avulsion fractures, highlight why they may be clinically relevant compared to many other injuries. Depending on the body part, the pull of the soft tissue that is still attached to the fracture fragment can make reduction, and therefore healing more difficult. This may cause fractures to heal in the wrong anatomic location (malunion), commonly with distraction and rotational malalignment. This can lead to weakness, pain, and dysfunction.

Related injuries include entrapment of soft tissue structures, fracture extension, intra-articular loose bodies, ligament and supporting tendon, soft tissue, and retinacula injuries.

The rate of neurologic injury is higher in some avulsion fractures if they are associated with dislocation.

In cases of residual joint instability, displacement or dislocation, the pull of adjacent or surrounding soft tissue and the fracture itself be an obstruction to the reduction of the fracture and/or a dislocated joint.

In general, joints are responsible for varying degrees of complex ranges of motion between bones. Bones provide attachment sites for muscles via tendons, which facilitate movement. Together with ligaments, capsules, and other soft tissues, the muscles and tendons around a joint form a stable soft tissue envelope and allow a base of motion specific to each joint. There are often static and dynamic stabilizers of joints, and the motion and stability of many of these joints rely on coordinated sensorimotor systems. Coordinated muscle contractions in concert with biofeedback from capsuloligamentous structures result in normal motion and functional stability.

Prominent in the orthopedic surgery literature and training are certain avulsion fractures that, when recognized, are pathognomonic for other associated injuries or conditions. Displaced pediatric apophyseal avulsion fractures of the olecranon, isolated greater trochanter avulsion fractures in the elderly, adult lesser trochanter avulsion fractures, the Segond fracture, posterior proximal tibial avulsion in a “dashboard injury,” and the “fleck sign” in the foot are six such examples which are briefly discussed below.

It has been recommended that a diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta be considered when displaced apophyseal avulsion fractures of the olecranon are seen in the pediatric population with relatively low-energy trauma. This is especially true if the injury occurs bilaterally. In patients with osteogenesis imperfecta who sustain this fracture, they are generally more displaced than children without the disorder, and the risk of incurring the same fracture on the other side is around 70%.****

Approximately 90% of elderly adults with an isolated greater trochanter avulsion fracture on plain radiographs have been found to have occult intertrochanteric extension on MRI.

In adults, lesser trochanteric pathology in the setting of avulsion injury without a clear trauma history is virtually always secondary to metastatic disease in the trochanteric region. This should be regarded as secondary to metastatic neoplasm until proven otherwise.

The Segond fracture has been extensively documented in association with ACL disruption and meniscal tear that accompany it.

A small posterior tibial plateau avulsion fracture seen after a so-called “dashboard injury” in the setting of a motor vehicle accident with an anteroposterior force applied to the proximal tibia on a flexed knee is essentially pathognomonic for posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) injury. Additional physical exam tests to assess the integrity of the PCL and other soft tissues around the knee should be performed, such as assessing for posterior sag of the tibia. Likewise, an MRI must be obtained to assess the extent of internal derangement that is likely to be present in association with the fracture and mechanism of injury.

The “fleck sign” seen as a bony fragment in the basal first intermetatarsal space on an anterior-posterior view radiograph represents an avulsion of the Lisfranc ligament and is diagnostic of Lisfranc injury. The Lisfranc ligament is a plantar interosseous ligament spanning from the lateral zone of the medial cuneiform to the medial zone of the second metatarsal. Widening of the interval between the first and second metatarsal bases is often seen, as well as dorsal displacement of the proximal base of the first or second metatarsal on the lateral view. The Lisfranc injury is a tarsometatarsal fracture-dislocation with disruption of the articulation of the medial cuneiform and base of the second metatarsal, which is the unifying factor in the disruption of the tarsometatarsal joint complex. The severity of injuries range, and can be purely ligamentous. Regardless of the type of Lisfranc injury, they must be treated. Missed injuries result in chronic pain, instability, dysfunction, and often progressive foot deformities. Although not diagnostic, a common physical exam finding of plantar ecchymosis at the level of the midfoot is highly suggestive of a Lisfranc injury and has been described as a pathognomonic sign of Lisfranc injury.