A majority of human trafficking victims will at one point come into contact with the health care system. Therefore, providers need to be aware that any of their patients could be trafficking victims.

**Exploitive Environments**

When healthcare workers encounter potential victims of trafficking, detailed work history and social history will assist in identifying red flags. In addition, a better understanding of the most common areas where persons are targeted for exploitation will help practitioners assess a potential victim.

Victims of labor trafficking tend to be near farms, fisheries, factories, or businesses such as nail salons, massage parlors, restaurants, and areas with high immigrant populations. Traveling sales crews, begging rings, landscapers, construction workers, domestic workers, nannies, elderly adult caregivers, and those in retail have a heightened risk of being labor trafficked. Immigrants may lack the power of communication due to language barriers which enable handlers from a similar background to approach them.

Sex trafficking can be hotel or motel-based, street-based, or in residences functioning as brothels. Commercial-front brothels, escort services, truck stops, bars, and strip clubs can be places where sex trafficking occurs. Sex trafficking can happen at home with parents, intimate partners, or other family members as the perpetrators. Victims may not see themselves as victims and may refer to the trafficker as their “daddy” or "boyfriend."

**Labor Trafficking Considerations**

Common presenting complaints of victims of human trafficking are much like those of intimate partner violence but may vary depending on the type of trafficking. Labor traffickers prey on specific vulnerabilities to entice individuals to accept substandard working conditions. Workers in the agriculture industry, factories, and domestic servitude sectors are vulnerable to human trafficking if their work visa and immigration status is controlled by one employer. This power over the individual and fear of deportation allows the trafficker to manipulate the worker, leading to victimization.

Agricultural and industrial workers who are forced to work long hours with substandard wages may be isolated, confined by the use of dogs, armed guards, fences, and locks. The seasonal nature of their work and movement from place to place heightens their vulnerability as they are often in unfamiliar surroundings. Domestic workers are also isolated, forced to live on the premises, and may lack access to cell phones and other communication devices. Language barriers add to vulnerability.

Workers in strip clubs and bars may have fraudulent work visas and ties to organized crime, rendering them vulnerable to trafficking. Drugs and alcohol are used as manipulation tools. Labor laws may not apply to subcontractors or independent contractors, thus increasing vulnerability. Traffickers seek to keep the victim isolated by proximity or language, vulnerable due to immigration status, without resources, in debt, and unprotected by labor laws to increase their ability to control and manipulate.

Trafficking in persons for labor exploitation may put a patient at risk for malnutrition, communicable diseases such as hepatitis and tuberculosis, pesticide and chemical burns, or exposure and work-related injuries due to lack of usual safety equipment such as safety belts, gloves, goggles, and masks.

**Labor Trafficking Red Flags**

The healthcare worker's most important role is to recognize a potential case of human trafficking. The provider may also empower the person being exploited, educate the victim on resources and established support structures, and provide a framework for a trauma-informed, victim-centered approach to healthcare.

The healthcare provider should start by asking open-ended questions in a private area. The approach should be non-judgmental to allow free disclosure by the potential victim. The provider should look for verbal and nonverbal clues of distress. Useful questions may include and not be limited to the list below:

- Are you being paid the wages that were part of the initial agreement?

- Can you change jobs if you want to?

- Would anything happen to you if you did quit your job?

- Can you come and go as you please, take bathroom breaks, eat when you want?

- Do you live with others? What are the home conditions, and where do you sleep? Do you have a bed? Do you sleep on the floor? Is it too cold or too hot?

- Did you pay a fee to get your job? Do you owe a debt to your employer?

- Do you have access to your money, your identification?

- Has your employer ever threatened you?

- Did you have eye protection, a mask, a safety harness? Personal protective equipment such as gloves? Respirators?

- Does your employer provide your housing?

- Are you working in the job you were hired to do?

- Are you concerned about your safety? Your family, or your children's safety?

- How many hours do you work a day? How many days per week?

- Have you moved around a lot? Do you know your address? Can you give me directions or the location of your house?

- Do you take care of others?

- Are there locks on the doors or bars on the windows? Can you leave freely?

**Barriers to Identification of Victims**

Healthcare providers may fail to stop, observe, and ask questions to identify a potential victim of human trafficking. Lack of knowledge about trafficking and the absence of protocols to identify trafficking can contribute to missed cases of trafficking. Victims may be frightened of the consequences of identifying their trafficker. They may not trust the healthcare system or provider and may not recognize that they are being exploited.

A patient who presents with multiple visits for a pain complaint with no organic cause may be a victim of trafficking. Patients that present with stress-related issues on multiple visits or return frequently may be victims of trafficking. Patients with overdoses, suicidal ideation, or suicidal attempts may be victims of trafficking.  Traffickers can pose as parents, grandparents, or spouses. Providers must investigate any suspicion of an exploitive relationship. The healthcare system may be the only contact the victim has with potential help.

**Sex Trafficking Red Flags**

According to the National Human Trafficking Resource Center (NHTRC) and hotline, general indicators or red flags of trafficking in persons may include but not be limited to the following:

- Inconsistent history or a history that appears coaxed. This may be difficult to determine if a language barrier is present.

- Resistant to answer questions about the injury or incident.

- Avoids eye contact, is nervous, fearful of touch.

- No idea of address or general area where they live.

- No control over their finances and lacks decision-making capacity.

- Accompanied by a controlling companion or family member that refuses to let the patient speak for themselves or be alone for care or insists on being the translator.

- Exhibits bizarre, hostile behavior. Resistant to care and assistance. They may have initially consented but changes their mind after being asked to undress for an exam.

- No identification or the companion has it in their possession.

- Under the age of 18 and involved in a commercial sex act.

- Tattoos or branding signs. Markings may say "daddy" "for sale," imply ownership or read like an advertisement for a product.

- Multiple sex partners.

- Inappropriate attire for the environmental conditions of the area.

- Attempt to reason away bruises or ligature marks by claiming a bruising or rare blood disorder.

- Silent, afraid to speak, cringes at the sound of a loud voice.

- Uses trafficking "lingo" such as "the life" or other words common in the commercial sex industry.

- Has addiction issues such as opioids.

- Admits to a forced sexual encounter or being forced into sex acts.

- It has a cover story to avert suspicion, but details may vary or be inconsistent.

**Head-to-Toe Assessment**

Conducting a head-to-toe, full assessment in this patient population is of vital importance. An examination may prove difficult due to the emotional and psychological state of the victim. These patients may be uncooperative, vague, or give an inconsistent history. These reactions are manifestations of their trauma. The difficult history can frustrate the provider. This frustration may lead to the desire to hasty decisions about diagnosis and treatment. The potential exists for "diagnostic overshadowing." and premature closure of the case. As with any trauma patient, a high index of suspicion should be present for co-existing conditions and comorbidities.

The patient assessment must be in private, without anyone accompanying the patient present. This private evaluation should be presented to the patient as standard procedure. A chaperone and certified interpreters should be used as usual. These providers can be used to establish trust and rapport with the patient.  Using a same-sex provider for the physical exam may be helpful, if possible.  During the exam, the patient may seem emotionally absent, hyperventilate, and not verbalize feelings of discomfort. Be alert to nonverbal signs. Reassure frequently and promote a relaxed, non-rushed atmosphere. Avoid interrogating the victim. Ask only direct, pertinent, open-ended, yet neutral questions. Maintain eye contact with the victim, barring cultural considerations, and avoid writing while the victim is speaking. Ensure the victim is completely undressed and in a gown so a complete trauma assessment can be initiated. Specifically, examine for the following:

- Bruising; old, healing or new lacerations; hematomas; signs of acute or chronic head trauma or a headache; missing hair or bald spots.

- Trouble hearing; damage to the auditory canal or eardrum; signs of trauma to the oropharynx such as lacerations or burns, blood in the mouth, ulcerations, tooth decay, broken teeth, gingival irritation, tongue abnormalities; signs of anemia or dehydration in the oral mucosa.

- Visual defects; tattoos or brands in the hairline or on the neck; signs of strangulation.

- Signs of chest trauma, murmurs; cigarette burns; bruising in various stages of healing;

- Respiratory issues that would indicate inhalation injuries from chemical exposure, toxic fume exposure, asbestos exposure, or mold exposure.

- Signs of tuberculosis such as night sweats, coughing up blood, fever, weight loss.

- Signs of stress-related cardiovascular, respiratory or gastrointestinal problems.

- Damage to lung tissue due to prolonged exposure to chemicals or pesticides, aspiration pneumonia, or other inhalation injuries;

- Hypothermia or hyperthermia from environmental exposure from working in damp, cool, poorly insulated factories or buildings; mold exposure signs/symptoms.

- Signs of gastrointestinal issues such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, or abdomen pain; rectal pain, itching, trauma, or bleeding; parasites in the feces or signs of abdominal trauma.

- Bruising to the back or scarring; tattoos that imply advertisement, ownership, or are sexually explicit in the pubic hair.

- Sexually transmitted infections; anogenital trauma; foreign bodies in the vagina, vaginal bleeding, discharge, rashes, itching, signs of injury, or forced sex

- There are signs of bruising or lower back scarring from repeated beatings; musculoskeletal issues such as signs of repetitive trauma; work-related injuries or injuries such as back problems from wearing heels for hours walking the streets or neck and jaw problems from frequent, forced oral sex.

- Fractures, old or new, any contractures. Cigarette or scald burns. Ligature marks/scars around ankles or wrists. Signs of scabies, infestations (scalp or body). Impetigo. Fungal infections.

- Signs of nutritional deficits such as vitamin D deficiencies from lack of exposure to sunlight, anemia, mineral deficiencies, brittle or fine hair.

- Signs of anorexia, bulimia, loss of appetite, malnutrition, severe electrolyte abnormalities.

- In children, growth and development abnormalities, dental cavities, or misaligned poorly formed teeth.

- Signs of opioid or other addiction.

**Signs of Physical or Psychological Torture**

Signs of physical torture may present on a dermatological evaluation such as abrasions over bony prominences, scratches or linear abrasions from a wire, or "road rash" to extremities from being thrown from or drug by a vehicle. Ropes and cords can leave elongated, broad-type abrasions. Ropes may leave areas of bruising mixed with abrasions. Belts or cords may have loop marks, parallel lines of petechial with central sparing. Tramline bruising (two parallel lines of bruising) can result from being beaten with a heavy stick or baton. Cigarette burns tend to be circular with a 1 cm diameter and can fade in a few hours or a few days. Burns, in general, tend to take the shape of the object that inflicted the burn.

Trafficking victims may be beaten or subjected to torture. As a result, bruises, lacerations, marks, or scars may be present in areas usually hidden by clothes so as not to disfigure the product/victim and make the person being trafficked less marketable.

It is important to note that some cultures practice such as cupping therapy may cause bruising and scars. Correlate this finding with detailed history as well as the presence of other red flags.

**Psychological and Mental Status Examination**

Mental health indicators of trafficking in persons may be missed or explained away as a panic attack or psychological illness. The provider should consider trafficking in all cases of unexplained mental distress. Look for signs such as depression, suicidal ideations, self-mutilation injuries, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and feelings of shame or guilt.

A trafficking victim may describe a situation as if they were an outsider looking in. They may use this mind-body separation to create a safe, alternate reality to cope with their situation.  They may use a third-person, omniscient point of view in their storyline. Patients exhibiting this behavior may be categorized as impersonal or devoid of emotion, numb to their surroundings, or detached. This is their survival adaptation.

Addiction issues may be present and result in withdrawal. The addiction may be fueled by the trafficker for control or by the victim to cope with the physical or emotional pain surrounding the trafficking situation.

**Documentation of Assessment Findings**

Documentation of physical findings is important and may assist with the prosecution of the trafficker. Follow established documentation guidelines and reporting requirements based on state and local statutes or federal laws.  Photo documentation may prove vital. Follow any protocols/policies specific to your institution regarding the taking of photos and their storage and obtain all required consent forms."