Any disturbance in the free flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) through the ventricular system leads to hydrocephalus in which there is excessive fluid accumulation in the brain. This leads to abnormal widening of the cerebral ventricle and raised ICP. The symptoms include vomiting, headache, irritability, blurred vision, gait disturbance, drowsiness, among others. In infants, the main sign is a rapid increase in head circumference.

Hydrocephalus can be communicating type (when CSF flow is not blocked) or non-communicating type (when CSF flow is blocked anywhere along the narrow passages connecting the ventricles). It is also classified as either congenital or acquired. The most common cause of congenital hydrocephalus is aqueductal stenosis while acquired hydrocephalus can be caused by etiologies like a tumor, trauma, infection, hemorrhage, among others. Communicating hydrocephalus is caused by impaired absorption of CSF by the arachnoid granulations which may be the consequence of any leptomeningeal processes such as hemorrhage as in acute subarachnoid hemorrhage or inflammation as in pyogenic fungal tuberculous or carcinomatous meningitis.

Aqueductal stenosis occurs genetically in the case of aqueductal atresia or can be acquired in the case of ependymitis or tumor of surrounding structures compressing the aqueduct. This leads to the dilation of both lateral and third ventricles with a normal fourth ventricle. X-linked hydrocephalus is a rare condition that presents with narrowing of Sylvian aqueduct, muscle stiffness, and permanently adducted thumbs.

A colloid cyst is a benign intracranial tumor occurring in the anterior and anterosuperior part of the third ventricle and can occasionally obstruct the foramen of Monroe, causing dilatation of one or both lateral ventricles. They have no intrinsic pathology but produce symptoms due to their obstructive nature.

Dandy-Walker malformation is a condition characterized by a complete absence of the cerebellar vermis. The key feature of this condition is the enlargement of the fourth ventricle.

The foramen of Luschka and Magendie may be obstructed in a condition called Arnold-Chiari malformation where the cerebellar tonsils get displaced downward through the foramen magnum and can give rise to internal hydrocephalus. They can also be obstructed in the case of inflammatory fibrosis of the meninges leading to congenital hydrocephalus.

Cavum septi pellucidi is a slit-like space in the anterior part of septum pellucidum and has a vital role in the sonographic assessment of the fetal brain. It is believed to be closely associated with the development of corpus callosum. The presence of cavum septi pellucidi in fetal sonography excludes complete agenesis of the corpus callosum.