For acute states, hyperammonemia usually requires no more than conservative treatment, i.e., intravenous (IV) fluids. The use of nitrogen scavengers like sodium phenylacetate or sodium benzoate for severe or moderate cases, along with restriction of protein intake and the introduction of non-protein calorie sources like fats and carbohydrates. When using carbohydrates with intravenous fluids, use dextrose 10% and appropriate electrolytes (sodium and/or potassium) for age. Avoid overhydration, as cerebral edema can occur. Abstinence from protein should not last more than 24 to 48 hours, as further catabolism can occur. In some cases, particularly in the presence of severe hyperammonemia refractory to medical interventions, clinicians could consider reduction by dialysis, either through CRRT (continuous renal replacement therapy) or hemodialysis. Dialysis should be stopped once ammonia levels reach 250 micrograms/dL or lower. Should seizures present, use phenobarbital or carbamazepine. Valproate is contraindicated since it induces hyperammonemia.

For maintenance, protein restriction should be in the minimal protein intake range to help with basic functions and development. With half of the dietary protein free of arginine, a total absence of this amino acid cannot be accepted, given its essential role for T cell and endothelial function. Ideal protein intake in infants ranges from 1 to 1.5 gm/kg. As the child grows, the restriction can be tolerated at lower levels. Daily administration of nitrogen scavengers on maintenance dosing is sodium phenylbutyrate 350 to 600 mg/kg per day.

Other authors advocate for ornithine supplementation, which could replenish hepatic ornithine and prevent hyperammonemia while also inhibiting the formation of neurotoxic guanidino compounds.

Liver transplantation can be considered the ultimate treatment to reduce recurrent hyperammonemia.

There should be monthly visits during infancy, with progressively increased intervals between visits as the patient grows: monitor liver function, arginine levels, spasticity, and development.

Preference should be given to medications that bypass liver metabolism over other medications. Examples are ibuprofen over acetaminophen or another antiepileptic over valproate.

Research has been implemented to provide a better response or an ultimate cure for this pathology. Various trials have used approaches like enzyme replacement therapy, adeno-associated viral vectors, CRISPR-associated protein nine genome editing, and induced pluripotent stem cells. Some have shown a successful response to their target goal. However, these results have not all been translated into a clinical setting due to their early stages.