During a follow-up appointment a few weeks later, he complained of multiple subcutaneous nodules. On physical exam, multiple, tender, non-erythematous subcutaneous nodules were noted along with a palpable, non-tender mass on the left side of the abdomen. CT abdomen showed a large heterogeneous mass measuring 20.1 by 10.7 by 18.1 cm, in the left quadrant of the abdomen along with a poorly defined low attenuation mass measuring 2.9 by 3 cm in the right hepatic lobe. CT guided biopsy of the left-sided abdominal mass was non-diagnostic. He underwent exploratory laparotomy, with excision of the left-sided abdominal mass along with splenectomy and distal pancreatectomy. There were multiple abnormal areas in the liver concerning for metastases. Pathology of the resected mass revealed sheets of malignant acinar cells with no intervening ductal structures or islets. Tumor cells were positive for trypsin and cytokeratin and were negative for CD117 and synaptophysin, consistent with pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma. Serum CA 19-9 levels were high. Lipase levels were elevated at 40,000U/dL. At this point, based on the biopsy and staging, the patient was diagnosed with stage IV pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma, but the cause of his polyarthralgia was still uncertain. Adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated with leucovorin, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and oxaliplatin for the carcinoma. During his treatment, his joint swelling and pain progressed and involved new joints of right ankle and left knee. Imaging studies of the joints showed joint effusion and soft tissue swelling. Arthrocentesis of the right ankle joint was performed, and the synovial fluid studies were consistent with infection and cultures were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas. He was treated with antibiotics including vancomycin and piperacillin–tazobactam without any improvement. Due to progressive worsening of the right ankle joint, he required irrigation and debridement with arthrotomy. Repeat cultures were negative, but his symptoms continued to worsen, and he had persistent drainage of milky colored fluid from the surgical site and eventually required a below-knee amputation. Surgical pathology of the right knee joint revealed acute on chronic inflammation with the presence of granulation and fibrin tissue, without any evidence of malignancy. For further evaluation, arthrocentesis of left knee, left ankle, and right wrist was done and yielded milky colored fluid. His lipase levels continued to remain above 20,000 U/dL despite being treated with chemotherapy.