Clinicians have a multitude of ways to provide anesthesia to patients in pain so they may perform maneuvers or procedures effectively while allowing for minimal discomfort to the patient. Anesthesia may be approached in a multimodal manner as there are multiple areas that one may target the transmission of pain as it propagates from the site of injury to the cerebral cortex. One such modality of pain relief is by targeting the peripheral nerve, which serves to transmit pain signaling from tissues. The tissue in which the injury occurred may be targeted by anesthetics to limit the transduction of pain as can the peripheral nerves which innervate the tissue and serve to transmit pain signals to the cerebral cortex.

Targeting the transduction of pain from the level of the tissue may be accomplished by the use of drugs that impede the pain signaling pathway, for example, opioids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or local infiltration of the injured tissue with an anesthetic. A disadvantage of using local infiltration is that the anesthetic is injected directly and/or indirectly into tissues and distorts the anatomy that the clinician needs to visualize to perform repairs. This technique is also associated with decreased patient comfort due to the amount of pain experienced during this procedure as a large amount of anesthetic is required for therapeutic effect.

The peripheral nerve may also be targeted by systemic analgesic agents such as opioids, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), or other dissociative drugs, but the nerve may also be directly targeted by the use of anesthetic agents in a technique known as a nerve block. Nerve blocks may be utilized proximal to the area of injury to provide a larger region of anesthesia, or they may be used regionally for targeted anesthesia closer to the injured tissue. A regional nerve block, and in particular the digital nerve block, is one such technique that allows for targeted anesthesia and is typically tolerated better by patients than local wound infiltration and allows for a large area of anesthesia in relation to the amount of anesthetic required.

The digital nerve block can be considered for use in the repair of various injuries such as repair of a complex laceration to a digit, reduction of phalangeal dislocation or fracture, drainage of digital infections such as felon or paronychia, the removal of the nail plate, or for ring entrapment and removal. Once a clinician becomes familiar with the anatomy and technique of this procedure, then it may be utilized extensively in practice.