Multiple organs and body systems are affected when thermoregulation is impaired. During a heat-related illness, insufficient thermoregulation can result in multiple organ and system impairments. (Notice that many of these issues are interconnected.)

- The heart experiences increased work as it increases both heart rate and cardiac output.

- The circulatory system can experience intravascular volume depletion.

- The brain can experience ischemia and/or edema.

- The gastrointestinal tract is vulnerable to hemorrhage and infection as the intestinal mucosa becomes increasingly permeable.

- The lungs become impaired if sustained hyperventilation, hyperpnea, and pulmonary vasodilation lead to ARDS.

- Acute renal failure is an effect of intravascular volume depletion and impaired circulation.

- Liver cells suffer because of the fever, ischemia, and cytokine increase in the intestinal tract.

- Various organs can become ischemic from microthrombi or DIC.

- Electrolyte abnormalities are likely as well as hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and respiratory alkalosis.

When body temperatures are severely decreased in hypothermia, the body’s systems are also adversely affected. The cardiovascular system is susceptible to dysrhythmias such as ventricular fibrillation. The central nervous system's (CNS) electrical activity is noticeably diminished. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema can occur as well as cold diuresis. Additionally, hypothermia causes preglomerular vasoconstriction which leads to decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and decreased renal blood flow (RBF).