The neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists are very useful in managing nausea and vomiting from a variety of causes. Fosaprepitant is an intravenous (IV) formulation that converts within 30 minutes after infusion to aprepitant. Aprepitant is available as an oral or IV dosage form and this medication can be prescribed in two strengths. There is a combination of netupitant/palonosetron as an oral formulation. Casopitant is an investigational medication in development. While these drugs are safe and effective, they are prohibitively expensive and only used in hospital settings. Most hospital pharmacists are alerted when physicians order these drugs; the healthcare prescriber is then asked to prescribe something less expensive but just as effective.

Pharmacists, nurses, and physicians also need to be on the same page for therapeutic reasons. As mentioned above, there are significant drug interactions involved with neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists; pharmacists need to communicate with the ordering physician if any drug interactions can potentially alter the effectiveness of the patient's therapeutic regimen. Similarly, nursing must be aware and informed regarding the proper administration of the drug and can check with the pharmacist or the physician regarding any concerns. Nursing will also be in the best position to monitor treatment effectiveness and adverse reactions; the nurse should report any issues promptly to the treating physician. Neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists can be an important tool for oncologists, oncology-specialized nurses, and pharmacists to combat chemotherapy-related nausea. These examples highlight the need for an interprofessional team approach to neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist therapy to provide maximum therapeutic effect with minimal adverse events and drug interactions. [Level 5]