Several patient questionnaires have been created and validated to help with the initial evaluation and ongoing management to assess for response to treatment. The Voice Handicap Index (VHI-10) provides insight into the functional and emotional aspects of the patient’s voice disturbance and is the most widely used patient survey.

Patients are referred to the Otolaryngologist for an in-office laryngoscopy, which evaluates both the laryngeal structure and function. The most commonly used instruments are mirrors, flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopes, or rigid endoscopes. During a flexible or rigid endoscopy, patient examinations can be easily recorded and documented while the patient is vocalizing. These examinations provide valuable knowledge as the vocal folds can be directly visualized and may identify mucosal abnormalities that may not necessarily be seen on computed tomography scans or magnetic resonance imaging.

Videostroboscopy uses pulsed light synchronized with the patient’s vocal frequency to give the illusion of slow-motion mucosal oscillation of the vocal fold. This is the single best diagnostic instrument in evaluating dysphonia to obtain information on mucosal pliability. The following components of the glottic cycle are obtained through stroboscopy: uniformity of glottic cycles (regularity), mucosal waveform, the symmetry of the folds in both the lateral and vertical planes, and pattern of incomplete versus complete versus partial closure. Stroboscopy is useful because it can detect abnormalities that may not be seen on a flexible or rigid endoscopy exam. Patients with malignant tumors may also benefit from surveillance via stroboscopy.