Small bowel resection involving the ileum or jejunum is straightforward as long as the bowel is adequately mobile. Duodenal resections are exponentially more complex due to the duodenum’s retroperitoneal position and proximity of the ampulla of Vater, biliary tree, and pancreas. For this reason, duodenal resections will almost always require an extra-anatomic reconstruction, often specific to the pathology being addressed. Given the variety and complexity of procedures to treat duodenal pathology and the marked difference between resecting duodenum versus the more distal bowel, it is reasonable to separate discussion of those procedures for their specific pathologies.

Management of various pathologies within duodenum demand utilizing different surgical approaches. Accordingly, duodenal tumors, including asymptomatic lesions that are found incidentally during esophagogastroduodenoscopy, are exponentially challenging. These lesions should be biopsied, and those with high malignant potential, including symptomatic tumors and adenomas, should be removed. While smaller lesions with less than 1 cm diameter are candidates for endoscopic polypectomy, larger tumors with greater than 2 cm size should be removed surgically. Considering the tumor's location within the duodenum, transduodenal polypectomy or segmental duodenal resection might be selected. The highest challenging duodenal tumors are those located in proximity to the ampulla of Vater and should preferably be managed with pancreaticoduodenectomy or Whipple procedure. For the 1-2 cm lesions, specifically, the lesions which are not exceeded beyond mucosa, other less-invasive procedures, including endoscopic polypectomy, are preferred. Adenomas that are removed endoscopically are subjected to long-term routine surveillance to diagnose the recurrent lesions timely. In patients with recurrent adenomas within the second portion of the duodenum, pancreaticoduodenectomy is indicated.

The entire small bowel should be examined before resection. If the surgery is being performed open, the portion being resected should be eviscerated and placed on a towel to limit contamination from spillage. Resections are planned based on the intended anastomosis: stapled or hand sewn. For a stapled anastomosis, defects are made through the mesentery close to the bowel wall, away from large vessels. Gastrointestinal anastomosis staplers (GIA), usually 60 mm linear cutting with a soft tissue load, are placed across the bowel through the defects. Staplers are then fired at a slightly oblique angle above and below the diseased segment, cutting and sealing the bowel in unison. The diseased, isolated segment of the bowel is then freed from the mesentery using electrocautery, with identified vessels suture ligated with silk suture. Once removed, the sealed ends are most commonly reconnected using a side-to-side, functional end-to-end anastomosis. In this technique, the proximal and distal segments are aligned in parallel with the mesenteric borders adjacent to one another. It is important to inspect the base of the mesentery to ensure there is no abnormal rotation of the tissue. Sero-muscular sutures should be placed on the mesenteric side for support and to prevent migration. Small enterotomies are then made on the anti-mesenteric corner of each segment. A common channel is then created by placing one limb of a GIA stapler into each lumen through these enterotomies. Firing the stapler then creates a common channel between the 2 segments. The common channel should be inspected to ensure there is no intraluminal bleeding at the staple line. Once hemostasis is confirmed, the enterotomies are then closed, usually by exclusion by firing another TA or GIA stapler across the top of the anastomosis. Edges should be checked to ensure the serosa is incorporated into the staple line on both sides. As the corners of the staple line have a higher risk of ischemia, Lembert stitches using absorbable sutures should be placed in the corners, allowing the tissue to invert beneath the suture. Lastly, the mesenteric defect is closed with permanent or absorbable sutures to prevent internal herniation. Care must be taken to avoid strangulating the edges of the mesentery, as the main blood flow to the anastomosis will come from this tissue.

A 2-layer, hand-sewn anastomosis will increase operative time but remains the preferred method for many surgeons. First, appropriate mesenteric defects are created. The mesenteric tissue between the 2 defects is then clamped and suture ligated. Two non-crushing clamps are placed across the bowel at each of the desired locations of transection, and the bowel is divided sharply. A 1-cm stump should be left beyond the end of the clamps for suturing. Anastomoses will typically be done in an end-to-end fashion. However, side-to-side and end-to-side methods can also be employed. The latter can be beneficial when a size discrepancy exists between the 2 segments, such as when 1 segment is more distended and edematous or making an ileocecal anastomosis.

With the diseased bowel segment now cut and removed, the cut ends of the small bowel are held aligned, and stay sutures are placed in the corners. The clamps holding the bowel ends are rotated in opposition to one another to bring the posterior outer serosal layers together. A series of silk interrupted Lembert sutures are then placed through the seromuscular layers to conjoin the 2 segments. This is continued until the stay sutures are reached at each end. Next, absorbable sutures are placed in full-thickness bites to form the posterior inner layer along with the same distance. The sutures should be placed so that the mucosa inverts and contacts the opposing mucosa throughout. With the posterior layer complete, absorbable Connel (U-shaped) stitches are placed in the corner, and the pattern is continued to close the anterior inner layer. Suturing of the inner layers can be safely done with either interrupted or continuous patterns. Continuous sutures have been shown in animal models to cause decreased perianastomotic tissue oxygen tension compared to interrupted sutures; however, limited human trials have not shown any significant difference in anastomotic leak rates when comparing the 2. Once that anterior inner layer is closed, silk Lembert stitches are placed in interrupted fashion across the anterior outer surface, completing the 2-layer anastomosis.

If a single layer is preferred, the steps above are performed, with the Lembert stitches being excluded. A small bowel anastomosis can be safely created with single or double-layer closure, largely depending on surgeon preference. Single-layer closures are faster when compared to a double layer. A Cochrane review concluded the 2 styles were equivocal in safety; however, a meta-analysis of available randomized trials comparing the 2 was only moderate quality. Therefore, the clinical discretion of the surgeon is always warranted. A single-layered closure is often preferred in patients with inherently narrow bowel lumens, such as neonates. A double-layer closure may cause a too-high risk of obstruction if the lumen is small. Overall, it isn't easy to compare the 2 techniques on a broad scale due to heterogeneity in all the factors that may affect the overall outcome. These include suture type, surgeon experience, patient factors such as treating disease, and other comorbidities.

SBR for mass or neoplasm will generally require oncologic margins of 8 to 10 cm and associated mesentery and lymphatic tissue; whereas, benign processes only require limited resection with sparing of the mesentery to preserve blood flow. If an oncologic resection is required, the primary vessel supplying the segment must be traced back to the mesenteric root and divided at its base. The adjacent mesentery is then fully resected in a wedge shape extending from the small bowel to the vessel's origin. This should allow for adequate lymph node harvest.

Under most circumstances surrounding an SBR, the surgeon will plan to return the small bowel to normal anatomic continuity. Numerous situations exist where this may not be preferred. The surgeon may opt for an extra-anatomic reconstruction to bypass or exclude a segment of diseased or non-functional bowel that cannot otherwise be removed. With a distal ileum resection, creating an ileocolonic anastomosis may be risky if there is a large size discrepancy between the two ends and/or a hostile environment from inflammation or infection. In this case, an end-ileostomy will be the safest option for the patient.

Creating an ileostomy starts with choosing a site for the ostomy, away from other incision sites and above the beltline. When possible, this site should be chosen and marked pre-operatively with the patient awake and sitting upright. A circular segment of skin is excised at the chosen spot, and sharp dissection is used to create a passage through the subcutaneous tissue to the rectus sheath. The rectus sheath is incised, and the muscle is bluntly dissected down to the level of the peritoneum, which is entered sharply. With the distal ileum adequately mobilized, it is grasped with a Babcock and gently delivered through the stoma, along with its supporting mesentery. Care must be taken to keep the terminal ileum in its correct orientation. Once the ileum is through the stoma, the main abdominal incision should be closed and covered before opening the bowel. The stapled/sutured edge of the ileum should then be excised to produce a fresh bleeding edge. Absorbable sutures should be placed between the seromuscular layer of the bowel and the subcutaneous tissue in each quadrant to orient the ileostomy. Once secured, interrupted sutures can then be placed circumferentially, taking full-thickness bites of the bowel and securing it to the dermis. When tightened and tied, these should help to avert the end of the ostomy. Once complete, the ostomy should be checked for patency before application of a stoma appliance.