Mastering the skill of endotracheal intubation to secure an airway plays a critical role in many settings such as pre-hospital environments, emergency rooms, critical care units, and peri-operative medicine. In a rapidly deteriorating, critically ill patient, success rests on adequate preparation, experience, and anticipated difficulty associated with airway, clinical condition, and intubation. Rapid sequence intubation involves the simultaneous rapid administration of a paralytic drug and an induction agent to create optimal conditions to provide rapid control of the airway with the placement of an endotracheal tube.

Usually, emergent endotracheal intubation is indicated in the following clinical scenarios

- Hypoxemic respiratory failure, especially when it is persistent despite 100% inspired oxygen or non-invasive positive pressure ventilator support.

- Hypercapnic respiratory failure causing respiratory acidosis and increased work of breathing indicative of impending respiratory failure.

- Upper airway obstruction or injury (e.g., burns or caustic inhalation) requiring early and rapid stabilization of airway.

- Shock/hemodynamic instability when associated with altered mentation and increased work of breathing.

- Clinical conditions associated with risk for airway compromises such as stroke, drug overdose, or coma.

Regardless of the indications for endotracheal intubation, rapid sequence intubation is the standard of care for all intubations, which are not anticipated to be difficult.