**Step 1: Before you start**

- A clean scope is required for this procedure.

- Check that the nasopharyngoscope is in good working order and that contact tracing for the scope is in place. There are different decontamination systems available for cleaning of the scopes, as previously mentioned, this depends on local hospital policies. Appropriate cleaning and disinfection guidelines and general principles for infection prevention will already be in place in your department.

- The operator should check the indications for scoping and confirm the procedure is appropriately being undertaken. Often, with oncology patients, previous changes may have been documented and these images should be reviewed.

- Often patients are apprehensive about having an endoscope inserted into their nostrils. Reassure them that this is a minimally invasive procedure that although uncomfortable it is not usually painful, is quickly done, and gives invaluable information.

- A topical spray like co-phenylcaine (lidocaine and epinephrine) or xylometazoline can be used to help decongest and anaesthetize the nose to make the passing of the endoscope easier and less painful. It can take a few minutes for the spray to take effect. The spray also does reduce the gag reflex which helps to give a stable image during scoping. The patient needs to be warned about the bitter taste and the abnormal feeling of an anaesthetized throat. This sensation takes about 1 hour to wear off during which time they should not eat or drink.

**Step 2: Preparing to pass the nasopharyngoscope**

- Verbal informed rather than written consent is usually adequate for this outpatient procedure.

- Check the clarity and focus of the image by using a label or writing.

- Explain the procedure and the manoeuvres that will be undertaken. These manoeuvres can help identify important and hidden anatomy during the scoping.

- Ask which nostril is more patent. Spray the nose if required.

- Sit upright, 'sniffing the morning air' position, with head support.

- Lubricate the scope.

- Wipe the tip of the scope with an alcohol wipe or on the patient's tongue to prevent fogging.

- The operator will be either looking directly down the scope or watching a monitor.

**Step 3: The Examination**

- Gently insert the scope into each nostril.

- Foreign bodies can be removed with handheld forceps using the scope for visual guidance.

- Examine the nose, posterior nasal space, the base of tongue, pharynx, and larynx methodically. Looking for normal and abnormal anatomy.

- The patient is then asked to do several manoeuvres to aid in visualization:

- 

- "Sniff in" - opens up the nasopharynx and allows the scope to be advanced easily beyond the nasopharynx
- "Stick your tongue out" - opens up the vallecular region at the base of the tongue often a place where base of tongue cancers hide
- "Blow your cheeks out" or "turn your head to the right and left shoulders" - opens up the piriform fossae again often a hiding place for cancers
- "Say Eeee" or "Count to 10 aloud" - causes abduction of the vocal cords, breathing in should have the opposite effect and abduct the cords equally
- "Swallow please" - allows any blood or mucous to be dislodged from the tip of the scope if it is causing poor visualization

**Step 4: Aftercare**

- Some patients feel lightheaded and should remain seated until this passes

- The patient should refrain from eating and drinking for 1 hour

- Nose bleeds and coughing are temporary if they occur and only last for a minute or two

**Step 5: Post-procedure**

- Appropriate documents are completed to allow contact tracing and the correct tariffs to be applied (often nasopharyngoscopy attracts its own tariff)

- Contact tracing with appropriate labels are placed in the case notes

- Diagrams and Pictures are appropriately annotated and stored, with patient identifiers, so that another practitioner looking at them can understand the findings