When AKI develops, goal-directed therapy to reach adequate cardiac output and oxygen delivery levels has been documented to reduce mortality resulting from AKI.

Several medications have been controversial in the treatment of AKI. Dopamine was thought to be useful in AKI as it promoted increased renal blood flow at low doses, but this has not been born out in studies. Fenoldopam is a selective dopamine-1 agonist that has been shown to reduce the need for RRT. Nonetheless, this has only been consistently demonstrated in patients having undergone cardiac surgery, and its use is limited by its ability to cause systemic hypotension. Diuretics are beneficial in improving urine output. However, diuretics increase serum creatinine and can worsen AKI. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is effective in reducing the need for RRT in post-cardiac surgery patients, yet, like fenoldopam, its utility is limited by systemic hypotension.

The KDIGO bundle recommends specific measures to help prevent AKI. These include avoidance of substances that are nephrotoxic, optimizing volume status to maintain sufficient perfusion pressures, maintaining normoglycemia, and monitoring serum creatinine, urine output, and perhaps monitoring of hemodynamics. The KDIGO bundle, if implemented early based upon biomarkers, reduces the development of AKI in postsurgical patients.

Prompt nephrology referral is vital in the management of AKI. Studies of hospitals without nephrology coverage have demonstrated recognition of AKI was delayed with an associated increase in resulting CKD and decreased survivability.