Proper technique must be employed during testing to ensure valid results. Tight or restrictive clothing should be removed so that the examiner can visualize the muscles being tested and observe for muscle twitch. The examiner should also stabilize the joint and ensure that other muscles do not provide assistance. Muscles should first be tested with gravity eliminated by positioning the patient, so that muscle contraction is perpendicular to gravity, such as along an examining table or bed. If the patient is unable to engage the muscle with gravity eliminated, the examiner should place a hand on the muscle and ask the patient to contract his or her muscles again. This allows the examiner to feel for a muscle twitch, even if a twitch is not visible. This observation would differentiate a score of 0 from a score of 1. When the patient demonstrates the full range of motion with gravity eliminated, the test should be repeated against gravity for the full range of motion. If this is successful, the patient should be challenged by the addition of a small degree of resistance, then maximal resistance by the examiner. The unaffected or less affected side should be tested first to gauge contralateral strength for comparison; all four limbs should be tested for completeness and to help guide the differential diagnosis based on patterns of weakness, such as upper extremity only, lower extremity only, or proximal muscles rather than distal.

The Medical Research Council Manual Muscle Testing method is very common, easy to perform, and does not require any specialized equipment. Despite these advantages, it also has its limitations. Scoring is subjective based on the examiner’s perception. There is variability between examiners for the maximal resistance they are able to apply, as some examiners are stronger than others. The test does not account for musculoskeletal conditions that may make testing painful or difficult to tolerate, such as tendinopathy or arthritis. The test is dependent on patient effort, which may be poor in some patients, owing to pain, proper comprehension of instructions, psychological causes, or secondary gain. Finally, the grading system classifies strength level but does not directly quantify strength.

The Alternatives to the Medical Research Council Manual Muscle Testing system aims to quantify strength directly in terms of pounds, Newtons, or other units. This requires specialized equipment, most commonly dynamometers. Dynamometry provides a more precise measurement of the force that a muscle can exert and can allow for differences in strength to be tracked over time that an examiner may not subjectively notice when using the MRC scale. Hand-grip dynamometry is a popular example, in which the patient squeezes a handle that records the force being applied. Limitations of dynamometry include the need for costly or specialized equipment, limited muscle groups that can be tested, and limited availability of testing equipment to clinicians across specialties or settings.

Another approach to muscle strength testing involves testing functional movements instead of quantifiable strength. Examples of functional tests include squatting or rising from a chair. Functional strength tests provide information about whether the patient is strong enough to perform essential daily activities, a limitation of both the Medical Research Council Manual Muscle Testing method and dynamometry. However, functional strength tests do not provide a grade or numeric quantity that can be tracked over time to gauge improvement.