The Evaluation of pain at the end of life follows the general pattern of pain assessment aimed at the site of pain, the onset of pain, character, radiation of pain, exacerbating, and relieving factors. Verbal description of the quality of pain is an important marker of the origin of pain. Somatic pain can be described as aching, whereas visceral pain may be described as cramping. Similarly, neuropathic pain may be burning or shooting in character. An evaluation of the intensity and duration of pain in the last 24 hours helps the caregiver quantify and manage pain. The cornerstone of efficient pain management includes round-the-clock assessment and repeated evaluations, especially following intervention.

Pain scales can help standardize care and provide objective assessment tools that are not provider-dependent. Several pain grading scales have been developed with validation. However, none of these scales is proven to be superior to others. The Likert-type scale for pain grades pain on a scale of 0-10, with “10” being the worst pain imaginable and “0” representing no pain. The Wong-Baker Faces pain scale comprises a series of faces with expressions of increasing distress. This scale provides superior assessment in children with reliability and validation, and its implementation in adults allows for the evaluation of pain in patients who may be unable to communicate verbally. Intensive care units and inpatient hospital units have started to incorporate a board facing the patient with information aimed at keeping the patient informed and oriented. This includes the date, short-term and long-term aims of care, contact details of caregivers, and a visual pain scale.

The patient is educated on admission to point at the pain scale to indicate pain and choose a face that best represents their pain. Using the same scale consistently between providers can help maintain accuracy and effectiveness of care. In patients with cognitive impairment and dementia, there are some scales that incorporate several factors that caregivers can observe at the bedside and evaluate the presence of pain. The Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) scale is one such measure that can quantify pain and the response to intervention in patients with dementia.