The treatment of schizoaffective disorder typically involves both pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. The mainstay of most treatment regimens should include an antipsychotic, but the choice of treatment should be tailored to the individual.

**Pharmacotherapy**

**Antipsychotics:**Used to target psychosis and aggressive behavior in schizoaffective disorder. Other symptoms include delusions, hallucinations, negative symptoms, disorganized speech, and behavior. Most first and second-generation antipsychotics block dopamine receptors. While second-generation antipsychotics have further actions on serotonin receptors. Antipsychotics include but are not limited to paliperidone (FDA approved for schizoaffective disorder), risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, aripiprazole, and haloperidol.

**Mood-stabilizers**: Patients who have periods of distractibility, indiscretion, grandiosity, a flight of ideas, increased goal-directed activity, decreased need for sleep, and who are hyper-verbal fall under the bipolar-specifier for schizoaffective disorder. Consider the use of mood-stabilizers if the patient has a history of manic or hypomanic symptoms. These include medications such as lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and lamotrigine which target mood dysregulation.

**Antidepressants:**Used to target depressive symptoms in schizoaffective disorder. Selective-serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are preferred due to lower risk for adverse drug effects and tolerability when compared to tricyclic antidepressants and selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.

**Psychotherapy**

Patients who have schizoaffective disorder can benefit from psychotherapy, as is the case with most mental disorders.

Treatment plans should incorporate individual therapy, family therapy, and psychoeducational programs. The aim is to develop their social skills and improve cognitive functioning to prevent relapse and possible rehospitalization.

**Individual therapy:**This type of treatment aims to normalize thought processes and better help the patient understand the disorder and reduce symptoms. Sessions focus on everyday goals, social interactions, and conflict; this includes social skills training and vocational training.

**Family and/or group therapy:**Family involvement is crucial in the treatment of this schizoaffective disorder.

**ECT (Electroconvulsive Therapy)**

ECT is usually a last resort treatment. However, not only has it been used in urgent cases and treatment resistance, but it should also merit consideration in augmentation of current pharmacotherapy.