In patients who provide reasonable effort during the test and reach a normal VO2peak (good effort without reaching VO2max) who state dyspnea or fatigue was their limiting factor during exercise, we can assume that they have a normal exercise tolerance.

In this case, we can assume that a cardiopulmonary issue such as CHF, interstitial lung disease (ILD), or COPD was not present. When testing these patients, we would be more likely to see an abnormal VO2peak with significant dyspnea.

In pulmonary diseases such as COPD and ILD, exercise intolerance may be due to an impairment in gas exchange being the limiting factor.

Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (exercise-induced asthma) is another pulmonary pathology to consider. It presents as difficulty breathing and wheezing during or after exercise. Objectively, it can be indicated by FEV1 decrease greater than 10% when compared to baseline.

In cardiac diseases, such as valvular abnormality, CHF, or CAD, exercise can be particularly dangerous. The increased demand on the heart can lead to myocardial strain. This issue becomes intensified in high temperature or high humidity exercise conditions. In response to the impaired evaporative cooling, vasodilation will occur to reduce body temperature, which leads to a compensatory increase in heart rate, which causes additional strain to the myocardial tissue.

Exercise intolerance can also arise due to metabolically/structurally dysfunctional muscle tissue. Myopathies are suggested when any significant cardiopulmonary issues are absent. Myopathies can present as muscle cramping or pain and are diagnosable with biopsy or genetic testing in some cases.

Exercise intolerance upon testing may be a result of poor effort or excessive perception of limiting symptoms. In both cases, objective measures such as lactate levels help differentiate true exercise limitations from alternate explanations of intolerance.

Over time, with extended periods of inactivity, skeletal muscles will atrophy, and the body will also become deconditioned. The recommendation is to have an approved physical therapy consultation and program for patients who are hospitalized for extended periods.

Lastly, it is essential to note that organ systems take time to adapt. If exercise intensity acutely increases past the body’s ability to repair itself, negative consequences may result, such as muscle strains, tears, and stress fractures. Excessive training can also cause an adverse response in the immune system, while research shows that moderate-intensity exercise increases the immune response slightly.