Located within the midbrain posterior to the crus cerebri fibers of the cerebral peduncle, the substantia nigra can be functionally and morphologically divided into two regions, the pars compacta (SNpc) containing dopaminergic neurons and the pars reticulata (SNpr) with inhibitor gamma-aminobutyric acid-containing (or GABAergic) neurons. The SNpc is a densely packed nuclear region. In gross anatomical dissections, the SNpc appears dark in color because of the high neuromelanin content which forms from the L-DOPA precursor in dopamine synthesis.

The SNpc has dopaminergic projections to the striatum, the putamen, and the caudate nuclei. Within the striatum, these dopaminergic projections synapse on two separate populations of dopamine-receptive neurons, D1-family receptor neurons, and D2-family receptor neurons (See Figure 1). The D1-family of neurons form inhibitory projections to the globus pallidus internus (GPi) which are called the "direct pathway" of the basal ganglia, while the D2-family of neurons form projections through the globus pallidus externus (GPe) which inhibit the stimulatory subthalamic nucleus (STN) that synapses on the GPi.

This second pathway is termed the "indirect pathway" because it indirectly stimulates the GPi, whereas the direct pathway directly inhibits the GPi. These pathways combined form a balance of activity on the GPI which ultimately regulates the initiation of motor output. The GPi sends its inhibitory projections to the ventral anterior (VA) and ventral lateral (VL) nuclei of the thalamus and, depending upon the balance between the stimulatory indirect pathway and inhibitory direct pathway, will either inhibit unwanted motor output by inhibiting thalamic nuclei or will disinhibit motor output to be released by allowing the thalamus to stimulate the motor cortex. The SNpr is an inhibitory GABAergic nucleus that works in conjunction with the GPi as the final output of the basal ganglia's direct and indirect pathways.

The SNpc receives input from the pedunculopontine nucleus, the primary reticular formation nucleus of the ascending reticular activating system.