There are no routine screening indications for vaginal cancer. If cervical cytology is abnormal and no cervical lesions are seen, evaluation for vaginal lesions should be undertaken. Vaginal cytology after hysterectomy for benign disease is not indicated due to low yield and high false positive rates. However, long-term surveillance is suggested after a hysterectomy for high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). This is especially true for immunologically compromised individuals.

Low-grade VAIN does not require treatment and can be followed with cytology and colposcopy.

Biopsy remains the gold standard for diagnosing vaginal cancer. This can be best accomplished by an examination under anesthesia and should include inspection of the vaginal fornices and biopsies of the cervix. Clinical evaluation without anesthesia can also be performed if the patient is comfortable. Staging is essential to developing a treatment plan if a primary invasive lesion is discovered. The current staging systems include the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging, Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) staging, and the American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC) staging.

Staging includes data from the physical examination, cystoscopy, proctoscopy, and chest and skeletal radiography. Biopsy of lymph nodes may be included in the TNM staging, as well as data from a final resected specimen. No specific lab abnormalities exist for diagnosing vaginal cancer; elevated liver function tests can suggest metastatic disease but are nonspecific.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis is useful in staging vulval and vaginal neoplasms to assess tumor size, local tumor extent, and the presence of lymph node metastases. Further indications for MRI are the diagnosis of post-therapeutic changes and tumor recurrence.

Although imaging studies have limited utility in diagnosing vaginal cancer, FIGO encourages using computed tomography (CT), MRI, and positron emission tomography (PET), to guide therapy. However, the imaging findings may not be used to change or reassign the stage.

It is essential to understand that the vaginal lymphatic system is extensive. The middle to upper vagina drains with the cervical lymphatics into the pelvic obturator node, the internal and external iliac chains, and the para-aortic nodes. Of note, the inguinal nodes are the first drainage from the distal third of the vagina, then to the pelvic nodes. The posterior wall lymphatics drain with the rectal lymphatics.