Advance directives are used if the individual cannot give informed consent or refusal due to incapacity.

- Understanding: Can the patient understand the information presented to them?

- Appreciation: Can the patient appreciate how this information relates to their circumstances?

- Reasoning: Can the patient compare options and infer the associated consequences of a choice as it relates to their values?

- Expressing a Choice: Can the patient communicate their preferences and decisions?

Advance Directives can be general or specific. Most will address whether the patient would want aggressive medical interventions such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), treatment in an intensive care unit, or mechanical ventilation. They also often address less aggressive measures such as administration of IV fluids, artificial nutrition, feeding tubes, admission to the hospital, or antibiotics.

Most advance directives include the “durable powers of attorney for health care” and “health care proxy appointment,” which allow individuals to appoint someone else to make health care decisions if they are rendered incapable of making their wishes known. The appointed health care proxy or surrogate has the same right to request or refuse treatment as the individual would have had if still capable of making and communicating health care decisions. Newer advance directives contain enriched content to assist individuals and their appointed agents, families, and clinicians to better understand and honor the patient's wishes. The American public is becoming increasingly comfortable with having "online" discussions, and the use of telemedicine or patient portals for electronic health records might provide newer and more innovative methods to help make sure these difficult but important discussions take place.

Clinicians need to be familiar with the medical and legal requirements of all forms of advance directives to fulfill the wishes of patients and their families. Also, it should be noted that no advance directive can cover all interventions for all conditions in all situations. The document would be so long and complicated that it would be rendered essentially useless in an emergent situation. Therefore, the surrogate should be familiar with the patient and the nuances of care that might be desired under different circumstances. For example, a patient with lung disease might have a "Do Not Intubate" order, but rather than being a concrete decision, the patient's intended meaning is that they do not want to be on life support for an extended period. In these cases, time trials of interventions can be attempted. If the patient fails to respond to the treatment within a set period, treatments can be withdrawn or withheld.