The two key members of the interprofessional team intimately involved in the care of the airways are the respiratory therapist and the nurse. While the respiratory therapist will suction patients at set times, the nurse will usually suction the airways more frequently as he or she is always at the bedside. The importance of suctioning of both ventilated and non-ventilated patients cannot be overstated. Presence of thick viscous secretions can lead to atelectasis, a decrease in oxygenation and even collapse of the lung lobe(s). Besides suctioning, these professionals also auscultate the lungs, monitor the pulse oximetry, check the secretions for odor and color to rule out an infection, recommend an arterial blood gas or even a change in the ventilator settings. Suctioning is often ordered by the physician but both the nurses and respiratory therapist frequently assess the patient for more suctioning if needed. Also intimately involved in patients who need suctioning of the airways is the radiologist. When atelectasis or a lung pathological process is suspected, x-rays are frequently ordered. In patients who are heavily sedated, the pharmacist also plays a vital role in adjusting the pain medications, so that the patient can breathe and cough up the secretions.

**Outcomes**

When suctioning is done correctly, the majority of patients have a good outcome. Complications are rare with suctioning but too frequent and aggressive suctioning can lead to hypoxia and iatrogenic injuries to the airways.