# Definition/Introduction

There is a consensus among all clinical specialties that the fat content of the average diet should be lowered to decrease the risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Low-fat diets are food where 30% or less of the calories come from fat. Multiple correlational studies have related a country’s cardiovascular mortality to the food consumption of its population.

A general rule is that if a provides 100 calories and it has 3 grams or less of fat, then it is a low-fat food. Common examples include vegetables, fruits, whole grain cereals, egg whites, chicken and turkey breast without skin, beans, lentils, peas, seafood, and low-fat dairy, among others.

Fats are essential to us, but we need to consume them in a limited amount. The main four types of dietary fats include polyunsaturated, monounsaturated, trans, and saturated fats. These four varieties of fats differ in their physical and chemical structures. The saturated and trans fats are considered solid at room temperature, whereas the mono and polyunsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature. Regardless of their physical and chemical properties, these all different forms of fat provide nine calories for every gram consumed, which is much higher than the amount of energy supplied per gram of carbohydrates or proteins. The saturated and trans fats raise the low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and are considered unhealthy, whereas the monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), which lower LDL, are considered beneficial.

Current National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) guidelines for adults based on ATP III (Adult Treatment Panel III) recommends reducing intake of saturated fats to less than 7 % of the total calories and cholesterol to less than 200 mg/day. Guidelines also recommend that polyunsaturated fat constitutes up to 10% of total calories, and monounsaturated fats constitute up to 20% of total calories.

There is abundant literature to suggest that a decrease or modification of serum cholesterol is a possible way to prevent atherosclerosis. Decreasing the amount of fat intake is an effective means of lowering the serum cholesterol concentration. Hence, a low-fat diet has been widely advocated by clinicians for reducing the cardiovascular-related morbidity and mortality of their patients.

# Issues of Concern

There have been multiple issues of concern and controversies around the concept of a low-fat diet. The biggest concern with the promotion of the low-fat diet has been that manufacturing companies are touting products labeled as low-fat products, where they are replacing the fat with large amounts of refined carbohydrates, which increase the risk of metabolic disorders and hypertriglyceridemia. Studies are also reporting that diets rich in carbohydrates, and low in unsaturated fat, can also negatively impact lipoprotein risk factors and increase cardiovascular risks.

Studies have also raised concern over the potential of lowering HDL cholesterol, raising triglycerides, and cause unfavorable postprandial lipemic changes.

The 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee did not endorse limiting dietary cholesterol to less than 300 mg/dL as presented in their prior editions. The committee made recommendations with a focus on dietary patterns rather than on the macronutrients.

# Clinical Significance

**Association with****Cardiovascular Disease**

There has been a direct relationship between dietary fat intake and cardiovascular disease (CVD).

Recent studies have reported that in men, the reduction of total fat and saturated fatty acids from 36% and 12% of energy to 27% and 8% of energy, respectively, resulted in a substantial decline in the total and LDL cholesterol levels.

**Association with Cancer**

The association between dietary fat and the risk of cancer development has had consistent support through multiple studies. There is epidemiologic evidence demonstrating associations between dietary fat intake and breast, prostate, colon, and even lung cancers in humans.

Of those cancers, dietary fat intake has been the most extensively linked with breast cancer.

One potential mechanism for the relationship between fat intake and prostate cancer include altered levels of sex hormones.

**Association with Obesity**

Obesity is a chronic disease associated with a plethora of comorbidities like diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension, fatty liver, and obstructive sleep apnea, to name a few.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

As an interprofessional health care team taking care of patients, practitioners must work in unison to provide the best dietary care practices. Recent recommendations have focused more on advocating proper dietary patterns rather than laying emphasis on macronutrients. Commensurate with the above approach focuses on a lifestyle approach, also called the Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes (TLC). It is the lifestyle component of the third report of the NCEP Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) III guidelines and is currently advocated by various health organizations, including the American Diabetes Association, American Heart Association, and The Obesity Society. It is currently a recommended therapeutic strategy for metabolic and cardiovascular health benefits.

The providers must develop tools to educate their team members, including nursing and allied health personnel, about this concept. This approach will help in forming a comprehensive team approach to propagate this strategy among the patient population. The team members need to comprehend the benefits of such a diet, which are not limited to improving the risk of developing metabolic syndrome, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and cardiovascular risk factors.

Patients should receive advice to follow a dietary pattern with emphasizes increased intake of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, low-fat dairy, poultry, fish, legumes, nontropical vegetables and oils, and limits consumption of sweets, sugar-sweetened beverages, and red meats. It also emphasizes the DASH dietary pattern along with lower sodium intake. Adults should also engage in aerobic physical activity to reduce LDL cholesterol and non -HDL cholesterol to counter the obesity epidemic and its various co-morbidities. The team of primary care providers, nurse practitioners, dietitians, and internists must be aware of the perils of high-fat content in the diet and form a multidisciplinary approach to manage the patient. A shared decision-making process with the patient is imperative to initiate this dietary change.