**Anatomy**

In the spinal column, the neural foramen is bounded anteriorly by the intervertebral disc, the superior and the inferior endplates of the vertebral bodies; posteriorly by the superior and inferior articular processes, IAP, which articulate as the facet joint; the adjacent pedicles form the roof and floor at that level. The dorsal and ventral roots join to form a spinal nerve within the neuroforamen. Each spinal nerve divides into a ventral ramus and smaller dorsal ramus as it exits the foramen.

The neuroforamen also contains arteries, veins, and epidural fat. The spinal nerves are supplied in a segmental manner by radicular arteries, which travel with each nerve root. In the thoracic and lumbar spine, radicular arteries arise from branches of the aorta and intercostal arteries. The intercostal and lumbar arteries divide into a dorsal segment supplying the paraspinal muscles, a somatic branch that travels ventral to the spinal cord that feeds the dura, and a radicular artery that supplies the spinal nerve and nerve roots within the neural foramen. The ascending cervical, deep cervical, and vertebral arteries give rise to the radicular and spinal medullary arteries, which traverse the cervical neuroforamina.

A major concern during transforaminal epidural steroid injections is careful avoidance of the radicular arteries. Specific needle approaches and protocols are designed to minimize and detect an intravascular injection discussed in the section "Complications/Safety." The largest radiculomedullary artery is the artery of Adamkiewicz, which anastomoses with the anterior spinal artery and supplies the thoracolumbar spinal cord in adults. The origin of this artery is variable but generally takes off at T9 but can arise as low as L5. It is left-sided in 68% to 85% of cases and lies in the superior or mid-portion of the neuroforamen in the majority of cases.

**Choice of Steroid**

Previously particulate steroids (triamcinolone, methylprednisolone, and betamethasone acetate) have been favored by some providers due to their theorized "depot effect," or increasing the duration the medication is deposited at the site of pathology. The same particulate effect that theoretically provides an analgesic benefit poses a safety concern as the particulates can aggregate to form particles larger than the size of a red blood cell (RBC). This is in contrast to non-particulate steroids like dexamethasone, which are 10-fold smaller than an RBC and do not aggregate under light microscopy.

Animal studies show that intravascular injection into the vertebral artery of particulate steroids cause neurological injury, whereas non-particulate steroids do not.