While imaging modalities may help in localizing a cause of the elevated abdominal pressure (bleeding, trauma, obstruction), they do not help make the specific diagnosis of abdominal compartment syndrome. The most accurate manner of confirming this diagnosis is from measured abdominal pressures. The IAP should be measured when any known risk of intraabdominal hypertension (IAH) is present.  This measurement can be achieved in many ways, including both direct and indirect methods. Direct methods include measurement of abdominal pressure using pressure transducers (e.g., Veress needle during laparoscopic surgery) or intraperitoneal catheters (e.g., peritoneal dialysis catheter). These methods are highly accurate; however, they are limited by their invasiveness. The more commonly used method is an indirect measurement such as intravesicular catheter pressures (e.g., Foley catheter), which has become the gold standard due to its widespread availability and limited invasiveness. The trans-bladder technique involves using aseptic clamping the drainage tubing of the Foley then connecting the Foley to a three-way stop tap adjusted to the level of the mid-axillary line at the iliac crest to zero transducers follow by injecting 25 cc of sterile saline into the bladder.  Measurements should be taken at end-expiration and complete supine position and expressed in mmHg.  Bladder pressures below 5 mm Hg are expected in healthy patients. Pressures between 10 to 15 mm Hg can be expected following abdominal surgery and in obese patients. Bladder pressures over 25 mm Hg are highly suspicious of abdominal compartment syndrome and should be correlated clinically. It is recommended that pressure measurements be trended to show and recognize the worsening of intra-abdominal hypertension.

Contraindications to using bladder pressures include bladder trauma, neurogenic bladder, BPH, and pelvic hematoma. Bladder pressures may be inaccurate if the patient is not sedated or lying flat.

CT scan may reveal several things such as the collapse of the vena cava, round abdomen, bowel thickening, and or bilateral inguinal herniation. The following grading system is used to categorize abdominal compartment syndrome:

- Grade I: IAP 12-15 mm Hg

- Grade II: IAP 16-20 mm Hg

- Grade III: IAP 21-25 mm Hg

- Grade IV: IAP >25 mm Hg