Common in new military recruits, a pervading theory is that osteoblastic activity lags behind osteoclastic activity during initial increases of exercise stress, leading to an increased incidence of stress fractures. March fractures occur secondary to bone fatigue or bone insufficiency. Bone fatigue occurs when a normal bone is unable to resist excessive mechanical demands. Bone insufficiency occurs when normal strain occurs on abnormal bone. Intrinsic risk factors such as nutritional deficiencies such as vitamin D or calcium increase the risk of these fractures. In addition, extrinsic risk factors such as the training type or shoe type can also contribute to an increased risk of metatarsal stress fractures.

**Classification System**

**Kaeding and Miller’s 5-Tier Grading System**

Grade of Stress Fracture/Radiographic Finding

- Asymptomatic radiographic findings

- Pain with no fracture on imaging

- Nondisplaced fracture on imaging

- Displaced fracture on imaging

- Sclerotic nonunion on imaging

**Biomechanics**

There are two types of cortical stress fracture that have been previously described. The two types depend on whether the stress is localized to the tensile or compression side of the bone that is under stress. Compression stress fractures correspond to a fracture line occurring on the side of the bone that is concave in shape. These fractures run parallel to the bone axis. In comparison, tensile stress fractures appear on the convex side of the stressed bone, and these fracture lines develop perpendicular to the bone axis. Compression stress fractures tend to be less common than their traction counterparts.