The therapeutic management of cheilitis is symptomatic and etiological:

Dry, chapped lips: Avoidance of lip sucking, lip balms, or any other causative agent, and the local application of petroleum jelly is helpful.

Allergic contact cheilitis and atopic cheilitis: Excluding the allergen responsible and applying a low to medium intensity topical steroid and emollients. Sometimes a potent steroid (fludrocortisone) or off-label use of topical calcineurin inhibitors may be required.

Angular cheilitis: The treatment is maintaining oral hygiene, using dentures with the proper fit, using barrier creams (eg, zinc oxide paste) or petrolatum and treatment of sicca symptoms. Vitamin supplements could be given in case of nutritional deficiency.

Infective cheilitis: Maintaining proper oral hygiene, and treatment of the underlying cause of infection is indicated.Candida albicans which has different treatment approaches depending upon the associated HIV AIDS infection. Topical therapy with clotrimazole troches, miconazole mucoadhesive tablets, or nystatin swish and swallow is recommended as initial therapy in HIV seronegative patients and in HIV seropositive patients with mild thrush. Patients with recurrent infection, moderate to severe illness, or immunosuppression (CD4 <100 cells/microL) should be treated with systemic fluconazole ( an initial 200 mg loading dose, followed by 100 to 200 mg daily for up to 14 after clinical improvement).

Actinic cheilitis: A variety of treatments are used for the management of actinic cheilitis depending upon its severity. Simple observation with regular visits or treatment with liquid nitrogen is advised in case of focal mild or moderate actinic cheilitis. Patients with multifocal or diffuse symptoms may benefit from first-line therapy with topical medications (eg, topical fluorouracil, imiquimod).

Drug-induced cheilitis: Lip moisturizers, emollients, and cessation of offending drugs lead to complete resolution of symptoms.

Glandular cheilitis and cheilitis granulomatosis: Various therapies have been implicated for glandular cheilitis, including systemic antibiotics and corticosteroids (topical, intralesional, or systemic), and vermilionectomy (in case of severe symptoms).