To diagnose transverse myelitis, a compressive cord lesion must be excluded first. Exclusion is usually performed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This is followed by a confirmation of inflammation either by a gadolinium-enhanced MRI or lumbar puncture (LP). A set of diagnostic criteria was developed but is generally reserved for research purposes as not all features are required to make the diagnosis in a clinical setting.

Diagnostic criteria include:

- Sensory, motor, or autonomic dysfunction originating from the spinal cord

- T2 hyperintense signal changes on MRI

- No evidence of a compressive lesion

- Bilateral signs/symptoms.

- Clearly defined sensory level.

- Evidence of inflammatory process demonstrated by gadolinium enhancement on MRI, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showing pleocytosis, or elevated immunoglobulin G (IgG) index.

- Progression to nadir between 4 hours and 21 days

Most important of the above criteria are the first 3.

When considering TM as a possible diagnosis, it is recommended the following investigative analyses be performed:

- MRI of the entire spine with and without gadolinium contrast to differentiate compressive vs. non-compressive lesions.

- Brain MRI with and without gadolinium contrast to evaluate for evidence of brain lesions.

- LP for CSF analysis including cell count with differential, protein, glucose, the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test, oligoclonal bands, immunoglobulin G (IgG) index, and cytology.

- Serum anti-aquaporin-4 (APQ-4)-IgG autoantibodies, anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) autoantibodies, B12 level, methylmalonic acid, serum antinuclear antibodies (ANA), Ro/SSA, and La/SSB autoantibodies, syphilis serologies, HIV antibodies, TSH and viral etiology tests as applicable.

Patients with evidence of longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions additionally will require the following additional studies:

- Serum erythrocytes sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), ANA, antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens, rheumatoid factor, antiphospholipid antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)

- Computed tomography (CT) of the chest to evaluate for evidence of sarcoidosis.

Additional testing may be performed in the appropriate clinical setting.

- Neuro-ophthalmologic evaluation

- Paraneoplastic evaluation

- Infectious serologic and CSF studies

- Nasopharyngeal swab for enteroviral PCR

- Serum copper and ceruloplasmin (copper deficiency may mimic TM)

- Serum vitamin B12 and vitamin E levels

- Spinal angiogram

- Prothrombotic evaluation

- Salivary gland biopsy