Reviewing the clinical efficacy of the different treatment modalities can help elucidate an effective technique. Pulsed radiofrequency has been used most frequently for the treatment of cervical or lumbar radicular pains. A study by Tanaka et al. reviewed this utility and has reported its efficacy. PRF has shown its value in the treatment of facet syndrome as well. One randomized controlled trial by Simopoulos et al. showed clinical efficacy of PRF in trigeminal neuralgia treatment, whereas multiple case reports discussed use for shoulder pain. Other applications of PRF have been based on single case reports or case series. Even though the observational studies collectively support its efficacy, larger controlled studies are needed as current data show variable efficacy for various reported conditions. Further, the reported effectiveness was largely short-term. The application of water-cooled radiofrequency ablation has less data, with one randomized controlled trial by Hacker et al. showing significantly lower pain and disability scores in those with the sacroiliac joint disease. Wright et al. provided a second retrospective look and reported its successful application in 27 patients.

For WCRF in patients suffering from discogenic pain, one 15-patient case series reported clinical efficacy. Other case reports support its use and exemplify how clinical efficacy is still in its primary stages. As stated for cryoablation, most of its documented use is in post-thoracotomy pain, with much data coming from the 1980s; however, in 2008, Ju et al. published a double-blind study of 107 patients that reported comparable pain control to the thoracic epidural. The authors, however, could not recommend the application of the technique due to the increased incidence of neuropathic pain in the study group. Multiple reports of cryoablation of head, face, and neck pain have been published, with only one controlled trial by Zakrzewska showing adequate effectiveness without evidence of additional complications. Of three reviewed studies of applying cryoablation in postoperative pain after herniorrhaphy, only one study by Birkenmaier et al. reported reduced postoperative analgesic usage in the study group. The other two studies showed no statistical significance in analgesic usage or pain scores, and one of the two, a study by Hodor et al. and Wang, showed the augmented incidence of sensory disturbances in the treatment arm.

Chronic pain continues to be one of the most challenging diseases to treat. Because of its multifactorial nature, treatment is consequently multimodal, including medical, physical, and interventional therapies. As the medical society fights to reduce narcotic usage in the treatment of chronic pain, the application of interventional techniques will continue to be notable treatment options in the battle against intractable pain. Amongst those, radiofrequency ablation used for the right indications has clinically aided in symptomatic relief and reduced medication dependence in this intricate diagnosis.