Nerve conduction studies are performed by stimulating a nerve using an external electrode in two different locations with its receiving electrode placed over the muscle or skin supplied by the nerve. The motor response is called compound muscle action potential (CMAP). CMAP reflects the sum of motor unit potentials stimulated. The amplitude is directly proportional to the number of depolarized axons. When the amplitude of the CMAP no longer changes, this means that all the axons are stimulated. On the other hand, the sensory response is called sensory nerve action potential (SNAP). SNAPs aid in determining whether the lesion is post-ganglionic or pre-ganglionic, which ultimately helps in localizing proximal lesions. The parameters measured in NCS are amplitude, latency (the time it takes to generate a response [i.e., CMAP or SNAP] from the time of administering the stimulus), and conduction velocity. In neurapraxia, CMAP and SNAP can be elicited distal to the injury. Proximally, NCV shows partial or complete conduction block, varying degrees of decreased CMAP and SNAP amplitude, and reduced conduction velocity. When remyelination is complete, these changes improve completely or partially.

Meanwhile, EMG is performed by directly inserting a needle electrode in the muscle that is at rest and during contraction, which can record action potentials in the muscle. It helps determine the chronicity of injury and differentiate if the cause of weakness is neuropathic or myopathic. It is used to detect abnormal spontaneous activity at rest, insertional activity, and motor unit action potential (MUAP) during voluntary contraction. The abnormal spontaneous activity aids in determining the onset of injury, the probable location, nature, and severity of the lesion. It includes fibrillation (FIB) and positive sharp waves (PSW). In neurapraxic lesions, the muscle does not reveal any abnormal spontaneous activity (i.e., absent FIB and PSW), and there are normal morphology and poor MUAP recruitment on voluntary contraction.

The electrodiagnostic study can be falsely reassuring from the time of injury up to two weeks because, at this time, Wallerian degeneration (i.e., in axonotmesis) is not yet complete.

In the retrospective study of 1124 cases, neurapraxia electrodiagnostic studies showed absent or rare FIB and PSW, normal MUAP morphology with reduced recruitment, and normal or reduced/absent SNAP or CMAP.

There have been recent advances made in the diagnostic evaluation of peripheral nerve injuries. The high-resolution ultrasound imagings help in comparing the cross-sectional area of the concerned nerve with that of its healthy counterparts.

Similarly, studies have verified the highest sensitivity of the proton density fat-suppressed MR  sequences in ruling out peripheral nerve injury in comparison to that of the high-resolution ultrasound studies.

Moreover, the usage of the fractional anisotropy, that measures the axonal density as well as the diffusion pattern along the nerve fibers, in conjunction with the tractography, helps in the earliest assessment of the continuity of the fiber tracts as well as visualization of any wasting of the fascicles, in comparison to that of their healthy counterparts.