A contrast-enhanced CT scan is the most widely used imaging technique to diagnose thoracic aortic aneurysms. It is readily available and aids in rapid assessment of the size, extent, and location of the aneurysm. Calcifications, dissections, and mural thrombus can also be clearly visualized.

MRI provides an axial and 3-D reconstruction of the ascending aorta. Contrast-enhanced MR angiography with gadolinium allows more accurate measurements of the aorta and its branches.

Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) accurately diagnoses aortic aneurysms and dissections and is a reliable technique to measure the annulus, sinus, sinotubular junction, and ascending dimensions.

Ascending aortography can demonstrate crisp images of the aortic contour and loss of the typical “waist” of the sinotubular junction during an aneurysm evaluation, although size measurements cannot be made.

PET scans are a newer diagnostic test and can show areas that “light up,” indicating increased metabolic activity depicting inflammation, signifying impending rupture, and should warrant prophylactic surgery.

A chest x-ray may show a convex contour of the right superior mediastinum, indicating an aortic aneurysm. In the lateral chest x-ray, there would be an absence of the retrosternal airspace in cases of an ascending aortic aneurysm.

Electrocardiogram (EKG) may demonstrate changes associated with aortic insufficiency, which would show signs of strain and left ventricular hypertrophy. Patients with concomitant coronary artery disease would show ST elevation or depression.

Genetic testing can now be employed to assess for TAA. Whole-exome and genome sequencing are effective in analyzing genes associated with thoracic aortic disease. Patients with high-risk genotypes, including MYLK, ACTA2, and MYH11 mutations, can be diagnosed efficiently.