The approach to patients with fibromyalgia includes educating patients regarding the disease and treatment approaches, exercise regimen, and drug therapy for patients not responding to non-pharmacologic measures.

**Patient Education**

It is important that patients with fibromyalgia understand their illness before the prescription of any medications.

- Reassuring the patient that fibromyalgia is a real disease.

- There is a role of stress and mood disturbances and the patients with fibromyalgia should be encouraged to learn relaxation techniques as well as be a part of formal stress reduction programs. About 30% of patients with fibromyalgia have major depression at the time of diagnosis and the lifetime prevalence is 74%. The lifetime prevalence of anxiety disorder is 60%. These patients should be encouraged to get treatment.

- Good sleep hygiene is an essential part of the management of fibromyalgia and recognizing and obtaining treatment of sleep disorders that may contribute to symptoms of fibromyalgia is equally important.

**Exercise**

Cardiovascular fitness training is recommended for patients as it helps with pain and improves sleep.

**Medications**

It is recommended to continue nonpharmacologic measures along with the use of medications for most patients with fibromyalgia. Some patients, may, however, respond adequately to nonpharmacologic measures alone. The medications that have been well studied and consistently effective are certain antidepressants and anticonvulsants. The antidepressants include tricyclic medications, like amitriptyline and other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) including duloxetine and milnacipran. Cyclobenzaprine, a tricyclic medication, has also been found to be effective in patients with fibromyalgia. The beneficial anticonvulsants include gabapentin and pregabalin. The three drugs for the treatment of fibromyalgia, approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) are pregabalin, duloxetine, and milnacipran. Therapy most often initiates with tricyclic antidepressants. An SNRI or one of the anticonvulsants is an option in patients with inadequate response or intolerance to tricyclic antidepressants. However, in a patient with more severe fatigue, depression, or severe sleep disturbance, an SNRI or an anticonvulsant is recommended.

**Treatment for persistent symptoms**

Despite the initial treatment with nonpharmacologic measures and single pharmacologic agents at maximum tolerated dose, many patients continue to be symptomatic. In those patients, the following are the current recommendations.

It is recommended to use a combination drug therapy in patients not responsive to monotherapy

Encouraging participation in a supervised physical exercise program for patients who have difficulty reaching a sufficient level of low-impact aerobic exercise. Referral to a physiatrist and/or a physical therapist would be helpful in these patients. Water-based exercises and yoga have also been found to be useful in a few studies.

Psychosocial interventions like cognitive behavioral therapy can be beneficial in patients with inadequate responses to initial treatments.

Specialty consultations which include consultations for rheumatologists, physiatrists, and psychiatrists are recommended in patients not responding adequately to initial therapies. Treatment should be multidisciplinary and individualized with close attention to the patient’s symptoms.

There is limited evidence for analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs as well as complementary and alternative therapies like tai chi, yoga, and acupuncture

Some studies have shown benefits with neuromodulation techniques like transcranial stimulation, occipital and C2 nerve stimulation, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation.