Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) is considered a clinical diagnosis; therefore, a diagnosis can be made with confidence at the bedside in most cases. For atypical cases or unusual subtypes, ancillary testing can be useful.

Electromyography and nerve conduction studies may be helpful in distinguishing GBS from its mimics. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) utilize technology to help distinguish between demyelinating and axonal forms of neuropathy. Needle electromyography may help to determine the acuity of a patient’s symptoms. In some cases, these studies may be helpful in evaluating for other considerations in the differential diagnosis such as neuromuscular junction disorders or diabetic neuropathy. Classically, electrodiagnostic studies should be undertaken at 10 to 14 days after symptom onset due to the time for Wallerian degeneration of sensory and motor nerve fibers; however, there have been many studies that reveal that early, nonspecific findings may be helpful in diagnosing GBS as early as 3 to 7 days after symptom onset.

The more common early electrodiagnostic findings in GBS include absent or prolonged H-reflexes and/or F-wave latencies.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shows a classic pattern of albuminocytologic dissociation. This term means that spinal fluid shows a normal amount of white blood cells and an elevated CSF protein level.

A number of ganglioside antibodies have been associated with GBS. Antibodies include anti-GM1, anti-GD1A, anti-GT1A, and anti-GQ1B. These range in sensitivity from up to 60% (anti-GM1 antibodies in acute motor axonal neuropathy) to up to more than 90% (anti-GQ1B antibodies in Miller Fisher syndrome). However, these laboratory studies usually require some time to obtain results and, therefore, may not be as helpful in decision making at the time of a patient admission.

Imaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) spine may show enhancement of the nerve roots, indicating a breakdown of the blood-nerve barrier due to inflammation in GBS. However, MRI utility in GBS is most useful to rule out other etiologies of quadriparesis or facial diplegia such as transverse myelitis or intracranial disease.

A negative inspiratory force (NIF) should be performed on patients with suspected GBS.  Serial NIFs should be followed in patients with a high risk of respiratory compromise.  Patients that are unable to perform a NIF of -20 to -30 cm H2O should be considered at very high risk.