Vaginal hysterectomy (VH) is a very common gynecological procedure used to treat a wide range of gynecological pathologies. A vaginal hysterectomy procedure incorporates the coordinated collaboration among the members of the interprofessional team. The nurse has a crucial role before, during, and after the VH procedure. Before the procedure, the nurse should assist the clinician in providing the woman and her family with the necessary information leaflets about the procedure, its benefits, and risks. The nurse should assist the clinician in the preoperative preparation of patients and ensuring that all preoperative investigations are readily available before the scheduled VH procedure. During the procedure, the nurse should assist the clinician in handling the necessary tools and ensuring the proper lighting to obtain the maximum visualization of the surgical field. The nurse must ensure that the diathermy equipment is connected and the patient is correctly insulated. The nurse has a paramount role in counting the instruments and towels used during the procedure and documenting the intraoperative blood loss. After the procedure, the nurse should monitor the vital signs of the woman and ensure that the woman's general and hemodynamic status is stable. The nurse should report any untoward changes in the vital signs of the patient to the clinician. Effective and clear communication among the members of the interprofessional team is mandatory to optimize patient outcomes. The interprofessional team needs to ensure patient safety at all times. Patient education is a key to successful vaginal hysterectomy procedures. The nurse should ensure that the woman is well-informed about the procedure and her concerns are addressed appropriately. The only way to achieve the best standard outcome for women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy and their families is through coordinated care among the interprofessional team members. [Level 5]