The six "B"s that are the common causes of autonomic dysreflexia:

- Bladder (catheter blockage, distension, stones, infection, spasms)

- Bowel (constipation, impaction)

- Back passage (hemorrhoids, rectal issues, anal abscess, fissure)

- Boils (skin lesions, infected ulcers, decubiti)

- Bones (fractures, dislocations)

- Babies (pregnancy)

Autonomic dysreflexia should be strongly suspected in any spinal cord injured patient with a lesion at or above T6 who complains of a headache. A blood pressure reading should be taken immediately, and corrective treatment should start if the patient's blood pressure is significantly elevated above baseline as most spinal cord injured patients have low blood pressure. A systolic blood pressure >150 mmHg or >40 mmHg above baseline is highly suggestive of autonomic dysreflexia. Bladder distension from urinary retention or a blocked Foley is the single most common cause of this disorder, and irrigating or changing the catheter is often immediately curative. Quick recognition and rapid alleviation of the underlying stimulus may be life-saving.

Any paraplegic or quadriplegic who complains of a severe headache should immediately be checked for possible autonomic dysreflexia by checking their blood pressure. If elevated, the patient should be moved to a sitting position with their legs dangling, and any constricting clothing or binders should be loosened. A careful check should be made for the initiating stimulus, which most often is a distended bladder. The majority of these patients will have Foley catheters which can easily become kinked or obstructed, so this should be checked first by either irrigation or by changing the catheter. Patients without urinary catheters should immediately have a Foley placed. If no treatable initiating cause is discovered, it should be treated as a hypertensive emergency as the patient is at high risk for a potentially life-threatening stroke if the blood pressure remains uncontrolled. In such situations, immediate, emergency treatment of the hypertensive crisis is most easily accomplished by applying 1 to 2 inches of 2% nitroglycerine paste directly to the skin above the level of the spinal injury or nifedipine 10 mg. using a "bite and swallow" technique.

Susceptible patients (any spinal cord injury patient who has had at least one significant episode of autonomic dysreflexia) should always carry an emergency treatment kit or bag with necessary supplies (such as Foley catheters (council catheters and coude tipped are preferred), guidewires, sterile lubricant, a tube of 2% lidocaine anesthetic gel, normal saline irrigation fluid, catheter tip syringe for irrigation, 10 cc syringes to empty and sterile water to fill the catheter balloons, emergency antihypertensive medications (such as nitroglycerine paste and nifedipine), instructions/information on autonomic dysreflexia such as a copy of this review, blood pressure cuff, etc.). A medical information card should be included containing the patient's identification information, address, emergency contacts, list of medical problems, allergies, usual medications, causes of prior episodes of autonomic dysreflexia, and baseline blood pressure. A simplified summary of the management of autonomic dysreflexia should also be in the emergency kit to assist healthcare personnel unfamiliar with the problem in the event of an emergency.

Having such an emergency kit immediately available could be life-saving!