Imaging: A chest x-ray is used to determine the pattern and extent of emphysema and exclude other causes of dyspnea. The “classic” pattern of emphysema in AAT deficiency is basilar predominant emphysematous bullae, although a range of patterns from basilar predominant to apical predominant emphysema may be seen. Some clinicians perform chest computed tomography (CT) scans for an initial assessment.

- Bronchodilator responsiveness (defined as a post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in one second [FEV1] rise of 200 mL and 12%) is common.

- Pulmonary function testing is used to assess the presence and severity of lung disease. Spirometry is typically obtained before and after bronchodilator, lung volumes, and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO). If DLCO is below normal or if the patient reports exertional dyspnea, a six-minute walk test should be obtained.

- All adults with persistent airflow obstruction on spirometry should be tested for AAT deficiency, mainly those from geographic areas with a high prevalence of AAT deficiency.

Additional features that should lead clinicians to test for AAT deficiency include:

- Emphysema in a young individual (e.g., age 45 years or younger).

- Emphysema in a person who does not smoke or smokes minimally

- Emphysema characterized by predominant basilar changes on the chest radiograph.

- A family history of emphysema or liver disease. Clinical findings or history of panniculitis

- Clinical findings or history of unexplained chronic liver disease.

The diagnosis of severe AAT deficiency is confirmed by demonstrating a serum level below 11 micromols/L (approximately 57 mg/dL by nephelometry) in combination with a severe deficient phenotype assessed by testing for the most common deficient alleles (i.e., S, Z, I, F).

If the AAT serum level is greater than 20 micromol/L, it is unlikely that the patient has a clinically significant AAT deficiency, but if we are evaluating for the presence of particular mutations, genotyping is necessary to identify heterozygotes and mutations that have incomplete penetrance.

The normal plasma concentration of AAT ranges from 80 mg/dL to 220 mg/dL (20 to 48 micromol/L using nephelometry or 150 mg/dL to 350 mg/dL by radial immunodiffusion). However, given the variability in reference ranges, patients with a serum AAT level below 100 mg/dL (18.4 micromols/L) should be evaluated further with isoelectric focusing or genotyping.

**Isoelectric focusing**is the gold standard blood test for identifying AAT variants and is considered a phenotype test.

**Genotyping**of the protease inhibitor (Pi) locus is performed on a blood sample using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology or restriction fragment length polymorphisms. These tests detect the most common known variants (F, I, S, Z). Gene sequencing of exonic DNA can be used if both tests fail to determine the genetic variant.

In monitoring asymptomatic patients, i.e., those with no respiratory symptoms and normal baseline spirometry (i.e., FEV1 80% or greater of predicted), spirometry should be repeated when symptoms change or at 6 to 12-month intervals. An unexplained decrease in the post-bronchodilator FEV1 to less than 805 predicted is an indication to initiate augmentation therapy.

Guidelines are lacking regarding monitoring for liver disease in patients homozygous for PiZ, PiS[iiyama], or PiM[malton]. It is advised to assess serum aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin on an annual basis. Some clinicians also obtain a complete blood count (CBC), looking for thrombocytopenia, and an abdominal ultrasound looking for cirrhosis every 6 to 12 months.