The etiology of aseptic meningitis can be categorized into infectious and non-infectious. Ultimately, the exact etiology can only be identified in 30-65% of the cases, despite all the diagnostic advancements made to date.

In terms of infectious causes, these include viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites, the most common agent being viral.

Bacterial, fungal, and parasitic infectious are less common than viral. Bacterial causes of aseptic meningitis may include partially treated meningitis, parameningeal infection (such as epidural abscess and mastoiditis), Mycoplasma pneumoniae, endocarditis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Treponema pallidum, and leptospirosis. Fungal causes may include Candida, Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, and Blastomyces dermatitides. Parasites causing aseptic meningitis include Toxoplasma gondii, naegleria, neurocysticercosis, trichinosis, and Hartmannella.

For the non-infectious causes of aseptic meningitis, etiologies can be classified into three main groups:

- Systemic diseases with meningeal involvement (e.i sarcoidosis, Behçet's disease, Sjögren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus and granulomatosis with polyangiitis)

- Drug-induced aseptic meningitis (most commonly reported with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), antibiotics (sulfamides, penicillins), intravenous immunoglobulin, and monoclonal antibodies)

- Neoplastic meningitis (that could be related to either solid cancer metastasis or lymphoma/leukemia.

Aseptic meningitis secondary to certain vaccines has also been described, such as measles, mumps, rubella vaccine primarily,