**Factors Maintaining Set-Point Homeostasis**

Neurohormonal changes, metabolism changes, and behavioral modifications in response to weight changes could regulate and protect a weight or fat mass set-point range.

**Neurohormonal**

Neurohormonal regulation of feeding behavior involves the interplay between satiety hormones and the central nervous system feeding centers. The hypothalamus plays a crucial role in this regulation, with the orexigenic and anorexigenic pathways controlling appetite. The orexigenic pathway is activated by the hormone ghrelin, is released by the stomach, and binds to neuronal receptors, releasing neuropeptide YY. This sends orexigenic (appetite-stimulating) signals to higher cortical centers, increasing hunger.

Alternatively, the anorexigenic pathway is activated by hormones such as leptin from fat tissue, GLP-1, amylin, and peptide YY from the gastrointestinal tract. These hormones activate pro-opiomelanocortin synthesizing cells (POMC), which release the alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone. This hormone binds to the melanocortin-4 receptor, signaling higher centers to activate the anorexigenic pathway and decrease appetite. Alterations in these pathways can disturb set-point regulation. These pathways are already dysregulated in obesity, increasing adipose tissue mass through increased caloric intake.

In response to weight loss, a series of changes can promote weight gain, such as increasing the level of orexigenic hormones and decreasing the levels of anorexigenic hormones. Additionally, food preferences change to foods with high-sugar content, high-fat content, and high-calorie density.

**Adaptive Thermogenesis**

Adaptive thermogenesis can explain the unsatisfactory results of weight loss. In response to negative energy balance, adaptive changes result in energy sparing by reducing resting energy expenditure (REE). During early weight loss, adaptive thermogenesis triggers changes to meet the brain's energy needs by an adaptive reduction in regulatory hormones such as insulin and leptin.

Leptin is a critical hormone in set-point regulation and weight maintenance through adaptive thermogenesis. During weight loss maintenance, leptin levels drop to keep energy expenditure low and prevent triglyceride stores from depleting to maintain the body's essential biological functions, such as reproduction. Leptin also appears to play a role in reducing thyroid activity (low T3) and decreasing sympathetic system activity to decrease skeletal muscle thermogenesis.

Nonresting expenditure (nREE) changes in the first 3 weeks of weight loss attempts are less clear, but there is a reduction of nREE eventually.

When recovering from starvation, people often overeat due to persistent thermogenesis suppression developed during starvation. These ongoing, adaptive thermogenesis mechanisms can increase the risk of long-term overshooting of weight gain.

Adaptive thermogenesis mechanisms during overfeeding are only partially understood. With overfeeding, some reported more than expected responses in increased spontaneous physical activity expenditure for weight changes. In contrast, some researchers reported compensatory increased energy expenditure due to an increase in the thermic effect of food, REE increase, and physical activity expenditure.

An example of adaptive thermogenesis's response to overfeeding is the Vermont overfeeding study. In this study, body weight gain was not as expected in response to excess overfeeding due to increased energy expenditure (EE) from weight gain (response to gain).