The pathophysiology of MAS is not completely understood. However, 5 important processes have been described: Meconium passage, aspiration, airway obstruction, inflammation, and surfactant inactivation.

- Meconium passage: Usually, fecal defecation rarely happens between 20 and 34 weeks of gestation.

- Aspiration: During the delivery process, fetal breathing usually leads to amniotic fluid moving in and out of the lungs. When amniotic fluid is stained with meconium, the fetus is at risk of aspiration. This is especially true with hypoxia, which can trigger the fetus to increase gasping, which leads to more amniotic fluid inhalation by the fetal airway.

- Airway obstruction: As meconium is thick and the fetal airways are small in diameter, the presence of meconium in the airways can cause obstruction. The mechanism is similar to a foreign body aspiration. The meconium plug can cause complete obstruction leading to lung collapse distally as well as atelectasis. When partial obstruction occurs, it causes a ball valve effect with increased air trapping, thus increasing the risk of air leak syndromes, notably pneumothorax. Recent data suggest that airway obstruction does not always happen in the context of MSAF and that obstruction alone does not completely explain MAS.

- Inflammation: Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of MAS. Material that constitutes meconium has been shown to trigger inflammatory processes that further contribute to the development of respiratory distress in MAS. Airway inflammation results in a form of chemical pneumonitis. Matrix metalloproteinase-8, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, interferon-gamma, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha have all been described to be significantly higher in patients with MAS.

- Surfactant inactivation: Inflammation and hydrolysis can alter and inactivate surfactant.

All these processes lead to a decrease in alveolar ventilation, causing increased ventilation-perfusion mismatch. This is the main cause of hypoxemia in infants with MAS. Prolonged hypoxemia will trigger pulmonary vascular constriction, which in turn increases pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). This is often accompanied by right-to-left shunting. These mechanisms can trigger PPHN.