Infants with severe vomiting caused by pyloric stenosis can develop profound hypochloremia and hypokalemia. The classic biochemical abnormality in hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is hypochloremic, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis.

Ultrasonography has become the standard imaging technique for diagnosing hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. It is reliable, highly sensitive, highly specific, and easily performed. An experienced ultrasonographer is necessary to diagnose pyloric stenosis. A novice sonographer may have trouble locating the pylorus. Pyloric wall thickness 3 mm or greater and pyloric channel length 15 mm or greater are considered abnormal and indicate pyloric stenosis. Ultrasound findings also include target signs and lack of gastric emptying.

Barium upper can help to diagnose pyloric stenosis when ultrasonography is not diagnostic but is rarely necessary. It should demonstrate an elongated pylorus and can show marked delayed gastric emptying. Findings may include string sign, double-track sign, or beak sign.

Sometimes, upper endoscopy, performed by a pediatric gastroenterologist, can be used as an additional diagnostic tool in rare, select cases when the other imaging tests are nondiagnostic or when the infant presents with atypical clinical features.

Abdominal X-ray lacks sensitivity and specificity significantly. Findings may include large stomach gas with the absence of gas in the colon secondary to gastric obstruction. Caterpillar sign may be present, which is a radiological finding that shows a dilated stomach appearance secondary to hypertrophied pylorus gastric contractions.