The standard trauma algorithim should be followed when evaluating a pregnant patient who has experienced trauma. Trauma assessment and resuscitation priorities are the same as in the nonpregnant woman but modified to thereafter address changes that occur in the later stages of pregnancy. This includes a primary, secondary, and tertiary survey. Attention should be paid to the vital signs as they change throughout normal pregnancy, noting changes to physiology as described previously. If alert and able, all women of child bearing age involved in trauma should be questioned on feasibility of pregnancy and Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) testing obtained unless expressed inability to conceive. Prior history of preterm labor, placental abruption and placenta previa are as well important to illicit if able. Likewise urgent OBGYN consultation is recommended especially when the trauma patient is of gestational second or third trimesters.

When the airway is compromised or rapid sequence intubation is deemed necessary, lower doses of succinylcholine are required due to the lower concentrations of pseudocholinesterase during pregnancy. It is important to avoid hypotension and provide supplemental oxygen due to the significant fetal vulnerability to hypoxia.

Clinical assessment alone may identify potential injury to the uterus or fetus. Concerning findings include: penetrating injury to the abdomen, vaginal bleeding, ruptured membranes, bulging perineum, presence of contractions and an abnormal fetal heart rate or rhythm. Vaginal bleeding is abnormal before labor and can be indicative of placental abruption, early labor, premature cervical dilation, or placentra previa. Rupture of the amniotic sac should be suspected when there is cloudy, white or green discharge, which leads to increased risk of infection. A ruptured amniotic sac may also lead to umbilical cord prolapse, which itself is an obstetric emergency requiring immediate cesarean section. If hemodynamically able, the pelvic examination should therefore include a speculum exam.

In addition, the abdomen should be palpated to determine the level of uterine height. Measurement of fundal height allows estimation of gestational age, for which may be the only insight into gestational age in an unresponsive patient. Between eight to twelve weeks, the uterus begins to enter the abdominal cavity, arising above the pubic symphysis. At 20 weeks, it approaches the level of the umbilicus.  At this point, the uterus should grow at approximately one finger’s breadth until 40-weeks gestation.  The uterus will reach the sternum at 36 weeks and then become lower as the fetal head engages into the pelvis.  Discrepancy between the fundal height and known gestational age should alert the clinician to an abnormality, concerning for uterine trauma or a preexisting condition such as multiple pregnancy or intrauterine growth retardation.