Appropriate treatment and management of SAD often depend on the symptom severity. In the case of mild symptoms, patient and parent education, support, and encouragement may be sufficient to help the patient resume normal activities.

**Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)**

CBT is considered the first-line treatment for SAD and is an optimal choice for its efficacy and low risk of adverse effects. CBT should include techniques involving psychoeducation, changing maladaptive thought patterns, and gradual exposure to anxiety-provoking situations. Effective CBT typically requires 10 to 15 outpatient sessions (60-90 minutes each) with the practice of newly acquired skills at home. The treatment regime may be shortened or prolonged depending on the severity of symptoms and comorbid factors.

Exposure therapy effectiveness is postulated to help increase the treatment response rate. Subjective reporting and heart rate measurements are unreliable indices of distress or emotional arousal during exposure. A reliable and alternate method of accurately measuring distress during exposure therapy is electrodermal activity (EDA). EDA is specific to sympathetic arousal and measures the activity of the eccrine sweat glands. Higher EDA indicates greater emotional and physiological arousal.

**Combination Therapy with CBT and an SSRI**

Although various reports describe improvement in SAD with pharmacotherapy, there are no medications with FDA-labeled indications to treat SAD, and high-quality (double-blind, placebo-controlled) studies are lacking. Some studies report CBT and SSRIs as equally efficacious for children with anxiety disorders; others report CBT to be superior to pharmacotherapy on some indices. More recent data suggest that combination treatment with CBT and SSRIs is more efficacious than either treatment alone, with as many as 81% of children with anxiety disorders who received sertraline and CBT being classified as responders compared to a 60% response rate for CBT alone and 55% response rate for sertraline alone.

A randomized control trial published in 2008 reported the superiority of combination CBT and SSRI therapy, attributed to the synergistic effects of the 2 therapies.

Authors of a recent systematic review evaluating the comparative effectiveness and safety of CBT and various pharmacotherapies for childhood anxiety disorders reported that SSRIs and serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) improved anxiety symptoms when compared to placebo. The efficacy of benzodiazepines and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) was supported by insufficient or low-quality evidence for treating these disorders.