**Embryology of Aortic Arch**

The distal part of the truncus arteriosus is from the aortic sac. The aortic sac forms the right and left horns of the aorta, which form the aortic arches before terminating in the right and left dorsal aorta. Each pharyngeal arch receives its own artery, which is derived from the aortic arches.

**Aortic Arches**

The pharyngeal arches and its vessels (aortic arches) develop during the 4th to 5th week of gestation but are not present simultaneously. They develop from cranial to caudal fashion. Initially, there are 6 aortic arches connecting the ventral aorta and the dorsal aorta. The fifth aortic arch either never forms or forms incompletely and regresses. The first arch mostly disappears, leaving behind a small portion that forms the maxillary artery. The second arch mostly disappears as well and forms the hyoid and stapedial arteries. The third, fourth, and sixth arches remain large to give rise to the vessels of the aortic arch as well as the aorta.

**Embryological Origin**

Right horn - brachiocephalic artery

Left horn - proximal aortic arch

3rd arch - common carotid artery, external carotid artery and the proximal portion of the internal carotid artery on both the sides

Left 4th arch - arch between the left common carotid artery (LCCA) and left subclavian artery (LSCA)

Right 4th arch - proximal portion of right subclavian artery (RSCA)

Left sixth arch - proximal portion forms the left pulmonary artery (LPA). The distal portion forms the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).

Right sixth arch - proximal portion forms the right pulmonary artery (RPA). The distal portion disappears.

Right dorsal aorta - right distal subclavian artery

Left dorsal aorta - left aortic arch distal to LSCA

Dorsal aorta - The cranial portion also forms the distal portion of internal carotid arteries on both sides. The portion of dorsal aorta between 3rd and 4th arches disappears. The portion of the right dorsal aorta between the origin of the 7th intersegmental artery and the junction with left dorsal aorta disappears as well.

Right seventh intersegmental artery - distal RSCA

Left seventh intersegmental artery - LSCA

The above embryological knowledge is essential in understanding the formation of vascular rings that can arise from various aortic arch anomalies.