Poor Perfusion/Ischemia - Healing wounds have an increased demand for oxygen and other factors to promote proper repair. Wounds with poor perfusion or ischemia do not receive sufficient blood flow to meet demand and are unable to heal correctly. Patient comorbidities, including vascular disease or venous insufficiency, increases patient risk for wound failure and dehiscence. Careful suturing can reduce local ischemia to the wound, preventing local wound failure.

Infection - Infected wounds are unable to heal appropriately and become 'stuck' in the inflammation phase. Without proper resolution of wound inflammation, proliferation, and maturation of the wound are unable to occur.

Smoking - Tobacco smoking has a vasoconstrictive effect leading to decreased wound perfusion. Nicotine also impairs proper macrophage migration and fibroblast activation, impeding the wound healing process.

Diabetes - Microvascular disease caused by diabetes can impair blood flow, leading to poor wound perfusion. Hyperglycemia also increases the risk of wound infection, decreasing healing.

Malnutrition/Hypoalbuminemia - Protein status is essential for fibroblast proliferation, collagen synthesis, and angiogenesis. Without adequate protein stores, proper wound healing becomes slowed. Limited carbohydrate reserves can lead to protein catabolism and wound breakdown. Deficiencies of vitamin C and zinc also lead to impaired wound healing. Optimizing a patient's nutrition before surgery can decrease the risk of wound failure.

Radiation - Surgery should be avoided in patients receiving radiation whenever possible. Radiation leads to microvascular obliteration, leading to a gradual decrease in tissue perfusion towards the epicenter of the radiated target area, compromising wound repair. Radiation can also lead to altered cellular replication and increased fibrosis, inhibiting proper wound healing.