Gallstones or cholelithiasis are responsible for one of the most prevalent digestive disorders in the United States. They are considered a disease of developed populations but are present around the world. It is both the result of a chronic disease process and the cause of subsequent acute disorders of the pancreatic, biliary, hepatic, and gastrointestinal tract. Over 6.3 million females and 14.2 million males in the United States between the ages of 20 and 74 have gallstones. Most patients with gallstones are asymptomatic, but 10% of patients will develop symptoms within five years, and 20% of patients will develop symptoms within 20 years of diagnosing gallstones. Gallstone prevalence also increases with age. Over one-quarter of females older than the age of 60 will have gallstones. Gallstones have various compositions and etiologies.

The critical feature of gallstones is that they are not all symptomatic. Sometimes they may migrate near the opening of the cystic duct and block the flow of bile. This can lead to tension in the gallbladder, which results in the classic biliary colicky pain. If the cystic duct is obstructed for more than a few hours, it can lead to inflammation of the gallbladder wall (cholecystitis). Sometimes the gallstone may move into the bile duct and cause obstruction, leading to jaundice and abdominal pain. Patients who have chronic gallstones may develop progressive fibrosis and loss of motor function of the gallbladder. The best test to make a diagnosis of gallstones is ultrasound. The treatment of gallstones depends on symptoms. The standard of care for symptomatic patients is laparoscopic cholecystectomy.