**Assessment of Military Service**

The foundations of a thorough mental health assessment do not change when discussing mental health concerns with a service member or veteran. A challenge that practitioners face is identifying military service in a patient’s history.

- “Have you or someone close to you ever serve in the military?”

- “When did you serve?”

- “Which branch did you serve in?”

- “What did you do while you were in the military?”

- “Were you assigned to a hostile or combat area?”

- “Did you experience enemy fire, see combat, or witness casualties?”

- “Were you wounded, injured, or hospitalized?”

- “Were you exposed to noise, chemicals, gases, demolition of munitions, pesticides, or other hazardous substances?”

- “Have you ever used the VA for health care?”

**PTSD**

Some individuals may have difficulties being aware or forthcoming about the emotional or cognitive aspects of PTSD and may instead present with complaints about physiologic symptoms such as insomnia. Nonetheless, history will form the basis of diagnosis, as not all patients have physical exam findings. There are eight criteria and two specifiers for PTSD, which should be explored through thorough history-taking, and are outlined below (see “Evaluation”).

**Depression**

The basis of a major depression diagnosis is found in the patient’s history. This should include a course of present illness, current symptoms and timeline, prior history of similar symptoms, alleviating or aggravating factors, impact on daily living, and complete medical history to include psychiatric history. Other categories to explore include family mental health history and social history, which includes job or relationship stressors as well as possible support structures. The same thorough history should be attained for military and veteran patients.

A pertinent physical exam is imperative for any encounter and is no different in patients presenting with mental health concerns. For example, patients experiencing depression often have physical manifestations such as fatigue, insomnia, or weight changes. Thorough consideration of organic etiologies must be given to those with somatic symptoms. Furthermore, providers must be willing to change a diagnosis if other symptoms and a more appropriate etiology are identified.

**Suicide**

Thorough histories are essential in evaluating patients with suicide risk. Specifically, clinicians should identify exacerbating and protective factors, particularly modifiable targets for intervention.

**Substance Use Disorders**

SUDs are a pattern of drug use causing distress or impairment, with at least two of eleven symptoms categorized under four categories (impaired control, social impairment, risky use, and pharmacologic effects) occurring over one year. Detailed criteria are in the “Evaluation” section below. Following a positive screen (also discussed below), providers should obtain a thorough history and exam, including medical and mental health comorbidities, family history, and social history. Presentations vary depending on the substance(s) used, and individuals may have incentives to minimize them. A mental status exam (MSE) may be helpful in the presence of psychiatric symptoms. This is an assessment of appearance, behavior, speech, motor activity, mood and affect, perceptions, thought processes, thought content (including suicidal/homicidal ideation, hallucinations, and delusions), insight, judgment, and cognitive function. Abnormalities should alert providers to the possibility of a SUD, as they are often associated. The MSE, however, is usually normal in SUD except during intoxication, withdrawal, active psychosis, or cognitive impairment from chronic substance use. Beyond the history and physical, a multidimensional assessment is necessary to offer personalized, comprehensive management plans. Consider:

- The pattern of substance use, treatment history, intoxication/withdrawal potential, and continued use potential

- Emotional, behavioral, and cognitive conditions

- Living environment

- Employment and finances

- Criminal justice involvement

- Readiness to change

Alcohol use can manifest in many organ systems and the behavioral, psychiatric, and social realms and may not be attributable to drinking. Examples include:

- Injuries from accidents or assault

- Anxiety, depression, and suicidality

- Concurrent use of other drugs

- Central or peripheral neurologic symptoms

- Sleep disturbances

- Hypertension

- Cardiac disease

- Electrolyte disturbances

- Gastrointestinal symptoms including reflux (GERD)

- Bone marrow suppression

- Macrocytosis

- Malignancies, including oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal

The use of other substances is also associated with compromised function in virtually every organ system. Diseases may develop from direct toxicity, method of administration, and high-risk behaviors surrounding use such as needle sharing, unprotected sex, or poor hygiene. Possible physical indicators of substance use include:

- Unintended weight loss or gain

- Scars (“track marks”) in injection drug use

- In inhalational use: nasal mucosal atrophy or septum perforation

- In acute intoxication/withdrawal: unsteady gait, slurred speech, pupil changes, conjunctival injection, eye tearing, rhinorrhea, odd behavior, tachycardia, diaphoresis

- Signs of medical comorbidities resulting from drug use (see “Complications” below)