The diagnosis of PMI is established by the ECG in conjunction with history and physical.

PMI most commonly manifests on ECG in conjunction with other vascular territories (e.g., inferoposterior) or in isolation.

**Isolated or “True” Posterior Myocardial Infarction**

Unlike the anterior, lateral, and inferior walls of the left ventricle, there is no lead on the standard 12-lead ECG that overlies the posterior wall. While transmural infarction (the result of STEMI or OMI) of other walls registers as “positive” or elevated changes on the corresponding leads of the standard 12 leads (e.g., inferior STEMI has ST elevations in the inferior leads II, III, and aVF), posterior MI registers only reciprocal changes on the standard anterior leads because there is no standard lead overlying the posterior wall.

Therefore, posterior infarction appears on the standard 12-lead ECG primarily as ST depressions in leads V1-V4,deepest in leads V2-V4.

- The National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR) defines isolated PMI as “ST elevations in leads V7-V9 or ST depressions maximal in V1-V3, without ST elevation in other leads is considered a STEMI equivalent and qualifies for emergent reperfusion.”

- The 2009 Standardization of ECG Interpretation Guidelines defines isolated PMI as 0.05 mV of abnormal J-point elevation in leads V7-V9 or “abnormal J-point depression of -0.05 mV in V1-V3 or -0.1 mV in all other leads” without qualification of what indicates abnormal J-point depression.

- The 2013 ACCF/AHA STEMI guidelines suggest that “ST depression in 2 or more leads of V1-4 may indicate transmural posterior injury”

- The Fourth Universal Definition of MI in 2018 suggests that the pattern of “new horizontal or downsloping ST-depression 0.5 mm or greater in two contiguous leads and/or T inversion >1 mm in 2 contiguous leads with prominent R wave or R/S ratio >1” is abnormal and likely ischemic; however, no specific recommendations for management are made.

The distinction between STEMI and OMI is demonstrated in many cases of true isolated PMI. It is clear that ST elevations meeting STEMI criteria are a medical emergency requiring emergent reperfusion; however, in many true PMI (as in the example below) the ECG manifests only ST depression and therefore does not meet current ACC/AHA STEMI criteria. Persistent symptomatic occlusion of the coronary artery supplying the posterior wall (OMI) requires emergent reperfusion and should therefore be treated as a STEMI, because persistent total occlusion is the typical cause of classic STEMI, and there has never been any evidence demonstrating a difference in the benefit of reperfusion between STEMI(+) occlusion and STEMI(-) Occlusion MI. As expected based on this knowledge, failure to recognize PMI is common and results in delays in time to reperfusion and worsened outcomes.

**Posterior Leads**

Performing a posterior ECG involves taking leads V4-V6 and applying them to the left side of the patient’s back. Specifically, V4 is applied to the posterior axillary line at the same level as V6 and is then referred to as V7. V5 is placed at the mid-scapular line at the same level as V6 and is referred to as V8. Finally, V6 is placed midway between V8 and the left paraspinal muscles at the level of V8 and is then referred to as V9.

Air is a poor conductor of electricity, and therefore, the ST elevations in posterior leads are much less profound since they must first go through the air of the lungs before reaching the leads. This may create a scenario in which the depressions in V1-V4 are obvious, but the posterior leads do not show much if any, elevation. ST elevation in the posterior leads of up to 0.5 mm may be normal.

**Biomarkers**

Troponin elevation greater than the 99th percentile of the upper limit of normal for the particular assay plus one of the following is criteria for acute MI:

- Symptoms of myocardial ischemia

- New ischemic ECG changes

- Development of pathological Q waves

- Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormalities in a pattern consistent with an ischemia etiology

- Identification of a coronary thrombus by angiography or autopsy

Importantly, the current contemporary troponin assays widely used in the United States will not be positive even in true AMI until up to 4 to 6 hours after the onset of acute coronary occlusion. Over-reliance on troponin in the diagnosis of AMI will result in delays of care and worse outcomes. The decision to perform emergent reperfusion is a bedside clinical decision based on history, physical, and ECG findings, and should not be delayed for any laboratory test.