**Stage 1 Palliation (Norwood, Sano, Hybrid)**

Post Stage I palliation patients are critically ill postoperatively and require ICU level care. Postoperatively, mechanical ventilation, inotropic support, and ongoing resuscitative efforts are required in a dedicated cardiothoracic intensive care unit.  The hemodynamic goals for these patients post-stage I Norwood include the following:

- Mean arterial blood pressure 40 to 45 mmHg

- pH 7.4

- pCO2 40 mm Hg

- pO2 40 mm Hg

- Hematocrit (Hct) 40%

- Systemic oxygen saturation 75$ to 85%

- Normal lactic acid

These parameters are maintained by altering pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and systemic vascular resistance (SVR), alternating ventilation strategy, and transfusing blood products as needed to maintain Hct of 40%.

**Increase SVR/D****ecrease SVR**

- Vasopressin/milrinone

- Epinephrine/nitroprusside

- Norepinephrine/alpha-antagonists

- Dopamine/nicardipine

**Increase PVR/D****ecrease PVR**

- Increase pCO2/decrease CO2

- (decrease ventilation or add inhaledCO2)/increase FiO2

- Decrease FiO2/inhaled nitric oxide

**Stage 2 Palliation (Hemi-Fontan/Bidirectional Glenn)**

Pulmonary vascular resistance must remain low to encourage pulmonary blood flow and maintain cardiac output. These patients benefit from early extubation as positive pressure ventilation, and thus, increased intrathoracic pressure reduces the passive pulmonary blood flow from the superior vena cava to the pulmonary circulation.

- Systemic oxygen saturation between 75% to 85%

- Modest hypercapnia (pCO2 from 35 to 45 mmHg) may improve cerebral perfusion and pulmonary blood flow, thereby improving systemic oxygen saturation.

- Optimize mixed venous saturation

**Stage 3 Palliation  (Completion Fontan)**

Fontan physiology is dependent upon the passive flow of blood from the systemic circulation into the pulmonary circulation.  Therefore, the maintenance of adequate volume status is key.  Maintaining low intrathoracic pressure encourages blood flow throughout the Fontan circuit and into the pulmonary arteries. Early postoperative extubation is highly desirable to decrease the length of exposure to positive pressure ventilation, reduce intrathoracic pressure, and thereby increase cardiac output.