Phenelzine is used for treatment-resistant depression and presently is used less frequently because of its many side effects and drug interactions. Most clinicians prescribe newer and better-tolerated medications with fewer side effects, but it still has clinical benefits, and as mentioned earlier, there is a resurgence in interest in MAOI drugs.

An interprofessional healthcare team of clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPS, PAs), specialists, nurses, pharmacists, and mental health professionals should work cohesively regarding medication administration and subsequent monitoring. All interprofessional healthcare team members need to cover the topic of tyramine-containing foods so the patient does not accidentally precipitate a significant adverse event by ingesting these foods. Pharmacists must also keep a close eye on the patient's medication record since the chance for drug-drug interactions exists and report any concerns to the prescribing clinician immediately. A hepatologist may be necessary to monitor hepatic function if phenelzine use results in hepatotoxicity.

Primary care clinicians and psychiatrists must monitor for serotonin syndrome, tyramine-induced hypertensive crisis, and dose-related orthostatic hypotension. A pediatric psychiatrist consult should take place in those rare instances of administering phenelzine to patients 16 years of age and under: benefits vs. potential side effects merit strong consideration. Nurses can provide patient counseling, review dosing schedules (essential because of multiple times daily dosing), and caution patients regarding adverse effects. The pharmacist can verify dosing and provide additional medication counseling for the patient. This kind of interprofessional teamwork relies heavily on open communication channels, and all team members can openly voice their medical opinions. This interprofessional approach will increase therapeutic success while helping minimize adverse events. [Level 5]

If any acute crises develop from phenelzine therapy, the patient must report to the emergency department for resuscitation and monitoring.