**Cerebral Aneurysms**

The majority of unruptured cerebral aneurysms are asymptomatic (85% to 90%), and they are incidentally found during brain imaging for other reasons.

Signs and symptoms of unruptured cerebral aneurysm include:

- Headache

- Eye pain

- Unilateral complete third cranial nerve palsy

- Ischemic/embolic cerebrovascular disease

- Seizures

- Visual loss or hemianopsia

Signs and symptoms of ruptured cerebral aneurysm include:

- Headache

- Nausea and vomiting

- Nuchal rigidity

- Altered mental status

- Eye pain

- Unilateral complete third cranial nerve palsy

- Loss of consciousness

- Photophobia

- Focal neurologic deficits

- Coma and death

Headache described as the "worst headache of my life" is the most common symptom of a ruptured cerebral aneurysm. About 10% to 43% of patients with SAH experience mild-moderate headache approximately 2 months before aneurysm rupture and 30% to 50% of patients report sudden onset headache 6 to 20 days before rupture. This headache could be a warning sign of an impending rupture. Approximately 10% to 30% of patients with aneurysm rupture die before reaching the hospital, another 30% die in the hospital or are severely disabled when discharged, and only 30% have a good recovery after appropriate treatment.

The Hunt and Hess classification system is used to classify the severity of SAH based on clinical findings and to predict outcomes and mortality. There are five different grades ranging in the severity of symptoms, which can correlate with the overall mortality of SAH.

- Grade I - Mild headache with slight nuchal rigidity. Approximately 30% of mortality.

- Grade II - Severe headache with full nuchal rigidity and no neurologic deficits other than a cranial nerve palsy. Approximately 40% of mortality.

- Grade III - Drowsiness or confusion with a mild focal deficit. Approximately 50% of mortality.

- Grade IV - Stuporous with moderate to severe hemiparesis. Approximately 80% of mortality.

- Grade V - Coma with decerebrate posturing. Approximately 90% of mortality.

The modified Fisher classification describes the amount of blood seen on a head non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan to predict the likelihood of developing vasospasm, ischemia, and stroke.

- Fisher 0 - No blood detected. The incidence of symptomatic vasospasm: 0%.

- Fisher 1 - Thin focal or diffuse SAH. The incidence of symptomatic vasospasm: 18%.

- Fisher 2 - Thin focal or diffuse SAH with intraventricular hemorrhage. The incidence of symptomatic vasospasm: 35%.

- Fisher 3 - Thick focal or diffuse SAH with no intraventricular hemorrhage. The incidence of symptomatic vasospasm: 31%.

- Fisher 4 - Thick focal or diffuse SAH with intraventricular hemorrhage. The incidence of symptomatic vasospasm: 68%.

**Aortic Aneurysms**

Most of the people with aortic aneurysms are asymptotic. Symptoms develop as the aneurysm enlarges and creates pressure on surrounding structures.

Signs and symptoms of unruptured aortic aneurysms include:

- Chest pain or tenderness

- Neck pain

- Cough

- Shortness of breath

- Wheezing

- Hoarseness

- Dysphagia

- Abdominal pain

- Back pain

- Trouble swallowing

Signs and symptoms of ruptured aortic aneurysms include:

- Sudden, intense and persistent chest pain that radiates to back or persistent upper back pain

- Sudden, intense and persistent abdominal pain

- Difficult breathing

- Low blood pressure

- Paralysis or weakness of lower extremities

- Loss of consciousness

- Trouble swallowing

- Sudden cardiac death