**Etiology and Pathophysiology**

The complex interaction of individual and environmental factors plays a crucial role in developing obesity. The most important factors contributing to childhood obesity are summarized below.

**Environmental Factors**

Changes in the environment in the past few decades in terms of easy access/ affordability of high-calorie fast food, increased portion size, increased intake of sugary beverages, and sedentary lifestyles are associated with increased incidence of obesity.

Feeding patterns in infancy have a long-term effect on developing obesity later on in life. It has been shown that breastfeeding in the first year of life is inversely associated with weight gain and obesity.

**Biological Factors**

There is a complex interaction between the neural, hormonal, and gut-brain axis affecting hunger and satiety. Hypothalamus regulates appetite and is influenced by key hormones, ghrelin, and leptin. Ghrelin is released from the stomach and stimulates hunger (orexigenic), whereas leptin is mainly secreted from adipose tissue and suppresses appetite (anorexigenic). Several other hormones like neuropeptide Y and agouti-related peptide stimulate hunger, while pro-melanocortin and α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone suppress hunger.

The gut microbiome includes the trillions of microorganisms that inhabit the human gut. Alterations in the gut microbiome can lead to weight gain through numerous pathways.Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Fusobacteria. These bacteria have a symbiotic relationship with their host. They can be affected by various factors, such as gestational age at birth, premature rupture of membranes, mode of delivery of the infant, type of feeding, feeding practices, and antibiotics usage. The maturation of gut flora occurs from birth to adulthood and is determined by various genetic factors, diet, lifestyle, and environment. Gut microbiota helps maintain the mucosal barrier, nutrient digestion (especially the synthesis of short-chain fatty acids), and immune response against pathogens. The imbalance of the gut microbiome (dysbiosis), leading to increased production of short-chain fatty acids, has been linked to developing obesity and other medical conditions, such as type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, Metabolic syndrome, anxiety, and depression.

**Genetic Factors**

Obesity can be either monogenic, syndromic, or polygenic types. Monogenic obesity is uncommon, occurring in 3% to 5% of obese children.

Genetic syndromes causing severe obesity include

- **Prader Willi syndrome:**Early growth faltering followed by hyperphagia and increased weight gain by 2 to 3 years. The mild or moderate cognitive deficit, microcephaly, short stature, hypotonia, almond-shaped eyes, high-arched palate, narrow hands/feet, delayed puberty are common features.

- **Alstrom syndrome:**Blindness, deafness, acanthosis nigricans, chronic nephropathy, type 2 diabetes, cirrhosis, primary hypogonadism in males, and normal cognition are common features in Alstrom syndrome.

- **Bardet Biedl syndrome:**Intellectual disability, hypotonia, retinitis pigmentosa, polydactyly, hypogonadism, glucose intolerance, deafness, and renal disease are the features in Bardet Biedl syndrome.

- Other syndromes include **Beckwith-Weideman syndrome**and**Cohen syndrome.**

Polygenic obesity is much more common and is caused by a complex interaction between multiple genetic variants and the environment known as gene-environment interaction (GEI). When a child with genotype variants conferring risk for obesity interacts with various environmental factors predisposing to obesity, there is a tendency for decreased physical activity, increased food intake, and body fat storage. Early life environment starting with maternal nutrition during the prenatal or early postnatal period and early childhood adverse environmental or psychosocial stressors can lead to epigenetic changes leading to obesity.

**Endocrine Factors**

Endocrine causes constitute less than 1% of cases of obesity in children.

**Medications**

Numerous medications can cause weight gain. These include antiepileptics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, diabetes medications [insulin, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones], glucocorticoids, progestins, antihistamines [cyproheptadine], alpha-blockers [terazosin], and beta-blockers [propranolol]. Close monitoring for excessive weight gain should be done when any of these medications are used in children.

**Toxins**

Endocrine-disrupting chemicals, such as bisphenol A and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, have been hypothesized to predispose to obesity by modulating estrogen receptors and possibly metabolic programming.

**Viruses**

Few studies in animal models have proven that obesity can be triggered by infection with adenovirus. However, human studies have found conflicting results.