Treatments for sleep disorders depend on the type of sleep disorder.

Treatment of insomnia can be broadly categorized into non-pharmacological and pharmacological treatments.

**Non-pharmacological**

- Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) includes a set of psychological and behavioral techniques specific to treating insomnia. Studies report that CBT-I is the psychological treatment of choice, using individual or group therapy techniques and, recently, digital CBT-I formats.
- Sleep restriction therapy (SRT): SRT limits the total time allowed in bed to increase the drive to sleep.
- Stimulus control therapy helps change sleep habits so that the patients don't have difficulty falling asleep. Patients should not go to bed until they are sleepy. Also, the bed should be used only for sleeping and not for watching television or reading books.
- Relaxation therapy: Relaxation techniques may be implemented before sleep. Meditation and breathing exercises are some of the relaxation techniques. 
- Sleep hygiene: A set of education about lifestyle and environmental factors (e.g., light, noise, temperature) that may interfere with sleep. Sleep hygiene may include education about normal sleep, avoidance of substance use, regular exercise, bedroom environment, sleep and wake times, and avoidance of daytime naps. However, sleep hygiene education alone is less effective than CBT-I in individuals with poor sleep or insomnia.

**Pharmacologic**

- Histamine type 1 receptor blockers (e.g., chlorpheniramine and diphenhydramine) are commonly used for difficulty sleeping due to their sedative effects. However, due to their anticholinergic effect, these drugs should be avoided.

- Benzodiazepines (BZD): these drugs are commonly used to treat insomnia. The drugs bind to a particular benzodiazepine site on the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor complex, enhancing the activity of neurotransmitters. These drugs suppress REM sleep and reduce stage 3 sleep while increasing stage 2 sleep. Examples include flurazepam and temazepam.

- Non-benzodiazepine hypnotics or z-drugs: these agents are used to treat acute and short-term insomnia. These drugs have non-BZD-like chemical structures but interact with the GABA-BZD receptor, causing sedation. Examples include zolpidem and zaleplon.

- Melatonin receptor agonists: the melatonin receptors MT1 and MT2 are implicated in regulating sleepiness and the sleep-wake cycle. Melatonin receptor agonists act on these receptors and improve sleep through the endogenous regulating system. These drugs are used in circadian rhythm sleep disorders, jet lag, and delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (insomnia with difficulty in sleep onset).

- Orexin receptor antagonists: orexin promotes wakefulness. Thus, the antagonism of this receptor helps in sleep. An example includes suvorexant, which improved ISI through improvement in sleep onset and maintenance.

Treatment of OSA includes primarily mechanical positive airway therapy (PAP), lifestyle changes, and options of oral appliances or surgical procedures in certain patients.

A number of medications can be used for the treatment of narcolepsy. Modafinil, a non-amphetamine stimulant that promotes wakefulness, is considered first-line therapy for narcolepsy as it reduces daytime sleepiness, is well tolerated, and has less abuse potential compared to traditional stimulants (amphetamines, methylphenidate). These traditional drugs are second-line drugs. Patients with significant cataplexy may benefit from REM-suppressing medications such as anti-depressants and sodium oxybate.

Light-phase shift therapy is useful for sleep disturbances associated with circadian rhythm abnormalities.

Gabapentin enacarbil, a prodrug formulation of gabapentin, significantly improves restless leg syndrome and hence can alleviate sleep disturbance.