Important clinical considerations regarding the ophthalmic veins include the following:

- Carotid-cavernous sinus fistula (CCF): CCF is a rare disorder involving abnormal communication between the cavernous sinus and the carotid arterial system. As the arterial blood flows into the cavernous sinus, the increased pressure causes stasis of venous blood, leading to dilation of the ophthalmic veins—patients present with exophthalmos, ophthalmoplegia, and conjunctival injection. The CCF and dilated ophthalmic veins are viewable on neuroimaging of the orbits. The gold standard for diagnosis and treatment is carotid angiography, although computed tomography angiography is a minimally-invasive alternative for diagnosis only. Treatment via a transarterial approach in direct CCFs is often required to prevent vision loss from elevated intraocular pressure as a result of venous congestion. For indirect CCFs, the preferred treatment is transvenous endovascular embolization. One approach, as outlined above, is the cannulation and ligation of the SOV or IOV under direct visualization.

- Ophthalmic vein varix: A varix is a rare orbital venous malformation characterized by dilation of thin-walled veins and low blood flow. The inferior ophthalmic venous plexus, in particular, includes many interconnected, narrow valveless veins. Varices are usually present at birth but manifest in young adulthood as diplopia and proptosis during maneuvers that increase venous pressure, such as Valsalva or prone positioning. Over time, there may be paradoxical enophthalmos when the globe retracts as the varix deflates. Imaging, including ultrasound, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging, can be used to detect varices. For symptomatic varices, treatment options include surgical excision with the aid of clips, endovascular coiling, and percutaneous injection of N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue.

- Increased intracranial pressure: Studies have shown that the diameter of the SOV on imaging correlates directly with intracranial pressure. Isolated bilateral dilation of the SOVs may be the initial sign of increased intracranial pressure, which should prompt urgent evaluation.

- Graves' disease: Color doppler ultrasound has been highlighted in the literature for its use in assessing the SOV in Graves' orbitopathy. During the active phase of thyroid eye disease, there is a significant reduction or reversal in SOV blood flow due to orbital congestion and inflammation. The circulation typically returns to normal following successful treatment, which is supported by clinically and radiographically improved signs of orbital congestion.

- Mass effect: Orbital pseudotumor is benign, idiopathic orbital inflammation with no identifiable neoplastic or infectious disorder. The mass effect from orbital edema may compress structures of the orbit, leading to occlusion or constriction of the superior ophthalmic veins, causing venous stasis.