Acute cystitis often presents urinary symptoms, including dysuria, urinary frequency, urgency, suprapubic pain or tenderness, and occasionally hematuria. Based on a systematic review examining the history and examination findings of women with uncomplicated UTI, the combination of dysuria and urinary frequency in the absence of vaginal discharge or irritation is highly predictive of uncomplicated cystitis (90% correlation).

Patients with complicated acute cystitis will often present similarly to uncomplicated cystitis. Specific patient populations with complicated cystitis may have atypical symptoms. For example, patients with multiple sclerosis occasionally present with acute neurologic deterioration, while those with a spinal cord injury may present with autonomic dysfunction or increased spasticity.

Cystitis may be differentiated from pyelonephritis by the absence of systemic findings such as fever, chills, or sepsis. Findings such as flank pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, nausea, and vomiting indicate upper UTI or pyelonephritis.

When evaluating a patient with symptoms of UTI, it is important to obtain a history of any previous episode of UTI, any recent antibiotic use, or any other risk factors that may predispose one to complicated infection such as diabetes, immunocompromised status, recent urologic procedures or instrumentation, renal transplantation, history of kidney stones, anatomical or functional urinary tract abnormalities, or pregnancy.

A pelvic examination is important in evaluating women with cystitis, especially if they have recurrent urinary tract infections. Recurrent infections are defined as two documented UTIs within six months or three in one year. Management of recurrent urinary infections is discussed elsewhere, particularly in the American Urological Association Guidelines on Recurrent Urinary Tract Infections.

In frail and debilitated patients, many general symptoms, such as a change of mental or functional status, fevers, chills, and falls, are associated with a presumptive diagnosis of UTI. Recent evidence suggests that only urinary changes (color changes, odor, gross hematuria) and acute dysuria were reliably associated with documented UTIs.