The principles of radiation physics apply to the field of radiation oncology, and ionizing radiation can be useful in the treatment of many different types of diseases. Radiation therapy uses targeted, high-dose radiation to indirectly or directly kill or stop the growth of cancer cells. The same mechanism of DNA damage is apparent in radiation therapy. Because cancer cells have a high mitotic rate, radiation can be very effective in cancer treatment. To put this into perspective, 1-2 Gy of radiation typically results in 40 double-stranded breaks in DNA.

In 3D conformal radiation therapy, radiation can be given from many different directions so that the beam can converge on the target tumor, and it can better accommodate the size and shape of the tumor. With Intensity-modulated radiation therapy or IMRT, the dosage of the beams can be manipulated to decrease the dose to surrounding healthy tissue and increase the dose to the target tumor. Tumors are carefully mapped out using CT or MRI imaging, and the appropriate dose for the tumor, as well as the surrounding tissues, is proposed during planning.

Cancer is also treatable using proton beam radiation, where protons are used instead of photons and electrons. Hydrogen atoms first split into positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons. The protons are then shot through a vacuum tube into a linear accelerator, where their energy further accumulates as they accelerate along with the delivery system. Once it reaches the desired energy level of about 100 million to 200 million electron volts, these protons can penetrate any depth within the body. These proton beams can be manipulated in shape and direction via magnets. To further customize and increase the precision of delivery, the opening of the proton accelerator can be changed to shape the beam as it exits the machine. When using photons or X-rays in radiation therapy, energy is deposited throughout the path of the beam. As a result, it affects tissue before and after it hits the tumor. Proton beam therapy is beneficial in that physicians can control where the beam deposits most of its energy. Protons travel through the body, releasing some energy throughout the path, but once they reach a certain point, called the Bragg peak, they deposit most of their energy. As a result, this type of radiation therapy focuses more energy on the actual tumor and spares the surrounding tissue.

Brachytherapy is another radiation therapy where a clinician implants radioactive material temporarily or permanently near or inside the target object. It is a type of internal radiation and is used to deliver higher doses of radiation in a more specific and smaller area that cannot be possible with external beam radiation. Brachytherapy categorization depends on the applicator type, anatomical site, source type, the type of implant, or the dose rate. Interstitial implants are radioactive sources either incased in seeds or wires, and they are inserted in the tumor. These are useful for cancers such as prostate cancer. Implants using molds or plaques are typically used for superficial lesions where radioactive sources are directly placed over the skin. Radioactive sources placed inside a body cavity such as the vagina or cervix are called intracavitary implants. High dose rate implants are given at dose rates greater than 20 cGy/min and are typically given only for a few minutes.

The precise delivery of radiation and its effectiveness in treating tumors has revolutionized the field of cancer treatment, and it has become part of the mainstay treatment for a multitude of cancers.