There is considerable evidence to support the decreased risk of VTE with appropriate prophylaxis. Considering that the majority of the cases of VTE are hospital-acquired, it provides a unique opportunity for thromboprophylaxis policies to be effectively instituted. Knowing that despite surviving an episode of VTE and anticoagulation, patients remain at risk for repeat episodes amplifies the magnitude of the problem. By some estimates, thromboprophylaxis can reduce VTE incidence by 30 to 65 percent without a concomitant increase in complications of anticoagulation therapy.

In medically ill patients at moderate-high risk for VTE, prophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended. Recent studies have shown, however, that this risk extends beyond their hospitalization.[28] Betrixaban is an oral factor Xa inhibitor recently approved by the U.S Food and Drug Administration for extended VTE prophylaxis in adults hospitalized for acute medical illness.

**Postoperative Preventions**

Given the higher incidence of VTE in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery, the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) published specific guidelines for what is considered appropriate thromboprophylaxis. They recommend a variety of chemoprophylaxis choices for patients at different levels of risk and state that even patients at elevated risk for major bleeding should receive VTE prophylaxis with aspirin or warfarin (with an INR goal below 2.0).

According to the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP), hip fracture surgery and total knee or hip arthroplasty pose a high risk for VTE. In these cases, mechanical (nonpharmacologic) and pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis is the recommended course. The recommended duration of VTE prophylaxis in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery is 10 to 14 days, according to the ACCP. In patients at low risk for bleeding, they recommend extended-duration postoperative prophylaxis of up to 35 days. Routine surveillance for VTE with ultrasonography is not a recommendation in patients undergoing orthopedic, general, abdominal-pelvic, or trauma surgery.