Cardiopulmonary transplantation is curative for Eisenmenger syndrome. However, this is impractical in most settings. Pharmacology has improved symptoms but not mortality. Potential pharmaceuticals for the treatment of Eisenmenger syndrome include diuretics, antiarrhythmics, and anticoagulation in some patients.

Supplemental oxygen has not definitively shown to have a mortality benefit.

Vasodilator therapies may provide an opportunity for clinical research, and studies have shown some symptomatic improvement. The Bosentan Randomized Trial of Endothelin Antagonist Therapy-5 (BREATHE-5) trial showed improved exercise capacity and symptomatic improvement with endothelin antagonists in patients with ASD, VSD, and PDA with Eisenmenger syndrome

Warfarin has been classically used for anticoagulation in Eisenmenger syndrome. In theory, anticoagulation may dispel some of the pathology related to in situ thrombosis inherent with the disease. However, the evidence for this practice is based on mostly observational studies.

Clinical follow-up should focus on checking annual CBC, iron studies, kidney function, and uric acid, with a focus on correcting any abnormalities. Patients also should be assessed with pulse oximetry, both with and without supplemental O2. Any abnormalities suggesting hypoxemia warrant further evaluation.

Surgical correction of the causative heart defect in adult patients is generally contraindicated

Classically, it is thought to be of little benefit to undergo such risky procedures with a plethora of potential consequences. Additionally, even with clinical response to vasodilator therapies for the pulmonary arterial hypertension component, there are only a select few case reports that show benefit for the closure of the anatomical defect. However, there is promising evidence that cardiac surgery, along with close peri- and post-operational management of pulmonary vascular resistance with advanced PAH therapies, may improve safety and mitigate downstream problems