Nitisinone is approved for oral use via pill capsules or oral suspension and should be administered as soon as the diagnosis of HT-1 is confirmed. NTBC dosage is dependent on body weight (kg). The recommended initial dose should be 0.5 mg/kg twice daily. Patients with persistent detectable levels of succinylacetone in the blood and urine after administration of NTBC should have their doses increased while continuously monitoring SA levels.

The maximal approved oral dosage is 2 mg/kg, administered twice daily. The oral capsule form of NTBC is administered either two hours after meals or at least an hour before a patient plans on eating. Patients with trouble swallowing tablets can be given NTBC administered through oral suspension. If patients are intolerant to oral suspension or pills, the pill capsules may be opened, and the contents can be mixed with water immediately before use.

Usage of oral suspension is not limited to mealtimes and can be taken at any time throughout the day. Nitisinone is currently approved in dosage strengths of 2 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, and 20 mg. The oral suspension of NTBC is approved at a dose of 4 mg/ml. Patients receiving an oral suspension of nitisinone could have constitutional symptoms such as diarrhea, headaches, or fatigue due to the polyol components included. The excretion of NTBC is unknown, and it has a half-life of about 54 hours.

NTBC inhibits the breakdown of tyrosine, causing an increase in tyrosine concentration in the blood. Thus it must be administered with dietary restrictions of tyrosine and phenylalanine.