The cellular organelles involved in the synthesis and modification of GAGs to their final, bioactive structure are numerous and differ based on the unique GAG synthesized. This section will provide an overview of the cellular mechanisms involved in GAG biosynthesis. It is important to note that unlike proteins and nucleic acids, GAG biosynthesis is a non-template driven process that occurs through the combined action of several tissue-specific enzymes.

The process of GAG biosynthesis begins in the cellular cytoplasm with the synthesis of five uridine diphosphate (UDP) derived activated sugars. These sugars include UDP-glucuronic acid, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, UDP-xylose, UDP-galactose, and UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine.

The noteworthy exception to the following steps in GAG biosynthesis is hyaluronic acid (HA). Instead of undergoing modification and sulfation in the Golgi apparatus, the HA precursor sugars UDP-glucuronic acid and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine are transported from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane for further processing without sulfation, which leads to the production of HA.

All other GAGs require additional modification steps that take place in and around the Golgi apparatus, including sulfation of functional groups by the action of the sulfate donor compound 3`-phosphoadenosine-5`-phosphosulfate (PAPS). The availability of PAPS for sulfation of GAGs significantly affects the biosynthetic rate of production of sulfated GAGs

Modification by epimerization of the resulting polysaccharide structures by enzymatic action is responsible for the production of the various molecular structures of GAGs and their resulting properties. The molecular structures of individual GAGs are in the following section.