Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) occurs from a deficiency of surfactant, due to either inadequate surfactant production, or surfactant inactivation in the context of immature lungs. Prematurity affects both these factors, thereby directly contributing to RDS.

**Fetal Lung Development**

It is essential to review fetal lung development and surfactant production to understand the etiology of RDS. The normal process of fetal lung development occurs in stages, known as embryonic, pseudo glandular, canalicular, saccular, and alveolar stages.

During the embryonic period, the lung bud first appears at 26 days as a ventral protrusion of the fetal esophagus.

The pseudo glandular stage starts around the fifth week of gestation and ends at the 16th week, and is the stage at which neuroepithelial cells, cartilage, ciliated cells, goblet cells, and basal cells develop in the proximal pulmonary epithelium. During this stage, the airways branch 15 to 20 times by the 18th week of gestation.

The canalicular stage, beginning the 16th week and ending around the 25th week, marks the beginning of the development of the pulmonary acinus, the formation of a blood-air barrier, and surfactant production via type 2 cells, culminating in a lung potentially viable for gas exchange. The increasing number and size of capillaries continue to vascularize the mesenchyme. Together with the growth of the bronchioles, this thins the mesenchymal space between the respiratory epithelial basement membranes and the vascular epithelium. Eventually, these capillary and respiratory epithelial basement membranes fuse, forming a rudimentary blood-air barrier.

During the saccular stage, from around the 24th week to the 32nd week of gestation, the terminal saccule forms, developing the respiratory bronchioles, which have a wall thickness that allows for gas exchange. It is at this stage that the premature infant is potentially viable in extrauterine life.

At 32 weeks, the alveolar stage begins, and alveoli start to form as the respiratory bronchioles develop septations, increasing the surface area for gas exchange. By term age, the lung contains 50 to 150 million alveoli.

**Surfactant**

The pulmonary surfactant covers the inner lining of normal alveoli. In the fetus, however, the developing alveoli are filling with fetal lung fluid, which does not contribute to gas exchange. During fetal life, surfactant production begins in the alveolar type 2 cells around 20 weeks gestation. Surfactant is predominantly lipid-dense, comprising of around 70% to 80% phospholipids, 10% protein, and 10% neutral lipids. The surfactant consists of four surfactant-specific proteins (SP); SP-A, SP-B, SP-C, and SP-D. SP-A and SP-D are involved in regulating inflammatory processes in the lung.

The lung experiences force due to the elasticity of the chest wall and lung parenchyma, and the surface tension of air-fluid interfaces in both the small airways and alveoli. Surfactant lipoprotein complex is significant as it decreases the surface tension on the small airways and alveoli, which prevents both the collapse of alveoli and entering of interstitial fluid into the airspace.

**Genetics**

Monozygotic twins have a higher incidence of RDS compared to dizygotic twins, and an increased incidence of RDS has also been reported in families, thus supporting an underlying genetic predisposition.