**Anovulation**

Ovulatory disorders make up 25% of the known causes of female infertility. Oligo-ovulation or anovulation results in infertility because no oocyte will be released monthly. In the absence of an oocyte, there is no opportunity for fertilization and pregnancy. To help with treatment and further classification, the World Health Organization subdivided ovulatory disorders into four classes:

- Hypogonadotropic hypogonadal anovulation: i.e., hypothalamic amenorrhea

- Normogonadotropic normoestrogenic anovulation: i.e., polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)

- Hypergonadotropic hypoestrogenic anovulation: i.e., premature ovarian failure

- Hyperprolactinemic anovulation: i.e., pituitary adenoma

Hypothalamic amenorrhea or functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (FHA) is associated with eating disorders and excessive exercise, which results in a decrease in hypothalamic GnRH secretion.

The most common type of Normogonadotropic normoestrogenic anovulation is PCOS. PCOS accounts for 80 to 85% of all anovulatory patients and affects 8% of all reproductive-aged females.

- Oligoovulation/anovulation

- Clinical signs of hyperandrogenism and/or serological elevations of androgens

- Polycystic ovaries demonstrated with ultrasound

Infertility caused by PCOS is thought to be associated with a dysfunction in developing a mature follicle leading to anovulation. The FSH and estrogen will be within normal laboratory limits. The LH can either be normal or elevated. The pathophysiology behind PCOS and infertility is not well understood; classically, abnormal pulsatility of GnRH is described as a possible underlying cause. Correlating the high of arrested follicles and polycystic appearing ovaries is the elevation of anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH).

Hypergonadotropic hypoestrogenic anovulation is the category of premature ovarian insufficiency and ovarian resistance associated with females' age. As mentioned before, a woman’s age affects fertility; this is due to a well-studied phenomenon of a steady decline in the quality and quantity of the patient’s oocytes. In terms of quantity, the female fetus at 20 weeks gestation has roughly 6 million follicles. The newborn has approximately 1 million follicles. At the onset of puberty, the number of follicles decreases to 300,000.

Ovarian quality is also essential to overall fertility. The loss of the oocyte quality throughout a woman’s life is associated with meiotic nondisjunction, resulting in aneuploidy. This is thought to be related to accumulated damage throughout life and age-related changes in the granulosa cells.

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is defined as hypergonadotropic hypogonadism before the age of 40. This disease is characterized by a lack of folliculogenesis, a decrease in estrogen, loss of oocytes, and infertility.

As mentioned above, the WHO recognizes prolactinemia as a leading cause of female infertility; however, the ASRM recently published guidelines that the initial workup does not need to include prolactin.

**Endometriosis**

Endometriosis is defined as endometrial tissue outside the uterine cavity. The diagnosis is based on the histological identification of endometrial glands and/or stroma outside the uterus. Endometriosis is most commonly found in the pelvis but can spread throughout the entire abdomen and affects 10% to 15% of reproductive-age women.

**Pelvic/Tubal Adhesions**

Pelvic and tubal adhesions, along with uterine and tubal abnormalities, account for a large portion of female infertility. Infectious processes within the abdomen are the leading cause of pelvic/tubal adhesions; the most common infectious process to affect infertility is pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). The microorganism that carries the greatest risk of infertility in association with PID is Chlamydia trachomatis. One in 4 women with tubal factor infertility will have positive antibodies to chlamydia, which are inversely proportional to pregnancy rates.

Hydrosalpinges, are a tubal abnormality caused by acute and chronic inflammation that damages the structural integrity of the fallopian. This damage leads to tubal obstruction, which blocks the distribution of physiologic fluid in the fallopian tube and results in fluid accumulation. The belief is that hydrosalpinges impair fertility through the retrograde flow of toxins and prostaglandins into the endometrium, creating a hostile environment for implantation by impairing endometrial receptivity.

**Uterine Causes**

Uterine causes of infertility are associated with either space-occupying lesions or reduced endometrial receptivity. In regards to uterine leiomyomas (fibroids), one meta-analysis demonstrated that only submucosal or intracavitary fibroids impaired implantation and pregnancy rates compared to other infertile controls.