Efforts to obtain a history should not delay the treatment of life-threatening toxicity. Furthermore, patients with severe phenol toxicity may be unable to provide a history of exposure due to depressed mental status or seizures. When appropriate, a focused history should seek to determine the toxin of concern, including the concentration, dose, route, and time of exposure. Questions regarding the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) such as gloves, coveralls, or respirators may help stratify the degree of exposure and possible exposure routes. Following workplace and household exposures, a safety data sheet (SDS) review may help identify active ingredients.

The clinician might detect the sweet, medicinal odor of phenol and provide a clue to the exposure. The onset of clinical effects vary by route of exposure but would be expected to occur within minutes to less than one hour. Examination findings may also vary by route of exposure. Central nervous system excitation or depression may occur rapidly, resulting in coma or seizures within minutes. Vomiting or other signs of gastrointestinal irritation may be presenting symptoms. White patches may be present in the oropharynx. Increased work of breathing and/or hypoxia may be a feature secondary to the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Severe phenol poisonings may also result in cardiovascular instability to include ventricular arrhythmias and hypotension.

Dermal exposure to small amounts of phenol will acutely result in a painless, white discoloration of the skin at the site of contact. Deeper burns may occur if decontamination does not occur promptly. The skin may later progress to erythema and blistering, and, in some cases, necrosis. Interestingly, phenol burns may also present with initial erythema at the contact site, followed by brown staining of the skin. Of note, these lesions are frequently painless due to the anesthetic, cooling effect of topical phenol. Desquamation of skin may occur over 3 to 5 days following contact before healing begins.  Dermatologists historically utilized this progression of phenol chemical burns in facial chemical peels.

Repeated dermal exposure to phenol may result in either hyperpigmentation; a blue-black discoloration called ochronosis, or hypopigmentation causing chemically-induced vitiligo.