It is pertinent to identify bone metastasis early, both for staging and prognostication as well as the implementation of prophylactic and treatment strategies which may lead to decreased morbidity and mortality.

Bone metastases can be characterized as osteolytic, sclerotic (osteoblastic), or mixed on imaging studies.

**Plain Radiograph**

X-rays or orthogonal radiographs are the initial imaging of choice in patients presenting with bone pain.

Plain radiography best detects osteolytic lesions, but they may not be apparent until they are greater than 1 to 2 centimeters and with loss of 50% of the bone mineral content at the site of disease. Osteolytic lesions are seen as thinning of trabeculae and ill-defined margins on radiographs, while sclerotic lesions appear nodular and well-circumscribed as a result of thickened trabeculae. Plain films tend to be insensitive, especially in detecting bone metastases and with asymptomatic and subtle lesions. Progression of disease and response to therapy can be monitored with plain films and further correlation with other modalities. Sclerosis or new bone formation in osteolytic metastatic lesions is demonstrated by the sclerotic rim of reactive bone, which starts at the periphery and eventually involves the center with continued healing. Purely sclerotic lesions are more difficult to assess. Major disadvantages of plain radiographs include poor sensitivity.

**Computed Tomography**

Computed tomography (CT) is more sensitive (74%) than plain radiographs. It is useful in the evaluation of cortical and trabecular bone as well as in the assessment of osteolytic and sclerotic lesion. CT scan is advantageous as it can determine staging or evaluate treatment response of other organs in addition to bone and objectively assess reactive sclerosis by calculating the change in Hounsfield units. Ribs are better evaluated with CT due to the high cortex to marrow ratio. The CT scan can also assist with pre operative planning for metastatic disease, particularly around the shoulder or pelvis.

**MRI**

In the detection of bone metastasis, MRI demonstrates a sensitivity of 95% and specificity 90%. MRI is also more advantageous than a bone scan as it can detect marrow involvement before the development of osteoblastic lesions. It can be used with women who are pregnant and used to detect spinal cord compression. Bone metastases manifest as low T1 signal and high intensity on the T2 weighted sequence. Whole-body MRI requires 40 to 45 minutes to perform and involves short-tau inversion recovery (STIR) and/or T1-weighted sequences.

**Nuclear Medicine**

Nuclear medicine scans also are used to detect bone metastases using osteotropic radioisotopes; these include skeletal scintigraphy, SPECT, and PET scan.

Skeletal scintigraphy or bone scan is the most commonly used radionuclide imaging which uses 99mTc-MDP employed in the detection of skeletal metastases. Radioisotopic imaging methods depict bone metastatic lesions as areas of increased tracer uptake.

The bone scan provides the advantage of scanning the whole skeleton and has a high sensitivity (78%) therefore resulting in early diagnosis. When osteoblastic activity is prominent, the lesions are readily detected using radionuclide bone scanning. However, bone scans have a low specificity for differentiating between benign and malignant bone lesions and for the detection of predominantly osteolytic lesions. Bone scans can be used to monitor the progression of disease and response to treatment.

SPECT uses 99mTc-MDP radioisotopes uptake to detect bone lesions; however, images are acquired in cross-sectional rather than a planar fashion. SPECT has a higher specificity of 91% compared to skeletal scintigraphy.

PET is a nuclear medicine technique that uses the radiotracers 18F FDG or 18FNaF for the detection of skeletal metastases. 18F FDG PET scan identifies bone metastases based on a high glucose metabolism exhibited by neoplastic cells. PET has a better spatial resolution compared to skeletal scintigraphy. 18F NaF-PET is proven to be substantially more sensitive and specific than bone scan and SPECT for the detection of bone metastases.

Combining imaging techniques and modalities allows for improved visualization both anatomically and functionally, leading to increased diagnostic accuracy. One example of this is the 18F-Sodium fluoride (18F-NaF) PET/CT bone scanning which has a significantly greater sensitivity (100%) and specificity (97%). Other hybrid imaging techniques include SPECT/CT, PET/CT, and PET/MRI.

Blood tests can aid in supporting the diagnosis of bone metastases. Complete blood count and a comprehensive metabolic panel should be obtained routinely. CBC may reveal anemia, thrombocytopenia, or pancytopenia in late stages. Serum calcium and alkaline phosphatase may be elevated due to ongoing osteolysis. Bone turnover markers are still being studied as indicators of bone resorption. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase has been proven to elevated in patients with breast and prostate cancer with bone metastases.

Objective scoring models such as the Mirel classification system for long bones and assessment of spinal stability in addition to imaging criteria are used to determine the surgical necessity for impending pathological fractures.