Basic 12 lead electrocardiogram may show sinus rhythm or development of atrial arrhythmias, most prevalent being atrial fibrillation, atrial/ventricular enlargement, evidence of acute or chronic ischemia, and conduction disorders such as bundle branch block(s). Chest X-ray may reveal cardiomegaly, chamber enlargement, signs of heart failure, and serial prognostic data.

Echocardiography, including transthoracic (TTE), transesophageal (TEE), and 3-dimensional (3D) mode, remains the "gold standard" modality of investigation for both diagnoses as well as management of MR.

In acute MR, TTE plays a crucial role in urgent bedside assessment of the underlying mechanism of MR, intracardiac pressures, and ventricular function. Due to the sudden onset of MR, an acute increase in LA pressure leads to pulmonary edema, and hyperdynamic LV function is noted. The murmur can be holosystolic or early systolic or barely audible due to the rapid equalization of pressures in LA and LV. If TTE is suboptimal, TEE provides very specific information, including vegetations or abscess, in case of infective endocarditis.

The severity of MR by qualitative and quantitative measures can be assessed by TTE with various methods of grading as follows:

**1. Color Doppler Method**

- **A. Regurgitant jet area**- The area of LA occupied by the MR jet gives an approximate estimation of the severity of MR, but the correlation is weak. In acute MR, the jet may not appear wide and large due to the rapid equalization of pressures. Also, the MR jet area highly depends on blood pressure, LA enlargement, LV systolic function, and eccentricity. Also, technical limitations in echocardiography itself can cause alterations in the jet area. In general, a central jet that occupies less than 20% of the LA area is considered trace or mild MR, and jet penetrating pulmonary veins is labeled severe MR. Eccentric jets should not be evaluated by these criteria.

- **B. Vena contracta method**- The high velocity, laminar flow at or just downstream of MR jet, is the narrowest portion of MR jet, and severity can be reliable as it is independent of flow rate and driving pressure of MR. Measurement of vena contracts (VC) is done in the plane perpendicular to the commissural lane in multiple images. In general, VC less than 0.3 cm is considered mild, greater than 0.7 cm as severe MR, and between 0.3 to 0.7 cm as moderate MR, but then other parameters need to be considered for confirmation.

- **C. Flow convergence or PISA (proximal isovelocity surface area) method**- Based on a complex hydrodynamic equation, PISA can be estimated on TTE/TEE after adjustment of the Nyquist limit and hemispheric shell of highest velocity and the minimum area is measured. Effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) is calculated from PISA measured by parallel alignment of continuous wave (CW) Doppler signal to MR jet and selection of appropriate aliasing velocity, as large errors can be introduced if aliasing velocity and alignment of CW signal are not accurate. It is a reliable method mostly for central MR jets and circular orifice. By convention, EROA ≥ 0.4 cm is graded as severe MR, 0.20 to 0.39 cm moderate, and less than 0.20 cm mild MR.

**2. Pulsed Doppler Method (Pulsed Wave (PW) method)**

The pulsed Doppler method is based on the principle that, in the absence of significant valvular regurgitant lesion(s) and intracardiac shunt, stroke volume (SV) through any cardiac valve should be the same to maintain a uniform cardiac output. So, to compensate for regurgitant flow volume, SV through the pertinent valve increases proportionately. SV, through any valvular annulus, is calculated by the cross-sectional area of the annulus and velocity-time integral (VTI) of the flow-through that annulus. Except for the tricuspid annulus, all other three valves have near-circular annuli with minor variations. SV is then calculated from these annuli, and SV of normal aortic or pulmonic valve is subtracted from SV of the mitral valve to obtain regurgitant volume (RV). Regurgitant fraction (RF) can be calculated from the ratio of RV to SV through the mitral valve. RV less than 30 ml is mild, and greater than 60 ml is severe. Errors can be introduced with incorrect measurements of the annulus, angulation, and VTI.

**3. Continuous Wave Doppler Method**

Apart from PISA, as mentioned above, the peak velocity of 4 to 6 m/s and the density of the jet have been directly correlated with significant MR. Also, early peaking of maximal systolic velocity, dense Doppler envelope, and triangular jet on CW is suggestive of severe MR in the central jet, but they are not reliable in eccentric jet due to lack of alignment to Doppler signal.

**4. Pulmonary Vein Flow Method**

In normal conditions, the pulmonary venous flow velocity is higher in systole than in diastole. But with progressive MR, the systolic velocity gets blunted, and in severe MR, it gets reversed, which is considered a very specific sign. Sometimes, a reversal of flow selectively occurs in one over other pulmonary veins. Hence, it is recommended to assess the flow in all pulmonary veins. In the presence of elevated LA pressure and atrial fibrillation, the reversal of flow may not be prominent.

Given the advantages and disadvantages of all these quantification techniques, it is recommended to utilize as many parameters as possible during TTE/TEE for a comprehensive assessment of MR. All these methods have provided uniform applicable criteria as well as reproducibility of data for long-term follow-up.

Recent advances in cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) have enhanced the assessment of the mitral valve apparatus.

Left heart catheterization with coronary angiography and right heart catheterization for hemodynamic assessment of MR is usually done after the confirmation of significant MR with noninvasive investigations and patients being considered for surgical/transcatheter interventional treatment. With advanced noninvasive modalities, the use of contrast left ventriculography for assessment of MR has gone down. Nevertheless, MR grade of more than 3 to 4 on ventriculogram portends severe MR. Assessment of coronary anatomy for ischemic MR is very important to determine percutaneous versus surgical intervention. Recent data shows that sensitivity and specificity for the correlation between MR and magnitude of large V wave in right heart catheterization have changed but remain a reliable parameter.