Togaviridae family:

- Chikungunya virus, an alphavirus, can be transmitted to humans by infected Aedes mosquitoes, maternal-fetal transmission, and blood products.

- Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus is transmitted via infected Culiseta melanura as well as some Aedes, Coquillettidia, and Culex mosquitoes. The incubation period is 4 to 10 days after the mosquito bite. Peak incidence for infection is during the months of August and September. However, infections can occur year-round.

- Western equine encephalitis (WEE) virus is transmitted by infected Culex mosquitoes. The virus can be found in North and South America. Less than 1% of infected adults develop encephalitis.

- Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE) virus has both epizootic subtypes transmitted by many mosquitoes and enzootic subtypes transmitted by infected Culex mosquitoes

Flaviviridae family:

- Dengue virus is transmitted by Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus mosquitoes. Clinically, this virus can cause disease, which can be classified into 3 categories: dengue without warning signs, dengue with warning signs, and severe dengue. Studies have shown that these viruses are directly neurotropic and can cause encephalitis.

- Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is an important cause of arthropod-borne virus encephalitis in Asia. The virus is transmitted via Culex species, predominantly by Culex tritaeniorhynchus, and is endemic in Asia.

- Murray valley encephalitis (MVE) virus is transmitted via Culex annulirostris mosquitoes. Geographically, this virus is restricted to Australia, New Guinea, and Indonesia. The incubation period is between 1-4 weeks, and most patients will initially have symptoms of a flu-like illness. Mortality rates in individuals with severe infection are between 15%-30%.

- St. Louis encephalitis (SLE) virus is an important flavivirus in the US. It is transmitted via Culex mosquitoes in the Americas. Transmission occurs in the summer months when mosquitos are active. Patients typically have a flu-like illness prior to developing any neurological manifestations. Mortality rates are higher in those patients who are over the age of 60. Neurological disease has also been described in the postinfectious period.

- West Nile virus (WNV), a mosquito-borne flavivirus, is an important cause of endemic encephalitis in the US. Cases should be suspected in individuals who have had recent mosquito exposure, organ transplantation, or blood transfusion. Additional risk factors for symptomatic infection include immunosuppressed individuals, patients with multiple co-morbidities, and the elderly. This virus is transmitted via infected Culex mosquitos, and individuals become viremic when the virus replicates in dendritic cells and macrophages, resulting in dissemination within the human host. Most infections related to WNV are asymptomatic, and less than 1% of individuals develop neurological disease. There are currently no vaccines available for use in humans.

- Powassan virus is an RNA virus that can be transmitted by Ixodes scapularis, Ixodes cookei, and Ixodes marxi. Most cases occur in the Northeast and Great Lakes regions in the US and follow a similar distribution as Lyme disease. There are a limited number of case reports of this virus in the medical literature, however, most recognized cases present with neurological findings.

- Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) virus is transmitted via Ixodes persulcatus and Ixodes ricinus in Europe and Russia as well as Ixodes ovatus in Japan. The incubation period lasts from 7 to 14 days, and the illness is known to be biphasic with neurological manifestations occurring during the second phase. Mortality outcomes differ with varying subtypes, with outcomes being worse in the Far Eastern group.

- Zika virus, another mosquito-borne flavivirus, is primarily transmitted via Aedes aegypti, although it can also be transmitted by Aedes albopictus. Transmission can also occur via maternal-fetal transmission, sexual transmission, blood products, organ transplantation, and laboratory exposures.

Bunyaviridae family:

- La Crosse encephalitis virus (LACV) is transmitted via Aedes triseriatus and is considered to be the most pathogenic member of the California encephalitis serogroup. Transmission occurs from July-September. Although many infected individuals are asymptomatic, 89% of reported cases in 2016 were neuroinvasive in the US.

- California encephalitis virus (CEV) is transmitted via Aedes mosquitoes. Although the California serogroup was named after this virus, it has rarely been implicated in CNS disease.

Reoviridae family:

- Colorado tick fever virus is transmitted via Dermacentor andersoni, a Rocky Mountain wood tick. Geographically, this virus is limited to the western US and Canada. 5% to 10% of infected children can develop neuroinvasive disease, however, mortality rates of this disease remain low.