**Percutaneous Implants**

The location of the implant is first mapped along the temporal line between 5.5 and 6 cm posterior to the external auditory canal. Many surgeons mark the periosteum at this point transcutaneously with methylene blue before making a skin incision. However, these measurements may be made (or confirmed) after the incision is made.

The skin thickness at the anticipated implant location is then evaluated so that the appropriate length abutment may be chosen. When placing a transcutaneous device, it is crucial to ensure scalp thickness lies within manufacture guidelines to ensure the proper function of the transcutaneous magnet. Once an accurate measurement of the skin and subcutaneous tissues at the site are obtained, an abutment 2 to 3 mm longer than the measured skin and soft tissue thickness is chosen. Of note, it is important to perform this measurement before infiltration with local anesthesia to obtain an accurate measurement.

The skin incision is usually designed approximately 5 mm anterior or posterior to the implant site and approximately 2 cm in length. Local anesthesia is then infiltrated according to surgeon preference. An incision is made through the skin and subcutaneous tissues to the periosteum. A subcutaneous flap is created by gently elevating the subcutaneous tissues from the periosteum until the previously marked implant site is located. Correct placement of this site is confirmed. The periosteum at the implant site is then incised and removed.

During any osseointegration procedure, adequate irrigation is imperative during drilling to avoid thermal injury, which can adversely affect adequate osseointegration. A guide drill is then used to create an opening to a depth of 3 mm. The site is then inspected to ensure no soft tissue or dura is encountered. Once this is confirmed, the bone is drilled to a depth of 4 mm. A bony well for the implant is then created with a countersink drill.

If the soft tissue thickness was measured to be more than 10 mm, thinning of the soft tissue over the implant site is performed. The abutment is mounted on the implant. The drill is decreased to a rate of thirty to forty rpm, and the implant is placed again with adequate irrigation to avoid thermal injury to the bone. The implant is tightened to 25 newtons. The soft tissue is then draped over the implant, and a 5 mm skin punch is performed to exteriorize the abutment. The incision is then closed according to the surgeon's preference. A pre-manufactured cap is usually attached to the abutment when it is left in place for one week.

**Transcutaneous Implants**

The surgical procedure for transcutaneous implants is similar to that of the percutaneous systems, except no percutaneous punch is made. The bony area immediately surrounding the implant location must be flat or drilled until it is flat to facilitate the transcutaneous device.

**Percutaneous and Transcutaneous Outcomes**

Percutaneous and transcutaneous bone-anchored systems have been shown to provide audiological benefits compared to unaided conditions. Additional studies have shown that percutaneous and transcutaneous implants provide audiologically equivalent conductive hearing rehabilitation, while percutaneous devices provide a minor advantage when a sensorineural hearing loss component is present.

**Middle Ear Implantable Hearing Prosthesis**

**Operative Technique**

Although the technique varies among devices, the key steps between most devices are consistent. The implant location is identified according to manufacture guidelines but often posterior pinna at the level of the zygomatic root. The skin over the expected implantation site is measured using the method described above. A postauricular incision is performed, the periosteum is incised, and a subperiosteal pocket is created.

A cortical mastoidectomy is then performed, followed by a facial recess approach. Of note, the placement of middle ear implanted devices often require larger facial recess exposure than cochlear implant procedures. Thus, close attention to the annulus and chorda-tympani nerve is imperative to avoid damage to these structures. The wound bed is then irrigated copiously to remove all blood and bone dust. Adequate exposure is then confirmed with a measuring device or dummy prosthesis according to the specific implant and location.

The implant is then secured to the target location according to the specific device and anatomy. It is important to avoid contact of the device with the cochlear promontory, tympanic membrane, or pyramidal eminence. After adequate device placement is achieved, the periosteum is approximate with suture, and the postauricular incision is closed according to surgeon preference.

**Outcomes**

Klieb et al. conducted a systematic review of active middle ear implants. This showed improvement in sound localization and speech in noise, but current data regarding the audiological outcomes and complications associated with these devices remains limited.