COVID-19, the illness caused by SARS-CoV-2, primarily affects the respiratory system and is spread mainly from person to person through respiratory particles from activities such as coughing and sneezing. Most transmission occurs from close contact with presymptomatic, asymptomatic, or symptomatic carriers. Transmission with aerosol-generating procedures and contamination of inanimate surfaces with SARS-CoV-2 has also been implicated in the spread of COVID-19. Epidemiologic data from several case studies have reported that patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection have the live virus present in feces implying possible fecal-oral transmission.

The median incubation period for SARS-CoV-2 is estimated to be 5.1 days, and the majority of patients will develop symptoms within 11.5 days of infection.

Another large meta-analysis that aimed to summarize clinicopathological characteristics of 8697 patients with COVID-19 in China reported laboratory abnormalities that included lymphopenia (47.6%), elevated C-reactive protein levels (65.9%), elevated cardiac enzymes (49.4%), and abnormal liver function tests (26.4%).

Based on the severity of presenting illness, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has issued guidelines that classify COVID-19 into five distinct types into which adults with SARS-CoV-2 infection can be grouped. It considers the severity of clinical symptoms, laboratory and radiographic abnormalities, hemodynamics, and organ function.

- **Asymptomatic or Presymptomatic****Infection**: Individuals with positive SARS-CoV-2 test without any clinical symptoms consistent with COVID-19.

- **Mild illness**: Individuals who have any symptoms of COVID-19, such as fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anosmia, or dysgeusia but without shortness of breath or abnormal chest imaging.

- **Moderate illness**: Individuals with clinical symptoms or radiologic evidence of lower respiratory tract disease and with oxygen saturation (SpO2) ≥ 94% on room air.

- **Severe illness**: Individuals who have (SpO2) ≤ 94% on room air; a ratio of partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen, (PaO2/FiO2) <300 with marked tachypnea with respiratory frequency >30 breaths/min or lung infiltrates >50%.Neutrophilia is also considered an essential hallmark of severe illness.

- **Critical illness**: Individuals with acute respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction. Patients with severe disease may become critically ill with the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which tends to occur approximately one week after the onset of symptoms. A multicenter prospective observational study that analyzed 28-day mortality in mechanically ventilated patients with ARDS concluded that COVID-19 ARDS patients had similar ARDS features from other causes. The risk of 28-day mortality increased with ARDS severity.

The frequency of the spectrum of disease was described in a report from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention that reported mild disease in 81% of patients, severe disease (with shortness of breath, hypoxia, or abnormal imaging) in 14%, critical disease (respiratory failure, shock, multiorgan dysfunction in 5%, and an overall case fatality rate of 2.3%.

**Extrapulmonary Manifestations of COVID-19**

- **Neurologic manifestations**: Besides anosmia and ageusia, other neurological findings include headache, stroke, impairment of consciousness, seizure disorder, and toxic metabolic encephalopathy. Five patients with COVID-19 developed Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) based on a case series report from Northern Italy.

- **Cardiac manifestations:**Myocardial injury manifesting as myocardial ischemia/infarction (MI) and myocarditis are well-recognized cardiac manifestations in patients with COVID-19. Other common cardiac manifestations include arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and cardiogenic shock. A single-center retrospective study analysis of 187 patients with confirmed COVID-19 reported that 27.8% of patients exhibited myocardial injury indicated by elevated troponin levels. The study also noted that patients with elevated troponin levels had more frequent malignant arrhythmias and a high mechanical ventilation rate compared with patients with normal troponin levels. Pre-existing cardiovascular disease seems to be linked with worse outcomes and increased risk of death in patients with COVID-19.

- **Hematologic manifestations:**Lymphopenia is a common laboratory finding in the vast majority of patients with COVID-19. Other laboratory abnormalities include thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, elevated ESR levels, C-reactive protein (CRP), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and leukocytosis.COVID-19 is also associated with a state of coagulopathy as evidenced by the high prevalence of venous and thromboembolic events such as PE, DVT, MI, ischemic strokes, and arterial thromboses that also occurred in patients despite being maintained on prophylactic or even therapeutic systemic anticoagulation. Notably, COVID-19 is associated with markedly elevated D-dimer, fibrinogen levels, prolonged prothrombin time (PT), and partial thromboplastin time(aPTT) patients at risk of developing arterial and venous thrombosis.

- **Renal manifestations:**Patients hospitalized with severe COVID-19 are at risk for developing kidney injury, most commonly manifesting as acute kidney injury (AKI), which is likely multifactorial in the setting of hypervolemia, drug injury, vascular injury, and drug-related injury, and possibly direct cytotoxicity of the virus itself. AKI is the most frequently encountered extrapulmonary manifestation of COVID-19 and is associated with increased mortality risk.

- **Gastrointestinal manifestations:**Based on a meta-analysis by Elmunzer et al.; that involved 1992 patients across 36 centers,1052 patients (53%) experienced GI symptoms, with the most common reported symptoms being diarrhea (34%), nausea (27%), vomiting (16%), abdominal pain (11%).

- **Hepatobiliary manifestations:**Elevations in liver function tests are frequently noted in 14% to 53% of patients with COVID-19 infection.

- **Endocrinologic manifestations:**Patients with pre-existing endocrinologic disorders such as diabetes mellitus are at increased risk of developing severe illness. Clinical manifestations such as abnormal blood glucose levels, euglycemic ketosis, and diabetic ketoacidosis have been noted in patients hospitalized with COVID-19.