To date, there remains a lack of standardization of bone turnover marker reference values; as such, the International Osteoporosis Foundation (IOF)–International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) Joint Working Group on Bone Marker Standards (WG-BMS) concluded that markers are not ready to be incorporated in daily clinical practice. Founded in 2012 as an initiative to maximize standardization of CTX-1 and P1NP assays to make them prepared for the clinical environment, the IFCC-IOF Working Group for the Standardization of Bone Marker Assays is currently working on a study to facilitate the availability of testing and reference values for osteoporosis clinics worldwide.

Interpretation of bone turnover markers concentrations is thus a continuing challenge as there is still a lack of consensus on universal reference interval values, making it difficult to identify bone turnover rates as low, normal, or high. Individual studies have outlined country-specific reference ranges to analyze their data, with P1NP and CTX-1 reference values obtained using cohorts in Europe, Asia, and North America, all showing similar values.

Those studies examining the risk fracture of healthy untreated postmenopausal women have overall shown postmenopausal women with higher BTMs to be at increased risk of fragility fracture. One such study reported specifically that study participants exhibiting BTM levels in the highest quartile amongst the study cohort were twice as likely to experience bone fragility fracture within the next five years in comparison to those in the first, second and third quartiles.

When evaluating CTX-1 and/or P1NP values to monitor adherence and good response to anti-osteoporotic medication regimen, conclusions on absolute values indicating adequate treatment are also lacking. The majority of studies have focused on establishing reference intervals for oral bisphosphonates, as they are first-line therapy in osteoporosis treatment and carry a high noncompliance rate. Several studies have recommended that the goals of bisphosphonate therapy in postmenopausal women should aim to achieve BTM levels that fall on the lower half of the reference interval determined by healthy, premenopausal women BTM levels;

LSC for CTX-1 and P1NP vary by study; however, results overall have proven to be similar to values reported in the TRIO study on postmenopausal osteoporotic women undergoing oral bisphosphonate therapy. This study reported values at 12 weeks of treatment CTX-1 and P1NP LSC and observed effect value obtained using the two prominent automated assays currently on the market. For CTX-1 and P1NP, LSC and premenopausal RI were found to be -56% and 0.13-0.81 microgram/L and -38% and 15 to 54 microgram/L, respectively. However, in addition to the need to validate these findings on a larger scale, other limitations found included some patients showing BTM levels already in the lower half of the RI before treatment initiation. LSC method requires patients having levels checked before initiation of treatment, which is not standard clinical practice for reasons discussed throughout this article.