When the endothelium of a blood vessel is damaged, reflexive neural stimulation causes transient vasoconstriction of the involved vessel. Additionally, the damaged cells release endothelin, further promoting vessel constriction in an attempt to limit blood loss. Subendothelial collagen becomes exposed at the site of injury. The plasma glycoprotein von Willebrand factor (vWF), released from the Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells, binds to the exposed collagen and serves as the site of platelet adhesion to the disrupted vessel surface. Platelets bind to vWF using their GPIb receptor. This binding results in a conformational change and activation of the platelet, causing the release of hemostatic mediators from the platelet’s granules, including additional vWF found in alpha granules to potentiate platelet accumulation.

As platelets continue to degranulate and their activation continues along a positive feedback loop, adenosine diphosphate (ADP) released from dense granules bind to P2Y1 and P2Y12 receptors located on the platelet’s membrane, inducing the expression of the GPIIb/IIIa receptor. This newly inserted platelet receptor, along with thromboxane A2 (TXA2) produced by platelet enzyme cyclooxygenase, allows for platelet aggregation. Though its role in hemostasis is currently under investigation, serotonin released from dense granules appears to function as another mediator of platelet aggregation while also promoting further vasoconstriction. Fibrinogen from alpha granules acts as a link between GPIIb/IIIa receptors on different platelets. Once platelets have linked together, a temporary platelet plug has formed, which is later fortified by the coagulation cascade of secondary hemostasis.