Infantile spasms can be classified into two, well-known groupings of symptomatic and cryptogenic. An additional subgroup of cryptogenic proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) is known as idiopathic infantile spasm.

Symptomatic IS is described in patients with an “identified etiology and/or significant developmental delay at the time of spasm onset.”

**Prenatal**

- CNS Malformations: The most common central nervous system (CNS) malformation to occur in the prenatal period, accounting for 30% of cases, is cortical dysplasia. Cerebral dysgenesis, lissencephaly, holoprosencephaly, and hemimegalencephaly account for the additional CNS malformations that can be associated with IS.

- Neurocutaneous Disorders: Neurocutaneous disorders need to be considered as an etiology for IS. The most common neurocutaneous disorder to be associated with infantile spasms and accounting for 10% to 30% of prenatal causes is tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) in which 68% of patients will have IS.

- Chromosome Abnormalities: Down syndrome is the most common chromosomal abnormality to be associated with IS. Up to 15% of prenatal causes of IS are attributed to chromosome abnormalities including 18q duplication, 7q duplication, deletion of MAGI2 gene on chromosome 7q11.23-q21.11, and partial 2p trisomy.

- Genetic Mutations: In addition to chromosomal abnormalities genetic mutations such as those encoding the forkhead protein G1, syntaxin-binding protein 1, calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase, ALG13, pyridoxamine-5’-phosphate oxidase, and adenylosuccinate lyase have been identified to be associated with IS.

- Inborn Errors of Metabolism: Twenty-five metabolic disorders have associations with IS. Phenylketonuria is the most common inborn error of metabolism with etiological associations with IS in countries where PKU is not identified at birth; this accounts for 12% of patients with PKU.

- Congenital Infections: The last prenatal insult that must be considered with associations to IS is congenital infections. These congenital infections include toxoplasmosis, syphilis, cytomegalovirus, and Zika virus.

**Perinatal**

Though prenatal factors account for the greatest proportion of cases of symptomatic IS, perinatal causes of IS to include hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and neonatal hypoglycemia also have etiologic associations with IS. Low birth weight is another factor that is 3 to 4 times more prominent in children with IS than that of the general population. At this time there has been no association found between IS and prematurity.

**Postnatal**

The last etiological associations with symptomatic IS are postnatal insults; these include traumatic injury, near drowning, tumors, and CNS infections with attribution of 15% to 67% of cases of symptomatic IS.

As noted above, IS is classified as symptomatic when there is an identifiable cause in addition to developmental delay present prior to the onset of spasms. Cryptogenic IS has no identifiable cause and the following criteria: no other kind of seizures, a normal examination, a normal CT and MRI, recurrence of hypsarrhythmia between consecutive spasms of a cluster, and lack of any focal interictal or ictal EEG abnormalities.