**Common Adverse Drug Reactions**: Amoxicillin is well-tolerated, but some common complaints can be gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.

**Superinfections**: Mucocutaneous candidiasis,clostridium difficile associated diarrhea. Of note, patients who take amoxicillin may have less diarrhea than those who take ampicillin because of better absorption in the gut.

**Nephrotoxicity**: Crystalluria, interstitial nephritis

**Hypersensitivity****Reactions**: Amoxicillin can lead to type-I, II, III, or IV reactions. It is essential to differentiate between a type-I and type-IV hypersensitivity reaction because one may be more dangerous than the other. A type-I hypersensitivity reaction is an IgE-mediated response to a sensitized patient that triggers widespread histamine release leading to an urticarial-like pruritic rash or severe anaphylaxis. A type-IV hypersensitivity reaction is not mediated by histamine release and is more papular or morbilliform and often not itchy. Professionals suggest that almost all patients that receive amoxicillin inadvertently for infectious mononucleosis develop a maculopapular rash caused by a type IV-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. These types of reactions are not known to cause anaphylaxis.

**Hepatotoxicity**: instances of idiosyncratic liver injury have been reported in persons receiving amoxicillin.  The serum enzyme pattern associated with the liver injury is the hepatocellular pattern with marked elevations in AST and ALT. There are minimal elevations in alkaline phosphatase. Most patients recover rapidly after withdrawal of amoxicillin and rapid recovery after withdrawal. The cause of the liver injury associated with amoxicillin use is hypersensitivity. Rare cases of acute liver failure and vanishing bile duct syndrome have been reported. Corticosteroids have often been used to treat the allergic manifestations of penicillin-related immunoallergic hepatitis. Likelihood score: B (highly likely but rare cause of clinically apparent liver injury).

**Postmarketing Adverse Drug Reactions**

**Gastrointestinal**: black hairy tongue, pseudomembranous colitis, hemorrhagic colitis

**Neurological**: reversible hyperactivity, agitation, anxiety, insomnia, confusion, convulsions, aseptic meningitis

**Hematological**: hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopenic purpura, eosinophilia, leukopenia, and neutropenia

**Dermatological**: serum sickness-like reactions, erythematous maculopapular rashes, exfoliative dermatitis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, hypersensitivity vasculitis