A thorough history needs to be ascertained, including:

- History of heart disease

- Symptoms of heart block

- Recent cardiac procedures

- Review of medications and dosing. Especially cardiogenic drugs such as,

- Beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and other rate-limiting drugs
- Amiodarone and other anti-arrhythmic drugs

A 12-lead ECG is required for diagnosis. The characteristic features of AV dissociation are:

- **Dissociated P Waves:**These appear as "P waves marching through the QRS complex." PR intervals might appear getting progressively shorter.

- **Capture and Fusion Beats:**Capture beats occur when an occasional atrial impulse reaches the ventricle when it is not refractory, leading to the capture of sinus rhythm. Fusion beats occur when a ventricular and supraventricular impulse simultaneously activates the ventricles. They fuse into a morphed ECG wave.

Based upon the presence or lack of capture beats, AV dissociation can be classified as incomplete or complete AV dissociation.

- **Incomplete****:**An occasional capture of an atrial beat occurs. Irregular periods of RR intervals will be witnessed, interrupted by "capture beats." Two specific variants of incomplete AV dissociation are:
- **Interference AV Dissociation****:**This occurs when impulses from the slowing SA node or independent ventricular impulses collide due to retrograde conduction. Often seem in second-degree heart block.
- **Isorhythmic AV Dissociation****:**A synchronized dissociation, while the atria and ventricles are beating independently of each other, they beat at the same rate. Thus, appearing as an association between the two chambers. This is often seen in junctional rhythms and might require a longer ECG strip for measurement.

- **Complete****:**The atria and ventricles are entirely independent of each other, giving no opportunity to capture beats. The atrial rate is often slower or equal to the ventricular rate. The PP and the RR intervals remain constant, but the PR interval varies.

Importantly, the lack of conduction of the P waves is mainly due to the timing of the P waves in relation to the QRS complex, as P waves arriving during the refractory phase of the ventricles will not be conducted. Rather than an affirmative presence of complete AV block. Current revisions of the nomenclature now recommend the classification to change to AV dissociation with or without capture beats. After confirming the presence of AV dissociation, the next step is to compare the atrial and ventricular rates to identify the presence of a complete heart block.

- Atrial rate more than ventricular rate: Diagnostic of complete heart block

- Ventricular rate more than atrial rate: rules out complete heart block

Moreover, the diagnosis of a complete heart block should not be made unless the ventricular rate is less than 40 beats per minute.