Infusion site infection, erythema, induration, tenderness to palpation, or signs of fluid leakage from the infusion site are some of the commonest problems that can arise. They are all indications for removal and the need for a new site to be chosen at a different location.

Hyperglycemia: Insulin analogs are rapid-acting, with the onset of action within 15 minutes, peaking in approximately 60 minutes, and lasting less than five hours after injection. In patients on a continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion, hyperglycemia secondary to disruption in insulin delivery must be on the differential.

The clinician should always check the infusion site during the physical exam. The easiest way to evaluate is to deliver an insulin bolus via the pump and recheck blood glucose. If blood glucose remains elevated despite insulin bolus, the tubing or infusion set is likely compromised and requires replacement.

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA): Since insulin analogs remain active for a relatively short duration, the risk for diabetic ketoacidosis is a concern as these patients do not have long-acting insulin in their system. Studies comparing the incidence of DKA in patients treated with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus multiple daily injections have demonstrated lower rates of DKA in patients on a continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion.

In rare case reports, the insulin pump site change has been associated with hypoglycemia after being injected with an unsolicited insulin bolus.