Dystonia is a neuro-functional disorder distinguished by modifications at different levels and numerous elements alongside the sensorimotor circuit. Numerous causes can lead to these disruptions and lesions along different points in interconnected pathways can yield similar motor dysfunction. Although the basal ganglia is a crucial brain region, abnormalities exist in many other regions throughout the motor circuit. Ultimately, a full comprehension of the pathophysiology of dystonia would most probably guide to a more effective, logical and directed therapy.

Because of the numerous causes of dystonia, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a neurologist, neurosurgeon, internist, pharmacist, primary care provider, therapists, and nurse practitioner. The primary treatment of dystonia is with medications and botulinum toxin. The pharmacist should educate the patient on the importance of medication compliance to control the symptoms. In addition, many patients may benefit from physical and occupational therapy. Speech therapy can retain methods to communicate and offer aids to help with speech. Some patients may require ambulatory devices.

However, treatment is often long term and the drugs also have numerous side effects. Surgery is no longer used to treat dystonia but DBS may be an option. Because dystonia is often life long, many patients develop anxiety and depression, hence a mental health nurse should be involved in the counseling of these patients. Finally, the social workers should be involved to ensure that the patient has adequate support and finances; so care is not neglected. Only through close collaboration between the team can the morbidity of dystonia be minimized.

**Outcomes**

The outlook for most patients with dystonia depends on the cause. In general, while lifespan is not reduced, the quality of life is poor.