Diagnosis of HP can be challenging and requires a combination of detailed history, HRCT findings, laboratory, and pathological examination. There is no single diagnostic test. Evaluation by an interprofessional team of pulmonologist, radiologist, pathologist, and social worker is recommended for making a prompt definitive diagnosis.

**Laboratory**

Blood counts and metabolic panels are usually normal. Inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are typically elevated.

Serum precipitins (IgG antibodies) against potential organic antigens- molds, fungi, grain dust can be assayed in patient’s serum. Identification of the offending agent is critical in diagnosing HP and advocating preventive measures. Unfortunately a positive IgG antibody only indicates exposure and does not confirm diagnosis. Moreover these tests have very high false-negative rates and the specific antigen may not be represented in the testing panel. Hence, a positive test does not confirm diagnosis and a negative test does not rule out a diagnosis of HP.

**Environmental Sampling**

When the suspected inciting factor is not commercially available, a sampling of settled dust at home or workplace environment may be required. Dust extracts from these samples can be used in specific IgG-inhibition tests with the patient’s serum.

**Inhalational Challenge**

If the patient develops clinical symptoms on exposure to the suspected antigen associated with a drop in spirometry values and radiographic changes, this would help confirm the diagnosis. This can be only performed at specialized centers and often standardized antigen preparations are not available.

**Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT)**

Spirometry often reveal a restrictive pattern along with a significantly reduced FEF due to small airways involvement. Lung volume measurements reveal a restrictive ventilatory pattern. Marked impairment in diffusion capacity (DLCO) is also noted. An obstructive or a mixed pattern of PFTs has also been described. PFTs aid in defining disease severity, monitor progression of disease and predict prognosis.

**Plain Chest Radiograph**

Patients often have normal chest radiographs. Patchy or diffuse airspace opacities, rarely consolidations are seen typically sparing apices and bases. In the chronic stage when fibrosis develops, an upper zone predominant reticular interstitial pattern with volume loss may be seen.

**High Resolution CT Scan****(HRCT)**

The classic HRCT finding is upper and middle lobe predominant patchy ground-glass or nodular opacities in a bronchovascular distribution, with evidence of air trapping. On expiratory images, mosaic attenuation indicative of air trapping is better appreciated. The heterogeneous appearance on CT scan of subacute HP with areas of ground glass or nodular opacities (high attenuation), air trapping (low attenuation) and normal parenchyma is referred to as the "head cheese sign." This appearance is compared to the cut surface of head cheese which is made from pieces of meat made from various parts of different animals. Accuracy of diagnosis based on HRCT can be as high as 92%.

As the disease progresses increased reticulation indicative of fibrosis and traction bronchiectasis are seen. Thin-walled cystic changes, parenchymal distortion and mediastinal lymphadenopathy can also be seen in chronic HP. The presence of reticulation and honeycombing can make it difficult to make a distinction from usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) or nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP). The relative sparing of bases and presence of air trapping favors HP over UIP or NSIP. Presence of honeycombing and traction bronchiectasis predicts higher mortality in chronic HP.

**Flexible Bronchoscopy**

Flexible bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in HP typically reveals lymphocytosis (often greater than 50%) and low CD4:CD8 ratio. This is not diagnostic of HP but only provides supportive evidence. Sarcoidosis has normal cell counts, with neutrophilia and high CD4:CD8 ratio. Lymphocytosis may not be seen in chronic HP and but the presence of lymphocytosis helps to differentiate it from UIP.

**Lung Biopsy**

If a definitive diagnosis cannot be reached after a comprehensive evaluation, then lung biopsy should be pursued. Transbronchial lung biopsy has a limited diagnostic role in HP as it does not yield enough tissue. In a small minority of patients with classic clinical and radiographic presentation, transbronchial lung biopsy should suffice to make the diagnosis. Surgical lung biopsies are often required in subacute and chronic HP to make a definitive diagnosis. Transbronchial cryobiopsy is a new tool utilized to obtain larger tissue samples.