Restoration of glottic competence may improve voice quality, dysphagia, and reduce the risk of aspiration. Addressing these symptoms may improve the patient’s overall quality of life. The patient’s characteristics such as age, occupation, social circumstances as well as their preferences will help dictate management.

Whatever the specific etiology of the glottic insufficiency, voice therapy usually plays a significant role. For unilateral vocal fold paralysis, voice therapy is the initial management choice since up to 60% of cases will resolve spontaneously.

Surgical options for glottic insufficiency due to unilateral paralysis or paresis aim to medialize the affected vocal fold such that glottic closure is achievable during phonation and the lower airway is better protected. The techniques employed are Injection augmentation, medialization thyroplasty (type 1 thyroplasty), laryngeal reinnervation, and arytenoid adduction.

Injection augmentation utilizes a variety of materials injected into the vocal fold that provides bulk to restore a more normal form to the vocal fold. It confers the advantage of producing immediate results and is a more minimally invasive option compared with laryngeal framework surgery. Materials currently used include absorbable hemostatic powder, bovine and human-derived collagen, fat, dermal filler (calcium hydroxylapatite), hyaluronic acid gels, and micro-ionized acellular dermis.

In medialization thyroplasty, the position of the vocal cord is medialized by an external approach in which a permanent implant is placed through a thyroid cartilage window intraoperatively, often with conscious sedation and intra-operative voice analysis (albeit crude, given the patient is heavily sedated). Medialization thyroplasty using various implants, commonly expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (**E-PTFE**) or Silastic, is deemed the gold standard treatment for large glottic gaps and is the mainstay surgical intervention for unilateral vocal cord palsy.

Arytenoid adduction involves recreating the pull of the lateral cricoarytenoid muscle thus repositioning the vocal process medially. It tends not to be used as the sole procedure but is useful as an adjunct where there is impaired vocal process contact but some residual vocal fold motion.

Non-selective laryngeal reinnervation involves anastomosing the ansa cervicalis to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, with the goal of maintaining the thyroarytenoid muscle bulk and tone. It has the potential for excellent vocal functioning as the vocal cords remain pliable compared with other techniques.

For the treatment of sulcus vocalis and vocal fold scars, along with injection augmentation and medialization and laryngoplasty, which address the glottic gap, epithelium freeing techniques are commonly employed in combination with injection augmentation or implantation to help improve the vibratory function of the vocal fold.