Alendronate is available in 5 mg, 10 mg, 35 mg, 40 mg, or 70 mg oral tablets; 70 mg tablet for solution; and 70 mg/75 mL oral solution.

Clinical indication directs dosing guidelines:

- Postmenopausal women: 5 mg oral tablet daily or 35 mg oral tablet once weekly

- Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: 5 mg oral tablet once daily or 10 mg oral tablet once daily in women not undergoing hormone replacement therapy

- Paget disease of the bone: 40 mg/day oral tablet for six months

- Pediatric patients: Safety and efficacy have not been established

- Severe renal impairment: Dosing not recommended; seek alternative treatment

- Low-risk of fracture: Consider drug discontinuation after 3 to 5 years of use.

Alendronate was a pregnancy Category C drug under the prior FDA classification system. It is unknown whether alendronate gets excreted in the milk of lactating women; use the drug during lactation with caution.

Alendronate should be taken in the morning with a full glass of water on an empty stomach in an upright position. Individuals should remain in an upright position for 30 minutes after intake to decrease the risk of adverse reactions. Do not chew, suck, or crush the tablet.

Patients taking human parathyroid hormone should avoid taking alendronate. This combination can reduce calcium-sparing effects, thus impacting serum calcium concentrations unfavorably.

Iles B. et al. created an experimental dosage form of alendronate nanoparticles that caused fewer gastric lesions in Wistar rats and demonstrated no toxicity in murine osteoblastic cells.