# Introduction

Sir Harold Ridley implanted the first intraocular lens (IOL) in 1949.

In most patients, emmetropia is the targeted post-operative refraction, while some patients are targeted for residual myopia.

Apart from the axial length and keratometry, other parameters may also be required, such as anterior chamber depth and the corneal white-to-white distance.

# Function

All patients need near-perfect visual outcomes. This necessitates a highly accurate calculation of IOL power. IOL formula calculation was first started in 1960. Fyodorov first devised a formula to predict the IOL power that would allow the refracted ray of light to fall on the retina.

The formula was based on three parameters: axial length (AL), corneal refractive power (K), and anterior chamber depth (ACD). This formula was used for anterior chamber IOLs. This formula stressed knowing where the IOL will rest after surgery. This position is known as the effective lens position (ELP). This is the only parameter that cannot be measured preoperatively. ELP is defined as the effective distance between the anterior surface of the cornea and the lens plane, assuming that the lens is infinitely thin.

This ELP is the main limiting factor for postoperative refractive predictability, as the axial length and corneal power are accurately measured.

**Regression formulae**: They are based on a mathematical and statistical analysis of many adult postoperative results. These formulae do not take into account the optics of the eye.

**Vergence formulae**: They are based on Gaussian optics. There are six variables in this theoretic formula which are

- Net corneal power (K)

- Axial length (AL)

- IOL power (IOLP)

- Effective lens position (ELP)

- Desired refraction (D Post Rx)

- Vertex distance (V)

# Issues of Concern

ELP cannot be measured, but it can be predicted. The IOL manufacturer predicts the form of the A-constant.

All these factors, when taken into account, can predict the accurate IOL power for the desired refraction for a specific eye. As these various vergence formulae use up to 6 biometry parameters, the accuracy of these formulae depends on accurate biometry. All the biometry measurements can now be obtained in a single biometry machine which simplifies the IOL calculation and selection. Furthermore, newer imaging modalities, such as swept-source optical coherence tomography, have improved the repeatability of biometry measurements.

Over time, regression-based derivations have been incorporated into each new generation of formulae to predict the refractive behavior and outcomes of IOLs in eyes with different anatomical dimensions.

Based on these variables, the IOL formulae can also be categorized as the following:

1) First-generation formula. 2) Second generation formula 3) Third generation formula 4) Fourth generation formula

**First-generation**

In 1967, Fyodorov developed his theoretical formula based on keratometry and axial length. Soon many authors devised their theoretical formula. In 1980 multiple papers were published on large IOL series. All authors found that axial length and keratometry were the most important parameters. Thus the SRK formula was devised, which was P= A - 2.5L - 0.9K.

**Second-generation**The first-generation formulae were quite accurate in regular eyes. But it did not work in extremely long or short eyes. Thus there was a need to adjust the formula for the axial length to be accurately factored. The second generation regression formula, the SRK II, was developed by adding a C-value to the original SRK formula: P= A - 2.5L - 0.9K + C.

If the axial length is 10 to 20 mm, the C value is 3. If the axial length is 20 to 21 mm, the C value is 2.0. IF 21 to 22 mm, the C value is 1. For 22 to 24.5 mm, it is 0. If the axial length is more than 24.5, the C value is -0.5. Other formulae, such as Hoffer's adjustment of ACD and the modified Binkhorst Formula, used the measured axial length.

**Third-generation**

The first generation of IOL formulae had a fixed constant for all axial lengths, such as the A constant in the SRK formula.

Holladay 1 formula divided the ACD into corneal thickness, the distance between the endothelium and iris, plus the distance between the iris and the lens. The last measurement was known as the surgeon factor, which varied according to the lens type. This factor required optimization.

Hoffer Q formula recommended a personalized ACD.

**Fourth-generation**

The third-generation formulae were fair in the IOL power calculations. But still, they needed refinement. More studies were going on that incorporated more patient parameters to further decrease postoperative refractive errors. The Haigis formula introduced three A constants such as a0, a1, and a2. All three constants can be personalized to refine the IOL power.

The Barrett formula was introduced, which was based on a model eye. It incorporated the final plane of the position of the IOL, which increased its accuracy.

Newer technologies are evolving to refine these formulae further. It is difficult to calculate the exact IOL power in high myopes. A Wang-Koch (WK) adjustment has been suggested to some third- and fourth-generation formulae to optimize the calculation for AL >25 mm.

Apart from the vergence and regression-based formulae, newer techniques have evolved in the last few years for IOL power calculation with increased accuracy.

**Ray tracing method**: The Olsen formula is based on studying axial and paraxial light through the eye with a particular IOL.

**Artificial intelligence**: The Hill-radial basis function (RBF) calculator combines artificial intelligence with regression analysis of a large postsurgical patient to calculate the IOL power.

Then there is Ladas formula, also known as the super formula.

**Optimization**

In the SRK formula, P=A-(2.5xAL)-(0.9xK). A is the lens constant. Its value depends upon the lens design, its make, haptic angulation, surgeon, and surgery method. The A constant can vary between individual surgeons for a particular cataract surgery technique. The A constant can vary for different IOL and surgical methods for a particular surgeon. The manufacturer provides the value of A constant, but every surgeon should optimize this value according to his surgical technique and IOL used. This is known as the optimization of the lens constant. Optimization is the process of finding the specific value of a lens constant, which, when used for that particular IOL type, will result in exact IOL power calculations.

The SRK formula can also be expressed as A= P+(2.5xAL)+(0.9xK). To know the A constant, one must know the ideal IOL power of that patient. That will depend upon the stable postoperative refractive error. This value will tell us how much deviation there is from the actual IOL power. Suppose a patient has a postoperative refractive error of +2.0D, and the IOL power implanted was 20.0D. It would be incorrect to assume that the ideal IOL power would be 22.0D because the refractive error at the spectacle plane is not the same as that at the IOL plane. To calculate the ideal IOL power using spectacle plane refraction, a Refractive Factor (RF) is needed. The RF is a value that needs to be multiplied by the refractive error to give us an estimate of the error at the IOL plane. Modern estimates of this RF value are in the range of 1.3 to 1.8.

If one takes RF as 1.5, in this example, the ideal power, Power (ideal)= Power (implanted)+ Refractive error X RF. Power (ideal)= 20.0+ (2x1.5)=23.0D. For myopic errors, the minus sign of the error would result in a lower actual IOL power. This process of back-calculation of the A-constant has to be repeated for several cases involving the same IOL model and surgery type. In each case, the A-constant is likely to be different, all these values are then averaged, and the resultant value is the optimized A-constant. This can be used for prospective calculations in place of the A-constant provided by the manufacturer.

There are two components to accurate IOL power calculation – precise biometry and accurate IOL power calculation formulae.

**Biometry**

Biometry is the process of determining the ideal intraocular lens power by measuring the corneal power and the axial length of the eye. Earlier ultrasound was used to measure the axial length. It required contact with the ocular surface. This applanation A-scan caused variable corneal compression and was prone to error.

In 1998 optical biometry was introduced, which used infrared light. It was a non-contact instrument, and the measurement did not alter the axial length; thus, it was quite accurate.

**PCI**: This technology was developed in 1986 by Fercher and Roth. It utilizes infrared light, which is directed inside the eye. The different tissue planes reflect this light. Interferometric techniques are then applied to measure the axial length.**OLCR**:  It uses the principle of a Michealson interferometer. A superluminescent diode produces a low-coherence infrared light which is then split into double beams by a coupler. One beam is directed into the eye, and the other is projected to a scanning reference mirror. The various tissue planes then reflect this light. The emitted and reflected lights form an interference pattern detected by a detector and analyzed.

**SSOCT**: This technology uses a swift, sweeping laser as the light source. The interference pattern captured undergoes Fourier transformation.

**Optical Biometers**

**IOL Master 500**: This machine from Carl Zeiss uses an infrared laser of 780nm wavelength and is based on PCI technology. It is highly accurate, up to 0.02 mm.**Nidek's AL-Scan**: It uses PCI technology to measure axial length, ACD, WTW, pupil size, central corneal thickness (CCT), keratometry, and corneal topography. It also comes with an ultrasound pachymeter and A-scan.

**Lenstar LS-900:**This machine uses OLCR technology. A superluminescent diode produces an 820 nm low-coherent beam of light. It can measure lens thickness, axial length, ACD, keratometry, anterior corneal topography, WTW, and pupil diameter. The corneal topography is useful in planning toric IOL cases. All IOL calculation formulae are incorporated, including Barrett Suite, Hill-radial basis function (RBF), Masket, Modified Masket, and Shammas. It was one of the first devices to measure lens thickness (LT).

**IOL Master 700:**This device is based on SS-OCT technology. It has a scan speed of 2000 scans per second. The inbuilt OCT scans the different ocular structures. The OCT image of the fovea allows the clinician to determine whether the fixation is central or not. It can measure both the anterior and posterior corneal curvature. It can take measurements in dense cataracts and opaque media. All the modern IOL power calculation formulae, including the Barret suite consisting of the Barret Universal 2, the Barrett True K, and the Barrett Toric, are available. It can also link with the Callisto eye system for toric IOL implantation.

**Tomey's OA 2000**: This instrument uses a Placido disc-based topographer with an SS-OCT-based biometer. It measures keratometry, CCT, ACD, AL, LT, WTW, pupillometry, and corneal topography. All modern IOL power calculation formulae, including ones based on ray tracing, are available on board.

**Eyestar 900**(Haag-Streit): It is an SS-OCT-based device. It can do elevation-based corneal topography, intraoperative aberrometry, and wavefront aberrometry during cataract surgery. This can make aphakic and pseudophakic refractive measurements. Real-time information on the toric IOL axis placement and position of limbal relaxing incisions can be taken by attaching it to the surgical microscope. Intraoperative aberrometry is useful in toric IOL, multifocal IOL, accommodative IOL, and post-refractive surgery cataract patients.

**Pentacam-AXL:**The Oculus Pentacam-AXL combines an elevation-based tomographer and a PCI-based optical biometer. A rotating Scheimpflug camera maps the corneal tomography, and PCI technology is used to determine the axial length. It also measures CCT and WTW. The advantage of Pentacam AXL is the ability to measure posterior corneal astigmatism, which is useful in toric IOL planning. It is also helpful in calculating IOL power in eyes with post-refractive surgery. This device can also perform wavefront analysis. It has all the popular IOL power calculation formulae in it.

# Clinical Significance

Though much advancement has been made in IOL power calculations, there are certain situations where the power calculation becomes difficult. It is because of changing axial length, irregular corneal surface, or previous corneal surgeries. This article will discuss each scenario one by one.

**Aphakia**

In aphakia, the double lens spikes of A-scan are replaced by a single spike of the anterior vitreous face and posterior capsule. The immersion method is preferred over contact biometry. Optical biometers have inbuilt modes for aphakia and are the most accurate method.

**Pediatric Population**

The long-term refractive outcomes among the pediatric pseudophakic population are hard to predict, and it is one of the biggest challenges in managing pediatric cataracts. Elongation of the eyeball and changing corneal curvature produce a tendency for the myopic shift.

The target IOL power should prevent amblyopia in the growing age and achieve emmetropia in adulthood.

Enyedi proposed "the rule of 7". In this rule, the sum of the postoperative refractive goal and the child's age is 7. The target refraction is decided accordingly. Thus for a 1-year-old child, the postoperative refractive target should be +6, for a 2-year-old +5, for a 3-year-old +4, +3 for a 4-year-old, +2 for a 5-year-old, for a 6-year-old +1, 0 for a 7-year-old, and −1 to −2 for patients >8 years of age.

**Corneal Ectasia**

Certain conditions like keratoconus and pellucid marginal degeneration have irregular cornea. In them, reproducible estimation of corneal power is difficult because of disease progression and unstable corneal surface.

It also measures the flatter keratometry and thus avoids hyperopia. There are few studies on IOL power in corneal ectasia. In one study, Thebpatiphat et al. showed that in keratoconus patients, SRK II had the least postoperative error than the SRK and SRK/T formulae.

Wang et al. analyzed Holladay I and II, Haigis, Barrett, SRK/T, and Hoffer Q formulae in 73 eyes of keratoconus patients. He concluded that  Barrett Universal II had the least mild and moderate keratoconus error.

Previous studies have suggested good outcomes with measured K in cases with mild to moderate keratoconus (K<55D) provided slight myopia was aimed. In advanced cases (K >55D), standard keratometry with aimed slight myopia does well.

**Post-refractive Surgery**

In refractive surgery, the anterior corneal surface is ablated. This results in an altered ratio of anterior to posterior corneal surface power. This causes inaccurate estimation of ELP.

The Maloney formula uses preoperative anterior and posterior corneal power, and then post-LASIK anterior corneal power is added to calculate the post-refractive corneal power.

The Haigis-L formula uses ACD for IOL power calculation; thus, it does not require preoperative keratometry values. The Barrett True K similarly does not require preoperative data.

IOL power calculation in post-radial keratotomy (RK) eyes is a challenge. Certain inherent risks are associated with the procedure that makes accurate IOL power calculation challenging. Progressive hyperopia is one of the most common challenges. In conventional RK, the central zone is as small as 3 mm and falls beyond the usual range of the biometer's measurement (4 mm). This results in an overestimation of keratometry and subsequent hyperopia.

**After Posterior Segment S****urgery**

Pars plans vitrectomy with silicone oil tamponade have resulted in improved complicated retinal detachment surgery outcomes. But silicone oil can induce cataracts in phakic eyes. Thus phacoemulsification with lens implantation and silicone oil removal in cataractous patients. Sound velocity in aqueous and silicone oil is 1532 m/ s and  987 m/s, respectively.

The A-scan uses ultrasound to measure the axial length. Thus, the sound waves take longer to reach the transducer from the back of the eye in a silicone oil-filled globe. So the measured axial length is greater in the presence of silicone oil.

The mean ratio of true axial length to measured axial length in the presence of silicone oil is 0.71.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A patient with decreased vision due to cataracts presents to an ophthalmologist. If the patient requires cataract surgery, then the calculation of IOL power is a necessary procedure. The optometrist and the ophthalmologist should know all the generations of  IOL power formulae. They should know their indications and where to use them. The know-how of the A-scan, keratometer, and optical biometer is a must. The nursing staff, optometrist, and ophthalmologist should be conversant with the upkeep and usage of these instruments. Thus interdepartmental communication will ensure better patient management.

The primary physicians can follow up with the postoperative patients. The nursing will be the first medical staff to contact the follow-up patients. They can assess the postoperative refractive error and report any issues to the primary care clinician or the ophthalmologist. This collaborative, interdisciplinary approach to care can ensure better patient outcomes.