**The classic symptoms of the nephritic syndrome are:**

- Periorbital and pedal edema

- Hematuria with red or cola-colored urine

- Proteinuria in non-nephrotic (i.e., less than 3.5 gm/day) range and may cause foamy urine when protein content is high

- Hypertension or poorly controlled blood pressure (BP) in patients with previously controlled BP

- Renal insufficiency characterized by oliguria (reduced urine output), and azotemia, due to decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

The clinical symptoms can have a variable course. They can present with a chronic progressive course causing chronic renal failure (usual adults with postinfectious GN and RPGN) or acute self-limiting illness (usual children with post-streptococcal GN). The acute fulminant course is usually seen in all patients with crescentic glomerulonephritis.

**The pertinent questions provider should ask the patients are:**

- Periorbital puffiness in the early morning

- Edema in legs in the evening

- The change in color, odor, consistency, and output of urine

- Recent upper respiratory tract or skin infection

- Fever, fatigue

- Ulcers and rash on the extremities to rule out vasculitis

- Hemoptysis and dyspnea may be present in Goodpasture syndrome (due to cross-reacting antibodies to the alveolar epithelium) and Wegener granulomatosis (if lungs are affected). History of viral disease or exposure to hydrocarbons may be elicited in these patients.

On physical examination, the patient may have pallor and anemia. On vital examination, the patients have elevated blood pressure. The signs of fluid overload may be present, including JVP distention, pitting edema, and crackles on chest auscultation.  On cardiovascular examination, a new heart murmur can be auscultated in patients with infective endocarditis. Palpable purpura and painful and swollen joints are present in patients with systemic diseases like vasculitis, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, and SLE.