When patients are poor operative candidates, refuse surgery or have unresectable disease, definitive radiation represents the standard of care. Oncologic outcomes are generally excellent with local control rates ranging from about 85%-95% depending on size. Primary radiation is often preferred for tumors >5mm of the central face where it can yield better functional and cosmetic results than surgery, particularly for the nose, lower eyelids and ears. However, cartilaginous areas such as the tip of the nose or ear lobe are at higher risk for necrosis and lower doses per fraction should be used. Radiation over thin-skinned areas with poor circulation (e.g., distal to elbows or knees) is generally to be avoided. Due to increasing risk of fibrosis and tissue atrophy over time, radiation is also not recommended in patients younger than 50 years old.

Radiation can also be used as an adjunctive therapy for high-risk tumors. Risk factors include positive margins, perineural invasion of a named nerve, large size, lymph node positivity and extensive invasion into surrounding structures such as skeletal muscle, bone or cartilage. Doses and fields will vary based on extent of initial and residual disease, with treatment to start once fully healed from surgery.

Even in non-curative settings, radiation can play a powerful role in the management of symptomatic skin cancers. These tumors can become deeply and widely ulcerative, causing pain, disfigurement and bleeding. Palliative radiation can improve quality of life for patients who are not candidates for definitive therapy due to poor performance status, limited life expectancy or metastatic disease. Even short courses of treatment can improve pain and bleeding; longer courses can offer more durable local control with favorable toxicity profiles.