Once there is a suspicion of a pheochromocytoma, one should keep in mind that 98% of these tumors are intra-abdominal (90% in the adrenal medulla), and less than 2% are found in the chest. Of these in the chest, CP is the rarest one.

**Biochemical Testing**

- Cardiac pheochromocytoma can be confirmed or excluded with biochemical testing by using serum and urine metanephrines.

- Once pheochromocytoma is diagnosed with chemical testing, then the tumor has to be localized. Since the abdomen, especially the adrenal gland, is the most common site, intra-abdominal imaging should be done to rule out intra-abdominal pheochromocytoma.

**Tumor Localization**

The most difficult part of this tumor is not diagnosing it, but localizing it. There is a number of imaging studies (including but not limited to CT or enhanced CT, PET scan, MRI, echocardiogram, labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG), or Tc labeled octreotide) that can be used. The most important of those studies will be reviewed below.

- **Iodine labeled metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)**is the most effective method to screen for cardiac pheochromocytomas. It is very useful to identify the tumor and also detect the presence of metastasis.

- **Echocardiogram:**transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) is less sensitive than transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) as tumors are often retro-pericardiac. When the tumor is firmly and extensively adherent to the pericardium, both of them are less sensitive.

- **Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):**cardiac MRI is very sensitive compared to CT scan and echocardiogram for localization. It can also identify the relation of the tumor to the surrounding structures.

- **Cardiac angiogram (cardiac catheterization):**This is indispensable pre-operative imaging of CP. It can localize both the tumor and the feeding vessels.

In summary: MIBG, MRI, and coronary angiogram are necessary imaging modalities for tumor localization after laboratory confirmation and they should be pursued before patient is scheduled for surgical intervention.