The initial first aid at the scene should be minimal and aim at getting the patient to the nearest treatment center quickly. Varying opinions exist regarding the usefulness of placing the affected extremity in a splint and keeping it at heart level. Therefore, this should only occur if it will not delay transportation. Removal of jewelry and any constrictive clothing on the affected limb is necessary due to the possibility of swelling and circulatory compromise. The patient should be kept calm and encouraged not to exert themselves as this could increase the snake venom absorption. Pressure bandages are another controversial topic. If the identity of the snake species is known to cause neurotoxicity and no local tissue damage, the application of a pressure bandage could slow the spread of the venom. However, if the venom is known to cause local tissue damage, the implementation of the pressure bandage may worsen the damage inflicted to the extremity. Application of a tourniquet proximal to the bite results in higher morbidity without any improvement in outcomes, so this practice has been discouraged. The use of venom extractors has also demonstrated to be ineffective. Local wound manipulation, such as incision or washout, is generally not suggested.

Measurement of the progression of swelling form Crotalidae envenomation is essential to decide if antivenom is indicated. Place ink mark on the proximal edge of the bite swelling as a baseline for serial measurements. Mark the progression of swelling with a skin marker, noting the time. Measure the circumference of affected extremity at the same level each time (i.e., mid-forearm or mid-shin). Measure the swelling extension and record circumference every 15-30 minutes. Once there has not been any progression of edema after four consecutive measurements, then decrease measurement frequency to every hour. Antivenom is indicated if swelling progressed beyond the bite site.

Identification of the offending snake species will help determine the appropriate antivenom treatment. There are two antivenoms against Crotalidae approved in the United States.

**Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab**- Initial Controlling Dose.

Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab is an antivenom approved for use in the United States and has antivenom components for four species of Crotalids.

Infuse 4-6 vials (the pediatric dose is the same as an adult) for usual envenomations.

Infuse 8-12 vials for cases with shock, airway involvement, or envenomation on the face or neck

Each vial of Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab is reconstituted with 18 mL of 0.9% NS and mixed by continuous inversion until no solid particles are noted. Do not shake. Further, dilute all reconstituted vials to a total volume of 250 mL with 0.9% normal saline. Start infusion at 25-50 mL/hr. for the first 10 minutes and monitor for allergic reactions. If no acute reaction noted, infuse the remainder of 250 cc over 1 hr. Once initial control is achieved by the cessation of proximal swelling, give 2 vials of antivenom IV every 6 hrs for 3 additional doses.

**Crotalidae immune F(ab)2 Equine**is the second antivenom product approved in the United States for Crotalidae envenomation. It is derived from two snakes, from North and South America, and is an F(ab)2 derivative of the immunoglobulin, which has a longer duration of activity than the Fab fragment in Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab. Once it is decided than envenomation has occurred, and Crotalidae immune F(ab)2 is the agent available for use, infuse 10 vials (the pediatric dose is the same as an adult). Each vial is reconstituted with 10 mL of 0.9% normal saline and mixed by continuous gentle swirling. Combine the contents of reconstituted vials promptly and further dilute to a total volume of 250 mL with sterile normal saline. Start infusion at 25-50 mL/hr. for the first 10 minutes and monitor for allergic reactions. If no acute reaction noted, infuse the remainder of 250 cc over 1 hr.

In countries like India and Australia, with a more significant variation in venomous snake species, there are multiple targeted antivenoms. In high prevalence areas, these antivenoms are stored at a central facility to aid in proper storage and distribution as needed. Antivenom should be administered within four hours, or as soon as possible thereafter, from the snakebite for optimal effect. Antivenom administration is intravenous, as a local subcutaneous injection has not proven to result in improved outcomes. There have been reported cases of recurrent neurotoxic envenomation after the initial dosing of a proper antivenom, which may be secondary to manipulation at the bite site, releasing a non-neutralized toxin into the bloodstream. All these cases improved after re-administration of the proper antivenom.

The primary treatment should also include resuscitation of the patient, including intubation for those with respiratory distress or paralysis and IV fluids for those exhibiting signs of shock. Some patients may require the use of vasopressors to counteract the vasodilatory effects of the envenomation. It is essential to recognize the systemic toxicity may progress rapidly, so early recognition and treatment are paramount.

Some patients will develop severe coagulopathies from their snake envenomations. Treat life-threatening bleeding with direct pressure. There is no evidence on the empiric use of blood products, such as platelets or fresh frozen plasma. Transfuse packed red blood cells in cases of severe blood loss.

There have been some studies that demonstrate the benefit of edrophonium and other long-acting anticholinesterase medications to counter the effects of the neurotoxic components of the venom.