The pain associated with acute injuries may require scheduled drug treatment. For some patients, the acute pain experienced may become chronic. Pain can be the result of neurologic and musculoskeletal conditions. Pain may also be local or systemic as a complication of diseases.

**Common Causes of Legitimate Pain**

**Neurologic and Systemic Diseases that Cause Pain**

- Alcohol use disorder

- Ankylosing spondylitis

- Brachial plexus traction injury

- Cancer

- Complex regional pain syndrome

- Diabetic polyneuropathy

- Drugs

- Fibromyalgia

- Giant cell arteritis

- Glaucoma

- Infections

- Migraine

- Osteoarthritis

- Osteomalacia

- Pernicious anemia

- Polymyalgia rheumatica

- Polyneuropathies

- Polyradiculopathies

- Postherpetic neuralgia

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Side effects of chemotherapy or radiation therapy

- Sjögren syndrome

- Spinal stenosis

- Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

- Smoking

- Temporomandibular joint dysfunction

- Thoracic outlet syndrome

- Trigeminal neuralgia

- Thyroid disease

**Psychological Causes of Pain**

- Anxiety

- Depression

- Emotional disorders

- Personality disorders

- Sleep disorders

**Musculoskeletal Causes of Pain**

- Ankylosing spondylitis

- Chronic overuse

- Dislocations

- Fractures

- Muscular strains

- Myofascial diseases

- Polymyalgia rheumatica

- Polymyositis

- Osteomyelitis

- Osteoarthritis

- Osteoporosis

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Mechanical back injury

**Common Causes of Situations Resulting in Illegitimate Use of Controlled Substances**

Any of the above conditions and causes of acute pain may progress to chronic pain. When there is chronic use of pain medicine, the risk of developing a use disorder to a controlled substance to control the pain increases. Risk factors for a use disorder with a pain medication include:

- Age

- Life circumstances

- Medical problems

- Physical problems

Factors that increase the risk of developing use disorder include:

- If an individual uses drugs to stay awake or sleep, they are at increased risk of developing a use disorder.

- If an individual undergoes exposure to other individuals with use disorder, they are at a higher risk of developing use disorder.

- If a parent has a use disorder, there is a greater chance the children will develop a use disorder.

- Individuals who engage in prescriber shopping are at increased risk of use disorder.

- If an individual receives multiple drugs from multiple prescribers, they are at a higher risk of addiction.

Factors that decrease the risk of use disorder include:

- Middle-age

- No psychiatric history

- Relaxed personality

- Those that follow instructions