Level of consciousness (LOC), altered mental status (AMS), post-traumatic amnesia (PTA), and Glasgow coma scale (GCS) are used in the evaluation of the severity of the TBI (see table 1). Moreover, recent studies recommend the implementation of the portable cognitive assessment tools at the time of the incidence of the TBI as a potential indicator for the long-term effects. One of the scales used in measuring the severity of deficit in cognitive functioning is the Ranchos Los Amigos Scale, as below:

- Level I = No response

- Level II = Generalized response

- Level III = Localized response

- Level IV = Confused-agitated

- Level V = Confused-inappropriate

- Level VI = Confused-appropriate

- Level VII = Automatic-appropriate

- Level VIII = Purposeful-appropriate

A comprehensive evaluation should include the utilization of the following tools:

- Clinical history/presentation with thorough neurological (Glasgow Coma Scale score)

- Labs: Serum levels of two biomarkers: Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase (UCH-L1) correlated with the degree of brain injury, with GFAP being the more reliable of the two up to 7 days after impact. They are proteins that leak from astrocytes and neurons when are damaged.

- Neuroimaging

CT head and MRI are used to measure changes in anatomical or physiological parameters of TBI. These include hemorrhage, edema, vascular injury, and intracranial pressure. However, for most cases of mild TBI, CT and MRI often show no abnormalities.

Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is used to detect axonal injury for mild to moderate TBI.

Functional MRI (fMRI) is often used to differentiate TBI from control groups and has been used to study activation patterns in patients with TBI.

Brain Perfusion Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) is used to measure cerebral blood flow and activity patterns. It is indicated for the evaluation of TBI in the absence of anatomical findings. Some authors suggest that SPECT should be part of the clinical evaluation in the diagnosis and management of TBI. A recent meta-analysis showed that PTSD patients have significant activation of the mid-line retrosplenial cortex and precuneus when presented with trauma-related stimuli. The preliminary data suggest it has a potential role in distinguishing PTSD from TBI. When compared to subjects with TBI, relative increases in perfusion were observed in PTSD in the limbic regions, cingulum, basal ganglia, insula, thalamus, prefrontal cortex, and temporal lobes. These results suggest that TBI is associated with hypoperfusion while PTSD is associated with regional hyperperfusion, providing important insights regarding pathophysiological differences between these disorders. Recent studies are also highly promising in differentiating PTSD from TBI using both region of interest (ROI) and visual readings (VR) analysis (The study was published on July 1, 2015, in PLOS One).

- Sleep studies: Some power-spectral analyses revealed patients in the mTBI group showed lower delta power and higher alpha power in the first NREM period and higher beta power in the first and second NREM periods. REM-period findings included lower beta in the third REM period and higher delta in the first REM period. Recent data suggested that sleep tests may be a sensitive measure of brain injury after mTBI and, theoretically, could be used to determine the anatomy of brain injury.