**Drug/Substance****Abuse**

**History**

A detailed history is necessary to establish the diagnosis of drug abuse. A patient’s social history can provide information about risk factors for unhealthy substance use and the impact of substance use on the patient’s role functioning. Look for a partner with a substance use disorder, poor socio-economic society, violence, high school alcohol, and other drug availability. A family history of substance use disorder (SUD) has been shown to be a risk factor for developing a substance abuse disorder. Heritability estimates range from:

- 50% to 70% for alcohol use disorder

- From 34% to 78% for cannabis use disorder

- 42% to 79% percent for cocaine use disorder

- 23% to 54% for opioid use disorder

Dig deep into a history of Disrupted familial and social relationships, failure to fulfill responsibilities at school or work (e.g., loss of job, poor grades in school. Ask questions about any past history of violent behavior, child abuse, financial problems, and sexual history (multiple partners, sex habits, etc.)

**Physical Exam**

During the physical examination, look for:

- Poor personal hygiene

- Significant weight loss or weight gain

- Signs of injection drug use including scars at injection sites (so-called “track marks”) on the skin

- Signs of drug inhalation including atrophy of the nasal mucosa and perforation of the nasal septum

- Evidence of acute intoxication or withdrawal, such as slurred speech, unsteady gait, pinpoint pupils, bizarre or atypical behavior, changes in the level of arousal (agitation or sedation), tachycardia, euphoria, etc. conjunctival injection, sweating, watery eyes, runny nose.

**Mental State Exam**

This examination should be performed and look for the following symptoms and signs:

- Behavior: Aroused, agitated, or sedated.

- Appearance: Personal hygiene, clothes,

- Speech and Voice: Slurred or pressured

- Mood: Euphoria, elated mood, depressed mood

- Perception: Hallucination

- Thoughts: Paranoia, delusions.

- Insight: Poor insight

- Cognition: Decreased concentration span, disorientation, amnesia

- Judgment: Altered

**Alcohol Abuse**

**History**

Ask about current and past alcohol use and treatment, family history of alcohol problems and treatment, and a detailed history regarding the quantity and frequency of alcohol use.

**Physical**

Physical features accompanying alcohol abuse range from a normal physical exam to features of alcohol withdrawal (tachycardia, tremor, agitation, clouding of the sensorium) to features of the advanced liver disease in case of chronic alcoholism (spider angiomata, palmar erythema, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, hepatic or splenic enlargement).