The human immune system is a complicated marvel that has evolved to demonstrate wide distribution through all the systems of the body. For example, the skin has the Langerhans cells; the liver has the Kupffer cells, the adenoids of the nasopharynx, etc. One such improvisation of the immune system is the MALT- the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. The MALT of the gut is the gut-associated lymphoid tissue(GALT). This article is about a part of the GALT- the Peyer's patches.

Peyer's patches are a group of well-organized lymphoid follicles located in the lamina propria and submucosa of the distal portion of the small intestine - the ileum and jejunum and sometimes in the duodenum. Almost 50% of these patches are in the distal ileum. These patches are the private immune system of the gut that helps in identifying the antigens and in producing antibodies. They grow and increase in number to a maximum at around 15 to 25 years of age, after which they decrease in number as age increases.

The Peyer's patches organize in the form of follicles, which mainly consist of B cells. However, the other immune cells therein are T cells, plasma cells, mast cells, eosinophils, macrophages, and basophils. In the Peyer's patches, the B lymphocytes reside in the germinal centers of these follicles where their maturation takes place, and the T lymphocytes are in the parafollicular zone. The Peyer's patches at their apices contain M (microfold) cells, enterocytes expressing MHC class II. They endocytose the particulate form of antigens and take them to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). One of the four main functions of APCs is to shuttle the antigens from tissues to sites of lymphocyte priming, one of which is the Peyer's patches.