A couple of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the pathogenesis of PDB.

**1. Epidermotropic theory:**proposes the Paget cell arises from an underlying mammary adenocarcinoma, with theneoplastic ductal epithelial cells migrating through the ductal system of the breast and reaching the epidermis of the nipple. In many case series, it was found that the immunohistochemical (IHC) staining properties were common between Paget cells and the ductal epithelial cells. In comparison, this was not the case between Paget cells and the epidermal keratinocytes of the surrounding nipple tissue.overexpression or amplification of the gene for HER2. Almost over 85% of the cases of PDB, Paget cells are stained with an anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody. It is hypothesized that the spread of Paget cells to the nipple epidermis from the duct system may be mediated through a motility factor that exerts its effect via the HER2 receptor. These data support a common genetic alteration and/or possibly a common progenitor cell for both the Paget cells and the underlying ductal carcinoma. Epidermotropic theory is, by far, the more widely accepted.

**2. T****ransformation theory:**proposes that thePDB arises from epidermal keratinocytes independent of underlying breast malignancy and actually represents an epidermal carcinoma in situ. George Thin in 1881 proposed this theory claiming that the secretions from the breast ducts continuously damage the epithelium, which leads to the transformation of these keratinocytes into cancer cells. This theory was supported by certain facts and observations that a small percentage of PDB did not have underlying parenchymal cancer. And whenever an underlying malignancy was present, it was often located peripheral to the nipple that would suggest two independent neoplastic processes. In one series of 80 female patients with PDB and breast cancers, underlying malignancy was located more than 2 cm away from the areolar margin in 29 cases.