As previously stated, the primary goal of the capillary is to allow for the exchange of fluid and metabolites between the capillary and tissue interstitium. The capillary will simultaneously provide nutrients from the arteriole and carry away waste products of cellular metabolism expelled by the tissues. However, anatomical considerations and intrinsic forces of the capillary govern the mechanism by which exchange occurs. In general, most organs in the human body, such as the heart, lungs, skeletal muscle, and GI tract, contain continuous, non-fenestrated capillaries. These allow water and solutes smaller than 3 nm to pass freely via simple diffusion. Conversely, molecules over 3 nm pass through selectively, often with the help of a transporter.

There are intra-capillary forces that also dictate molecular movement, known as Starling forces. The difference in hydrostatic and oncotic pressures between the capillary and the tissue interstitium is the primary determinant of these forces.

As arteriolar blood first enters the capillary, the hydrostatic pressure is higher than that of the interstitium, thus favoring flux of fluid into the interstitial space. Capillary blood has a high concentration of albumin, which cannot diffuse through the capillary membrane; this exerts a strong oncotic pressure favoring nutrient flux back into the capillary. However, the hydrostatic pressure is greater than the oncotic pressure, which causes fluid and nutrients to diffuse into the interstitial space. As blood moves along the capillary bed, capillary hydrostatic pressure starts to decrease since the fluid is leaving the vasculature, and oncotic pressure decreases slightly as proteins that are small enough may filter through the capillary. Ultimately, hydrostatic pressure drops more significantly, and the net oncotic pressure prevails, causing fluid and waste products to diffuse from the interstitium back into the capillary to be carried away by venules.