As with all trauma patients, advanced trauma life support (ATLS) protocol should be followed as with any patient that presents to the trauma bay.  After completion of airway and breathing evaluation, assessment of circulation is next.  The management of vascular injuries has its basis the concept of hard or soft signs.  The WTA and EAST each have different definitions of hard signs and soft signs.  The WTA defines hard signs as expanding hematoma, bruit, thrill, external bleeding, pulselessness, pallor, paresthesia, paralysis or pain. The WTA recommends using the hard signs for major named arteries, which includes anything proximal to the anterior tibial artery or tibioperoneal bifurcation but it excludes the profunda femoris artery.  The EAST defines hard signs as pulsatile bleeding, thrill, pulse deficit, bruit or expanding hematoma.  The definition of soft signs, per the WTA, is a history of arterial bleeding at the scene or in transit, neurological deficit occurring in a nerve adjacent to a name artery, proximity of the injury to name artery or a small nonpulsatile hematoma present over an artery.  The EAST definition of soft signs is the same as the WTA.

When assessing circulation, pulses in the extremities should undergo palpation first. For overt vascular injuries noted on the initial survey, such as active bleeding, manual compression or a compressive dressing should be attempted to control hemorrhage.

When evaluating traumatic extremities injuries, if it appears severe, one must decide if the limb is salvageable.  A mangled extremity will have injuries to three of the four functional components (vessels, soft tissue, bone, and nerves).  Multiple scoring systems have been created to predict limb salvage including the Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS), Predictive Salvage Index, NISSSA score, Limb Salvage Index and Hannover Fracture Index.