The syndesmotic articulation of the distal tibiofibular joint occurs between the convex surface of the distal tip of the fibula and the concave fibular notch of the distal tibia. The stability of the syndesmosis is crucial to proper dynamic ankle and lower extremity function. The osseous portion of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis consists of the tibia and fibula, and the four connecting ligaments include the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, inferior transverse ligament, and the interosseus ligament.

The anterior-inferior tibiofibular ligament originates from the longitudinal tubercle on the anterior surface of the lateral malleolus and attaches on the anterolateral tubercle of the tibia (Chaput fragment). It functions to hold the tibia and fibula tightly together and prevents excessive fibular displacement and external talar rotation. The posterior-inferior tibiofibular ligament originates at the posterior tibial tubercle (Volkmann fragment) and attaches to the posterior lateral malleolus. It functions alongside the anterior-inferior tibiofibular ligament to hold the tibia and fibula together. Slightly deep to the posterior-inferior tibiofibular ligament is the inferior transverse ligament, which serves to create a labrum that deepens the articular surface of the tibia posteriorly, helping to increase joint stability. The interosseus ligament lies at the distal end of the interosseous membrane and acts as a spring to prevent excessive separation of the tibiofibular mortise during ankle dorsiflexion and heel strike.