**Diminished Thermoregulatory Capacity of the Elderly**

During the aging process, the sympathetic response to a cold environment is blunted reducing the discharge rate of sympathetic nerves to the cutaneous vasculature. Additionally, due to the increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) there is a decrease in availability of BH, which is an essential co-factor in the production of norepinephrine, so the sympathetic neurotransmitter itself is in shorter supply. Vasodilatory response to heat is also impaired due to ROS which may limit nitric oxide synthase function. The elderly are therefore at risk for both hypothermia and hyperthermia.

Considering that thermoregulation involves more than the adaptations of cutaneous blood flow to changing ambient temperatures, it is essential to consider the other physiologic limitations of the elderly that place them at risk for insufficient thermoregulation. The expected increase in cardiac output in response to heat has decreased in the elderly due to reduced sensitivity of the beta adrenoreceptors in the heart. Less renal and splanchnic blood flow is redirected to the skin as well due to the reduced sympathetic tone. The dermal thinning that occurs with age reduces vascularization and limits the efficacy of the skin as an insulator or heat exchanger. Sweat glands are less productive, and the morbidity of dehydration exacerbates this problem in the elderly population. Thermogenesis has reduced due to reduced skeletal muscle mass involved in shivering, atrophy of brown tissue mass, endocrine deficiencies, and cardiopulmonary problems restricting the available oxygen for consumption in heat production. Peripheral nerve fiber loss and lower conduction velocity contribute to reduced thermal sensitivity that develops in a distal to proximal fashion. For uncertain reasons, behavioral thermoregulation seems to be impaired in the elderly as well, and they tend to favor warmer environments.

The average difference between the core body temperature of a young adult and a geriatric adult is approximately 0.4°C; this is an important clinical consideration when evaluating an older adult for fever since their baseline temperature is lower. One study of nursing home patients found an increase in the incidence of infectious fever in the elderly when the fever threshold was lowered to 37.2 degrees C/99 degrees F, or 1.1 degrees C/2 degrees F above baseline. It is therefore clinically relevant to keep in mind the physiologic differences in thermoregulation between the elderly and young adults patient populations.

**Heat acclimatization**

Humans who live in tropical regions demonstrate a higher heat tolerance than those living in more temperate regions. Their core body temperature is similar, but their threshold for a thermoregulatory response to heat is about 0.5°C higher; this is due to the adaptation of the sweat glands. Heat loss by evaporation gradually increases, and so does aldosterone secretion. The result is an increased level of less salty sweat and resultant thirst from the increased NaCl plasma concentration.