The function of the heart is to effectively pump blood throughout the body, and hence disturbing the blood flow and/or the rhythm of the heartbeats negatively impacts the heart's functional goals. Structural defects prevent the heart from effectively pumping blood, especially during times of increased demand. Ion channel defects disturb the regularity of necessary electrolytes, which maintain the heart's rate and rhythm. Consequently, untreated, structural defects can result in arrhythmia, while persistent arrhythmia may lead to structural heart changes. An example of this is dilated cardiomyopathy which can develop due to an excessive premature ventricular contraction (PVC) burden.

As the most common cause of sudden cardiac death, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy involves outflow obstruction of blood flow. The ventricular wall becomes rigid as a result, and the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) and left atrial pressures rise, contributing to pulmonary congestion. Ultimately, this predisposes patients with HOCM to lethal arrhythmias. A similar process occurs in anabolic steroid-induced left ventricular hypertrophy. ARVD involves fatty infiltration of the right ventricle making the heart susceptible to frequent PVCs and ventricular arrhythmias, particularly during strenuous exercise. Other structural defects such as coronary artery anomalies are considered dangerous depending on the specific anomaly. Left or right coronary arteries originating from the pulmonic artery are considered potentially serious.

Ion channelopathies are due to genetic defects which lead to malformation of the channel proteins. The outcome is electrolyte derangement; specifically potassium, calcium, sodium, and magnesium. Aside from ion channel defects, accessory pathways are another cause of arrhythmias. If a separate electrical pathway, besides the atrioventricular (AV) node, is communicating from the atria to the ventricles, rapid rate and arrhythmias may occur.

Acquired cardiac disease in athletes mostly ties to atherosclerotic coronary artery disease and/or drug-induced cardiac changes. Middle-aged and older athletes are naturally prone to atherosclerosis and may be at risk of plaque rupture within the coronary arteries during strenuous exercise.