# Definition/Introduction

Young's Rule is an equation used to calculate pediatric medication dosage based on patient age and the known recommended adult dose. The definition of Young's Rule is the age of the patient divided by the age added to twelve, all multiplied by the recommended adult dose. This formula appears below:

**[Age / (Age + 12)] x Recommended Adult Dose = Pediatric Dose**

Young's Rule can be applied quickly in situations where the current weight of the patient is unknown. Other approaches to pediatric dosing using age include the Webster and Fried rules.

The Clark Rule or the Body Surface Area Rule can be implemented if the weight of the patient is known.

# Issues of Concern

Pediatric dosing based on age has the potential for suboptimal therapeutic levels due to the broad range of potential weight, especially with increasing childhood obesity. Young's Rule cannot be used for newborns, and consideration must be given to growth variability at the given age.

It should be noted that Young's Rule can be a guide for dosing but is not accurate for pediatric dose prediction. The activity of cytochrome P450 enzymes depends on age, leading to high inter- and intra-individual variability in the pediatric population.

# Clinical Significance

In situations where the weight of the pediatric patient is unknown, for instance, at the point of injury, Young's Rule can be safely implemented if the patient age and the recommended adult dosing are known. Age and the disease state can change the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of the drug; consequently, an adjustment in the dosing regimen in children is necessary.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Knowledge of Young's Rule can serve several purposes in pediatric drug dosing, and interprofessional healthcare team members should be familiar with it. The most obvious use is for the clinician when calculating the dose for a pediatric patient. A secondary use can be to verify that the dose ordered or prescribed is not outside of the parameters for the child. This is where nurses, during administration or pharmacists, when filling an order or prescription, can apply the Young's Rule and potentially prevent a toxic or therapeutically insufficient dose from being dispensed. In an open, interprofessional team environment, this can improve patient outcomes and prevent adverse events. [Level V]