Undifferentiated connective tissue disease usually has a mild clinical course and can be managed primarily as an outpatient. Many drugs can be used, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, calcium channel blockers, and antimalarial drugs such as hydroxychloroquine. These drugs are considered the cornerstone of therapy. In severe cases, immunosuppressive drugs can be used, especially when there is severe organ damage or involvement. The surgical option is not routinely used in this disease. In addition, some simple things could help patients, such as applying sunblock lotions and using protective clothing in patients with photosensitivity. Despite the mild clinical course, specialty consultations can sometimes be required to improve management in some patients.

To be specific, NSAIDs can be useful for their antipyretic, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory effects. Naproxen is a good example, and it is used for mild-to-moderate pain relief. Another choice is COX-2 selective medication such as celecoxib, which is used to minimize adverse effects seen with non-selective NSAIDs as gastric ulcers and gastrointestinal bleeding.

Systemic corticosteroids are often used to induce remission in case of flaring-up. These are usually prescribed in combination with other drugs to control the systemic inflammation associated with this disease. Prednisone is a common type of systemic corticosteroid and is considered an immunosuppressant agent. It is often used for autoimmune disorders since it can decrease the inflammation caused by the immune system.

If the manifestations of undifferentiated connective tissue disease are not well controlled with the previous medications or if the symptoms are severe, immunosuppressant agents are the key treatment. A couple of drugs are typically utilized in this disease, such as methotrexate or azathioprine. Both have been shown to control severe symptoms. Methotrexate is considered a steroid-sparing agent. This drug decreases symptoms of inflammation associated with undifferentiated connective tissue disease. Azathioprine is typically effective for****joint and extra-articular****symptoms**.**

Antimalarial drugs are usually used in case of a severe rash or photosensitivity. These drugs have anti-chemotactic effects on inflammatory leukocytes. They can prevent intracellular processing of the autoantigens. These drugs are usually used in combination with NSAIDs to control articular, mucocutaneous, and constitutional symptoms. Hydroxychloroquine is a common example, and it can inhibit the chemotaxis of neutrophils and eosinophils, which prevent the activation of complement systems.

Calcium channel blockers are commonly used in connective tissue diseases. They can relax the vascular smooth muscles and decrease the resistance of peripheral vessels, which helps in the management of the Raynaud phenomenon. Nifedipine and diltiazem are examples of calcium channel blockers.