Once the diagnosis of LADA is made, non-pharmacological therapies including a diet with carbohydrate and calorie counting, exercise, and precautions to prevent complications similar to those employed in patients with T1DM and T2DM. Since LADA is a heterogeneous condition, pharmacological treatment has to be personalized to gain the maximum therapeutic advantage.

The two goals of pharmacological treatment are (1) to obtain good glycemic control and (2) to prevent or delay complications. Therapies that will preserve beta-cell function are a priority. Insulin has been the treatment of choice for LADA. Studies have shown preserved beta-cell function as evidenced by a maintained stimulated C-peptide response, normal HbA1C levels, and a decrease in autoantibody concentrations.

Sulfonylureas are a poor choice for LADA. They deplete beta-cells of insulin as depicted by falling C-peptide levels, the persistence of antibodies, and the earlier progression to insulin.

Although metformin may help initially in glycemic control in patients with LADA with higher BMI, it alone cannot achieve the second and more important goal of preserving beta-cell function or delaying its destruction.

Thiazolidinediones have antiinflammatory effects on beta-cells and can prolong their survival and can be useful if used in the earlier stage in LADA. They can also be combined with insulin. Rosiglitazone is the only drug studied in LADA.

DPP4 inhibitors have shown promise alone or when combined with insulin in preserving beta-cell function in LADA. They affect metabolic control by prolonging levels of GLP1 and other peptides. Their primary action is to increase levels of GLP1, thereby suppressing glucagon and increasing insulin secretion after a glucose load by activating DPP4 receptors in the GI tract and brain. DPP4 receptors have also been identified on the surface of T lymphocytes, where they may affect immune regulation. This latter action may be of importance in slowing the beta-cell immune destruction in LADA. Thus far, these studies with DPP4 inhibitors have been either underpowered or not long-term. While this drug category has potential value, additional studies are needed before routinely recommending them for patients with LADA.

A study using the GLP1 receptor agonist dulaglutide has shown reductions in HbA1C levels and improvement in beta-cell function in patients with LADA with results comparable to T2DM.

The benefit from the addition of vitamin D to insulin or DPP4 inhibitors in improved glycemic control and preserving beta-cell function has been demonstrated in separate studies.

Similarly, a Chinese herbal decoction combined with insulin has yielded positive results.

SGLT2 inhibitors have not been well-studied in LADA. However, some case reports of euglycemic ketoacidosis have appeared. Therefore this category is not recommended.

There are no studies with metformin alone in LADA, and with understandings of both the pathogenesis of LADA and the pharmacological profile of metformin, the latter has no role as a single agent for this condition.

The novel immunomodulating treatment with alum formulated recombinant human GAD65 by administering 3 injections of 4 mcg each into a lymph node in the groin along with daily oral vitamin D is in phase II of the GADinLADA trial. The study will evaluate the effects of the drug on the parameters of the beta-cell function for one year. This is based on the encouraging results from the DIAGNODE2 T1DM trial and the Diamyd LADA trial, which involved the injection of the GAD 65 formulation subcutaneously 20 mcg per dose for 2 doses one month apart. Several beneficial changes were noted in the immunological system. These included a shift of the GADA isotypes to IgG3/igG4, increased beneficial cytokines, increased FOXP3, and TGF beta, all favoring a Th2 lymphocyte response, more regulatory T lymphocytes, and downplay of activated T lymphocytes thereby promoting a state of immune tolerance. These beneficial effects were persistent even after four years.

In some patients with obesity and DM, bariatric surgery (BS) is undertaken for weight loss and glycemic control. Some cases with presumed T2DM and obesity, in reality, have LADA. In such patients, BS causes successful weight loss, but inadequate glycemic control post-surgery and the remission of diabetes often seen in T2DM are absent in LADA confirming a progressive beta-cell failure. Patients with LADA have an increased post-operative risk of ketoacidosis and should be diligently watched. Some experts have even suggested screening for beta-cell function before BS to avoid disappointment with glycemic control in all obese patients with DM.