**Common Cardiac Arrhythmias**

Aeromedical concerns with regards to cardiac arrhythmias in aviators are the risk of sudden incapacitation, hemodynamic symptoms, recurrences, and treatment modality.

**Bradycardia (less than 50 bpm)**

For all classes of medical, FAA certification requires documentation of history and findings, cardiovascular events, and any test deemed appropriate. A medical certificate may be issued by the aeromedical examiner if no evidence of coronary artery disease is documented.

**Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW) and ECG Pattern**

The Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern is ECG findings without supraventricular tachycardia. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is ECG findings with supraventricular tachycardia.

The aeromedical concern with Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome is sudden cardiac death. Sudden cardiac death is due to the occurrence of malignant arrhythmias from rapid anterograde action potential conduction in the setting of atrial fibrillation. Pappone et al. reports that sudden cardiac death occurs in 0.0 to 0.8% per year or 1.4% over a five-year period in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome, and reports that sudden cardiac death cannot be predicted. Other studies determined predictors of SCD as young age, male gender, inducible AVRT, multiple accessory pathways, and short refractory period of the pathway.

According to the United States Air Force waiver guide, Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome pattern is disqualifying for all classes. A waiver is possible after non-invasive testing shows low risk with annual follow-up. It is important to note that these guidelines continue to change and it's imperative to refer to the waiver guide for current aeromedical disposition.

Catheter ablation for Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome in an aviator requires a three-month grounding period and further evaluation by a cardiologist to stratify risk.

**Left and Right Bundle Block for all Classes of Medical Certification**

LBBB will not occur in aircrew younger than 25 years of age. It is rare in aircrew 25 to 35 years old. Most occur in aircrew older than 35 years old.

Right Bundle block is a normal variant in young aircrew, and further investigation is not required.

The FAA requires cardiovascular evaluation as above, as well as, a graded exercise test (GXT). If there is no evidence of coronary artery disease, a medical certificate can be issued. Otherwise, deferral to the FAA is required.

**Atrial Fibrillation**

Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation is of greater concern aeromedically than chronic atrial fibrillation.

In military aviation, rate control medications for atrial fibrillation are not compatible with the +Gz environment.

Chronic and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation requires an FAA decision.

**Valvular Heart Disease**

In a study by Strader JR and Kruyer WB, et al., regarding the efficacy of echocardiographic screening of Pilot Applicants, 20,208 screening echocardiogram were analyzed, and 294 or 1.45% were initially read as disqualifying for flight duties. The most common diagnosis was bicuspid aortic valve with mild or less aortic insufficiency 154 (0.76%), mitral valve prolapse with mild mitral regurgitation 51 (0.25%) and trileaflet aortic valve with mild aortic insufficiency 58 (0.29%).

About 70% of patients with bicuspid aortic valve develop aortic valve insufficiency and or aortic stenosis in their lifetime.

Pilots with healthy functioning bicuspid aortic valve are fit for unrestricted flying but periodic echocardiography to monitor complications is required. Aircrew with mitral valve prolapse with mild mitral regurgitation may be allowed to continue flying duties with regular surveillance for complications.

**Coronary Heart Disease and Interventions**

Usually disqualifying and requires FAA decision. A six-month grounding period is required by the United Kingdom CAA before a cardiologist assessment. In the United States Air Force guidelines, a pilot with history of previous myocardial infarction or revascularization has a potential to return to flying with a waiver on a case by case basis if he or she has no residual ischemia with normal cardiac function. The return to fly status is dependent on how much coronary artery disease is appreciated and the pilot is likely restricted to multiple-pilot aircraft. Coronary artery calcium (CAC) scoring is a useful screening criteria in asymptomatic patients, and is a much more effective tool than a treadmill stress test or functional cardiac imaging as these have poor positive predictive value. It even mirrors the results seen in invasive angiography. A CAC score of 10-99 was associated with a cardiac event of roughly 1%, so the current criteria to not need a waiver for flying in USAF standards is a CAC of <10.

**Hypertension**

The FAA’s acceptable blood pressure limit is a systolic blood pressure of less than or equal to 155 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure less than or equal to 95 mmHg.

The United States Aeromedical Consultation Service:  hypertension for aeromedical purposes is defined as a three-day average systolic blood pressure greater than 140 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mmHg.

Treatment of hypertension reduces the risk of stroke by 35 to 40%, myocardial infarction by 20 to 25%, and heart failure by 50%.

In aviators younger than 35 years old, causes of secondary hypertension like alcohol, drugs, obesity, and renal problems should be considered.

Modifiable risk factors should be considered as first-line treatment in aviators.

The FAA acceptable medications are alpha-adrenergic blockers, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, angiotensin II receptor antagonist, direct renin inhibitors, and diuretics.

Unacceptable medications are centrally acting: clonidine, guanabenz, guanfacine, methyldopa, nitrates, and reserpine.

The USAF acceptable medications are hydrochlorothiazide (thiazide diuretic), chlorothiazide (thiazide diuretic), triamterene (potassium sparing diuretic), Lisinopril, Ramipril, Losartan, and Telmisartan (ARA).

Unacceptable medications in military aviation are beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and alpha-blockers. Atenolol, Nifedipine, and Amlodipine may be allowed on a restricted basis for a flight crew that does not operate in high +Gz environments.