The key to sciatica is patient education. There are many causes of sciatica, and the disorder is best managed with an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes clinicians, mid-level practitioners, orthopedic surgeons, osteopaths and chiropractors, physical therapists, neurologists, rehabilitation nurses, and a pain specialist. Unless there is an acute compression of the spinal nerves, most sciatica cases are best managed conservatively. Patients should be encouraged by the clinician and nurse to lose weight, stop smoking and enroll in a physical therapy program. Bed rest should be limited. For some etiologies, manipulation/manual therapy may be an option. The pharmacist should caution the patient against the use of prescription-strength medications to avoid dependence and other adverse effects and if opioids are used, they should assist the team in making sure the course is very short and not refilled. Surgery should only be undertaken when conservative methods have failed, but the patient must be educated on the risks of surgery and the potential complications. Finally, even after surgery, participation in regular exercise is essential.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes of patients with sciatica are difficult to analyze. Every surgical study measures different parameters as good-outcome, and hence the data are either misinterpreted or hyped. In general, patients with chronic pain (more than 6 months) have a poorer outcome following surgery than patients with acute pain (less than 6 months). Some studies report a cure rate of more than 75%, but other studies report cure rates of less than 50%. There are several newer orthopedic procedures to manage sciatica, and all report success rates of 70% and above in the short term. Irrespective of the short-term result, the majority of patients with sciatica tend to have residual or recurrent pain in the long term. Many continue to be dependent on pain medications, are disabled, and have a poor quality of life.