The main goal of management is symptomatic relief. The underlying cause should be treated whenever possible, e.g., treating nasal congestion to avoid mouth breathing. If xerostomia is medication-induced, stopping or swapping to one with less xerostomic effects should be considered.

**Patient Education**

- Frequent sipping of water

- Chewing sugar-free gum

- Sucking on sugar-free candy

- Avoiding caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, and dry or hard-to-chew foods

- Correcting dehydration by increasing fluid intake

- Regular oral hygiene and dental care

**Local Measures**

Artificial saliva in dose forms such as sprays, lozenges, and gels may be indicated before meals and as needed. The disadvantages of saliva substitute products are that they do not work reliably, the duration of action is limited, they have an unpleasant taste, and carry a high monetary cost. Despite this, they are helpful for special times, like during a flight or bedtime.

**Pharmacological Treatment**

The sialogogue drugs pilocarpine and cevimeline are FDA-approved medications for managing xerostomia.

The most prevalent adverse effects of pilocarpine include sweating, nausea, and rhinitis.

The application of topical physostigmine has also been a therapy option in treating xerostomia. Physostigmine is a cholinesterase inhibitor, thus increasing the amount of acetylcholine available to stimulate salivary glands. It increases the production of saliva by stimulating mucin-producing glands. A gel containing 1.8 mg of physostigmine may provide relief for about two hours.

Malic acid has demonstrated some benefits if xerostomia is drug-induced.

**Other Measures**

Electrical stimulation has been shown to improve salivary flow, but these intraoral devices are not practical for everyday use. Patients undergoing radiation to the head and neck area may benefit from amifostine.