**Frontotemporal Dementia**

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), formerly known as Pick disease, is a neurodegenerative disorder involving the frontal and temporal cortex, sparing the parietal and occipital lobes. The histopathological findings that characteristically present in FTD include round aggregates of tau protein known as Pick bodies and ubiquitinated TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43). The clinical manifestations of FTD vary depending on the location of degeneration but often encompass prominent personality changes, disinhibited social behavior, aphasia, and can even be associated with motor neuron disease. The core spectrum of FTD disorders includes behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), non-fluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia, and semantic variant primary progressive aphasia.

FTD is one of the more common etiologies of early-onset dementia, with the mean age of symptom onset being 58 years old. Behavior variant FTD, the most common of the subtypes, typically presents with a dramatic change in personality and has is where the neurodegeneration occurs more heavily in the frontal lobe than the temporal lobe.  Patients with bvFTD often demonstrate socially inappropriate behavior, apathy, loss of empathy, compulsive behavior, and hyperorality, or dietary changes.

FTD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease with no cure. Treatment of FTD aims at lessening the symptoms and includes drugs such as SSRIs, atypical antipsychotics, and atypical antidepressants.

**Cerebrovascular Disease**

The cerebrovascular diseases often manifest in the frontal cortex. When an individual has a stroke, their presenting symptoms can clue physicians into where in the brain the ischemia is taking place, and what blood vessel could be occluded.  If someone has sudden weakness in their upper extremity and face, then by referring to the motor homunculus, it can be determined that their stroke is occurring on the lateral and inferior portion of their primary motor cortex, a region supplied by the middle cerebral artery. Thus this is termed a middle cerebral artery stroke. Of note, the corticospinal and corticobulbar pathways both cross on their way to their lower motor neuron, and as such, the motor cortex is contralateral to the side it innervates. If someone had suffered from a left middle cerebral artery stroke, they would present with right upper extremity weakness and right facial drooping. Anterior cerebral artery strokes are significantly less common but present with weakness in the contralateral lower extremity.