**Initial Assessment:**It involves an initial assessment of the patient, including vitals, detailed history, physical exam with more emphasis on abdominal and pelvic exam, followed by complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, and a pregnancy test. Mature cystic teratomas do not have any specific diagnostic tumor marker.  Serum tumor markers, in particular, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) have shown to play some role in diagnosis and follow up. Cystic teratomas are usually asymptomatic and often discovered on workup for other conditions. However, in patients presenting with abdominal pain, discomfort, and increasing abdominal girth, imaging plays an important role in further workup.

**Imaging:**Although plain radiographs may show radiopaque bodies due to calcifications during work-up for urinary or intestinal pathology, cysts with very little or no calcification can be easily missed. Ultrasound is the preferred initial radiological investigation for the evaluation of adnexal mass. Cystic teratoma appears as a heterogeneous mass with echogenic focus causing acoustic shadowing due to calcification, sebum, and hair. Fat fluid and hair fluid levels are more specific features. Some other peculiar sonographic findings include the Rokitansky nodule, iceberg sign, dot-dash pattern(dermoid mesh), and floating balls sign. Transvaginal ultrasound is superior to abdominal ultrasound for screening for cystic teratomas with a sensitivity of 57.9% and specificity of 99.7%. It has proven to be as accurate as MRI in the identification and characterization of ovarian cystic teratomas.

In torsion, a whirlpool sign with a twisted vascular pedicle is seen on color Doppler ultrasound.

**Histopathological evaluation**remains the gold standard for diagnosis.