CLL comprises 25 to 30% of total leukemias in the United States. According to the American Cancer Society, there will be approximately 21,040 new CLL cases and about 4,060 deaths in the year of 2020. Worldwide, 191,000 cases and 61,000 deaths are attributed to CLL/SLL every year. CLL can affect adults as young as 30 years of age. However, it is mostly seen in adults with an average age of 70 years. CLL is extremely rare in children. The incidence is known to rapidly increase with increasing age. CLL has a slightly higher incidence in male populations than female populations (1.3 to 1 to 1.7 to 1). However, studies have shown that women can have a more aggressive form of the disease than men.

The incidence of CLL varies by geographic location and race. CLL is most commonly seen in adults of the Western population. It is high amongst the Caucasian population compared to the Asian Pacific Islanders or the African-American population. The incidence of CLL in Western countries is similar to that of the United States but is rarely seen in Asian countries (China and Japan).  CLL is common amongst the Jews of Eastern European descent. It is most commonly seen in Non-Hispanic Whites and least common in Asians. The incidence in African Americans is in between the Caucasian and the Asian ethnicity groups.

CLL is reported to have a genetic basis and is known to run in families (familial CLL). The age at diagnosis of the second-generation offspring is nearly 20 years younger as compared to the parent. First-degree relatives (siblings, children, or parents) of CLL patients have double the risk for CLL. Moreover, 17% of first-degree family members of CLL patients had monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis, which is a precursor of CLL. Ultimately only a small percentage of patients with monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) will develop into CLL.