Knowledge of the microbiological profiles of different postpartum infections, local resistance patterns, and the severity of the patient’s illness should guide antibiotic choices. As a general rule, antibiotic regimens, particularly in very sick patients, should have a broad-spectrum of antimicrobial coverage at the beginning and should be narrowed as more clinical evidence from cultures or pathology specimens becomes available. Pharmacists can often help tailor initial antibiotic choices and aid in narrowing the spectrum as care progresses. Consideration should be given to whether the patient is breastfeeding, and all efforts should be made to use antibiotics that will allow the patient to continue breastfeeding safely.

While antibiotic regimens may differ for specific postpartum infections, the foundation of the treatment of most infectious conditions is the same. In patients with hemodynamic compromise, balanced crystalloid fluids should be given to a maximum of 30 ml/kg of ideal body weight.

The treatment of endometritis varies with severity. Patients with mild, early endometritis may be able to receive outpatient treatment; shared decision-making between the provider and the patient should always precede the decision to treat on an outpatient basis. Intramuscular and oral regimens can also be used in low-resource settings where intravenous antibiotics may not be an option. In patients who are appropriate for outpatient treatment, potential 14-day regimens include clindamycin 600 mg orally every 6 hours plus gentamicin intramuscularly 4.5 mg/kg every 24 hours; amoxicillin-clavulanate 875 mg orally twice daily; cefotetan 2g intramuscularly every 8 hours; meropenem or imipenem-cilastatin 500 mg intramuscularly every 8 hours; or amoxicillin 500 mg and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 hours.

The listed regimens are safe for breastfeeding patients and resulted in a greater than 85% cure rate in early endometritis.

The mainstay of treatment for septic abortion is the removal of the infected products of conception. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initiated within an hour of making the diagnosis.

For mild superficial surgical infections without systemic symptoms or purulence, an oral course of antibiotics is typically sufficient. A first-generation cephalosporin like cephalexin should be used when there is no associated purulence.Staphylococcus aureus and expand coverage accordingly.

Necrotizing fasciitis is a surgical emergency that cannot be sufficiently treated with antibiotics. However, pending emergent surgical intervention, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started. A common regimen is vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam with clindamycin, which is used for its anti-toxin activity.

Finally, treatment for SPT is intravenous ampicillin (2 g then 1 g every 4 hours), gentamicin (5 mg/kg daily), and clindamycin (900 mg every 8 hours).