Cellulitis is a frequently encountered infection of the deep dermis and subcutaneous tissue, mainly affecting the lower extremities, but it can have many mimickers.

Erysipelas is sometimes considered a form of cellulitis. However, it is a more superficial infection affecting the upper dermis and superficial lymphatic system. Bright red erythema, elevation of the affected skin, and well-demarcated borders can help to diagnose erysipelas and distinguish it from cellulitis, which tends to be more mildly erythematous (pink) and flat with less distinct boundaries.  Erysipelas may also have streaking when superficial lymphatics are involved. It most commonly results from the exotoxins released from group A strep (Streptococcus pyogenes).  First-line treatment for erysipelas is amoxicillin or cephalexin.

Chronic venous stasis dermatitis is a long-standing, bilateral, inflammatory dermatosis secondary to chronic venous insufficiency and typically involves the medial malleoli. It appears on the lower extremities and manifests as erythema with scaling, peripheral edema, and hyperpigmentation. Treatment focuses on treating the underlying chronic venous insufficiency and its sequelae, such as lower extremity edema.

Necrotizing fasciitis is a rare infection of the fascia that leads to necrosis of the subcutaneous tissue. Its characteristic presentation includes fevers, erythema, edema, pain out of proportion to the exam, and crepitus. It qualifies as a surgical emergency and requires surgical debridement immediately. Imaging may be obtained to help confirm the diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis but should not delay surgical intervention. CT imaging revealing subcutaneous gas in the soft tissue is highly specific for necrotizing fasciitis.

Septic arthritis, or an infected joint, can involve any joint but typically involves the knee joint. Patients present with joint swelling, warmth, pain, and decreased mobility of the joint. Septic arthritis treatment is by joint aspiration and antibiotics directed at the most common pathogens.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is typically unilateral and presents with tenderness, erythema, warmth, and edema.  It often affects the lower extremities. Patients commonly have the presence of risk factors for DVT, such as a history of immobility, active cancer, or a family history of venous thromboembolism. Deep vein thrombosis rarely manifests with fevers or leukocytosis, but they can be present. Ultrasound imaging is used to confirm the diagnosis.