Caloric intake is not solely about quantity. The quality of the caloric intake is vital as well. Just because all foods in equal amounts may be isocaloric, this does not mean that they are all isometabolic. When comparing foods, an equal number same amount of calories does not mean that the foods will affect the body in the same way. For example, obtaining one’s daily calories only from fat may numerically equate to the calories one can get from fruits and vegetables, but potential benefits are lost and numerous risks associated with not getting the right balance of nutrients. If one’s diet consists solely of sugars and refined carbohydrates without adequate intake of protein, huge rises in blood sugars will result, leading to increased insulin spikes and increased fat storage.

Studies have also shown that an increase in caloric consumption from fruits, vegetables, and whole grains decreases the risk of certain types of malignancies including (but not limited to) esophageal and esophagogastric junctional adenocarcinoma and that a diet high in animal fats (particularly red meat) actually increases the risk of these cancers.

Daily caloric intake can be calculated and is influenced by various factors, including gender, height, weight, activity level, and age. Children, for example, have different caloric needs than adults, and specific age groups of children have different caloric needs. Infants, for example, require liquids filled with high amounts of fats and nutrients, especially vitamins and minerals. As they grow older, especially past age 5, fiber, healthy fats, protein, and calcium become of great importance for their bones and teeth to grow healthy and strong. From toddler age to adolescent age up until the age of 18, caloric need requirements grow steadily higher.Adult women and men differ in what they need in regards to caloric intake, thus they have different requirements for weight loss. On average, a woman should eat 2000 calories per day to maintain her weight, and she should limit her caloric intake to 1500 or less in order to lose one pound per week. For the average male to maintain his body weight, he should eat 2500 calories per day, or 2000 a day if he wants to lose one pound per week.

However, weight loss is not this simple for every person. Counting calories and increasing exercise do indeed have a noticeable effect on weight loss, but it is temporary. To actually maintain this weight loss, it is important to focus on the type of calories that are put into the body. Fat has long been considered the root of the obesity epidemic, but research has shown that the real culprits are processed sugars and carbohydrates. In fact, foods containing a high-fat content are some of the most nutritious foods one can consume; for example, nuts, avocados, and olive oil.The problem with refined sugars is that they make insulin levels surge. When these insulin levels spike, fat cells respond by storing these calories. However, the calories are not filled with nutrients the body needs. Our brains recognize this fact and respond with hunger. This, in turn, makes us want to eat more and causes our metabolisms to slow down, resulting in weight gain. Another false belief is that by exercising excessively, one can eat whatever is desired. However, 80% of our weight is what we put into our bodies and only 20% of the amount we burn by activity.A person’s caloric intake consists of carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and for some, alcohol. Alcohol contains the type of calories that should be limited the most, as it contains calories called “empty calories,” meaning they have nothing the body can actually use for energy. Alcohol simply causes weight gain without adding nutrients to the body. Carbohydrates, proteins, and fats have varying calories per gram. Carbohydrates and proteins, for instance, contain 4 calories per gram, and fat has 9 calories per gram. This is helpful in calculating calorie consumption per day when trying to obtain and maintain a healthy weight.Balance in one’s diet is key to good health. The American diet is filled with excessive amounts of processed sugars and saturated fats, with basically none of the other nutrients the body desires. Fat and glucose are vital to sustaining life, especially brain function, but they cannot be the sole fuel to keep the body energized. This is a major issue in the American diet today and a growing area of concern, not just because of malnutrition but also because of the increase in chronically debilitating yet preventable diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, and various cancers.