An incision is made through the skin, subcutaneous tissue, fat, and platysma. Skin flaps are then raised deep to the platysma and superficial to the sternohyoid muscle. The flaps are elevated superiorly and inferiorly to the level of the thyroid cartilage and sternal notches, respectively. Care should be taken to identify and preserve the anterior jugular veins as well as the superficial network of veins that lie beneath the platysma to avoid unnecessary bleeding.

The strap muscles (sternohyoid and sternothyroid) are lateralized by incising the median raphe until the thyroid capsule is identified. During the removal of a large multi-nodular goiter, the strap muscles may rarely require the horizontal division to improve exposure. If the division of these muscles is necessary, it should take place as high as possible to preserve the strap muscles' innervation by the ansa cervicalis.

In a total thyroidectomy, it is prudent to begin the procedure on the side of a confirmed malignant diagnosis or on the larger side in benign disease. In the event of an intra-operative complication or nerve injury requiring early termination of the procedure, this allows the removal of the most important tissue prior to termination of the surgery. It should be noted that there are many approaches to thyroidectomy, and only one is described in detail below.

Blunt dissection of the superficial loose areolar tissue off of the thyroid gland progresses laterally until the carotid sheath is identified.

The recurrent laryngeal nerve is nearly always located within a few millimeters of the inferior thyroid artery but may be superficial or deep to it.

The surgeon may consider sending intraoperative frozen sections in select circumstances. Given advances in molecular testing, frozen sections have less utility in Bethesda criteria 3 and 4 nodules. They may be considered in Bethesda 5 nodules (suspicious for malignancy) in order to determine if a completion thyroidectomy should be performed, especially in elderly patients or those with comorbidities, and noncompliant patients with surgeon concern for follow-up.

Prior to closure, the surgical field is evaluated for hemostasis. The divided strap muscles and platysma are re-approximated with absorbable suture such as 3-0 Vicryl followed by re-approximation of the skin. Many surgeons prefer to place a drain in order to monitor and trend output. Drains placed post thyroidectomy with neck dissection can also be useful in monitoring for chyle leak, which may give the drain a milky appearance.

Intraoperatively, if a parathyroid gland is found to be devascularized, it should be re-implanted to minimize the chance of postoperative hypoparathyroidism.

Central neck dissection, in conjunction with total thyroidectomy, is sometimes indicated. CND should be performed with well-differentiated large tumors (T3 and T4), poorly differentiated thyroid cancers, and the presence of pathologic lymph nodes in the central compartment.