Symptoms and signs of brucellosis are nonspecific; cultures and serology are usually necessary for diagnosis. Some general laboratory findings might suggest the diagnosis. Following laboratory tests are ordered in patients suspected of having brucellosis:

**Complete Blood Count (CBC)**

CBC typically shows neutropenia and anemia. Thrombocytopenia is also reported (secondary to hepatosplenomegaly or from immune thrombocytopenia). Pancytopenia can be seen in a few patients.

**Inflammatory Markers**

Laboratory testing on the patient may show elevated C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum lactate dehydrogenase, and alkaline phosphatase.

**Liver****Enzymes**

Elevation in liver enzymes is very common. These elevated levels may reflect the severity of hepatic involvement and correlate clinically with hepatomegaly.

**Culture**

Brucellosis may be diagnosed by blood cultures in tryptose medium; however, because of the slow-growing nature of Brucella, the cultures may take a week or more to become positive. Bone marrow culture has a higher yield than blood cultures because the reticuloendothelial system holds a high concentration of brucellae. Because of the ease of aerosol transmission, any potential Brucella specimens should be handled under a biohazard hood.

**Serology**

Standard agglutination testing is the most common method of diagnosis in endemic areas. Indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Rose Bengal testing also may be used. Repeated serologic testing is recommended if the initial titer is low. Titers higher than 1:160 in conjunction with a compatible clinical presentation are suggestive of infection. Titers higher than 1:320 are considered to be more specific, especially in endemic areas. Seroconversion and evolution of the titers can also be used for diagnosis.

**Polymerase Chain Reaction**

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests have been developed for the rapid detection and diagnosis of Brucella species in human blood specimens.Brucella gene BCSP31 and the 16S-23S rRNA operon.

**Radiography**

Pedro Pons sign, erosion of the anterior superior aspect of lumbar vertebrae with osteophytosis, is associated with spondylodiscitis caused by Brucella. Disc space narrowing, bone destruction, and sclerosis may be seen on imaging in patients with spondylitis. Nonspecific hepatitis and granulomas may be observed on liver biopsy.

**Biopsy**

Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy may be required to establish a diagnosis in certain patients. A percutaneous liver biopsy may be needed in the patient with liver granulomas to obtain a specimen for diagnosis. Analysis of liver biopsy specimens may reveal granulomatous hepatitis and hepatic microabscesses.