Central venous access is obtained via the internal jugular (IJ), subclavian (SC), and femoral veins.

The internal jugular vein is a paired vessel that collects blood from the head, face, and neck and delivers it to the superior vena cava (SVC). It runs within the carotid sheath alongside the common carotid artery and the vagus nerve. The IJ begins at the jugular foramen and travels lateral to the internal and common carotid arteries, terminating at the innominate vein. The right IJ makes a straight line from the brachiocephalic vein to the SVC and is often preferred for central venous access; however, the left IJ takes a more acute angle as it joins the left innominate and again as the innominate joins the SVC. The mean diameter is 10 mm but may range between 5 mm and 35 mm. Placing the patient in the Trendelenberg position can increase the size of the IJ to allow for easier cannulation. The IJ is easily accessed at the apex of the Sedillot triangle, bordered medially by the sternal head of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM), laterally by the clavicular head of the SCM, and inferior by the clavicle.

The subclavian (SC) vein is a large, paired vein that drains blood from the bilateral upper extremities. It runs from the outer border of the first rib to the medial border of the anterior scalene. At this point, it joins the IJ to form the innominate (brachiocephalic) vein. It is separated from the subclavian artery by the anterior scalene. The average diameter is 10 mm to 20 mm. Placing the patient in the Trendelenburg position also increases the diameter of this vein and minimizes the risk of a venous embolus formation. The SC vein is accessed 1 cm to 2 cm inferior and lateral to the clavicular transition point - the flat, lateral two-thirds of the clavicle.

The femoral vein is also a large, paired vein that drains the bilateral lower extremities. It travels medially to the femoral artery in the femoral sheath. The femoral vein is a continuation of the popliteal vein and begins at the adductor hiatus within the adductor magnus. It becomes the external iliac at the inferior margin of the inguinal ligament. Access for CVCs occurs at the common femoral vein, which is located halfway between the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) and pubic symphysis, below the inguinal ligament. The average diameter of the common femoral vein is 11 mm to 15 mm. Non-tunneled CVC femoral access is favored during emergent placement, especially during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and intubation.

Knowledge of the surface anatomy is usually enough to cannulate the blood vessel of choice; however, the use of ultrasound has been shown to reduce complications rates, including hematoma, arterial access, pneumothorax, and central line infection.