Atomoxetine is available in 10 mg, 18 mg, 25 mg, 40 mg, 60 mg, 80 mg, and 100 mg capsules as a hydrochloride salt. Patients can take atomoxetine with or without food as a once-daily dose in the morning or two evenly divided doses in the morning and afternoon. Capsules should not be opened and should be taken whole.

- Initial dosing for adults is 40 mg per day and can be increased after a minimum of 3 days to achieve therapeutic effects. A maximum daily dose is 100 mg per day.

- Initial dosing for children older than six years and less than 70 kg is 0.5 mg/kg per day. The maximum daily dose of 1.4 mg/kg per day or 100 mg, whichever is less.

Atomoxetine is the first non-stimulant medication to receive FDA approval for the treatment of ADHD. Previous medicines approved to treat ADHD, such as methylphenidate and other amphetamines, are CNS stimulants. Therefore, they may carry a higher risk of abuse and addiction than atomoxetine. Clinical studies of atomoxetine have shown a lack of abuse potential, consistent with preclinical predictions. While atomoxetine has been demonstrated to be effective in treating ADHD, many studies have shown stimulant medications have greater efficacy. Also, stimulant medications typically have an almost immediate clinical effect, whereas atomoxetine may take several weeks for full noticeable therapeutic action. Patients may stop taking atomoxetine without tapering.

**Special Population**

- ****Dosage adjustment based on Pharmacogenetics:****Patients who are CYP2D6 poor metabolizers should be prescribed 40 mg per day. The dose may be increased to 80 mg per day after four weeks if there is an inadequate response.

- **Hepatic Impairment**: Atomoxetine exposure (AUC) is increased, compared with normal subjects, in subjects with moderate (Child-Pugh Class B) (2-fold increase) and severe (Child-Pugh Class C) (4-fold increase) hepatic insufficiency. Dosage adjustment is recommended for patients with moderate or severe hepatic insufficiency. Hence for moderate hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh class B), 50% dose reduction is recommended. For severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C), a 75% dose reduction is recommended.

- **Renal Impairment**: Patients with renal impairment usually do not need dose adjustment per the manufacturer's product labeling.

- **Pregnancy Considerations**: Atomoxetine is pregnancy category C medicine.

- **Breastfeeding considerations**: No serious adverse events were reported in the breastfed infants, but alternate drugs for the treatment of ADHD are preferred.