Management of median nerve injury depends on the etiology. Splinting is considered a first-line treatment option for mild to moderate carpal tunnel. Research shows it to be superior to placebo, but no single splint stands out as superior. However, a separate study has shown a neutral wrist splint to be twice as effective in symptomatic relief compared to that of an extension splint.

Other conservative therapies include physical therapy, yoga, and therapeutic ultrasound. Again, the first-line for conservative management in the case of mild to moderate carpal tunnel are corticosteroid injections and night splints.

Evidence does not support one technique over another; however, ultrasound-guided injections appear to be more effective than blind techniques.

Patients with severe carpal tunnel symptoms who have failed conservative management after four to six months should receive an offer for surgical decompression. If a patient has failed conservative management and opts for surgical decompression, it is recommended to get electrodiagnostic studies prior to surgery to help determine underlying severity as well as prognosis. Consensus suggests carpal tunnel release surgery is more beneficial than no treatment at all and has demonstrated improved clinical outcomes compared to wrist splints. Endoscopic and open carpal tunnel release surgeries show improvement in patient symptoms. When comparing open to endoscopic carpal tunnel decompression, patients return to work one week earlier with endoscopic decompression. New evidence supports the use of ultrasound-guided carpal tunnel releases.

Symptoms with mild compression of the median nerve tended to worsen over ten to fifteen months, while patients with moderate or severe involvement tended to improve. Treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome with splinting or surgical decompression can lead to complete or marked improvement at one year following therapy in 70 to 90 percent of patients.

Treatment of pronator teres syndrome includes limiting activity that produces symptoms. NSAIDs, local corticosteroid injections into the tender points of pronator teres, and median nerve decompression surgery have also demonstrated effectiveness.