Peripheral vascular disease is primarily driven by the progression of atherosclerotic disease leading to macro and microvascular dysfunction. PAD typically affects the lower extremity vascular beds, but larger arteries such as the abdominal aorta and iliac arteries are frequently involved. More severe disease can involve multilevel and/or diffuse disease. The pathophysiology of atherosclerosis is a complex inflammatory response with the involvement of various vascular cells, thrombotic factors, and cholesterol and inflammatory molecules.

Atherosclerosis begins with lipoprotein accumulation within the intimal layer of large arteries. The lipoprotein presence within the endothelium leads to lipid oxidation and cytokine response with the infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages.

Atherosclerotic plaque builds up slowly over decades within the wall of the vessel. Plaque accumulation results in vascular stenosis and frequent vascular dilation to maximize end-organ perfusion. Once the vessel dilation capacity is maximized, the plaque continues to accumulate, which further compromises the lumen occasionally, leading to critical narrowing of the artery. As narrowing progresses and obstructs the artery, collateral circulatory beds frequently develop to preserve distal perfusion and tissue viability. These collateral circulatory pathways are unable to match the blood supply provided by a healthy vessel completely. IC results when blood flow distal to the occlusion is sufficiently compromised, resulting in fixed oxygen delivery that is unable to match oxygen demand.

Acute ischemia may ensue if in-situ vascular thrombosis occurs or a cardioembolic source suddenly occludes the narrowed vessel.