In 2016, international guidelines were developed to treat drug-susceptible tuberculosis, led by the Americal Thoracic Society and Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) with the participation of various US and international organizations.

The preferred regimen is the combination of INH, RIF, PZA, and EMB for the intensive phase for 8 weeks (56 doses) and INH and RIF for the continuation phase for 18 weeks (126 doses). The medications are given daily, 7 days a week. If there is a concern about compliance or difficulty achieving DOT, the dosing for the continuous phase could be modified to 3 times weekly. When drug sensitivity is available, and the bacterium is susceptible to both INH and RIF, EMB could be stopped.

Treatment of tuberculosis in HIV-positive patients constitutes a unique challenge due to potential drug interaction with antiretroviral therapy. In general, it is still recommended to use the same duration of treatment for both intensive and continuation phases (two and four months) in HIV-positive patients who are infected with drug-susceptible tuberculosis. The exception is an unusual situation when the patient is not receiving antiretroviral therapy. In this situation, it is suggested that the continuation phase is continued for 3 additional months.

Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) is treated with fewer medications for a shorter period of time. 2020 LTBI treatment guidelines include the NTCA- and CDC-recommended treatment regimens that comprise three preferred rifamycin-based regimens and two alternative monotherapy regimens with daily isoniazid. These are only recommended for persons infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis that is presumed to be susceptible to isoniazid or rifampin. A regimen of 3 months of once-weekly isoniazid plus rifapentine is a preferred regimen that is strongly recommended for children aged more than 2 years and adults. Another option is 4 months of daily rifampin for HIV-negative adults and children of all ages. Three months of daily isoniazid plus rifampin is a preferred treatment that is conditionally recommended for adults and children of all ages and for patients with HIV. Regimens of 6 or 9 months of daily isoniazid are alternative recommended regimens.

In general, severe treatment side effects that warrant cessation of medications occur in 4% to 9% of patients receiving conventional drug therapy.

**Drug-resistant Tuberculosis**

Drug resistance is a major problem in treating tuberculosis.

Mono-resistant TB: Resistance to one of the drugs of standard first-line medications.

Polydrug resistance: Resistance to more than one first-line medication (except the combination of INH and RIF).

Multidrug resistance (MDR): Resistance to both INH and RIF

Extensive drug resistance (XDR): MDR plus resistance to a fluoroquinolone and injectable second-line medications.

There are multiple settings where drug resistance could develop. Nonstandardized treatment protocols among countries or medication shortages in resource-limited countries lead to incomplete treatment.

There are multiple second-line drugs for MDR, but unfortunately, the cure rate is much lower than drug-susceptible tuberculosis. The global cure rate is variable between countries. Surveys reported cure rates between 20 to 48%.