**ALPCAPA**

Symptoms usually occur within the first two months of life–the time the ductus arteriosus closes, as the clinical effect of ALCAPA is dependent on the pressure difference between the systemic and pulmonary circulatory systems.  Decreased resistance in the pulmonary vasculature results in a left-to-right shunt from the right coronary artery to the PA–coronary steal phenomenon. The elevated pulmonary vascular resistance in utero results in systemic pulmonary arterial pressures.  Consequently, the perfusion through the anomalous LCA is sufficient, albeit desaturated. Thus, symptoms rarely present early during infancy. Antegrade flow through the LCA decreases with the decline in PA pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance, and becomes more dependent on the collateral network between the right and left coronary arteries. The maturity of this collateral network will determine the clinical course after the ductal closure, as it ultimately determines the myocardial viability. A child with a well-developed collateral network may survive past infancy, albeit with progressive LV dysfunction.  The lack of adequate collateral vessels from the RCA causes myocardial ischemia and ventricular dysfunction from insufficient perfusion, with eventual myocardial infarct, aneurysmal changes, and ultimately death. Early ischemic changes usually appear within the subendocardium with a patchy distribution.

The typical clinical symptoms appreciated at 4 to 6 weeks include poor feeding, tachypnea, failure to thrive, and pallor.  With an enlarged cardiac silhouette seen on chest X-ray, children commonly receive a diagnosis of heart failure due to a dilated cardiomyopathy. Clinicians have confused a syndrome of severe pallor, diaphoresis, and irritability as infantile colic, in which the term "anginal equivalent" was coined.

Physical exam findings include tachypnea, tachycardia, a gallop rhythm, cardiomegaly, hepatomegaly, and commonly a systolic ejection murmur due to mitral regurgitation.  The murmur is a result of either papillary muscle dysfunction or ventricular remodeling. The enlarged cardiac silhouette on chest X-ray is nonspecific; however, pulmonary congestion is also common in infants. Lateral or anterolateral infarction with Q waves and elevated ST segments on electrocardiogram (ECG) are classic findings in infants. In older children and adults, the Q waves are less prominent; however, hypertrophy of the posterobasal left ventricular wall may be appreciated.

Diagnostic studies include echocardiogram and cardiac catheterization. A dilated, poorly contracting left ventricle is common on echocardiography, with mitral regurgitation due to a poorly mobile posterior leaflet.  It is possible to visualize the coronary ostia on color-flow Dopper echocardiography; however, coronary angiography remains the best diagnostic tool and is necessary if color-flow Doppler does not identify both ostia with certainty.  While the anomalous LMCA may originate anywhere along the main PA or one of the branches, it most commonly originates from the rightward posterior sinus. Coronary arteriograms will also show the collaterals originating from the RCA, late filling of the PA, and the left-to-right shunt. The cardiac catheterization will also document elevated LV end-diastolic, left atrial, and pulmonary artery pressures. Pulmonary angiography may be an option if doubt remains about the diagnosis, or the origin of the LCA ostium is uncertain.  Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has been reported to be useful in defining the proximal course of the vessels.

**ALCA-R**

The major clinical significance of the ALCA-R is the risk of myocardial ischemia and sudden cardiac death in the intraarterial course of the anomalous course. The ischemia is the result of compression of the anomalous vessel from surrounding tissue, an issue that is most significant during systole and exercise. The remaining three subtypes of the ALCA-R are only rarely associated with myocardial ischemia.

Unfortunately, the diagnosis of this condition is difficult. EKG typically shows no abnormalities, and the symptoms mimic those of angina. Patients in which there is suspicion of ALCA-R should undergo an evaluation with an MRA or CT angiogram followed by an intravascular ultrasound to determine the subtype and extent of compression of the anomalous vessels. The diagnosis is, unfortunately, most commonly made following an episode of SCD.