Fluconazole is available in both oral (suspension and tablet form) and intravenous preparations. The pharmacokinetic properties are similar following administration by the intravenous or oral routes; intravenous administration is useful in patients with impaired gastrointestinal absorption or motility. Fluconazole's absorption is unaffected by food or gastric pH. The bioavailability of oral fluconazole is over 90% compared with intravenous administration.

Fluconazole clearance is primarily by renal excretion, with approximately 80% of the administered dose appearing as the unchanged drug in the urine. In comparison, it excretes about 11% of the medication in the urine as metabolites. The serum half-life is approximately 24 hours, allowing for once-daily dosing; however, the daily dose of fluconazole to treat infections other than vaginal candidiasis should depend on the organism and the response to therapy. Treatment should continue until clinical parameters show that active fungal infection has subsided.

**Adult Dosing**

Fluconazole administration requires multiple doses except in vaginal candidiasis, where the recommended dosage is 150 mg as a single oral dose. The doses range from 200 mg on the first day, followed by 100 mg once daily as in oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis, to daily doses of 50 to 200 mg in the treatment of Candida peritonitis and urinary tract infections. However, doses of up to 400 mg daily have been used in systemic candida infections and to prevent candidiasis in patients undergoing a bone marrow transplantation.

The recommended dosage for treating acute cryptococcal meningitis is 400 mg on the first day, followed by 200 mg once daily, with an initial therapy duration of 10 to 12 weeks after the cerebrospinal fluid becomes culture negative. In addition, a suppression dose of 200 mg once daily is recommended in patients with AIDS. Higher daily doses of 600 to 100 mg have been necessary for treating some endemic fungal infections like coccidioidomycosis, especially in disseminated diseases.

**Pediatric Patients**

The following daily doses in adults (100, 200, and 400 mg) should be equivalent to the following doses (3, 6, and 12 mg/kg), respectively, in pediatric patients, but doses exceeding 600 mg/day are not recommended.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Fluconazole use requires caution in patients with liver dysfunction, given its hepatotoxic potential.

**Renal Impairment**

The pharmacokinetics of fluconazole is affected by the reduction in renal function. Therefore, the dose of fluconazole needs to be reduced in patients with impaired renal function. If creatinine clearance is ≤ 50 ml/min, the clinician must reduce the dose to 50%. Patients on hemodialysis should be given 100% of the recommended dose after each dialysis session. On non-dialysis days, the clinician should administer the dose according to the patient's creatinine clearance.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) stated that chronic, high doses (400 to 800 mg/day) of fluconazole could be associated with a rare and distinct set of congenital disabilities in infants whose mothers received the drug during the first trimester of pregnancy. This risk does not appear to be related to a single low dose. Based on this information, fluconazole's pregnancy category is former FDA Category D. According to a meta-analysis, there is a risk of cleft palate, bowed tibia and femur, brachycephaly, and increased risk of musculoskeletal malformations and congenital heart defects in patients exposed to high dose fluconazole therapy during pregnancy. Hence, healthcare providers should avoid fluconazole in pregnant mothers except in patients with life-threatening fungal infections. However, fluconazole may be used if the expected benefit outweighs the possible risk to the fetus.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

According to the manufacturer's labeling, clinicians should be cautious when prescribing fluconazole to a nursing woman. Fluconazole is acceptable in nursing mothers because doses excreted into breastmilk are less than the neonatal fluconazole dosage. Therefore, clinicians frequently prescribe fluconazole to treat recurrent breast candidiasis in nursing mothers. The regimen for breast candidiasis is 400 mg once, followed by 200 mg daily for at least two weeks.