Positional (non-synostotic) brachycephaly and/or plagiocephaly are usually treated conservatively. The best management for positional plagiocephaly is prevention. Pediatrician counseling on tummy time beginning in infancy and early repositioning. If present, torticollis exercises should be utilized. Surgery is not indicated, given the absence of craniosynostosis. The parents of affected infants should be reassured, and attempts may be made to alternate the infant's head position for sleep (repositioning education). Other conservative treatment measures include massage therapy, physiotherapy (for torticollis), assistive devices, and helmet therapy. Helmets are expensive, require frequent visits to the orthotist every two weeks, and have their own set of complications, including pressure sores, subcutaneous abscess, and failure to correct the deformity.

Synostotic infant head shape abnormalities require surgical intervention, with the timing of surgery being crucial. Infants with signs or symptoms of raised intracranial pressure require urgent interventions. Surgical repair of uncomplicated bicoronal synostosis is usually delayed until after the sixth month of life and is usually undertaken between the sixth and twelve months of life. Lambdoid synostosis should be repaired earlier, between the second and sixth months of life. Established surgical management strategies include sub-total or complete cranial vault remodeling, cranioplasty (spring-assisted), and endoscopic suturectomy with postoperative helmet therapy. Early referral is advised as delayed referrals may result in more extensive surgical interventions with higher risks of complications. The best outcomes for endoscopic surgery are between the ages of 0 to 6 months of age while the bone is still the most malleable. The benefits of endoscopic surgery include less observed patient discomfort, less blood loss, and shorter hospital stay.

Following endoscopic surgery, a helmet is often fitted 3-7 days following surgery and may be worn up to 1 year post-operatively.