Patients with KSS will have the following clinical manifestations:

**Chronic Progressive External Ophthalmoplegia**

Mitochondrial myopathy characterized by drooping of the eyelids (ptosis) and paralysis of the extraocular muscles (ophthalmoplegia).

**Pigmentary Retinopathy**

In patients with pigmentary retinopathy, there is a migration of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells or macrophages containing melanin into the retina. Hence, pigmentary retinopathy is the final common outcome of many retinal and chorioretinal disorders and often a common manifestation of numerous metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases.

Retinitis pigmentosa is the name given to a large group of hereditary retinal degenerations that share the common feature of progressive damage to the photoreceptor–pigment epithelial complex. Pigmentary retinopathy can mimic retinitis pigmentosa phenotypically because of the presence of characteristic pigmentary changes in the retina. Moreover, visual symptoms in retinitis pigmentosa such as night blindness or diminished visual acuity can also be manifest in pigmentary retinopathy. However, they are generally mild and occur in only about 40% to 50% of patients.

The pattern of retinal involvement and electrophysiologic tests can assist differentiate between them apart. Pigmentary retinopathy initially involves the posterior fundus (e.g., peripapillary zone), whereas retinitis pigmentosa initially affects the peripheral and mid-peripheral retina. Furthermore, in pigmentary retinopathy, there is a diffuse depigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium with a characteristic mottled “salt-and-pepper” pattern of pigment clumping, in contrast to “Bone spicule” pigment formation in retinitis pigmentosa. Distinctive ancillary findings in retinitis pigmentosa are pallor of the optic disc, attenuation of retinal vessels, visual field defects, and posterior cataract.

Electroretinography (ERG) is usually normal or mildly abnormal in pigmentary retinopathy, whereas the ERG analysis demonstrates severely depressed or extinguished scotopic responses and less severely reduced photonic cone responses compared to retinitis pigmentosa.

**Cardiac Conduction Disturbances**

Patients with KSS may develop cardiac conduction disorders at any time. Abnormalities range from simple PR interval prolongation to infranodal high-degree atrioventricular (AV) block. This predisposes the patients to stroke or sudden death from the direct effects of an arrhythmia or a cardiac embolus.

**Non-Ocular Muscle Weakness**

In some patients with KSS, the facial muscles can become affected. The involvement of orbicularis oculi muscles affects the ability to close the eyelids tightly, whereas the involvement of the frontalis muscle hinders the opening of already ptotic eyelids.

Occasionally, patients experience dysphagia when the muscles of mastication get involved.

With the progression of the disease, weakness of the neck and shoulder muscles can develop as well as the mild weakness of the extremities muscles.

**Non-muscular Neurologic Dysfunction**

The following abnormalities could be observed: cerebellar ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, neuropathy, and impaired intellectual function.

**Endocrine Disorders**

Endocrine dysfunction can be the initial presenting symptom preceding other neurological manifestations of KSS. The frequency of endocrine disturbances has been reported to range from 35% to 67%, including the following: diabetes mellitus, short stature and growth hormone insufficiency, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, adrenal insufficiency, and primary hypoparathyroidism. Therefore, endocrinologists should be aware of possible multiple-endocrine complications and regularly screen for them, given that these are potentially treatable aspects of this disease.