Both the legitimate/clinical use of cocaine and toxicity resulting from illicit use require interprofessional healthcare team coordination.

Cocaine toxicity is managed by an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, poison control, internist, cardiologist, and psychiatrist. The management is strictly supportive, with the treatment of symptoms as needed. Some of these patients may require admission to the ICU and monitoring by nurses. If a patient receives benzodiazepines to treat toxicity, a pharmacist should carefully review the patient's medication record and verify benzodiazepine dosing. Before discharge, patients should be referred to a mental health nurse so that they can receive education regarding the detrimental effects of this agent and how to stop further usage. They can also benefit from ongoing support from a mental health professional such as a social worker or psychotherapist.

The use of cocaine as an anesthetic agent will require careful consideration by the clinician, who should involve the pharmacist in dosing and medication reconciliation. If nursing is administering the drug, they should also coordinate with the clinician and the pharmacist to ensure proper administration and patient safety. It can also be important to know whether the patient has ever had an issue with misusing cocaine as a recreational drug, which may prompt the use of a different agent for the procedure.

When using cocaine as a therapeutic agent or when misused by a patient requires full interprofessional team collaboration, open communication channels, and coordination of actions and interventions for safe and effective treatment with minimal adverse effects. [Level 5]