# Definition/Introduction

Behavior risk factor surveillance system or BRFSS is a United States national self-report telephone survey that provides prevalence data concerning behavioral risk factors associated with the nation's most common health conditions.

Many of the BRFSS questions come from other national surveys that collect information via face-to-face interviews, telephone interviews, and physical examination. These surveys include the National Center for Health Statistics (NHANES), National Health and Nutrition Interview Survey (NHIS), National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), Current Population Survey (CPS), and National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSUH). Therefore, BRFSS prevalence estimates can be compared with other national surveys to assess their validity and accuracy. A comprehensive review of numerous published scholarly studies confirms its validity and reliability.

There are three parts to the survey questionnaire- core, optional, and state-added questions. The core contains three sections. Core questions are a standardized set of questions used by all states. The annual core consists of questions that are asked yearly. Rotating core questions are two sets of questions used in alternating years. The emerging core consists of 5 questions that address current or emerging issues and are usually apart of the core for one year. Optional modules include rotating core questions that are not in use that year. State-added questions are questions each state chooses to add based on its individual needs.

Throughout the year, survey interviews are conducted by each state's health department using the same core questionnaire, standardized sampling methods, and methodology. This data is then submitted to the CDC monthly for further processing and analysis. Weighting and adding calculated variables are statistical and analytical methods that decrease potential bias and ensure that the data collected is representative of the population from which it is derived. Survey data is published online by the CDC on an annual basis. Each year's questionnaire, background, design data, survey results from 1984 to the present, as well as analytical and statistical tools for further disseminating and processing are available on the CDC's BRFSS website.

# Issues of Concern

The significant challenges faced by BRFSS include low response rates, adapting to change in modes of communication, and reaching a multi-language diverse population. The rate of response has dropped significantly since 1993. Currently, surveys are conducted using cell phones and landlines in both English and Spanish. The addition of multi-language versions and new outreach strategies aimed at accessing hard-to-reach respondents is necessary to increase the participation of a diverse and expanding U.S. resident population.

# Clinical Significance

BRFSS prevalence data concerning chronic diseases, health risk behaviors, and preventive practices are used by all 50 states and 3 U.S. territories to track and monitor the health of U.S. residents. Policymakers, scientists, governmental municipalities, and agencies use this data to implement public health policies, research, programs, and resources to target the leading causes of morbidity and mortality. It helps to support public health planning and policies such as legislation concerning drinking and driving, air pollution, and the usage of seat belts.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, suicide, kidney disease, chronic respiratory disease, etc., are among the nation's leading causes of morbidity and mortality.