An interprofessional healthcare team is the optimal means to successfully manage patients treated with dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers such as nisoldipine. Providers must be knowledgeable regarding the symptoms of toxicity. A team consisting of nurses, laboratory technicians, pharmacists, physicians, and other healthcare professionals is necessary to optimize care to improve clinical outcomes in case of overdose. Pharmacists should offer to consult about the use of glucagon, insulin, and vasopressor therapy. A toxicologist consult should also take place when indicated. Cardiologists, intensivists, and the emergency team may have involvement in managing a patient further as many of these cases require further interventional management during the hospital course, including maintenance of an airway. By coordinating care, a patient on nisoldipine who may be experiencing toxicity or adverse symptoms can be successfully managed.

Interprofessional team dynamics will also serve to prevent nisoldipine adverse reactions. The prescriber can consult a pharmacist to verify dosing and check the medication record for potential drug interactions. Nursing will be able to perform much of the monitoring necessary at follow-up visits and help determine patient compliance and treatment effectiveness. Both the pharmacist and nursing should promptly alert the prescriber to any concerns, so adjustments to the regimen (either dosing or agent selection) can be made and lead to improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]