Warfarin is a once-daily oral medication. Warfarin administration can be at any time during the day, but recommendations are for administration in the afternoon or evening. By instructing patients to take warfarin later in the day, healthcare providers can have the opportunity to individualize a patient's warfarin dose the same day based on their most current lab values.

**Pharmacodynamics/Kinetics:**

**Route of Administration:**Oral

**Drug Composition:**Warfarin is a racemic mixture composed of R and S enantiomers of the drug. Each enantiomer gets metabolized through unique pathways, and the S-enantiomer is approximately three to five times more potent than the R-enantiomer.

**Absorption:**Rapid and complete absorption

**The onset of action:**The onset of action is typically 24 to 72 hours. A peak therapeutic effect is seen 5 to 7 days after initiation. However, the patient's international normalized ratio (INR) may increase within 36 to 72 hours after initiating treatment.

**Duration of Action:**2 to 5 days

**Distribution:**Small volume of distribution (0.14 L/kg)

**Protein Binding:**99%

**Metabolism:**Hepatic metabolism, primarily through the CYP2C9 enzyme. Other minor enzymatic pathways for metabolism include CYP2C8, 2C18, 2C19, 1A2, and 3A4.

**Genomic Variants:**Research has shown that genetic variations in CYP2C9 affect an individual's warfarin clearance. Patients who are heterozygous for the 2C9 (*1/*2 or *1/*3) can experience an approximately 37% reduction in S-warfarin clearance. Patients who are homozygous for reduced function alleles (*2/*2, *2/*3, or *3/*3) may experience a nearly 70% reduction in clearing S-warfarin.

**Elimination Half-life:**The half-life of warfarin is generally 20 to 60 hours (mean: 40 hours). However, it is highly variable among individuals.

**Time to peak (plasma concentration):**approximately 4 hours

**Excretion:**Warfarin is primarily eliminated as metabolites by glomerular filtration in the kidney (92% via urine).