The internal capsule and the other white fiber structures can be affected by various pathologies, such as degeneration, demyelination, deficiencies (vitamin deficiency), vascular (infarction, hemorrhage, AVM, angioma), hypoxia, intrinsic neoplastic (glioma, oligodendroglioma, ganglioglioma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor), infection (tuberculosis, pyogenic abscess), parasitic involvement (neurocysticercosis, hydatid cyst), trauma, iatrogenic (postsurgical), epilepsy, psychiatric illness, etc. Commonly, intraventricular lesions such as ependymoma, glioma, meningioma, colloid cysts, etc., can extend into the internal capsule and other white fiber tracts. Appropriate neurosurgical anatomy and orientation are essential, along with physiological, pathological, and microsurgical skills for dealing with these pathologies.

One paper described the concept of the central core within each cerebral hemisphere as an obvious anatomical delimitation with important clinical and surgical implications.

Furthermore, another paper used a similar concept of “central core” to describe a vertical plane positioned at the anterior limit of the pyramidal tract allowing the surgeon to identify the posteriorly placed genu and the posterior limb of the internal capsule. Secondly, due to the vascularization of the internal capsule being a surgical barrier, the central core can be divided into medial and lateral portions along the parasagittal plane. For lesions present medially to the vascular supply of the internal carotid artery, a supracarotid-infrafrontal approach or an anterior transcallosal approach extending through the floor of the lateral ventricle has been described. Alternatively, for lesions on the lateral side, an anterior transinsular route has been suggested.