Hookworm infections are usually asymptomatic. Symptoms usually relate to the stage of parasite development and the site of the affected host. It usually starts at the time of skin penetration in the form of a localized erythematous reaction (ground itch).

Hookworm related cutaneous larvae migrans (creeping eruptions) have links to zoonotic hookworms. It is endemic in many developing countries, while travelers and health professionals are the sectors that are usually affected in developed countries. It starts as an erythematous papule that develops afterward into the characteristic serpiginous, 1 to 5 cm tunnels beneath the skin, which occur as larvae become unable to penetrate the deep layers of the skin and stay in its superficial layers. Infection often affects hands and feet as the usual contact site with soil.

During the pulmonary stage, the infection might express itself in the form of cough, sneezing, bronchitis, hemoptysis, and eosinophilic pneumonia (Loeffler syndrome), usually self-limiting and doesn’t need any intervention. With peroral infection, nausea, vomiting, pharyngeal irritation, cough, and dyspnoea might occur (Wakana syndrome).

Once worms reach the small intestine, nonspecific abdominal symptoms might occur, such as abdominal pain and distension, diarrhea, occult fecal blood, and occasionally melena. The small size of the parasite makes surgical complications unlikely.

The major feature of hookworm infection is iron deficiency anemia secondary to blood loss, either through direct parasite consumption or blood leakage from the parasite attachment site to the gut.

Additionally, hypoalbuminemia might lead to edema formation and generalized anasarca. Occasionally, some patients crave soil and ingest dirt (geophagia).