**Laboratory Assessment in VITT**

Based on the treatment guidelines by the British Society of Haematology (BSH), Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis Research (GTH), and American Society of Hematology (ASH), patients suspected of VITT should undergo initial laboratory workup and imaging modalities as described below.

- **CBC with platelet count and peripheral blood smear**
- Typical platelet nadir ranging from 9,000 to 107,000 have been reported.

- **Coagulation panel**(PT/INR and aPTT)

- **Fibrinogen**
- Typically, low levels of fibrinogen have been noted in VITT.

- **D-dimer level**
- Markedly elevated D-dimer levels( > 4 times ULN) were observed in most cases.

- **Fibrinogen**
- Typically, low levels of fibrinogen have been noted in VITT.

- **PF4-heparin ELISA**
- GTH recommends this as the first test in their diagnostic algorithm.
- In most reported cases with no heparin exposure, the serum demonstrated vigorous reactivity on the PF4–heparin ELISA.
- If negative, VITT can be ruled out as almost all reported VITT had positive PF4-heparin ELISA results.
- If low positive, patients should undergo the confirmatory PF4 platelet activation assay.

- **PF4-dependent platelet activation assay**
- Serotonin release assay
- P-selectin expression assay
- Heparin-induced platelet activation (HIPA)

**Pertinent Imaging Studies**

Clinicians should consider the following studies:

- **Intracranial imaging**-  this is focused on evaluating for cerebral sinus venous thrombosis (CSVT) with either magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) venogram or computed tomography (CT).

- **Transabdominal and Transthoracic imaging**focused on evaluating for splanchnic thrombosis and/or pulmonary emboli with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) venogram.

- **Duplex Ultrasound**of the lower extremities is another option if clinically indicated for evaluating deep vein thrombosis (DVT).