The pyramidal tracts are part of the UMN system and are a system of efferent nerve fibers that carry signals from the cerebral cortex to either the brainstem or the spinal cord. It divides into two tracts: the corticospinal tract and the corticobulbar tract.

The corticospinal tract consists of neurons that synapse on the spinal cord controlling movements in the limbs and trunk. It originates in multiple areas of the brain, mainly in the primary motor cortex (Brodmann area 4) and in premotor areas (Brodmann area 6). However, it can also originate from the somatosensory cortex, cingulate gyrus, and the parietal lobe. From here, it will descend through the corona radiata, internal capsule, cerebral peduncles, pons, and upper medulla. Once it reaches the lower medulla, about 85 to 90% of the fibers will cross over or “decussate” at the pyramidal decussation to form the lateral corticospinal tract (LCST). They continue their descent in the lateral funiculus and terminate at all levels of the spinal cord. A few of these fibers that are responsible for fine motor function such as controlling finger and hand movement will synapse directly on lower motor neurons. However, most will terminate in lower motor neuron “pools” (groups of interneurons that process and integrate the information before passing it on to the lower motor neurons). At the pyramidal decussation, the 10 to 15% of fibers that did not decussate will continue down uncrossed as the anterior corticospinal tract (ACST). These fibers are involved in controlling proximal muscles such as those in the trunk. Typically lesions of the ACST tend to have a minimal clinical effect.

The pyramidal decussation is a critical concept to understand. Because of the crossing over of the fibers, the location of the lesion will determine which side the symptoms will arise. Lesions above the decussation will cause symptoms on the contralateral side of the body, whereas lesions below the decussation (typically the spinal cord) will cause symptoms on the ipsilateral side.

The corticobulbar tract synapses on the cranial nerves controlling muscles of the face, head, and neck. It originates in the frontal lobe’s primary motor cortex and follows a similar path to the corticospinal tract. It descends through the corona radiata and the internal capsule. They will then exit and synapse directly on the lower motor neurons of cranial nerves. The fibers of the corticobulbar tract bilaterally innervate almost every cranial nerve except for cranial nerves VII and XII, which are innervated by the contralateral cortex. What this means is that a corticobulbar tract lesion on the left side of the face will cause weakness of the right side. However, since every other cranial nerve except for VII and XII are innervated bilaterally (both the left and right hemispheres), lesions to both sides of the corticobulbar tract will need to occur for symptoms to appear.