Compartment syndrome occurs when pressures increase within a fixed cavity of the body, leading to ischemia, muscle damage, and organ dysfunction. These "fixed" spaces are constrained by muscular and fascial boundaries, which may have limited compliance when they become swollen.

Intraabdominal hypertension is defined as the sustained intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) above 12 mmHg.

Abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS) is a severe illness seen in critically ill patients.  ACS results from the progression of steady-state pressure within the abdominal cavity to a repeated pathological elevation of pressure above 20mmHg with associated organ dysfunction.  Failure to recognize and immediately manage ACS can lend to poor prognosis as ACS is recognized as an independent predictor of mortality.  High clinical suspicions with protocolized monitoring and management should be adapted when treating the critically ill, especially those with significant fluid shifts. This clinical diagnosis should be considered in patients with tense or distended abdomen with associated instability; however, it may also be seen without abdominal distention.

The exact clinical conditions that define ACS are controversial. The dysfunction may present with respiratory concerns such as high peak airway pressure and inadequate ventilation and oxygenation or decreased urine output caused by falling renal perfusion, but these concerns are reversible with intervention.

Abdominal compartment syndrome has medical and conservative management options, and treatment is aimed at identifying and treating the cause of the compartment syndrome. However, patients with clinical deterioration may require emergent surgical decompression.