A complete history and physical examination should be obtained to identify risk factors for HAND/HAD as well as to rule out other causes of dementia. Risk factors identified by the CASCADE study include low CD4 count, advanced age at seroconversion, duration of HIV infection, and prior AIDS-defining diagnosis. Particular attention should be given to adherence to the medication regimen and medical follow up as well as the timing of HIV diagnosis, stage of disease and current treatment. Time course of symptoms and degree of functional impairment should be elicited. Other conditions potentially contributing to cognitive impairment should be identified including any history of head trauma, substance abuse or psychiatric disorders.  The onset of complaints is generally indolent. Patients and their families or caregivers may report mood changes, memory impairment, insomnia, weight loss or apathy.

Patients experiencing mild neurocognitive deficits are unlikely to have specific complaints. As a result, neuropsychological testing should be administered routinely with HAD risk factors or low CD4 counts. Patients may exhibit flattened affect and lack of emotional lability which may distinguish them from those with a major depressive disorder. Deficits in verbal fluency, decision-making, executive functioning and memory are common. Higher cortical dysfunctions such as aphasia, agnosia and apraxia are generally absent but may develop in the later stages of progression. Patients with advanced disease may develop frontal release signs, hyperreflexia and difficulty with rapid alternating movements. A neurologic exam should assess the level of alertness (HAD generally does not cause an alteration in the level of consciousness) and findings suggestive of an alternative neurologic disorder such as Parkinson disease, stroke, tumor or progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.