Retinal hemorrhages are classified according to the location in the retina: Retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL), intraretinal, subretinal, subretinal pigment epithelium (RPE), subhyaloid/preretinal, and vitreous hemorrhage.

**Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer (RNFL) Hemorrhages**

RNFL hemorrhages are superficial and follow the direction, shape, and spread of the RNFL bundles. Three types of hemorrhages are seen at the level of RNFL: flame-shaped hemorrhages, splinter (disc) hemorrhages, and Roth spots.

- Flame shaped hemorrhages: These hemorrhages are diffuse, found in the posterior pole, and last approximately 6 to 12 weeks. They occur typically in diseases affecting superficial retinal capillary plexus secondary to arterial diseases like hypertension, blood dyscrasias, and anemias.

- Disc (Drance) hemorrhages: Theses are superficial splinter shaped hemorrhages located near the optic disc margin at the prelaminar level within one-disc diameter, usually with a tapered end towards the disc and feathery end away from the disc.

- Roth spots: Roth spots are round in shape with a white center. It was Litten who described the association (Litten sign) and referred to it as Roth spots.

**Intraretinal Hemorrhages**

These dot and blot hemorrhages are found within the inner nuclear and outer plexiform layers of the retina. These are dense, dark red, sharply outlined, and are seen in disorders that affect the pre-venular deep capillary layer. Common causes for such hemorrhages include diabetic retinopathy, retinal vein occlusions, ocular ischemic syndrome, sickle cell retinopathy, and juxta foveal telangiectasia.

**Subretinal Hemorrhages**

These hemorrhages occur between the photoreceptor layer and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The hemorrhages are deep red in color and broader in shape with diffuse margins. Such hemorrhages are commonly seen in ARMD, presumed ocular histoplasmosis, high myopia, PCV, retinal macroaneurysm, and trauma. Sub-macular hemorrhages are commonly seen in choroidal neovascular membranes secondary to ARMD.

**Sub-RPE Hemorrhages**

These hemorrhages are located between RPE and Bruch membrane and appear dark red with well-defined sharp borders. They are commonly seen in choroidal neovascular membranes (CNVM), choroidal tumors, and choroidal rupture secondary to acute trauma.

**Sub-hyaloid or Preretinal Hemorrhages**

Preretinal hemorrhages are “boat” or ‘D’ shaped hemorrhages which collect between the posterior limiting membrane of the vitreous and internal limiting membrane (ILM) of the retina.

**Vitreous Hemorrhage (VH)**

Bleeding into the vitreous cavity is seen as fresh blood clots with sudden onset of floaters.

**Shaken Baby Syndrome**

This comes under abusive head trauma (AHT), is seen in young children caused by repeated acceleration-deceleration injury.