The management of macrosomia is not clearly defined and should be multifaceted.

**Medical Management**

Induction of labor (IOL), which was widely recommended until recently, has been discouraged due to the lack of clear evidence on its significance in the management of macrosomia. Pregnancies complicated by fetal macrosomia in patients with pre-existing or gestational diabetes and improved glycemic control via recommended pharmacologic and other interventions will lead to a reduction in the risk of perinatal complications. Pregnancies with macrosomia and no underlying diabetes pose a different challenge to the obstetric provider and other health care providers when appropriate treatment and intervention are needed. The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommends an elective caesarian delivery to women with pregnancies complicated by macrosomia if the estimated fetal weight is above 5000 g and no underlying glucose intolerance or 4500 g with underlying glucose intolerance.

**Diet and Exercise Program**

As previously stated, the two most important determinants of fetal macrosomia are uncontrolled maternal diabetes and excessive weight gain. The combination of a modified dietary regimen with adequate insulin therapy in pregnant women with diabetes might lead to a significant reduction in the likelihood of developing macrosomia. Graduated and tolerable exercise programs may decrease the risk of unnecessary weight gain during pregnancy and, in the long-term, reduce the risk of macrosomia if the patient has no other risk factors.