Multiple conditions can result in trismus. Acute trismus may be caused by facial, mandibular, or iatrogenic trauma. Examples of iatrogenic trauma include third molar extraction and intramuscular administration of anesthesia.

Chronic trismus may arise from temporomandibular disorders, neoplasia, surgery, radiotherapy in the head and neck for managing cancer, local infections, and connective tissue disorders like lupus erythematosus.

**Trismus As a Complication of Local Anesthesia**

Trismus is a possible complication of the inferior alveolar nerve block (IANB). During the administration of this block, the masticatory muscles can be accidentally penetrated, mainly the medial pterygoid muscle, resulting in pain-related trismus. When the affected muscle stretches, it triggers pain, causing its immediate reflex contraction and mandibular opening limitation.

**Trismus As a Complication of Dental Extractions**

Pain, trismus, and swelling are common complications of the surgical extraction of mandibular third molars.

**Trismus As a complication of Trauma to the Face and Mandible**

Fractures, mainly mandibular, may result in limited mouth opening.

**Trismus As a sign Of Temporomandibular Disorders (TMD)**

Temporomandibular disorders refer to the dysfunction and pain of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and muscles of the mastication.

**Trismus As a Complication of Dental Infection**

Dental infection must be suspected in patients presenting with acute trismus, as severe dental infections involving the masticatory muscles often cause trismus.

**Trismus as a Sign of Malignancy**

Patients presenting with limited mouth opening and pain in the pre-auricular area are likely to be diagnosed as having a TMD.

Trismus rarely presents as the primary sign of malignancy, but it should not be ruled out. Cases of misdiagnosis of trismus as TMD leading to delayed diagnosis of malignancy have been described in the literature. For example, a case of a 62-year-old patient presenting with severe trismus and TMJ pain who was misdiagnosed as having a TMD and underwent treatment but was found to have adenocarcinoma of the temporal region a year later.

- Opening less than 15 mm

- No history of clicking

- Pain of non-myofascial origin (e.g., neuralgia)

- Lymphadenopathy

- Suspicious intra-oral soft tissue lesion

**Trismus As a Complication Of Head and Neck Cancer Treatment**

Trismus is a common side effect of head and neck cancer and its treatment.

The temporomandibular joint or the mastication muscles can experience fibrosis because of radiotherapy, leading to trismus.

**Classification**

Multiple conditions can result in trismus. Some authors classify trismus according to the involvement of the temporomandibular junction (TMJ) in intraarticular and extraarticular etiologies.

**Traumatic**

- Hemarthrosis/hematoma

- Fracture or dislocation of the mandible or zygomatic arch

- Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) contusion

- Intraarticular bone islands/foreign bodies

- Displaced meniscus

- Direct injury to muscles of mastication

**Inflammatory**

- Osteoarthritis

- Soft tissue fibrosis

- TMJ ankylosis

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Scleroderma

- Temporal arteritis

**Infectious**

- Pyogenic arthritis

- Osteomyelitis of the mandible

- Tonsillitis

- Peritonsillar or other pharyngeal abscesses

- Tetanus

- Odontogenic abscess

- Mumps

- Parotid abscess

**Congenital Malformations**

- Pierre-Robin sequence

- Trismus-pseudocamptodactyly syndrome

**Head and Neck Neoplasms**

- Pharyngeal carcinoma

- Parotid gland tumors

**Odontogenic**

- Impacted third molar (or following extraction thereof)

**Iatrogenic**

- Perioperative inflammation

- Radiotherapy for head and neck cancer

**Neurogenic**

- Tetanus

- Status epilepticus

- Parkinsonism

- Strychnine, phenothiazine poisoning

- Medication adverse effect (phenothiazines, metoclopramide, tricyclic antidepressants)

- Hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, respiratory alkalosis

**Psychogenic******(conversion disorder)