The sciatic nerve emerges from the greater sciatic foramen below the piriformis. It divides into the (medial) tibial and (lateral) common fibular divisions. The septum of Compton-Cruveilhier separates the two divisions. The tibial division innervates the posterior half of the adductor magnus, the semitendinosus, the semimembranosus, and the long head of the biceps femoris. These hamstring muscles arise from the ischial tuberosity. They are long, stringy muscles arising from the ham (buttock).

In the thigh, the short head of the biceps femoris is supplied by the common fibular nerve.

The tibial nerve then passes into the leg, innervating the superficial posterior compartment and the deep posterior compartment. The superficial posterior compartment consists of the triceps surae (medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius and the soleus) and the plantaris and popliteus. The plantaris is innervated by the tibial nerve, as is the popliteus. The deep posterior compartment consists of the tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, and flexor hallucis longus. Passing behind the medial malleolus, the tibial nerve forms the medial plantar nerve, which innervates the flexor hallucis brevis and abductor hallucis, the first lumbrical, and the fibularis tertius.

The common fibular nerve divides into the superficial fibular nerve that innervates the fibularis longus and the fibularis brevis in the lateral compartment of the leg and the deep fibular nerve, which innervates the tibialis anterior, the extensor digitorum longus, the extensor hallucis longus, extensor hallucis brevis, extensor digitorum brevis, and the first lumbrical. An important clinical point is that the deep fibular nerve innervates the space between the big and second toe. This is the only part of the foot with sensory innervation from the deep fibular nerve.

The lateral plantar nerve is the homolog of the ulnar nerve in the hand. It innervates the adductor hallucis, flexor digiti minimi brevis, lumbricals 2 through 4, four dorsal interossei, and three palmar interossei.