**Lateral Medullary Syndrome (Wallenberg syndrome):**This is the most common stroke in the medulla. It is due to vertebral artery thrombosis or dissection. A lesion in the lateral medulla produces ipsilateral ataxia (inferior cerebellar hemisphere and spinocerebellar fibers), vertigo, horner syndrome (sympathetic fibers), headache, horizontal or vertical nystagmus (inferior vestibular nucleus and pathway), dysphagia, dysphonia (fibers of the cranial nerve IX and X), and pain with impaired facial sensation on the face (descending spinal trigeminal complex fibers). On the contralateral side, there is impaired pain and temperature sensation of the arms and legs due to the involvement of the spinothalamic tract. This syndrome does not include weakness because the corticospinal fibers are not affected. It is associated with occlusion, most likely due to atherothrombosis of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery or its branches supplying the lateral medulla.

**Medial Medullary Syndrome (Dejerine syndrome):**This results from occlusion of the distal vertebral artery or the anterior spinal artery. Lesions cause a lack of blood flow to the pyramidal decussation resulting in a contralateral arm and leg paralysis. The contralateral face has also been found to be affected in 50% of cases. Ipsilateral tongue paralysis can occur due to the hypoglossal nerve, and nystagmus can also present from the damage of the medial longitudinal fasciculus.

**Bilateral medial medullary syndrome:**This is an uncommon combination of the two major syndromes, affecting bilateral medial medullary. The associated symptoms are flaccid quadriplegia sparing the face, hypoglossal nerve palsy, and respiratory failure.

**Hemi medullary syndrome (Reinhold):**This is a very uncommon disease, with around ten patients reported in the medical literature. It has lateral and medial medullary syndrome symptoms. This lesion results in contralateral hemiparesis, contralateral hemisensory loss, ipsilateral ataxia, ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, ipsilateral facial sensory loss, dysarthria, nausea, and vomiting.

**Babinski-Nageotte and Cestan–Chenais:**These are very rare intermediolateral syndromes that can be considered “halfway state” between Wallenberg lateral and Reinhold hemi-medullary syndrome. Babinski-Nageotte has all the symptoms of lateral medulla syndrome with hemiparesis because the lesion has spread to the pyramidal tracts. Babinski-Nageotte syndrome is the result of simultaneous ischemia of the branches from the PICA and the anterior spinal artery, which is why it is so uncommon. Cestan-Chenias syndrome occurs with infarction of the lateral and anterolateral arterial groups with sparing of the posterior arterial group area. This syndrome has all the symptoms of Babinski-Nageotte syndrome, but there is no cerebellar ataxia because it spares Flechsig’s afferent posterior spinocerebellar tract.