Cycloplegics are contraindicated in patients with the shallow anterior chamber, close angle-closure glaucoma, history of allergy or hypersensitivity to any component of drugs, and systemic anticholinergic drugs receiver.

Atropine gets absorbed systemically through the lacrimal sac and thus should be avoided in children as far as possible.

It is advisable to compress the lacrimal sac for a minute after topical application to prevent systemic absorption. Though uncommon, few local side effects reported with atropine include the allergic reaction of lids and conjunctiva, crusting of lid margins, and dryness of periocular skin.

The blurring of vision and photophobia are direct consequences of cycloplegic and mydriatic effects of atropine. Systemic side effects include dryness of skin and mouth, tachycardia, irritability, delirium, flushing, skin rashes, abdominal distension, or hyperpyrexia. Very rarely, a severe reaction in the form of progressive respiratory depression has also been reported.

Homatropine can rarely have side effects, including incoherent speech, hallucinations, disorientation, psychosis, and visual disturbances.

Cyclopentolate is rarely associated with side effects like lacrimation and blurred vision. Systemic side effects include hallucinations, ataxia, disorientation, disturbance in speech, and restlessness.

Tropicamide is contraindicated in angle-closure glaucoma and hypersensitivity to the drug. Tropicamide is linked with CNS disturbance in infants and children. It should be used carefully in the elderly and cases with increased IOP. Tropicamide locally causes a stinging sensation, and systemic absorption may result in confusion and hypersensitivity reaction in children.