**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

The management of tooth fractures, luxations, and avulsions can be challenging as patients can often present to settings other than a dentist’s office, and treatment can be time sensitive. To maximize good outcomes and prevent complications, early treatment and regular follow-up appointments are recommended. General practitioners must recognize a traumatic dental emergency, implement early treatment, and expeditiously refer the patient to definitive treatment. It is also necessary for general dentists to not only educate the public regarding the prognosis and success of treatment but also educate at-risk populations regarding preventive measures, as well.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

The management of dental infections can be challenging as there are varying stages of the disease which cannot all be managed by a single healthcare provider. While patients with mild dental disease can often benefit from having management initiated in an urgent care, primary care, or emergency department setting, outcomes are best when they are expeditiously referred to a dentist or oral surgeon for definitive management in the outpatient setting. Likewise, patients with advanced dental infections with or without serious complications benefit from a collaborative approach across numerous specialties involving emergency physicians, hospitalists, intensivists, dental professions, oral surgeons, pharmacists, and nursing professionals.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

The management of post-extraction bleeding and postoperative bleeding can be challenging as patients can present to clinical settings other than their dental office where not all local hemostatic agents will be readily available. To maximize good outcomes and prevent complications, all healthcare providers should be familiar with the local and systemic treatment interventions and understand when to best utilize them. Patients who have a higher risk of experiencing post-extraction bleeding or postoperative bleeding (such as patients with known congenital coagulopathies, a systemic illness that increases bleeding, and anticoagulant therapy use) should have their dental care performed in conjunction with either a hematologist or primary care physician when appropriate.

Similarly, the management of alveolar osteitis can be challenging as these patients may also seek care in clinical settings other than their dental office. To maximize good outcomes, all healthcare providers should be familiar with the diagnosis and the initial steps of treatment. Encouraging interprofessional communication in these situations will also help dental professionals expedite appropriate outpatient follow-up.