It is important to appreciate the limitations in our ability to accurately report the definitive epidemiological trends as the contemporary recognition and diagnosis of SLAP injuries remains debated.

The highest incidence rates of SLAP lesions present in the 20- to 29-year-old and 40- to 49-year-old age groups.

As knowledge has evolved through time, with improvements in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) quality, SLAP tears subsequently became a more frequent diagnosis.  However, the ideal treatment of SLAP tears was never fully elucidated, and thus the increasing recognition of SLAP injuries brought about an increased incidence of SLAP repair rates across institutions.

**The Rise of SLAP Repair Rates**

While Snyder’s group reported that SLAP repairs represent about 3% of shoulder cases in a large tertiary referral center, ensuing studies from the first decade of the 2000s reported a consistent rise in the overall increased rate of SLAP repairs performed at many other institutions.  Weber et al. reported surprising trends after mining the American Board of Orthopaedic Surgery (ABOS) Part II database. The ABOS database houses the collection of International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10), and CPT coding across eligible ABOS Part II candidates during their respective board collection periods. The authors noted an increase in the SLAP repair rate to greater than 10% of shoulder cases reported by 2008.

Similarly, a 2012 study reported the rising incidence of arthroscopic SLAP repair rates within New York State from 2002 to 2010, noting a 464% increase in the number of SLAP repairs. This increase constituted a jump in case volume reporting from 765 to 4313 annual SLAP repairs. This increase translated to a population-based increased incidence rate from 4 per 100000 patients in 2002 to 22.3 per 100000 patients in 2010.

**The fall of SLAP Repair Rates**

As our knowledge regarding the actual clinical significance of SLAP tear presentations continued to evolve from 2010 and beyond, the initial rise in the incidence rate of SLAP repairs performed reached its peak before subsequently declining over the last decade.  Moreover, clinicians began reporting on the critical importance of differentiating younger, active patient populations (e.g., under 40 years old) and overhead athletes from the older patients (e.g., over 40 years old) with degenerative SLAP tears secondary to repetitive overhead manual laborer occupations.

Erickson et al. reported in 2016 that an institutional trend from 2004 to 2014 (including four fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons) revealed decreasing rates of total SLAP repairs performed. Further, the age of patients operated on for SLAP tears was decreasing, and the majority of SLAP repairs still being performed by the latter half of the study were limited to mostly Type II SLAP tears.

A 2015 study investigated the adjusted incidence rates of SLAP tears as reported in the Defense Medical Epidemiological Database between 2002 and 2009. The adjusted annual incidence rate for SLAP lesions increased from 0.31 cases per 1000 person-years in 2002 to 1.88 cases per 1000 person-years in 2009, with an average annual increase of just over 20% during the study period.

Despite the aforementioned limitations, the contemporary consensus regarding SLAP tears is that they account for 80% to 90% of labral pathology in the stable shoulder, although they are typically seen in association with other shoulder pathologies and rarely present in isolation.