**Tear and Contact Lens Interaction**

The corneal tear film plays a vital role in maintaining the functional integrity of the cornea. It acts as a barrier, nourishes, and lubricates the corneal surface. The cornea is the primary refractive surface and comprises numerous refractive elements.

It is vital to maintain the transparency and integrity of the cornea. The contact lens acts as a barrier between the tear film and the cornea and hampers the harmonious relationship between the two. This interaction reduces contact lenses' health, functioning, efficiency, efficacy, and acceptability.

**Lens Position and Tear Film Interaction**

The lens can't be clamped or stuck to the cornea. The properties of the tear film, such as surface tension and viscosity, act as glue to hold the contact lens over the cornea surface.

The pre-lens tear film acts as a plastic sheet to hold and tack the lens due to the firm, cohesive force between the water molecules and also serves as an adhesive force between water and the lens material. Approximately 11grams of force is needed to displace the lens as per experimental studies. When the tear film covering the lens breaks, the method of internal adhesion plays a key role. Negative pressure builds up between the lens, the corneal surface, and the tear film. It acts as a collar between the edge of the lens and the cornea, and this tear film acts as a container for the lens. When measured, this negative pressure is approximately 29 dynes/ cm.

**Optical Properties**

The tear lens or the post-lens tear film interface plays an essential role in improving the function of the contact lens.

The refractive index of the cornea is 1.376, and that of tears is 1.337. If the indices were equal, all degrees of the irregularities of the corneal surface, as well as astigmatism, would be perfectly corrected with the CL. With high degrees of astigmatism, residual astigmatism will be proportionately higher.

**Impact on Corneal Nourishment**

Contact lens impacts the cornea in numerous ways.

- Retard the tear evaporation and interfere with tear hypertonicity.

- Acts as a barrier to the delivery of oxygen

- Traps the water and reduces waste disposal

- Injure or traumatize the dead epithelial cells.

The hard CL covers approximately 50-80% of the corneal surface, and 70 to 85% of this area is permanently protected with normal lens mobility. The covered area is dependent on the nutrition of the tear film under the contact lens. The post-lens tear interface needs constant renewal to meet the corneal oxygen demands.

It has been observed that under static conditions, the oxygen in the post-lens tear interface is exhausted within 90 seconds with hard or soft CL with 40% hydration. Further, the non-oxygen dependant pathway is significantly less efficient (approximately 1/18) than the oxygen-dependent pathway. There is an accumulation of lactic acid, the corneal nutrition is compromised, and this is corneal edema and haziness.

The blinking mechanism creates a pump mechanism in the cornea-contact lens interface, and the pressure on the lid presses the contact lens, which expels the post-lens tear interface, which is then formed again. The pump efficacy depends upon

- Tear volume behind the contact lens

- Blink frequency

- Percentage exchange of fluid with each blink

The soft contact lens has a large diameter and comprehensively covers the lens surface. An aqualung effect is seen due to the hydrophilic nature of the lens. When blinking is absent, the corneal surface lacks oxygen, and the pump effect is missing. The oxygen delivery in soft lenses is only 10% of hard CL. But the lens flexibility helps create a capillary layer of fluid under the lens surface. The corneal deturgescence is reduced due to hypotonicity of the tear film resulting from excessive secretion of tears, change in blink rate, and impairment of evaporation.

**Lens Edge Effect**

The contact lens is covered by the patient's tear film, resulting in a prism-shaped meniscus at the lens edge. If the edge of the lens comes in the pupillary area, it may result in the formation of the second focus of the image on the retina. This is common with low riding as well as high-riding lenses. This is called as ghost image effect or the edge flare effect.

**Lens Damage**

The lens spoilage can result from irregular contact lens interactions with the tear film. There can be multiple deposits on the contact lens surface which can affect the lens's optical properties. The deposits can damage the contact lens and reduce its working efficiency within six months. The lens deposits can be due to

- Lens surface irregularities due to manufacturing defects

- Tear film inadequacy

- The porosity of the lens

- Blink irregularity and deficiency

- Immediate tear film break-up time

- Altered tear film composition

- Reduced tear film volume

- Altered pH of the tear film