Gingivitis is caused by the microbial plaque deposits located in or close to the gingival sulcus. The microorganisms more strongly associated with the etiology of gingivitis include species of Streptococcus, Fusobacterium, Actinomyces, Veillonella, and Treponema. Bacteroides, Capnocytophaga, and Eikenella are also potentially linked to the etiology of the disease. There may be other local or systemic etiologic factors that intensify plaque deposition or the vulnerability of the tissue to the microbial attack

Based on the etiology, gingivitis can be classified into different types.

**Plaque Induced Gingivitis**

This is the most common cause of gingivitis. Plaque is a thin film that forms on the tooth surface due to poor oral hygiene. If not regularly removed, it can harden up and form calculus. As plaque harbors a large number of bacteria, inflammation can occur in the gingival tissue.

Some local factors can contribute to the formation of plaque, such as crowding of teeth due to which plaque removal becomes difficult. As misaligned teeth often require orthodontic correction, cleaning difficulty increases accumulating more plaque. Furthermore, a dental prosthesis that does not have an adequate fit or is not properly finished can also act as a nidus for plaque accumulation.

In children, tooth eruption is frequently associated with gingivitis as plaque accumulation tends to increase in the area where primary teeth are exfoliating, and permanent teeth are erupting as oral hygiene may be difficult to be maintained in these areas. This is referred to as eruption gingivitis.

**Nutritional Gingivitis**

This may occur due to a deficiency of vitamin C. It has been found that a modern lifestyle with the intake of an increased amount of refined carbohydrates and an increased ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids can promote the inflammatory process

**Hormonal Gingivitis**

During pregnancy, there are not only changes in hormone levels but also a greater predisposition to dilating blood vessels. These factors contribute to an exaggerated inflammatory response by the gingival tissues even to a minor quantity of plaque accumulation. In fact, it has been suggested that the levels of estrogen determine the severity of gingival inflammation created against the biofilm at the gingival margin

The hormonal alterations that occurred during puberty influence how the gingival tissue reacts to plaque accumulation causing what is known as puberty gingivitis. It has been found that in the cytoplasm of the cells of the gingiva, receptors for both estrogens and testosterone that have a high affinity for these hormones are present. The receptors for estrogen are specifically present in the basal and spinous layers of the epithelium. In the connective tissue, such receptors are found in the fibroblasts and endothelial cells of small vessels. Therefore, the gingiva is an easy target organ for these steroid hormones resulting in gingivitis. It has been observed that during adolescence, gingivitis appears earlier in girls (eleven to thirteen years) than in boys (thirteen to fourteen years)

**Drug-Induced Gingivitis**

Various drugs used for systemic conditions can cause gingivitis as a side effect such as phenytoin (used for epileptic seizures), calcium channel blockers (used for angina, high blood pressure), anticoagulants, and fibrinolytic agents, oral contraceptive agents, protease inhibitors, vitamin A and analogs. The mechanism behind this gingival inflammation is thought to be the ability of the metabolites of these drugs to induce the proliferation of fibroblasts. An imbalance between the synthesis and the degradation of the extracellular matrix leads to the accumulation of immature proteins in the extracellular matrix, particularly collagen. This, in turn, results in gingivitis

Apart from the already mentioned, various risk and influencing factors can contribute to the development of gingivitis. These include smoking and tobacco chewing, systemic conditions, genetic factors (hereditary gingival fibromatosis), and local conditions (dry mouth, crowded teeth).