**Medical Management**

Once the diagnosis of orbital cellulitis is confirmed, prompt antibiotic treatment is paramount. Due to the rare, but serious, complications associated with this condition, intravenous antibiotics should be started for empiric coverage of the most common associated organisms which usually include gram-positive organisms such as Staphylococcus and Streptococcus and gram-negative bacilli. Should there be a concern for intracranial extension, anaerobic coverage should also be included. One should always keep in mind the local trends of antimicrobial susceptibility, especially regarding MRSA coverage.

Empiric treatment most often includes a combination of IV antibiotics with broad coverage for the organisms discussed above. In patients with normal renal function, Vancomycin IV should be started with the addition of one of the following antibiotics: ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, ampicillin-sulbactam, or piperacillin-tazobactam. Should an intracranial extension be suspected, a combination of vancomycin plus ampicillin-sulbactam or piperacillin-tazobactam should be given, and no further therapy is needed. If ceftriaxone or cefotaxime were added to vancomycin, however, then metronidazole should be added for triple therapy for added anaerobic coverage.

Should the patient have a simultaneous sinusitis, it is also recommended to aid with nasal congestion by administration of oxymetazoline nasal spray for 3 days as well as saline nasal irrigation to help drainage of the sinuses and aid in the recovery of the underlying cause of the orbital cellulitis.

Special consideration should be given to patients with severe penicillin and/or cephalosporin allergy. In this case, a combination of vancomycin with either ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin may provide adequate coverage of the presumed causative organisms. However, it should be noted that Fluoroquinolone penetration into the central nervous system (CNS) has been shown to be quite low and therefore poor for preventing the spread of infection and intracranial complications.

Once clinical improvement has been noted, most often after 48 to 72 hours of IV antibiotics, it is suitable to transition the patient to oral antibiotics for continued treatment on an outpatient basis. Oral treatment regimens include the use of MRSA covering agents such as clindamycin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, plus one of the following for better Streptococcus and anaerobic coverage: amoxicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, cefpodoxime, or cefdinir.

Total antibiotic treatment usually covers a 14-day course; however, complicated cases may be treated for up to 21 days.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management is reserved for special circumstances, primarily the presence of large subperiosteal abscesses or orbital abscesses. One clue to the necessity of surgical intervention could be changed in visual function and lack of improvement in fever, swelling, proptosis, or pain. These clues should guide prompt imaging studies to re-evaluate the presence of a new or enlarging abscess.

In general, subperiosteal abscess greater than 10 mm in size should be evaluated by the ophthalmology surgical service and would likely need drainage. Orbital abscesses regardless of size should also be evaluated by the surgical team, and any intracranial extension of the infection should be evaluated by the surgical team for any possible drainage or shunts that may be required for evacuation of pus formation.