**1. Cardiac Failure and Cardiac Arrest**

SvO2 drops in patients with left ventricular failure or cardiogenic shock. Fall in CO results in changes in DO2 and a subsequent increase in VO2, ultimately leading to inverse changes in SvO2. Patients with chronic heart failure may be adapted to a low SvO2 (30 to 40%) due to chronic tissue hypoxia. An acute drop in SvO2 is an indication of cardiac deterioration. On the other hand, SvO2 improving (to >72%) following cardiopulmonary resuscitation is a marker for the return of spontaneous circulation. Thus, in such settings, it is useful to monitor SvO2.

**2. Severe Trauma**

SvO2 (<65%) after trauma predicts a loss of blood and a need for blood transfusion. Additionally, a low SvO2 in the first 24 hours following a major trauma/head injury is a prognostic indicator of higher mortality and longer hospital stay.

**3. Major Surgery**

Monitoring SvO2 in high-risk surgery has been shown to be beneficial for the early detection of hemodynamic deterioration. This indicates an inability of the heart to increase the CO in the setting of occult blood loss or anemia in patients with cardiac dysfunction. As with trauma, a low SvO2 indicates a postoperative increase in morbidity and mortality. A decrease in SvO2 when weaning a patient off of mechanical ventilation indicates a failure of extubation. The period of intraoperative derangement of SvO2 is a predictor of postoperative complications.

Anesthesia, analgesia, sedation, mechanical ventilation, blood transfusion, and intravenous fluid administration are all routinely utilized perioperative interventions that influence venous oxygen saturation. Studies have shown that a goal-directed approach intraoperatively reduces complications, hospital length of stay, and mortality postoperatively. Strict adherence to predefined hemodynamic goals (cardiac index, SvO2, oxygen extraction ratio, urine output) has demonstrated a lesser occurrence of organ dysfunction and an overall improved outcome.

**4. Sepsis and Septic Shock**

Sepsis is characterized by myocardial depression, hypovolemia, hypotension, and organ dysfunction. Septic shock is defined as sepsis with global tissue hypoxia and hypotension not correct by fluid resuscitation. 'Early goal-directed therapy' (EGDT) developed by Rivers et al. in 2001 is an accepted approach to sepsis and septic shock management.

While many studies have clearly demonstrated the benefit of SvO2 monitoring for EDGT, several recent randomized trials have failed to show any improvement in survival.