Pseudomonas aeruginosa causes a wide spectrum of infections with varying severity, examples include:

- Pseudomonas folliculitis is characterized by a maculopapular pruritic rash, axillary lymphadenopathy, breast tenderness, and fever. It is associated with the use of hot tubs, jacuzzis, and pools.

- Puncture wounds in the foot, especially in children, can lead to infection with Pseudomonas. A classical scenario is a nail or glass injury through rubber shoes or soles. Local tenderness, purulent discharge, other signs of infection are found; however, delay in the presentation and diagnosis due to lack of symptoms initially may predispose to serious complications like osteomyelitis and septic arthritis.

- In cystic fibrosis exacerbations, pseudomonal coverage is always needed. Chronic infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs in more than 60% of adults with cystic fibrosis and is linked to higher mortality.

- In patients with burns, Pseudomonas infections were found to decline and are replaced by gram-positive organisms and other emerging gram-negative organisms e.g., Aeromonas hydrophila.

- Patients with diabetes are more likely to develop malignant otitis externa caused by Pseudomonas and present with otalgia and otorrhea. Examination frequently reveals granulation tissue inside the ear canal.

- Populations at-risk are extremely susceptible to pneumonia caused by Pseudomonas. Pseudomonas pneumonia should be considered in any patient who has signs and symptoms of pneumonia and who is immunocompromised.

- While patients with an organ transplant in general, are susceptible to all systemic pseudomonal infections, kidney transplant patients are at increased risk of recurrent pseudomonal urinary tract infections.

- Other examples include endophthalmitis, endocarditis, meningitis, and many others.