Although IgA nephropathy is a common disease, the data on prevalence is not very accurate because a renal biopsy is necessary to establish the diagnosis. Not all patients undergo a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis and instead receive conservative management. About 10% of the renal biopsies in the United States show IgA nephropathy. Forty percent of renal biopsies in Asia and 20% of renal biopsies in Europe show IgA nephropathy.

The prevalence varies geographically, and variations in disease burden are seen depending on whether biopsy registry data was used or dialysis registries were utilized to obtain these estimates. Despite these caveats, organ replacement and biopsy registries indicate geographic variation in disease estimates with a higher burden in Pacific Asian regions. Biopsy registry data is sometimes inaccurate as patients with mild disease may never undergo a biopsy, and the disease may not be detected. A systematic study of biopsy-based literature from multiple countries reveals an overall incidence of over 2.5 per 100,000.

Most studies in this review were from Europe and North America, except one from Japan. In a Japanese study of the pediatric population, the incidence in the biopsy registry where broad screening programs were carried out was eight-fold greater than in a Tennessee program where the biopsy was not part of routine screening and was only done in certain cases (4.5 versus 0.57 per 100,000/year).

Compelling data suggests a higher burden of IgA nephropathy in East and Pacific Asian countries. These reports parallel geospatial differences in the prevalence of genetic susceptibility loci observed in global genome-wide association studies.

There are regional variations in the progression of the disease; however, these are difficult to establish given lead-time biases introduced by differences in biopsy practice. In a study of 669 patients, the multivariable analysis revealed that people of Pacific Asian origin have a higher risk of end-stage renal disease (ESRD).