A key difficulty in treating CHS is its classic resistance to mainstay antiemetic therapy in both the emergency and primary care setting such as ondansetron and metoclopramide.

Serotonin antagonism in the gastrointestinal tract from medications such as ondansetron, dolasetron, and granisetron likewise have varying levels of efficacy. Tricyclic antidepressants also antagonist serotonin receptors and may limit nausea due to this mechanism, though their extensive side effect profile such as transaminitis and predisposition to various dysrhythmias via QTc prolongation and QRS widening make appropriate dosing of these medications a priority. Drugs with an anticholinergic effect may likewise block medullary mediated vomiting, though they may have minimal impact on visceral stimulation, including the crippling abdominal cramping pain that patients with CHS experience. Opioids, while often prescribed for the patient’s debilitating abdominal pain, are not appropriate for CHS, as they may, in fact, worsen nausea and vomiting.

The historical feature of CHS patients having their symptoms partially or even fully relieved through hot baths or showers raises the consideration of heat therapy for relief. A 2014 anonymous internet survey sought to obtain information regarding hot shower usage amongst nearly five hundred marijuana users, who were predominantly Caucasian women from the United States of America with a mean age of 34 years and all recruited from a cyclical vomiting referral center in the United States at the Medical College of Wisconsin. This population had a high proportion of comorbid conditions, including anxiety, depression, migraine, and bipolar disorder. Sixty-seven percent of respondents noted that hot showers relieved their symptoms, though whether symptoms were merely ameliorated or fully resolved is unknown. Of note, this survey took place before the widespread legalization of cannabis, and a fear of litigation may have influenced respondent answers.

Capsaicin has been put forward as a potential analgesic with many hypotheses regarding its mechanism of action.

As of 2018, twenty published cases of CHS demonstrated significant relief of both pain and vomiting with capsaicin cream, though, due to various difficulties including the nascent age of this diagnosis, differing diagnostic criteria, and the lack of recruitment for large case series and randomized control trials, have not fully legitimized capsaicin use as definitive therapy for CHS.