Current concepts point to insulin resistance as the primary metabolic defect leading to NAFLD. Insulin resistance leads to an increased influx of free fatty acids (FFA) into the liver. This happens due to the failure of insulin to suppress the hormone-sensitive lipase, causing more FFA to be released from the adipose tissue. Also, elevated insulin levels and insulin resistance promote continuous synthesis of triglycerides in the liver. These two sources of triglycerides result in accumulation of lipids in the hepatocytes causing macrovesicular hepatic steatosis.

Lipid accumulation in non adipose tissue is a key factor for the progression of insulin resistance, DM(Diabetes mellitus) and cardiovascular disease.

The current hypothesis is that NASH is an evolution from NAFLD caused by a second "hit." The evidence behind this second insult in not conclusive, but the most acceptable theories involve oxidative stress, specific cytokines, plus lipopolysaccharides. Free fatty acids and hyperinsulinemia potentiate lipid peroxidation and the release of hydroxy-free radicals, directly injuring the hepatocytes by recruiting neuroinflammatory mediators. Chronic liver injury over time will lead to activation of stellate cells, creating a potential for hepatic fibrosis.

The diagnosis of NASH can only be established with liver biopsy.

Biopsy findings can reveal the following.

- Type 1: fatty liver alone; macrovesicular steatosis

- Type 2: fatty accumulation and lobar inflammation

- Type 3: fat accumulation and ballooning degeneration

- Type 4: fat accumulation, ballooning degeneration and either Mallory hyaline of fibrosis.

Type 3 and Type 4 are NASH by definition.