Lymph nodes are small, round kidney-shaped structures that run with the lymphatic system. Lymph nodes play a vital role in the body’s ability to fight off infection. A tough fibrous connective tissue capsule encapsulates lymph nodes. The fibrous capsule extends into the lymph node to form trabeculae and divide each node into lobules. Different lymph node size has a different number of lobules. Each lobule divides into separate compartments; cortex, paracortex, and medulla—the cortex houses primary follicles, which are dormant B- cell lymphocytes. The paracortex houses T-cell lymphocytes. The medulla contains reticular cells and macrophages and communicates with efferent lymphatic vessels.

Lymph node has afferent vessels that carry lymphatic fluid to the lymph node. As the fluid travels through the lymph node, immune cells within the node filter for harmful substances such as bacteria, viruses, parasites, and other foreign material. If there is a presence of an antigen, B-cell lymphocyte in the follicles create antibodies that are specific to the antigen. Activated primary follicles form into secondary follicles called germinal centers and indicate the proliferation of B-lymphocytes and the production of antibodies. The antibodies tagged the antigen for destruction by other immune cells. T-cell lymphocytes are responsible for cell-mediated immunity. Macrophages phagocytize pathogens such as bacteria and viruses and destroy them.

Lymph nodes are located throughout the body and can be found deep within tissues and superficially and drain specific areas of the body. The inguinal lymph nodes are in the groin area and classify as superficial and deep. The superficial inguinal lymph nodes reside below the inguinal ligament and subdivide into the inferior, superolateral, and superomedial nodes. The superficial inguinal lymph nodes drain the anal canal(below the pectinate line), the skin below the umbilicus, lower extremity, scrotum, and vulva. The deep inguinal lymph nodes are within the femoral sheath medial to the femoral vein. The deep nodes receive drainage from the glans penis or clitoris, as well as the superficial lymph nodes. The superficial and deep inguinal lymph nodes both drain into the external iliac lymph nodes.