Pembrolizumab is a relatively new biological agent, and even though it is effective, it does require close monitoring for safety; thus, besides the clinician who prescribes the agent, both the nurse and pharmacist are responsible for educating the patient on the potential side effects of the drug. Since some of the adverse effects are delayed-onset like colitis and hypophysitis, an outpatient oncology nurse should follow the patients. The clinician, nurse, and pharmacist team members should regularly check the renal and liver function. During IV administration, the drug is known to cause chills, fever, flushing, hypotension, hypoxemia, pruritis, rash, rigors, and wheezing. While checkpoint inhibitors have lower rates of infusion reaction than other monoclonal antibodies, it is still essential to monitor. More crucially, the drug may cause transient increases in blood glucose. Finally, because the drug can trigger an allergic reaction, the interprofessional team needs to have the necessary medications and equipment to counter it in the room.

**Outcomes**

PD-L1 expression levels and treatment decision-making in NSCLC (Level 1).

Tumor-expressed PD-L1 has the potential to suppress immune system responses by downregulating anti-tumor lymphocyte activity upon binding PD-1. In theory, an antibody that can block this interaction should be an effective anti-cancer agent. In practice, clinical trials of pembrolizumab and other checkpoint inhibitors have shown meaningful responses in many oncology indications thus far. As a corollary, it would make sense that tumors that express the most PD-L1 would be the most susceptible to one of these antibodies.

In NSCLC, for example, Brody et al. conducted a large meta-analysis of thirty-five different clinical trials and showed many studies that linked higher PD-L1 expression with worse survival, but also several other studies that showed no such effect.

The FDA recently changed the pembrolizumab NSCLC monotherapy approval label to include PD-L1 expressers greater than 1% (from greater than 50%). However, without adequate head-to-head studies, pembrolizumab may not provide optimal patient outcomes compared to other approved treatment options in patients with PD-L1 expression between 1 and 49%.

With the rapid developmental pace in the field of molecular therapeutics for lung cancer, treatment decisions are becoming more personalized and sophisticated. Therefore it will be of great importance to have support systems to help thoracic oncologists stay up-to-date.