Three distinct layers comprise the heart walls, from inner to outer:

- Endocardium

- Myocardium

- Epicardium (inner layer of the pericardium)

The muscles of the heart, termed the myocardium, make up the middle and thickest layer of the heart wall. This layer lies between the single-cell endocardium layer, which lines the inner chambers, and the outer epicardium, which makes up part of the pericardium that surrounds and protects the heart. Histologically, heart muscles are composed of cells called cardiomyocytes that have unique structures and properties correlating to their contractile function.

The sinus node, located within the right atrial myocardium, spontaneously depolarizes and thus determines the heart rate. These depolarizations are currents of ion influx that are carried from the sinus node to the heart muscle via conducting cells. When the depolarization reaches the heart muscle, voltage-gated sodium channels open, allowing a rapid influx of sodium ions into the cardiomyocytes, depolarizing the cells. The positive membrane potential triggers voltage-gated potassium and then calcium channels to open, allowing potassium to rush out and calcium to rush in. The initial influx of calcium is necessary for the second release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum found within the heart muscle cells. The accumulation of intracellular calcium ions binds to troponin C, moving tropomyosin aside to allow actin-myosin binding and cross-bridge cycling responsible for muscle contraction.