Managing the patient of hamstring injury requires proper communication and understanding of responsibilities on the part of the team involved in the management. This includes the primary provider, orthopedic surgeons,  radiologist, nursing staff, pharmacist, physical and occupational therapist, and, most importantly, the patients themselves. Good coordination of care is required for proper recovery and also preventing reinjuries. If a patient comes with pain on the back of the thigh while running, sprinting, or stretching, which prevents further continuation of the activity, they should be evaluated for an acute hamstring injury. Radiologists have a key role in determining the size, nature, and extent of the injury, which will be crucial in further management of the injury. These patients should be evaluated by either sports medicine or Orthopedics to determine the need for surgical management.

Early surgical intervention gives better results than the late interventions, especially in the complete proximal avulsions of the hamstring muscle.

An orthopedics consultation is of paramount significance to have a better outcome after the injury as early operative treatment gives promising results. The nursing staffs have a key role too in both non-surgical as well as surgical management. The physician assistant, nurse practitioner, if they are seeing a patient with a hamstring injury, should be able to determine when to refer to orthopedics or sports medicine and the need for operative vs. non-operative management. After proper surgical or non-surgical management, physical and occupational therapists have a crucial role in the rehabilitation, strength training, and speeding up the return to play. Studies have generally shown there is 87% strength return after 6 to 12 months post-surgery, while about 98% strength returns after more than 12 months of surgery.