Wallenberg syndrome was first described in 1808 by Gaspard Vieusseux. However, a more detailed description given in 1895 by Adolf Wallenberg identified this condition as infarction of the lateral medulla oblongata following occlusion of the vertebral artery (VA) or Posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). Wallenberg syndrome is also called lateral medullary or posterior inferior cerebellar artery syndrome. This neurological disorder is associated with various symptoms that result from damage to the lateral segment of the medulla posterior to the inferior olivary nucleus.

**Anatomy**

The posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) usually originates from the vertebral artery at an average distance of approximately 16 or 17 mm below the vertebrobasilar junction.

- The anterior medullary segment begins at the origin of the PICA. It ends at the level of a rostrocaudal line that passes through the most prominent part of the inferior olive.

- The lateral medullary segment extends from the level of the most prominent point of the olive to the level of the origin of the glossopharyngeal (CN IX), vagus (CN X), and accessory (CN XI) rootlets.

- The tonsillomedullary segment begins where the PICA passes posterior to the CN IX-XI and ends at the midpoint of the PICA's ascent toward the roof of the fourth ventricle along the medial surface of the tonsil.

- The telovelotonsillar segment begins where the PICA ascends to the mid-level of the medial surface of the tonsil and ends where the artery exits the fissures between the tonsil, vermis, and hemisphere to reach the suboccipital surface.

- The cortical segment begins where the PICA leaves the groove between the vermis, tonsil, and hemisphere and includes the terminal cortical branches.

The trunk of PICA gives rise to perforating, choroidal, and cortical branches. The PICA supplies the medulla, the choroid plexus, the tela choroidea of the fourth ventricle, the tonsils, the inferior vermis, and the inferior aspects of the cerebellar hemispheres.