Central sympathetic nuclei are located in the intermediolateral nucleus of the lateral grey column of the spinal cord, extending from T1 to L2-L3 levels. Their axons leave the spinal cord in the ventral roots and form white rami shortly after the ventral ramus separates from the spinal nerve. These myelinated white rami then proceed to either paravertebral or prevertebral ganglia. Paravertebral ganglia form the sympathetic trunk along both sides of the vertebral column, consisting of 20 - 24 paired and interconnected ganglionic nodes that join together at the coccygeal level to form the terminal unpaired node of the sympathetic chain known as the ganglion Impar. Prevertebral (preaortic) ganglia are organized in plexuses surrounding major branches of the abdominal aorta (the celiac, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric ganglia). Preganglionic white rami reach these ganglia after transiting through the paravertebral ganglia and abdominopelvic splanchnic nerves. The postganglionic fibers leave the ganglia in the form of unmyelinated grey rami and either join somatic nerves or form visceral nerves (they course along with the corresponding visceral vascular bundles or join splanchnic nerves). The afferent input to sympathetic ganglia is relayed via general visceral afferent fibers that carry pain and reflex sensations from internal organs to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.

Pharmacologic sympathetic blockade with local anesthetics is used diagnostically to evaluate if the pain experienced by the patient is sympathetically mediated. Often, pain relief lasts longer than the expected action of local anesthetic, thus making the block therapeutic. Adding a depot corticosteroid, if indicated, can prolong the action of such block from days to weeks. Once the block is proven effective, the use of chemical neurolysis or ablative modalities may provide a longer-lasting effect. When correct needle placement is confirmed radiographically, and significant analgesia is achieved using a very low concentration of local anesthetic, without signs of sensory or motor blockade, it is presumed it occurred as a result of the sympathetic block.