Spinal cord stimulation has proven its efficacy in refractory and difficult-to-treat pain syndromes. However, to enhance outcomes, it must also be cost-effective. In 2005, North and colleagues studied the cost-utility between SCS therapy and reoperation. The mean per-patient cost was $105,928 for reoperation versus $48,457 for SCS. Ultimately SCS was more effective and less expensive than reoperation in post-laminectomy syndrome patients.

Stimulation has shown a cost-benefit when compared to non-stimulation in the treatment of chronic back pain. Kumar et al., in 2002, followed 104 patients with failed back surgery syndrome, where 60 patients received implants.  The control group (54 patients, non-stim) and the experimental group (60 patients, stim) were followed for five years. The average annual cost for the control group was $38000 versus $29000 for the stim group. The higher healthcare costs in the non-stimulator group were attributed to more medications, more follow-up visits, emergency center visits or hospitalizations, imaging (X-rays and MRIs), and rehab centers/physical therapy.

The interprofessional healthcare team is necessary for the best outcomes. Pain physicians and nurses, interventional radiologists, neurosurgeons, surgical nurses, radiology technicians, and pharmacists all participate in care. Nursing will provide follow-up and coordinate activities among other professionals and specialists with the surgeon. Pharmacists will assist with the patient's post-procedural medication regimen, help prevent opioid misuse or dependence, and consult with the team regarding any potential drug interactions. The interprofessional approach will lead to improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]