Standard MVr is performed utilizing full cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and ischemic arrest. There are numerous possible surgical approaches, including median sternotomy, right thoracotomy, and robot-assisted. Regardless of incisional approach taken, the core principles of mitral valve repair remain the same: the goal is to create a competent mitral valve with good coaptation depth, ring annuloplasty, and avoidance of systolic anterior motion. We describe here the surgical techniques for MVr via median sternotomy. This approach is necessary for patients requiring additional concomitant procedures including coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), ascending aortic intervention, or additional/multiple valve intervention.

Cannulation for CPB is achieved via the ascending aorta and bicaval venous cannulation. Cardioplegic arrest is achieved via the antegrade and retrograde routes. After aortic crossclamping and adequate diastolic cardioplegic arrest, the interatrial groove (Sondergaard's or Waterston's) is exposed. Left atriotomy is created away from the pulmonary veins. Alternatively, a transseptal approach can be performed by right atriotomy and incising the septum by the fossa ovalis. Appropriate retractors are placed for exposure. The valve is then inspected systematically using saline injection as well as visual inspection of each segment. Repair technique will depend on findings of valve pathology. Isolated P2 prolapse, for instance, can be repaired either by triangular vs. quadrangular resection and ring annuloplasty, or by creating neo-chordae to the appropriate papillary muscle. We recommend ring annuloplasty for all repairs. Annuloplasty sutures are placed around the annulus, and the anterior leaflet height is sized. Depending on MR pathology (primary vs. secondary, ischemic vs. non-ischemic), the ring can be true-sized or undersized. It is important to test the valve for coaptation depth with the ideal depth being about 1 cm. It is also important to avoid excessive undersizing of the ring as this may cause systolic anterior motion (SAM).

Alain Carpentier’s technique for correction of MR includes leaflet repair with quadrangular resection and rigid annuloplasty to correct annular dilatation, developed through autopsy and pathology studies of the MV.

With Lawrie’s technique, avoidance of reoperation and significant recurrent MR as assessed by echocardiography at ten years is 90.1% and 93.9%, respectively, according to reports. Also, if the ventricular filling gets optimized through adequate preload and afterload, atrioventricular dyssynchrony is avoided, and hypercontractility is limited, there is almost no postoperative systolic anterior motion (SAM).

Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery (MIMVS) can be divided into two groups: partial sternotomy and right thoracotomy, including the open and video-assisted methods, with or without robotic assistance.[27][28] MIMVS has been shown to reduce surgical trauma by avoidance of a full sternotomy incision. MIMVS approaches will require different cannulation techniques, generally involving the femoral vessels. Sündermann et al. showed equivalent short-term and mid-term outcomes with MIMVS, as compared to conventional surgery, regarding the incidence of stroke, mortality, and durability of repair.[30] Patients who undergo MIMVS have reduced blood loss, need for blood transfusion, mechanical ventilation time, and intensive care unit stay, as well as a quicker resumption of regular activity.

An innovative approach for the treatment of degenerative MV disease due to posterior leaflet prolapse is trans-apical beating heart MV repair with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) chordae implantation. CPB is avoided as a small left anterolateral thoracotomy incision is made at the fourth or fifth intercostal space to access the cardiac apex. The Neochordae device used for this procedure allows the physician to grasp and pierce the leaflet while pulling the PTFE cord through the prolapsing segment. The neochordae get externalized at the level of the cardiac apex and titrated to maximal coaptation on echocardiography with the resolution of MR. Most patients were found to be stable at early follow-up. This technique is utilized to treat MR due to prolapsing lesions early in the history of the disease, with little or no annular dilatation and limited LV remodeling.