The normal tongue epithelium is keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Several epithelial changes are known to precede the development of invasive tongue carcinoma. These changes include increased mitosis, cellular pleomorphism, abnormal organization, and nuclear enlargement. Depending on the extent of these changes, these are classified from mild dysplasia to severe dysplasia/carcinoma in situ. Important pre-malignant lesions of the tongue that may harbor dysplastic changes are leukoplakia and erythroplakia. Leukoplakia manifests as whitish superficial plaques on the tongue surface that do not scrape off. It carries a low risk of malignant transformation, and simple excision by a variety of different methods is recommended. Erythroplakia, on the other hand, presents as red, erythematous plaques and has a high risk of malignancy, as it almost always harbors significant dysplastic changes and even carcinoma in situ. Wide local excision of these lesions is recommended.

The invasion of the basement membrane is the hallmark of invasive carcinoma. The classic histopathologic features of invasive SCCA of the tongue are keratin deposits and nests of squamous cells with stromal fibrosis. Basaloid, papillary, spindle-cell, and verrucous are some of the histologic subtypes. However, except in the case of very poorly differentiated tumors, the above described prototypic histologic characteristics are fairly constant. Perineural invasion, lymphovascular invasion, and loss of differentiation are important histologic features, and their presence negatively impacts prognosis. In addition, the depth of invasion is the most important histologic finding in tongue SCCA, as it is the major determinant of prognosis and influences treatment selection, and risk of locoregional metastasis. Patients with malignant tongue tumors with more than 5-8 mm of depth of invasion have a relatively high risk of occult nodal micrometastatic disease despite a clinically and radiologically negative neck.

Importantly, immunohistochemical staining for p16 protein is traditionally used as a surrogate marker for HPV-associated neoplasia.