Neonatal evaluation:

- In newborn infants, assess the presence of jaundice by first examining the skin for a yellow appearance in a room that is well lit. More objective measurements include obtaining total serum bilirubin (TSB) or transcutaneous bilirubin (TcB) in newborns. An hour-specific bilirubin nomogram can be used to risk-stratify newborn patients with elevated bilirubin levels to help determine the appropriate treatment.

- Although screening tests for G6PD deficiencies are available, they are not routinely performed in the United States; however, screening should be considered in newborns that have severe jaundice resistant to phototherapy or who have a family history or ethnicity suggestive of G6PD deficiency. The most common screening method includes a rapid fluorescent spot test to detect the generation of NADPH from NADP. Screening can also be performed by quantitative spectrophotometric analysis.

Children and adult evaluation:

- The evaluation of older patients presenting with complications of G6PD deficiency begins with a complete history to include new medications and screening for a family history of similar symptoms. It is also important to evaluate for possible infection, as the stress of infection may trigger a hemolytic event in patients with G6PD deficiency.

- Laboratory studies include a complete blood count, bilirubin levels, reticulocyte count, serum aminotransferases, and lactate dehydrogenase. A peripheral blood smear may show signs of hemolysis such as schistocytes.