Anaphylaxis is the most severe form of a hypersensitivity reaction that has a rapid onset from minutes to hours. The reaction is caused by the activation of mast cells and basophils through the binding of cell membrane receptors to IgE antibodies. The activation of these cells causes the release of mediators from secretory granules such as histamine, tryptase, carboxypeptidase A, and proteoglycans. This reaction progresses to the activation of secondary substances like phospholipase A2, then cyclooxygenase and lipogenesis as well as arachidonic acid, platelet-activating factor, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. These cytokines and chemokines create life-threatening symptoms, including bronchoconstriction, increased vascular permeability, and facial flushing. The reaction further progresses with the platelet-activating factor, which causes bronchoconstriction and vascular permeability. The activation of neutrophils by tumor necrosis factor and further recruitment of effector cells, and enhances chemokine synthesis. This severe rapid progression is life-threatening and leads to death without intervention to triggers either a reversal or stopping the process promptly, preventing secondary reactions.

Common known triggers of anaphylaxis are bee stings, peanuts, (legumes), latex, and medications, but other substances can trigger this reaction. Therefore, an interprofessional approach to diagnosis is the recommendation. Patients may have anaphylaxis if they meet the criteria below

1. Acute onset of illness involving the skin, mucosal tissue, or both. This process is over in minutes to hours and can be in the form of generalized hives, pruritus, flushing, swollen lips, tongue, and uvula. In addition to these, there should be at least one of the following:

a) Respiratory compromise such as dyspnea, wheezing, bronchospasm, stridor, and decrease peak inspiratory effort and hypoxemia (which can be produced by the tissue edema and capillary leak in the lung tissue).

b) Reduced blood pressure or associated signs and symptoms of end-organ hypoperfusion (shock, hypotonia, syncope, incontinence).

2. Two or more of the following reactions that occur rapidly after exposure to a likely allergen (referred to in the literature as antigens, haptens, and mast cell receptor stimulants) for seconds or up to several hours.

a) Involvement of the skin-mucosal tissue signified by hives, itching to flushing, and swollen tissues such as lips, tongues, and uvula; other mucosal tissue can be affected as well from topical exposure and may not be as evident.

b) Respiratory compromise from dyspnea, swelling of the bronchus causing wheezing, bronchospasm, and stridor, or reduced peak expiratory flow and hypoxia.

c) Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms of syncope.

d) Persistent gastrointestinal signs and symptoms such as cramping, vomiting, excessive salivation with due to inability to swallow secretions).

(Skin symptoms are absent or unrecognized in up to 20 percent of episodes, thus incorporating the other symptoms of gastrointestinal or the listed symptoms improve recognition of anaphylaxis and allergy).

3. Reduced blood pressure alone after exposure to a known allergen for that patient as defined below:

a) Reduced blood pressure in adults is a drop in systolic to less than 90 or greater than a 30 percent drop from that person's baseline.

b) Reduced blood pressure in infants and children is the systolic blood pressure lower than normal for their age-specific rage or greater than 30 percent drop in systolic blood pressure:

(age [in years] x 2) + 70 mmHg up to 17 years of age (e.g., a child 1 month old; 1 month/12 months = (0.083 x 2) ==> 0.16 + 70 = 70.16)

Please note; once the age calculation reaches 90 mmHg, one can use the systolic pressure of 90 mmHg.

(This allows for the detection of anaphylactic reactions in which only one organ system is involved.)

Further, a response of resolved signs or symptoms to epinephrine for a known allergen would also be considered anaphylaxis.