Laboratory evaluation will identify anemia. The hemoglobin indices in iron deficiency will demonstrate a low mean corpuscular hemoglobin and mean corpuscular hemoglobin volume. Hematoscopy shows microcytosis, hypochromia, and anisocytosis, as reflected by a red cell distribution width higher than the reference range. Serum levels of ferritin, iron, and transferrin saturation will be decreased. Serum ferritin is a measure of the total body iron stores. The total iron-binding capacity will be increased. Stool for occult blood may reveal a gastrointestinal source of bleeding. A simple mean corpuscular hemoglobin/RBC index, or Mentzer index, can help differentiate between the two causes of microcytic/hypochromic anemia. These causes are iron deficiency and thalassemia minor. An index greater than 15 suggests iron deficiency, while an index less than 11 suggests thalassemia minor. The definitive test to rule out thalassemia minor is hemoglobin electrophoresis. Other tests like an iron profile are necessary for severe anemia or when anemia does not respond to iron therapy. Low ferritin is a reliable marker of iron deficiency. However, a ferritin level that is within the reference range or elevated is not very useful in patients with inflammatory conditions such as malignancies, infection, and collagen disease. This is because it is an acute-phase reactant. The standard for establishing iron deficiency is a bone marrow aspiration or biopsy followed by iron staining since it is unaffected by inflammation. However, the cost and invasiveness of this test make it less feasible; it is rarely performed for this reason.