The major organ involved in heat loss is the skin which is responsible for approximately 90% of heat loss. Skin is the largest organ in the human body. Thermoreceptors in the skin consist of free nerve endings with sensory axons that transmit information to the spinal cord. Different types of cation channels activate within nerves depending on the temperature. For example, painfully cold temperatures activate TRPA1 whereas burning pain activates TRPV1/2 channels.

Behavior is the most effective response to changes in temperature. Behavioral changes initiated by excessive heat loss include adding layers of clothing, curling up to minimize exposed surface area, or standing near a heat source to enhance heat gain via radiation. To minimize heat production if overheated, the behavioral response would be to reduce physical activity and enhance heat loss by convection by standing near a fan.

Other changes made by the hypothalamic efferent output include adjusting sympathetic outflow through the intermediolateral column to subcutaneous vessels. There is decreased sympathetic outflow to vessels causing vasodilation to avoid heat loss. Vasodilation results in the opening of arterioles and arteriovenous anastomoses which markedly increases blood flow to facilitate a greater transfer of heat to the skin surface. The thermal gradient between the relatively cooler environment drives radiation of heat from the skin surface into the surrounding air. Additionally, a reduced sympathetic outflow through the reticular formation to the ventral horn of the spinal cord and skeletal muscle results in shutting down thermogenesis by shivering. Sweat glands have muscarinic receptors activated by acetylcholine to enhance evaporative heat loss and other thermogenic signalers like thyroid hormone, and adrenal release of catecholamines will decrease to reduce metabolic activity.