Therapeutic lifestyle measures may be beneficial for controlling migraines, including proper sleep hygiene, healthy nutrition, routine meal schedules, regular exercise, and managing migraine triggers such as stress, alcohol, weather, and, most commonly, hormones.

Managing menstrual-related headaches starts with identifying where the headache aligns with the patient’s menstrual cycle. If a patient is already on oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), the headache may be prevented simply by altering her current hormone regimen by reducing the estrogen dose to limit the premenstrual decline in estrogen that precipitates the MRH.

If women are opposed to starting hormonal therapy, are noncompliant, or contraindications exist, common abortive therapy involves using triptans, which target the direct pathophysiologic mechanism of migraines. All triptans are serotonin 1b/1d receptor agonists that prevent pain by blocking trigeminal nerve activation, inhibiting the release of vasoactive peptides, and promoting vasoconstriction.

Most nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) block COX 1/2 and can be an effective monotherapy in some women. Mefenamic acid has been extensively studied for treating acute MRH and can relieve general dysmenorrhea.

Metoclopramide given intravenously has been proven to be as efficacious as triptan therapy when treating acute migraines in an emergency room setting.

Dihydroergotamine is an alpha-adrenergic blocker vasoconstrictor and potent serotonin 1b/1d receptor agonist usually reserved for severe cases of chronic intractable migraine headaches or status migrainosus.

Pharmacologic modulation of CGRP activity appears to mediate trigeminovascular pain transmission in migraine. Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonists are novel options for acute migraine treatment in patients with either insufficient response or contraindications to first-line medications.

Other alternative nonpharmacological interventions to consider are nerve blocks. Patients opposed to taking oral or intravenous medications may be candidates for the sphenopalatine ganglion block.

Neuromodulation such as transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation, and in extreme circumstances, surgical deactivation of migraine trigger sites have limited data but are therapies directed at stimulating the nervous system with an electrical current or a magnetic field. These options are generally reserved for patients with poor response or contraindications to pharmacological interventions.

The use of opioids in treating MRH is generally avoided due to long-term changes in the CNS at the molecular level. Opioids lead to increased descending facilitation from the rostral ventromedial medulla and increased excitatory neurotransmission at the level of the dorsal horn, causing medication overuse headaches.