Diagnosis of Graves disease starts with a thorough history and physical examination. History should include a family history of Graves’ disease.

**Thyroid function tests to diagnose hyperthyroidism:**

The initial test for diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test. If TSH is suppressed, one needs to order Free T4 (FT4) and Free T3 (FT3). If free hormone assays are not available, total T4 (Thyroxine) and total T3 (Triiodothyronine) can be ordered. Suppressed TSH with high FT4 or FT3 or both will confirm the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. In subclinical hyperthyroidism, only TSH is suppressed, but FT4 and FT3 are normal.

**Tests to differentiate Graves from other causes of hyperthyroidism**:

Graves diagnosis can be obvious with a careful history and physical examination. Features suggestive of Graves disease include a positive family history of Graves disease, the presence of orbitopathy, diffusely enlarged thyroid with or without bruit and pretibial myxedema. However, if the diagnosis is in question due to lack of one or more of these features, following tests can be ordered:

1. Measurement of TSH receptor antibody (TRAb): There are two available assays, the thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) and thyrotropin-binding inhibiting (TBI) immunoglobulin or thyrotropin-binding inhibitory immunoglobulin (TBII). Measurement of TRAb with third generation assay has sensitivity and specificity of 97% and 99% for the diagnosis of Graves disease.

- Hyperthyroidism during pregnancy when thyroid uptake scan is contraindicated

- Pregnant women with h/o Graves disease to determine possible fetal and neonatal hyperthyroidism as these antibodies cross placenta

- Patients with possible Graves’ orbitopathy without biochemical hyperthyroidism

- Patients with recent h/o large iodine load where thyroid uptake scan cannot be reliable, e.g., recent amiodarone use, recent imaging studies with iodinated contrast

- To determine the prognosis of hyperthyroidism who are being treated.

2. Radioactive iodine uptake scan with I-123 or I-131:  In Graves disease, the uptake will be high and diffuse whereas, in a toxic nodule, the uptake will be focal known as a hot nodule. Toxic multinodular goiter will have heterogeneous uptake. The radioactive iodine uptake in subacute or silent thyroiditis, factitious hyperthyroidism, and recent iodine load will be low.

3. Thyroid Ultrasonogram with Doppler: The thyroid gland in Graves disease is usually hypervascular.

4. T3/T4 ratio greater than20 (ng/mcg) or FT3/FT4 ratio greater than 0.3 (SI unit) suggests Graves disease and can be used to differentiate Graves’ disease from thyroiditis induced thyrotoxicosis.

**Other Tests:**

CT or MRI of orbits can be performed to diagnose Graves orbitopathy in patients who present with orbitopathy without hyperthyroidism.

Patient with hyperthyroidism can have microcytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, bilirubinemia, high transaminases, hypercalcemia, high alkaline phosphatase, low LDL and HDL cholesterol.