Because there are many causes of nephrotic syndrome, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team. Once nephrotic syndrome is diagnosed, patient education is vital to prevent high morbidity.

Since most are outpatients, the pharmacist should encourage compliance with the medications. In addition, the doses of the drugs (diuretics and ACE inhibitors) may need continual reassessment depending on the patient's response. If the patient has been started on a corticosteroid, the pharmacist must assist the team by monitoring the patient for the adverse effects of these medications. The nurse should educate the patient on the importance of immunization and an appropriate diet.

For those children who have a failure to thrive, a dietary consult should be sought. Many of these children may require vitamin D or calcium supplements to prevent bone loss. The nurse should also educate the family on how to measure urine output daily and record the amount, as this will provide an indication of how the disease is progressing. Finally, a dietary consult should be obtained to educate the patient on a low-salt diet to prevent an aggravation of the edema. Only through such an approach can the morbidity of nephrotic syndrome be lowered.

Due to the rarity and complexity of this disease, an interprofessional approach to evaluation, treatment, and education of the patient and family will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5]

Prior to the era of antibiotics, survival was rare for patients with nephrotic syndrome. Today, most patients with nephrotic syndrome survive, and the prognosis usually depends on the cause of kidney dysfunction. However, the prognosis in infants with nephrotic syndrome is still poor, and only those who can undergo dialysis or kidney transplantation have good survival. In patients who develop focal glomerulosclerosis, remission from proteinuria is only seen in one-third of patients. Because of frequent relapses, many of these patients require long-term corticosteroids and consequently also develop many adverse effects from these medications. About a third of these patients will require dialysis within five years.

The best prognosis is for patients with minimal change nephropathy, with few relapses, and less than 5% require long-term corticosteroids. The long-term risk of renal failure in these patients is low. Patients who show a poor response to steroids usually have poor outcomes. For those who develop nephrotic syndrome due to a secondary cause, the morbidity is primarily related to the cause. Diabetic patients who respond to ACE inhibitors may develop a slowing down of proteinuria and stabilize renal function. Those who develop amyloidosis will usually have a guarded prognosis.