There are different approaches for thymectomy; these are summarized below. Step by step technique of thymectomy is described as follows.

- Intubation: Left-sided double-lumen endotracheal tube, confirmed with bronchoscopy.

- Recommended:

- 
              
- Foley catheter for urinary output.
              
              
- Possible- thoracic epidural for pain control.
              
              
- An arterial line for blood pressure monitoring.

- Median Sternotomy Approach:

- 
              
- Positioning: supine
              
              
- The bilateral chest including the sternum is prepped and draped.
              
              
- The surgery begins with a vertical median sternotomy, which can be either a partial or a complete incision depending on the resection extent. The mediastinal pleura is then incised to access the anterior mediastinum. Borders of dissection extend superiorly to the thoracic inlet, specifically the innominate vein, inferiorly to the diaphragm, and laterally to the phrenic nerves. All thymic tissue is resected, including its associated mediastinal fat surrounding tissue or organs may also need to be removed if involved in the disease process. Next, mediastinal drains are placed, including chest tubes, into the pleural space. The sternum is then closed with sternal wires and primary closure.

- Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery (VATS) Approach:

- 
              
- Positioning: supine
              
              
- The bilateral chest, including the sternum, is prepped and draped.
              
              
- The VATS procedure is usually approached via a right or left thoracoscopic method (right-sided approach may provide better exposure). The patient is placed in the right lateral 30-degree decubitus position. Selective lung ventilation may aid in exposure to the apex of the thoracic cavity (valve trocars can be utilized instead to allow low-pressure CO2 insufflation into the hemithorax instead). The mediastinum is accessed through the right chest; all 3 trocars are placed along the submammary fold. Ports should be triangulated to improve working conditions. The two working ports are placed anteriorly or posteriorly to the scope port. A combination of hook cautery, scissors are utilized to incise the pleura anterior to the phrenic nerve. The lateral border of the left lobe of the thymus is where the phrenic nerve is. Dissection of the thymus begins from the diaphragm inferiorly to the inferior portion of the thyroid superiorly and is extended laterally to the border of the phrenic nerves. Dissection is continued on the left side up to the right phrenic nerve. Once this is complete, a chest tube is placed on the right side and the attention is turned towards the contralateral side. If visualization is difficult, ports can be placed in the contralateral chest as well- ports are positioned similarly, and dissection continues until the thymus is free. The thymic tissue is placed in an Endocatch bag, and another chest tube is placed on the right side. Each lung is allowed to re-expand under direct vision and the procedure is completed.

- Robotic Approach:

- 
              
- Positioning: Supine with right side elevated using folded blankets or gel pad.
              
              
- The bilateral chest, including the sternum, is prepped and draped.
              
              
- Port position: Fifth intercostal space anterior/midaxillary line (camera), third intercostal space midaxillary (left robotic arm), fifth intercostal space parasternal (right robotic arm), and an assistant port.
              
              
- Once ports are placed, the surgeon assumes control of the robot console. Any chest wall, pleura, or lung abnormalities are addressed and biopsied if necessary. Next, lysis of any adhesions from prior surgeries is performed. Once adequate visualization is achieved, dissection of the thymus begins starting at the inferior border. This continues anteriorly to the sternal edge and then superiorly and laterally. Once to the superior edge, the right superior thymus horn is dissected free. This is followed by dissection of the left superior horn until the entire thymus has been freed. The thymus is then placed in an Endocatch bag and removed from the thorax via the assistant port. Hemostasis is confirmed from the underlying and surrounding tissue as well as from the port sites. The right lung is re-insufflated under direct vision, and a chest tube is placed. Port sites are closed according to the surgeon's preference.

- Specific Considerations-

- 
              
- Trocar placement is adjusted depending on the anatomy of the patient. 
              
              
- Single lung ventilation may assist in exposure to the thymus.
              
              
- A right-sided approach may offer improved thoracic inlet access to the thymic veins as they drain into the innominate vein.