The clinical syndrome seen with A. cantonensis is due to the intense inflammatory reaction of the dying parasites. Eosinophilic meningitis (EoM) remains the most common presentation of angiostrongyliasis. Headache is the most common symptom that can be associated with neck stiffness, nausea, and vomiting. Paresthesias and hyperesthesias can be associated with symptoms that can last for several weeks. Eosinophilic encephalitis (EoE) is rare but usually fatal due to late diagnosis. Rarely, ocular involvement can manifest with foreign body sensation and blurred vision from the anterior chamber and intravitreal invasion of larvae, respectively.

CNS features of infection include new-onset severe headache resistant to NSAID therapy and paraesthesias (such as touch hypersensitivity, tingling, burning sensation). Shifting paresthesias are a notable characteristic along with migratory pain in the trunk and limbs (not in a dermatological distribution). Sixth or seventh cranial nerve palsy may occur. It is not clear why patients may also present with urinary retention. Before CNS symptoms become prominent, changes usually start with the GI tract. The incubation period for infection occurs over 1 to 3 weeks (but can extend up to 6 weeks), and during this time, patients may develop nonspecific abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. This occurs due to the infiltration of the intestinal wall by the larva. They then circulate through the blood and ultimately penetrate the brain through the blood-brain barrier when the neurological symptoms start to occur. This period takes one to a few weeks to occur, and so patients may have a resolution of the initial GI symptoms and be asymptomatic during this period, or there may be the persistence of the GI symptoms. Emesis can also occur due to meningeal involvement. More nonspecific symptoms include lethargy, low-grade fever, difficulty sleeping, confusion. Children tend to have less prominent neurological findings and more gastrointestinal involvement. The physical exam should focus on a complete neurological and abdominal exam.