**Hematoma**

Like the rest of the face, the forehead has an excellent blood supply, which contributes to rapid healing and low rates of infection. The corollary is that mid-forehead brow lifting tends to be relatively bloody. Meticulous hemostasis is crucial during and after the dissection. A hematoma encountered postoperatively requires immediate drainage because of the risk of skin flap necrosis and stretching of the forehead skin, which can negate the effect of the brow lift.

**Facial Nerve Injury**

The frontal branch of the facial nerve is at risk if the lateral end of the incision is extended and carried deeper than the skin.

**Sensory Nerve Injury**

- Hypesthesia/paresthesia: most patients experience temporary hypesthesia because of the raising of the skin flap; this usually recovers in a few weeks. If the supraorbital and/or supratrochlear nerves are injured, long-term or permanent numbness can ensue.

- Neuralgia: injury to the supraorbital nerves can cause neuralgia in rare cases.

**Incision Pruritus**

This is common for the first one to two weeks after surgery.

**Unsightly Scar**

The final appearance of the forehead scar is very difficult to predict, even when the incision is closed with attention to eversion and minimization of tension. Patients with significant sun damage or darker skin are likely to suffer hypo- or hyperpigmentation, but a widening of the scar is typically the most troublesome outcome. Skin resurfacing or the use of silicone gel can improve the appearance of the postoperative scar substantially; some surgeons will address scars with aggressive prophylaxis; however, planning laser resurfacing as soon as the sutures are removed and insisting that patients avoid sunlight exposure for an entire year after surgery. Numerous laser options are available: Er:YAG and CO2 for resurfacing, PDL and Nd:YAG for telangiectasias, and Er:glass for depressed scars.

**Brow Asymmetry**

Brows are, by their very nature, almost always somewhat asymmetric. Postoperative asymmetry should ideally not be more than that seen preoperatively. Most bystanders will not notice a brow asymmetry of less than 3 mm.

**Abnormal Soft Tissue Contours**

Contour deformities are not uncommon after resection of the corrugator and procerus muscles. Conservative myomectomy rather than the extirpation of the muscles leads to fewer contour deformities. Fat grafting to fill any volume deficits at the conclusion of surgery can be very helpful for improving patient satisfaction.

**Lagophthalmos**

Brow lifts are often combined with upper eyelid surgery. Temporary lagophthalmos is very common but should only last for a few days. Patients noted to have xerophthalmia, lagophthalmos, or a poor Bell's phenomenon preoperatively may require a more conservative surgery or staging between a brow lift and upper blepharoplasty. In most cases, the brow lift should be performed first so that the surgeon can assess how much dermatochalasis remains before excising the upper eyelid skin. While some surgeons do successfully perform the blepharoplasty before the brow lift, there is the risk that an aggressive brow lift performed after the blepharoplasty will result in significant lagophthalmos.