The purpose of evaluating the male partner of a couple suffering from infertility is:

- to determine if the male factor is contributing to the infertility issue

- to identify the small percentage of cases (about 20%), that can be normalized with treatment

- to determine if assisted reproductive techniques (ART) would ultimately benefit the couple

The evaluation starts with a complete and comprehensive sexual and medical history, including reproductive history, family history, significant trauma to the pelvis, testicles or head, sexual performance, libido, occupation, systemic diseases, intake of alcohol, smoking, recreational drugs, medications, steroid abuse, previous chemo/radiotherapy, pubertal development, testicular descent, surgical history involving the scrotum and inguinal regions, exposure to toxic chemicals such as pesticides, loss of body hair, shaving frequency, sexually transmitted infections (STIs), tuberculosis, mumps, scrotal infections such as epididymitis, prior biological children produced, maternal exposure to DES, anosmia (associated with Kallman syndrome), breast enlargement and galactorrhea, precocious puberty (at 9 years of age or earlier), etc. An undescended testicle, whether unilateral or bilateral, can have an effect on male fertility even when surgically repaired. Sickle cell disease can cause intratesticular ischemia. Chronic renal failure has been associated with hypogonadism, while liver failure sometimes causes gynecomastia (from increased estrogen levels), testicular atrophy, and reduced secondary sex characteristics. Tuberculosis, prostatitis, epididymitis, and STIs (especially gonorrhea) can cause vasal scarring and obstructive azoospermia, while mycoplasma infections tend to reduce sperm motility. The use of sexual lubricants that are toxic to sperm (such as water-based, water-soluble personal lubricants, saliva, and others) should be eliminated. Non-toxic lubricants would include egg whites, peanut and vegetable oil. Petroleum jelly is not particularly spermatotoxic but is still not recommended due to viscosity.

During the physical examination, it is important to look at the body form as well as to check for possible signs of endocrinopathy, gynecomastia, skin, hair distribution, and particularly secondary sexual characteristics. If the patient appears muscular and has a low sperm count, do an endocrine screening panel as he could have a very low LH which would be suggestive of testosterone abuse. Obesity tends to increase the peripheral conversion of testosterone to estrogen.  This decreases LH levels and has been associated with reduced sperm counts.

Examination of the penis would include a check for hypospadias, phimosis, and Peyronie plaques.

Testicular size should be measured.  In a normal adult male, the testicular volume should be at least 15 ml, and the length of the testis should be at least 4 cm. If the testis measures less than 4 cm in its largest dimension, it is considered "small." The presence or absence of the vas deferens should be noted and documented. The bilateral absence of the vas is reported in 1% to 2% of infertile men and is related to mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, even in the absence of any clinical signs of cystic fibrosis.

The presence of a hydrocele should be noted. If a hydrocele is present, a testicular ultrasound must be used to examine the testicle since an adequate direct physical examination is not otherwise possible.

Testosterone deficiency might cause various physical signs depending on its severity and age of onset.  Hypogonadism in early gestation results in atypical genitalia, but in late gestation, it causes micropenis.  Hypogonadism in childhood causes delayed puberty, while in adults, it causes decreased libido, erectile dysfunction, decreased body hair, infertility, and loss of secondary sexual characteristics.

A varicocele that is identifiable on the physical examination might be clinically significant with regard to possible infertility. Varicoceles are the most common correctable cause of male infertility, so a careful check for their presence should be undertaken. They are relatively easy to identify, even on a simple physical examination. Varicoceles are present in 15% of men, but in those with an abnormal semen analysis, the incidence increases to 40%.

Bilateral absence of the vas deferens on physical examination is associated with CFTR gene mutations, and both partners should be genetically checked. If a positive result is found, genetic counseling should be done prior to any assisted reproductive techniques, IVF, or ICSI. The presence of a buffalo hump (a pad of fatty tissue just below the neck and between the shoulders) along with a round (moon) face, thin skin with multiple bruises and stretch marks would be suggestive of Cushing disease, while patchy, diffuse hyperpigmentation might suggest iron overload syndrome.

In general, if a patient has azotemia with bilateral atrophic testes, a good outcome from treatment may be possible only with IVF and ICSI.