Patients with brain injury can benefit from neuropsychological assessment as part of an interprofessional team approach to care. As mentioned above, cognitive assessment can help dictate a treatment plan, monitor recovery, and help determine when a person is ready to return to work, driving, or sports.

Another clinical population for which assessment is valuable is older patients with long-standing memory concerns along with other cognitive deficits with or without corresponding brain atrophy. These cases may require an assessment to help determine a differential diagnosis as well as aid in decision-making. Other groups with reported memory and other cognitive problems also may require dementia assessment and consideration of psychological factors contributing to a patient’s symptoms (e.g., dementia versus depression).

Psychological factors can be overlooked in neurological patients. These may include mood changes such as depression or anxiety, including post-traumatic stress disorder, or behavioral dysfunction such as agitation, poor initiation, or wandering. Emotional and behavioral sequelae can be the direct result of underlying neurological impairment. For example, patients with left frontal strokes or those localized to subcortical areas of the brain can experience an “organic depression.” Alternatively, damage to frontal areas also may result in behavioral disturbances such as disinhibition, impulsivity, abulia, and emotional lability. A comprehensive neuropsychological assessment, in this case, would also assess for neuropsychiatric sequelae.

Forensic issues, such as that of capacity (competency, in legal terms), also can arise in medical settings. Decision-making capacity, whether for a medical procedure, designation of a health care agent, or disposition, is a clinical finding regarding a patient’s decisional abilities. Although people are presumed to have the capacity, cognitive impairment and/or psychiatric disturbances can impair one’s capacity to make decisions. Neuropsychologists often are called in to help assess capacity; this always involves an interview with the patient and any collaterals, as well as an assessment of functional abilities. A full neuropsychological assessment is not always required, although some evaluation of cognition usually is performed.

Many other patients with neurological and/or psychiatric etiologies can benefit from a neuropsychological assessment. In children, neuropsychologists often work with the school system to provide accommodations for deficits.