Obtaining a thorough history and physical examination is paramount when attempting to identify nonorganic functional hearing loss or exclude any underlying organic pathology. Many behaviors and clinical clues may be revealed during history taking and physical examination, guiding the examiner to suspect nonorganic functional hearing loss. Therefore, the examiner must observe the patient's behaviors keenly throughout the examination and history-taking process. The patient may cup the ear and rely excessively on lip reading and yet be able to answer the examiner when he turns away from the patient. Other patients may speak softly (patients with hearing loss often speak loudly as they cannot hear their own voices well) and appear nervous.

Such behaviors are important clues suggesting nonorganic functional hearing loss. In cases of unilateral hearing loss, however, reactions to sounds and communication abilities cannot be used to suggest nonorganic functional hearing loss.

The examiner should also note the source of the patient's referral, as insurance/compensatory claims companies often refer malingerers for evaluation.

A thorough history of any cause of emotional conflict or distress must be taken. Family problems, difficulties at work or school, recent psychological trauma, a sense of a lack of attention by parents (in the case of children), or a recent diagnosis of a life-threatening illness may be present.

History of psychiatric illness is important to note, as is a history of previous hearing loss or ear disease. Concomitant non-audiological symptoms such as unexplained weight loss and insomnia should be considered possible indicators of underlying psychological stress contributing to nonorganic functional hearing loss.

Anxiety over new school environments (e.g., skipping a grade, transferring to secondary school) may cause nonorganic functional hearing loss in children. In other cases, some children of higher than average intelligence may feel burdened by expectations to excel academically.

In contrast to this, children of less than average intelligence and those with learning difficulties may feel distressed that they cannot keep up with their peers. Many children with nonorganic functional hearing loss know people who are hard of hearing or may have suffered from hearing loss previously due to organic causes.

An otological examination should include careful inspection of the pinna, external auditory canal, and tympanic membrane. Tympanic membranes are generally normal in patients with nonorganic functional hearing loss. Occasionally, findings such as dulling of the tympanic membrane, tympanic membrane retractions, wax, and healed tympanic membrane perforations may be seen. In these cases, although a pathology does exist, the hearing loss exhibited is far greater than what would be expected if the patient does have nonorganic functional hearing loss.