Impetigo is usually managed by a multidisciplinary team that consists of a nurse practitioner, primary care provider, pediatrician, and a dermatologist. Topical antibiotics alone or in conjunction with systemic antibiotics are used to treat impetigo. Antibiotic coverage should cover both S aureus and S pyogenes (i.e. GABHS). While untreated impetigo is often self-limiting, antibiotics decrease the duration of illness and spread of lesions. In addition, antibiotic treatment decreases the chances of complications involving kidneys, joints, bones, and lungs, as well as acute rheumatic fever.

In areas of high prevalence of MRSA  or if cultures are positive for MRSA, clindamycin or doxycycline are the preferred treatments. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is effective against MRSA, but should only be used if group A streptococci are not the causative agent, or in addition to an anti-streptococcal antibiotic.

Children with impetigo should maintain good personal hygiene and avoid other children during the active outbreak. It is important to wash hands, linens, clothes and affected areas that may have come into contact with infected fluids. Sores can be covered with a bandage to help prevent spread by contact. If impetigo is recurrent, evaluation for carriage of the causative bacteria should be performed.  The nose is a common reservoir and carriers can be treated with mupirocin (Bactroban Nasal) applied in the nostrils. Children with severe impetigo should be followed because a small number may develop glomerulonephritis. The outcomes in most other cases are excellent.