Complete surgical resection is the treatment of choice for bronchial carcinoids and usually confers a good prognosis, particularly in typical carcinoids.  Evidence has shown excellent survival rates of 5, 10, and 15 years of 92%, 88%, and 76% respectively. Atypical carcinoids carry a worse prognosis with a 5 and 10-year survival rate of 69% and 24 to 52%, respectively. Surgical interventions include radical resection via pneumonectomy, bilobectomy, lobectomy, and more conservative approaches such as segmentectomy, wedge resection, and sleeve bronchectomy. The majority of cases are localized, with resection leading to better outcomes.

Stage IV bronchial carcinoid tumors have a slightly different approach to management. Surgical resection alone is not sufficient for patients diagnosed with late-stage disease.  These patients are candidates for interventional radiology interventions in attempts to reduce the size of the tumor.  Somatostatin analogs are used in these procedures not only to decrease tumor mass, but they also have beneficial effects in the symptomatic management of neurosecretory effects of the disease.

In patients with advanced disease, chemotherapeutic agents such as temozolomide and thalidomide, although still under clinical trials, have shown therapeutic benefits.  Other clinically studied chemotherapy options include radioisotope-labeled peptide receptor therapy with 131-MIBG, 90 Y-DOTA-TOC, or 177 Lu-DOTA-TOC have also shown promising results in their respective clinical trials. Further clinical trials with tyrosine kinase antibodies and inhibitors of the mTOR mammalian receptors are still currently under trial.