**Basic Evaluation**

The initial evaluation should target establishing the diagnosis and identification of the clonal origin of the disease. At diagnosis, a complete medical history is necessary. A comprehensive symptomatic assessment is pertinent, and triggers of mast cell activation symptoms require documentation (NSAIDs, heat, opioids, anesthetics, friction, contrast, anxiety, stress, vaccines, dextrans, and insect bites). Note any previous history of anaphylaxis to any particular food, medications, or other triggers requiring epinephrine.

**Includes the following workup:**

- Laboratory evaluation includes a complete blood count, renal and hepatic function panel, serum tryptase, albumin, and calcium.

- Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy should have immunophenotyping for CD25, tryptase, and KIT mutations.

- Bone densitometry is a recommendation as systemic mastocytosis patients are at increased risk for bone loss.

**Advanced Evaluation**

Based on the clinical presentation, the following additional studies are performed:

- Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan is indicated for abnormal white blood cell counts, hepatosplenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy.

- Gastrointestinal endoscopy and biopsies are indicated for patients with GI symptoms.

- Biopsies of liver and lymph nodes are indicated with the elevation of liver function tests or if patients experience any localizing symptoms, respectively.

**Criteria for diagnosis of Systemic Mastocytosis:******As per the World Health Organization (WHO) diagnostic criteria for systemic mastocytosis:

1. Major criterion:

- Presence of multifocal clusters of abnormal mast cells (greater than 15% of mast cells in clusters) in the bone marrow or extracutaneous tissues.

2. Minor criterion:

- Elevated serum tryptase level (over 20 ng/ml)

- Abnormal mast cell CD25 expression

- Presence of KITD 816V mutation

- Presence of greater than 25% atypical mast cells.

Diagnosis of systemic mastocytosis requires one major and one minor criterion or three minor criteria.

**Evaluation for Organ Dysfunction:**It consists of B and C findings.

B findings include:

- Bone marrow biopsy over 30% of mast cells or abnormally high serum tryptases

- Hepatomegaly or splenomegaly or lymphadenopathy

C findings include:

- Bone marrow biopsy shows cytopenias

- Palpable hepatomegaly as well splenomegaly

- Osteolytic lesions or pathologic fractures

- Malabsorption resulting from mast cell infiltration of the GI tract