Neurotrophic keratitis is a degenerative corneal disease characterized by partial or complete loss of corneal sensation. This occurs due to impaired trigeminal sensory innervation and derangement of epithelial repair.

Morphologic and metabolic disturbances lead to recurrent epithelial defects, stromal ulceration, and eventual corneal perforation.

Cenegermin is an rhNGF produced in recombinant Escherichia coli as an inactive pro-peptide, with the molecular formula of “C583H908N166O173S8”. Cenegermin is cleaved by enzymatic hydrolysis into nerve growth factor (NGF) active form upon topical instillation. Mature NGF is a small protein composed of 118 amino acids that form a noncovalent dimer with three intramolecular disulfide bonds.

The nerve growth factor binding to TrkA leads to intracellular activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Ras, phosphoinositide 3-kinase(PI3K), cell division control protein 42 (Cdc42), and phospholipase-c gamma (PLC-γ). The exact mechanism is not entirely clear. Recombinant human nerve growth factor acts directly on corneal epithelial cells to maintain limbal epithelial stem cell potential and lacrimal gland receptors to promote tear production. Recombinant human nerve growth factor has been shown to support corneal re-innervation through the accelerated recovery of nerve fiber density.

Clinical trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of cenegermin in 151 neurotrophic keratitis patients in two, eight-week, randomized controlled, double-blind studies. Patients were administered eye drops six times daily in the affected eye(s) for eight weeks. In these trials, 69.6% of patients treated with cenegermin achieved complete corneal healing in eight weeks, compared to 29.4% of patients treated without cenegermin. Compared to the vehicle, patients treated with cenegermin showed statistically significant reductions in lesion size and the rate of disease progression during blinded treatment. Based on clinical trials, cenegermin is effective in restoring corneal integrity, corneal sensitivity, and transparency.