Imaging is imperative for the accurate diagnosis of Bertolotti syndrome. Plain radiographs of the lumbar spine and pelvis can generally provide ample diagnostic information to show lumbosacral transitional vertebrae.

\Review of these radiographs may show enlargement of one or both L5 transverse processes, an apophysis of L5 that articulates with the sacrum, or both. The sacroiliac joints commonly appear normal on plain radiographs.

Advanced imaging in the form of computed tomography (CT) can delineate the lumbosacral junction in greater detail than plain radiographs, especially in patients of greater body habitus, which may obscure the imaging. Osteophyte formation and the extent of fusion at the articulation site can be more carefully scrutinized on CT imaging. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful for identifying other lumbar pathologies, including degenerative lumbar intervertebral discs along with disc herniations/annular tears/fissures, as well as areas of sites of neural stenosis.

Aside from these added benefits of advanced imaging, CT and MRI can also help with vertebral numbering, which may not be apparent on plain radiographs and are critical for treatment planning.

There is no particular laboratory workup that is crucial in the diagnosis of Bertolotti syndrome. However, labs may be considered to rule out other inflammatory or malignant processes. Additionally, if the patient is experiencing any degree of radicular symptoms, an electromyogram (EMG) of the lower extremities may be obtained to help diagnose lumbar radiculopathies versus peripheral neuropathies.