The management of the disease usually involves enteral or parenteral supplementation of zinc. A lifelong supplementation with 3 mg/kg/day of elemental zinc may be required. Several formulations are available, and zinc sulfate is the preferred oral formulation. Four milligrams of zinc sulfate contains about 1 mg of elemental zinc. Zinc chloride is preferred for parenteral supplementation. The clinical response is often dramatic and occurs shortly after initiating treatment, usually within a few days. The first sign of response to treatment less irritability. Shortly after that, improvement in skin lesions is noted. While on therapy, regular monitoring of certain parameters is also required. This includes periodic measurement of zinc levels, complete blood counts, erythrocyte indices, serum copper level, and occult blood in the stool. Alkaline phosphate levels also may rise during treatment with zinc supplementation. High zinc levels in plasma may inhibit copper absorption due to competitive inhibition of a common cationic transporter; therefore, hypocupremia may result during therapy and should be monitored. Other adverse effects of zinc supplementation therapy could be gastric irritation and gastric hemorrhage.

In cases of acquired zinc deficiency, the doses required for zinc supplementation are variable, depending on the underlying cause. Patients with malabsorption may need higher doses for response to treatment. Compresses and emollients applied at the affected areas may help in re-epithelialization when used along with zinc supplementation.