Multiple different radiopharmaceuticals have been developed to evaluate cerebral hemodynamics. SPECT radiotracers such as technetium-99m ethyl cysteinate dimer (Tc99m-ECD), technetium-99m hexamethylpropylene amine oxime (Tc99m-HMPAO), and N-isopropyl-p-I-123 Iodoamphetamine (I-123 IMP) can be used to obtain comparative measurements of regional cerebral blood flow (CBF).

These radiotracers are lipophilic, allowing them to cross the blood-brain barrier easily. Once the blood-brain barrier is crossed, these compounds become hydrophilic, which will enable them to be retained within the brain for prolonged periods. Compared to Tc99m-HMPAO, Tc99m-ECD has a higher uptake in the gray matter, giving images better gray-to-white matter differentiation.

These radiopharmaceuticals are useful in the setting of epilepsy because they allow time for a patient to be stabilized during the acute ictal state before transferring the patient to the SPECT scanner for imaging.

Absolute measurements of CBF can be obtained using xenon-133 (Xe-133), unlike most radiotracers used in SPECT cerebral perfusion imaging. The most common method for obtaining absolute measurements of CBF in SPECT cerebral perfusion imaging is through correlating levels of Xe-133 in arterial blood gas samples and deriving an arterial input function, an equation that describes the kinetics of radiotracer uptake into the brain.

With the ability of PET scanners to look at metabolic information such as oxygen and glucose metabolism in addition to cerebral hemodynamics, absolute quantitative information about cerebral hemodynamics is more often obtained using PET rather than SPECT. The benefit of absolute quantitative CBF flow measurements in clinical practice is somewhat limited as comparative quantitative measurements, and qualitative analysis tend to give the majority of clinically relevant information.

PET radiotracers such as intravenous H215O (oxygen 15-labeled water) can be used to measure absolute CBF. Inhaled 15O2 can measure regional oxygen extraction fraction (rOEF) and regional cerebral oxygen metabolism (cMRO2). C15O can be used to obtain cerebral blood volume measurements (CBV).

Absolute quantitative measurements of CBF can be obtained in PET using intravenous oxygen-15 labeled water by measuring arterial blood levels of radiotracer and using arterial input functions, similar to how absolute CBF is measured in SPECT with Xe-133.

Low-molecular-weight isotopes, which are commonly used in PET radiopharmaceuticals, such as F-18 and O-15, require a cyclotron to produce and tend to have short half-lives. O-15-labeled compounds have half-lives that typically range from 2 to 20 minutes, while F-18-labeled compounds tend to have half-lives of up to 110 minutes.

Because of this, a significant amount of coordination is required between radiopharmaceutical providers and health care institutions to coordinate the delivery of radiopharmaceuticals and perform PET examinations.

Acetazolamide can be used in both SPECT and PET cerebral perfusion imaging to assess cerebral vascular reserve in patients with chronic cerebrovascular occlusive disease. In healthy brain tissue, acetazolamide inhibits carbonic anhydrase resulting in increased CO2 production and reflexive vasodilation by cerebral vasculature. This results in increased CBF due to decreased vascular resistance. Normal areas of the brain will have an approximately 20 to 30% increase in CBF after administration of acetazolamide.

In areas of the brain with abnormally decreased cerebral perfusion pressure, there is reflexive vasodilation of the cerebral vasculature in an attempt to restore normal cerebral blood flow. Because the vasculature is already dilated in areas of the brain with decreased cerebral perfusion pressure, it cannot respond to acetazolamide to the same degree as normal brain tissue.