Once other causes of hypotension are treated and/or ruled out, then the physical movement of the uterus off of the spine (and inferior vena cava) is necessary.  This may be accomplished in one of the following ways.  When trauma is not involved, simply placing the patient in the left lateral position may be done. However, when trauma is present, immobilization of the spine must simultaneously occur, and different maneuvers are indicated

The patient will likely be on a backboard with cervical spine immobilization necessary, which presents a unique challenge.  There are three ways listed to accomplish the lateral position without compromising the immobilization. First, isolated elevation of the right hip alone may alleviate the compression. According to the Advanced Trauma Life Support Guidelines, tilting the backboard 15 to 30 degrees to the left (right side upwards) is an additional option.  This may be done either manually or with elevators, including premade elevators or towel rolls placed under the board. This option is sometimes difficult as the weight of gravid abdomen gravitationally pulls the patient to the left side, potentially compromising spinal immobilization. Though difficult, in-line immobilization is a priority.  Finally, when either of the first two maneuvers is not optional due to moribund condition and CPR, or other, a manual displacement of the uterus to the left of the midline is the treatment. This is done by placing the provider's hand on the right side of the abdomen, lateral to the gravid uterus, and shifting the uterus to the left, and thus off of the vena cava. This maneuver is simple, requires no expertise, and is not harmful to the uterus or fetus.