**Adverse Reactions to Opioids**

Common adverse reactions include drowsiness, respiratory depression, confusion, dizziness, nausea/vomiting, headache, fatigue, pruritus, pinpoint pupils, constipation, and urinary retention. Because opioids induce euphoria at higher doses than prescribed, these drugs are a high risk for abuse and addiction. Long term drug tolerance, hyperalgesia, or increased sensitivity to pain caused by damage to nociceptors or peripheral nerves may occur.

**Depressants**

Hypnotics, sedatives, and tranquilizers treat anxiety and sleep disorders. These drugs increase the inhibitory activity of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid by inhibiting overall brain activity producing a calming effect. Examples of depressants include:

**Anxiety**

Benzodiazepines are schedule IV  medications and include drugs such as alprazolam, clonazepam, diazepam, estazolam, and triazolam. They are used to treat anxiety, stress reactions, muscle spasms, and sleep disorders. They should be used short-term with caution as they have a high risk of addiction, dependence, and tolerance. The combination of benzodiazepines and opioids should be avoided due to the potential for addiction and respiratory depression.

All CNS depressants can cause confusion, drowsiness, and poor coordination. Avoid stopping these medications abruptly, due to the risk of dangerous or fatal withdrawal symptoms or seizures. Benzodiazepine overdose is treated with a benzodiazepine antagonist, flumazenil, that can be administered via IV and provides rapid reversal.

For anxiety treatment, there are options that are less risky such as buspirone, which binds to serotonin and dopamine D2 receptors. It causes minimal drowsiness and has less abuse potential.

**Sleep**

Whenever possible, prescribers should select non-benzodiazepine sleep medications such as eszopiclone, zolpidem, and zaleplon which act on GABA type A receptors in the brain but with fewer side effects and less risk of dependence and they are schedule IV. Other options include melatonin and ramelteon.

**Stimulants**

Stimulants often abused include dextroamphetamine, methamphetamine, and methylphenidate. They work by enhancing the effects of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and dopamine in the brain. While stimulants increase alertness, cognition, energy, and motivation; they also induce vascular constriction resulting in elevated heart rate and blood pressure, increased respiratory rate, and dilated airway, elevated blood glucose, and insomnia. They are used to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, narcolepsy, and rarely depression. Misuse can cause euphoria as a result of increased dopamine activity in the brain. Abrupt withdraw can cause depression, fatigue, and insomnia. Abuse or overdose may cause hostility, paranoia, psychosis, hyperthermia, arrhythmias, cardiovascular arrest, or seizures. They are classified as schedule II drugs.

A slightly safer alternative is modafinil which works to block the reuptake of dopamine. It has a slightly safer profile and is classified as schedule IV.

**The American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians guidelines recommends monitoring for opioid adherence, abuse, and noncompliance by urine drug tests and monitoring programs.**

The treatment plan for opioid use in chronic pain should include frequent assessment of pain level, origin, and function. If there is a change of dosage or agent, the frequency of patient visits should be increased. Chronic response to opioids should be monitored by evaluating the 5 A's.

- Affect

- Aberrant drug-related behaviors

- Activities of daily living

- Adverse or side effects

- Analgesia

Signs and symptoms, if present, that suggests treatment goals are not being achieved include:

- Decreased appetite

- Excessive sleeping or day/night reversal

- Impaired function

- Inability to concentrate

- Mood volatility

- Lack of involvement with others

- Lack of re-engaging in life

- Lack of hygiene

The decision to change, continue, or terminate opioid therapy is based on achieving treatment objectives without adverse effects. Physicians, wherever possible, should work with pharmacists.****

**Acute Overdose Management**

Accidental or deliberate overdose is always a risk factor in patients taking opioids. The patient and family should be instructed in the signs and symptoms of an overdose and basic emergency management until paramedics' arrival.

The immediate response to overdose management is to secure the airway and breathing; however, survival is heavily dependent upon the rapid administration of an opioid antagonist. Many states allow naloxone distribution to the public. Licensed healthcare providers may prescribe opioid antagonists for at-risk individuals, relatives, or caregivers. Emergency medical service personnel, peace officers, and firefighters also have the drug available.

While opioid antagonists such as naloxone, naltrexone, and nalmefene are available, acute overdoses are usually treated with naloxone as it quickly reverses opioid-related respiratory depression. Naloxone competes with opioids at receptor sites in the brain stem, reversing desensitization to carbon dioxide and preventing respiratory failure.

The naloxone dose is 0.4 to 2 mg administered intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously. The dose may be repeated every 2 to 3 minutes. Naloxone is available in pre-filled auto-injection devices. Advanced Cardiac Life Support protocols should be continued while naloxone is being administered.