Diffuse astrocytoma is the primary differential diagnosis on imaging and is nearly indistinguishable from OG. Diffuse astrocytoma often has less dystrophic calcification on imaging and often has more white matter and less cortical involvement than OG. However, the main discriminating factors are genetic markers, namely, the lack of 1p/19q deletion in astrocytoma.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is an important diagnostic consideration from OG, as they have a much poorer prognosis and are unfortunately much more common. GBM will typically have more avid and heterogeneous enhancement (though it may be harder to distinguish from higher-grade, enhancing anaplastic OG). GBM sometimes have patchy areas of restricted diffusion and areas of central necrosis, both uncommon in OG. Calcification is uncommon in GBM and very common in OG. Histologically, GBM will have more aggressive features, such as necrosis and neovascularization, and they lack the 1p/19q deletion and are often IDH compared to OG.

Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNET) is another low-grade cortical/subcortical based neoplasm that can look similar to OG, although DNETs tend to have a more “bubbly” cystic T2 hyperintense appearance and may have adjacent cortical dysplasia. They are also more often found in children and young adults, as opposed to OGs, which are more often diagnosed in older adults.

Ganglioglioma is another cortical/subcortical neoplasm that occurs more often in children and young adults and can be a seizure focus. Gangliogliomas typically present as a cyst with enhancing nodule on MRI and are more commonly seen in the temporal lobe as opposed to OG.

A multinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumor (MVNT) is a cortical/subcortical lesion that may have imaging overlap with OG and typically appears as a cluster of small bubbly cysts that are T2/FLAIR hyperintense and do not typically enhance. The lesion is typically incidentally found and maybe a malformation/dysplastic lesion as opposed to a true neoplasm.