# Introduction

Gastrointestinal hormones are peptides released into the portal system targeting specific cells. Gastrointestinal hormones are an essential part of the digestive system since they regulate smooth muscle contractions of the gastrointestinal system allowing the food to move throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Motilin is the hormone that is cyclically released during the fasted state and is released by the entero-endocrine cells (Mo cells) in the upper small intestine. Motilin stimulates gastric and small intestine motility, causing undigested food in these regions to move into the large intestine. This movement is also known as the migrating motor complex (MMC), or the interdigestive myoelectric complex. Motilin also stimulates the production of pepsin in the stomach chief cells, as well as the release of pancreatic polypeptide and somatostatin.  Motilin has been associated with disturbed gastrointestinal motility.

# Issues of Concern

The gastrointestinal peristalsis is increased hormonally by cholecystokinin, gastrin, serotonin, insulin, and motilin. The gastrointestinal motility is decreased hormonally by glucagon and secretin. The current thinking is that secretin decreases the motility of the digestive tract by reducing the level of plasma motilin.

# Cellular Level

Motilin is 22 amino acid oligopeptide secreted by M cells, which are present in the epithelium of the mucosa of the duodenum mainly.

Motilin binds to the motilin receptors, which are G protein-coupled receptors.

# Development

In the fourth week of pregnancy, the distal part of the foregut and the proximal portion of the midgut form the origin of the duodenum. The junction of the two parts of the duodenum is just distal to the origin of the liver bud.

In the fifth week of the pregnancy, the epithelial cells proliferate, making the duodenal lumen smaller.

# Organ Systems Involved

The target cells of motilin are large intestine, small intestine, stomach, lower esophageal sphincter, and gallbladder.

# Function

Motilin acts on several organs. It increases gall bladder emptying, increased insulin release from the pancreas, GI tract mobility, and increased hunger.

Motilin is considered recently as a primary orexigenic hormone by modulating the neurocircuit in the brain.

Motilin raises pepsin output and the acid secretion in the stomach.

# Mechanism

Motilin is released periodically and increased during the fasting period.

# Pathophysiology

Motilin has been associated with disturbed gastointestinal motility.

# Clinical Significance

Erythromycin activates the motilin receptors, which are G protein-coupled receptors. Such compounds have the name motilides. Using erythromycin can cause concentration-dependent contractions of the stomach and promote gastric emptying significantly. However, erythromycin has less potency compared to motilin.

A study examined patients who underwent T tube after choledochotomy and cholecystectomy have duodenal-biliary reflux. The level of motilin was measured in patients after having a T tube after choledochotomy and cholecystectomy. Researchers divided the patients into two groups, which were the reflux group and control group. The level of motilin of reflux group patients had a much lower motilin level compared to the control group. This observation could probably explain the cause of the duodenal-biliary reflux. The lower level of motilin causes hypomotility of the sphincter of Oddi.