The sebaceous gland contributes the vast majority of skin surface lipids via its main product, sebum, which helps to seal in moisture and prevent desiccation of the skin. Because sebaceous glands empty into the hair canal, sebum mostly escapes onto the skin surface via a wicking action involving the hair shaft. In addition to cell debris and lipids, sebum also contains antimicrobial substances, free fatty acids, and matrix metalloproteinases. These elements, combined with the formation of a cutaneous lipid film, help protect the skin from external insults.

The sebaceous gland is also an important site for androgen processing and modulation. All of the enzymes necessary for transforming cholesterol to steroids or adrenal precursors, such as dehydroepiandrosterone, are found in the skin. The sebaceous gland can also inactivate androgens via hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, an enzyme present as early as 16 weeks of fetal life. The type-1 isoform of 5-alpha-reductase, which serves to convert testosterone into its most potent form, is also abundantly produced in the sebaceous glands, especially sebaceous glands found on the face and scalp.

The sebaceous gland is also importantly under hormonal control. Androgens regulate sebaceous gland function through binding to nuclear androgen receptors (AR). ARs are present in numerous skin components, with a particular predilection for the sebaceous gland, where androgens stimulate cell proliferation and lipogenesis.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulates local skin cell receptors via paracrine methods, leading to increased levels of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and lowering IL-8 synthesis in sebocytes as well as inducing cortisol production. Together, these effects have a powerful anti-inflammatory effect that counteracts the normal stress-signal cascade and helps limit excessive tissue damage.