Treatment for Trypanosoma brucei gambiense and T. brucei rhodesiense are different, and additionally, treatment is dependent on the stage of infection.

For the first-stage of the disease caused by T. brucei gambiense pentamidine is the first-line therapy. Route of administration is intramuscular for one week or intravenous with normal saline over 2 hours. Three injections versus prolonged therapy may be equally effective. Once an involvement of CSF is detected pentamidine is no longer effective. Side effects of pentamidine include injection site reactions, abdominal pain, and hypoglycemia. More serious adverse events seen with pentamidine in the treatment of other diseases include leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hyperkalemia, and QT-prolongation.

Second stage disease caused by T. brucei gambiense includes eflornithine or melarsoprol. Eflornithine has been shown to be superior in reducing mortality as compared to melarsoprol and is, therefore, the preferred medication for the second-stage of disease. Combination of nifurtimox and eflornithine reduces dosage and cost of therapy.

The first stage of disease caused by T. brucei rhodesiense is treated with suramin. Although also effective for disease caused by T. brucei gambiense the high prevalence of Onchocerca in those areas, and the risk of severe allergic reaction with suramin prohibits use in west and central Africa. For T. brucei rhodesiense, first-stage disease suramin is used for up to 30 days. Notably, this medication is rapidly degraded in the air and needs to be injected immediately after dilution with distilled water. Adverse reactions with suramin include hypersensitivity reactions, nephrotoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, bone marrow toxicity, and subsequent agranulocytosis and/or thrombocytopenia.

T. brucei rhodesiense second-stage disease can be treated with melarsoprol. Adverse reactions may be severe including an encephalopathic syndrome in up to 8% of patients. Dexamethasone and diazepam are used for this. Skin reactions including pruritus and maculopapular rashes are common with bullous lesions occurring rarely. Motor and sensorial neuropathies may occur.

Treatment for Chagas disease is unique in that 2 nitroheterocyclic compounds are used. These are benznidazole and nifurtimox, and the former is preferred secondary to its favorable side effect profile. Dosing of benznidazole is 5 mg/kg per day for 60 days, and nifurtimox is given 8 to 10 mg/kg per day in adults, 12.5 mg/kg per day in adolescents, and 15 to 20 mg/kg per day in children, all with a duration of 90 to 120 days. Side effects of benznidazole include photosensitivity, severe exfoliative dermatitis, peripheral neuropathy, and bone marrow suppression. This necessitates a complete metabolic panel, hepatic function panel, and complete blood count with the latter repeated every two weeks while therapy is given. Side effects with nifurtimox include gastrointestinal distress, peripheral neuropathy, and mood disturbances. Complete blood count, hepatic function panel, and a complete metabolic panel (CMP) should be obtained with peripheral neuropathy assessment every 2 weeks while on treatment.