Metastatic cancer of the peritoneum is often an incidental finding detected during surgical exploration or on diagnostic imaging with modalities like CT scan or MRI performed for other indications. Biopsy of detected tumors or lesions is a confirmatory test to identify the type of cancer cells and to differentiate it from primary peritoneal cancer.

The primary objectives of the work-up and investigation modalities employed in cases of suspected peritoneal metastasis are the following:

- Early detection of possible peritoneal metastasis in a patient with recently diagnosed abdominal or pelvic malignancy and to rule out the presence of distant metastases in extra-abdominal areas, which becomes an absolute contraindication for surgery with curative intent.

- To determine the extent, size, and major organ involvement by metastatic cancer to decide proper patient selection for cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC).

- Early staging of the PC to help ascertain valuable information about potential outcomes and predict prognosis after treatment.

Cancerous lesions involving the peritoneum are sometimes visible with CT Scan, MRI, and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography PET/CT. Each modality has its importance depending on the type of cancer and area of involvement. Presently the peritoneal carcinomatosis index (PCI) scoring system proposed by Dr. Sugarbacker provides a useful tool for better patient selection for surgery and a better understanding of prognosis and outcome (described in the management and staging section below). So most of the imaging studies are employed for their diagnostic parameters based on how accurately they can contribute to the PCI score preoperatively.

**CT Scan**: It can provide appropriate site-specific cancer involvement in the abdominal cavity. The crucial findings for peritoneal metastasis are focal or diffuse thickening of peritoneal folds, which could appear as sclerotic, nodular, reticular, reticulonodular, or large plaque-like structures. Sometimes a large, thick layer of inhomogeneous density would be visible between the abdominal wall and bowel loops, which is sometimes called an “omental cake.” It is a neoplastic tissue layer. CT will also detect macronodules and micronodules if they are lying at the surface of the liver or spleen. Ascites can also be detected if it is over 50 ml.

**MRI:**It is also one of the diagnostic tools for detecting peritoneal metastasis. However, it has not shown any significant superiority over CT scanning. One study demonstrated an advantage of MR over single-helical CT to detect metastasis over peritoneum, omentum, and bowel.

**PET Scan:**The use of a PET-CT scan is more useful than just a PET scan, as the addition of CT allows for better anatomic visualization. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography PET/CT is the preferred imaging that can detect the presence of cancer lesions based on the glucose uptake of the cells. It can be falsely negative when cells do not show good glucose uptake. Thus in cases where it is used for postoperative imaging, it would be better to document preoperative results for comparison to avoid false-negative results.

**Diagnostic Laparoscopy:**Surgeons recommend preoperative use of diagnostic laparoscopy for the assessment of the resectability of peritoneal tumor nodules before undergoing cytoreductive surgery (CRS). This approach is useful in patients for whom the previous imagining studies are insufficient in providing adequate information about the extent of disease involvement. However, it is sometimes not favored due to the difficulty related to trocar insertion and fear of port-site tumor recurrence. But currently, many surgeons are advocating its important role in affirmative decision making before actually going for laparotomy. In one study, it was found to have a positive predictive value of 83.3%. It also helped to avoid unnecessary laparotomy in 45% of the cases with no port-site recurrences or morbidity after 18 months.

**New Proposed Diagnostic Methods**

Different surgeon groups have proposed new diagnostic techniques for the optimum detection of peritoneal carcinomatosis and a more accurate understanding of its extent and size before considering surgical exploration:

- Detection of ascitic CEA (carcinoma embryonic antigen) is a useful measure for diagnosing colorectal cancer (CRC) with PM.

- Extensive involvement of small bowel by peritoneal carcinomatosis precludes the use of cytoreductive surgery. CT lacks sufficient accuracy in preoperative detection of disease in the small intestine that may subsequently impact the decision to offer CRS. One group of researchers demonstrated that CT-enteroclysis (CTE) is very useful in detecting cancerous implants in small bowel/mesentery. It showed 92% sensitivity, 96% specificity, 97% PPV and 91% NPV.

- Another group of investigators explored the use of single-incision flexible endoscopy (SIFE) for diagnostic staging before surgery, and they compared it to rigid endoscopy (SIRE). The major objective was to avoid trocar site metastasis by reducing the need for extra trocar usage. The study showed feasibility in 94% of cases with SIFE and demonstrated superiority to SIRE in terms of technical exploration and outcomes. Future studies are needed to compare this with conventional laparoscopy.