**Complications of Intravitreal Gas**

**i)****Feathery posterior subcapsular****cataract:**The predisposing factors include longer intraocular longevity gas and patients who fail to maintain a prone position. It can be prevented by leaving a thin layer of anterior hyaloid intact. While the mild form tends to resolve spontaneously, persistent opacities may need surgical intervention. A transient feathery cataract seen on the first postoperative day is very common after using gas, and it tends to resolve spontaneously.

**ii) Raised IOP:**It occurs either due to an overfill or bubble expansion. The complication is usually short-lived and can be managed with anti-glaucoma medications (AGM). However, the eyes with compromised outflow facility due to pre-existing peripheral anterior synechiae, angle-closure glaucoma, or neovascular glaucoma can have refractory glaucoma.

**iii) Hypotony:**The bubble can leak from the sclerotomies, resulting in hypotony. In case the hypotony is prolonged or severe enough to cause suprachoroidal hemorrhage, gas reinjection may be required. The Silicone study has defined hypotony as IOP < 6 mmHg.

**iv) Subretinal gas:**Subretinal space migration of gas can occur either intra-operatively due to the presence of persistent traction or in the postoperative period. Intra-operatively it can either be displaced with the help of external scleral depression or drained internally after the release of residual traction. Retinectomy of the abnormally scarred retina and surrounding normal retina may be needed to reattach the retina. During the postoperative period, the subretinal gas can lead to retinal re-detachment and may need a re-surgery if it affects the break closure. However, it can be left alone if away from the break.

**v)****Gas in the AC:**This can occur in aphakic eyes, pseudophakic eyes with a posterior capsule rupture, or phakic eyes with zonular dialysis (pre-existing or intra-operative). Intra-operatively, it can affect the surgical view and may require removal along with the injection of viscoelastic agents in the AC. Retained viscoelastic agents in the AC may cause an early postoperative rise in IOP, which can usually be successfully managed with anti-glaucoma medications.

**vi) IOL capture:**This can be prevented by keeping the anterior capsulorrhexis smaller than the IOL optic and advising the patient to maintain a strict prone position in the early postoperative period.

**vii) Ocular venous air embolism (OVAE) or presumed air by vitrectomy embolization (PAVE)**: It is a rare but potentially fatal complication. It results from air entry inside the vortex veins through either a large surgical/ traumatic choroidal wound or a slipped infusion cannula. The expanding suprachoroidal bubble can cause an embolism in the heart, causing immediate death. Hence, the infusion cannula should be checked for its presence in the vitreous cavity before performing FAE. The first sign of air entry in the suprachoroidal space is the appearance of an unexplained choroidal elevation. The surgeon needs to quickly stop the air infusion and change the position of the infusion cannula.

**Complications of PFCL**

**i) Subretinal PFCL:**The risk factors for subretinal migration of PFCL include the creation of small bubbles, the presence of large retinal breaks or retinotomies, high velocity of PFCL injection, high turbulence in the vitreous cavity, and the presence of retinal traction. The turbulence can be minimized by the slow release of scleral depression and the use of non-valved cannulas. If subretinal PFCL is detected intra-operatively, it can be removed by creating a small drainage retinotomy and active suction with a flute needle.

Subretinal PFCL can lead to scotoma, visual loss, retinal thinning, or retinal holes. It can be seen on optical coherence tomography (OCT) as dome-shaped hyporeflective space. Post-operatively, PFCL outside the fovea can be observed, whereas the subfoveal bubble has to be removed. Subfoveal PFCL can be removed by creating an iatrogenic RD by injecting saline into the subretinal space outside the fovea with the help of a small-gauge needle. The PFCL bubble can then be gently stroked away from the fovea and aspirated by creating a small retinotomy. Small PFCL bubbles in the vitreous cavity can be observed unless they migrate into the anterior chamber.

**ii) Intraocular toxicity**: Residual PFCL can cause either chemical or mechanical toxicity due to its higher specific gravity.

**iii) PFCL in the anterior chamber (AC)**can cause visual disturbance, corneal endothelial loss, and IOP rise.

**iv) Subarachnoid migration is rarely**reported, especially in eyes with congenital cavitary anomalies of the optic nerve head (ONH) like optic disc pit and morning glory syndrome.

**Complications of Silicone oil**

**i) Cataract:**While posterior subcapsular feathery cataracts can be seen in the early postoperative period, nucleus sclerosis can finally ensue. Posterior capsular plaque is very common in eyes with silicone oil tamponade.

**ii) Emulsification:**It is described as breaking down a large silicone oil bubble into smaller bubbles. It is caused by the shear stress generated due to eye rotations at the interface between the SO and the aqueous solution. The oils with higher viscosity are less likely to undergo early emulsification. It may appear as “inverse hypopyon” in the AC and lead to glaucoma and inflammation. Inverse hypopyon may also be seen in the posterior segment, especially in pathological myopia with posterior staphyloma.

The risk factors for early silicone oil emulsification include long duration of SO tamponade, the brand, and type of silicone oil, nystagmus, impurities in silicone oil, inflammation, presence of surfactants (including intrinsic surfactants like fibrinogen, fibrin, and serum resulting from hemorrhage, inflammation, and infection; and extrinsic surfactants like contaminants in SO like sterilization detergents found in the vitrectomy tubing or the vitrectomy cutter), low viscosity, low molecular weight, and intraoperative turbulence at the interface of PFCL and SO.

When the handpiece was placed at the interface of BSS, and SO, phacoemulsification, long-duration phacofragmentation with high power, and high-speed vitrectomy caused emulsification of the SO.

**iii) Glaucoma:**The Silicone study reported an incidence of 8% at a 36-month follow-up. An IOP rise can occur due to several causes. It is important to identify the cause and treat it accordingly correctly. The causes of IOP rise include:

a) Pupil block glaucoma can occur during the early postoperative period and can be prevented by creating an inferior iridectomy at 6’o clock (Ando iridectomy).

b) SO overfill can cause IOP rise in the early postoperative period. The eye may present with a shallow AC or oil herniating through the pupil. It can best be avoided by checking the IOP at the end of surgery. In SO overfill, the meniscus at the inferior part of the SO (at the junction of SO superiorly and the intravitreal fluid inferiorly) is not seen on indirect ophthalmoscope even on the downgaze.

c) Secondary open-angle glaucoma can occur due to mechanical blockage of the trabecular meshwork or trabeculitis due to the emulsified oil. The eye may need treatment with a glaucoma drainage device as trabeculectomy may fail due to fibrosis.

d) Migration of SO into the AC

**iv)****Migration in the AC:**SO can migrate into the AC without an adequate barrier in conditions like aphakia, zonular dehiscence, or posterior capsular rupture. A complete fill in the AC can be difficult to identify due to the lack of a fluid meniscus. Subtle clues for diagnosis include a posterior bulge in the iris, shimmering reflex on the iris crypts, and absence of aqueous flare. The cornea in such a case may initially be clear due to the lack of fluid in AC, which can cause corneal hydration. However, corneal edema may appear after SOR as significant damage to the corneal endothelium has already occurred.

SO should be removed from the AC at the end of the surgery using the following maneuver:

a) Close the two superior sclerotomies to avoid loss of SO

b) Construct two paracentesis incisions - one inferiorly and one superiorly

c) Inject either saline or viscoelastic into the AC from the inferior paracentesis incision. SO underfill in the vitreous cavity can be prevented by avoiding excess fluid injection.

d) Remove the oil by engaging it through the superior paracentesis.

**v) Keratopathy:**Prolonged use of SO is associated with keratopathy in the form of either band-shaped keratopathy or bullous keratopathy. The Silicone study reported a rate of 27% at 24-month follow-up. The incidence is higher in aphakic eyes.

**vi) Visual loss:**An unexplained loss of ≥2 Snellen lines after SOR has been reported. However, the incidence and the pathogenesis of this complication are unknown.

**vii) Ganglion cell layer (GCL) and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) toxicity:**OCT (optical coherence tomography)-based studies have shown that SO tamponade can lead to the thinning of inner retinal layers like RNFL, GCL, and even the inner plexiform layer. OCT angiography-based studies have shown that the vessel density in the superficial capillary plexus (SCP) is also reduced. It has been proposed that mechanical compression caused by SO may be responsible for causing SCP ischemia.

**viii) Choroidal thickness:**SO tamponade has been reported to cause a reduction in the choroidal thickness.

**ix) Subretinal migration**can occur in eyes with RRD with PVR changes and may affect retinal reattachment. It can be drained either through a transscleral approach or internally by creating a retinectomy**.**

**x)****Subarachnoid migration**has rarely been reported, especially in eyes with congenital cavitary anomalies of the ONH.

**xi)****Subconjunctival migration**can occur due to poor closure of the sclerotomies or raised IOP.

**xii)****Delayed macular hole with inverse pseudohypopyon post silicone oil removal:**This is an infrequent late postoperative complication.