Lumbar sympatholysis is performable using modalities such as radiofrequency ablation (RF), chemical neurolytic agents, and rarely surgery. A plethora of techniques and recommendations have been described for each option. In this article, we will provide an overview of common basic techniques, focusing on RF and chemical methods.

Fluoroscopy frequently aids sympathectomy procedures, allowing the provider to navigate the bony landmarks and allow visualization of injected contrast material.

For this procedure in its various modalities, the patient is placed prone on the fluoroscopy bed. Monitors are attached. Anxiolytic agents are an option. Prophylactic antibiotics are not indicated in usual circumstances. Routine surgical time-out is necessary to verify patient identity, procedure, and site. The lumbar region of the patient is prepped in a sterile fashion. Fluoroscopy is used in a posterolateral oblique projection to identify the targeted region(s) in L2-L4. Local anesthesia is administered into the skin and subcutaneous tissue at the needle entry site at the discretion of the provider. Cutaneous temperature is usually monitored before and after at bilateral lower extremities to determine the efficacy of successful sympathetic blockade.

**Chemical Neurolysis**

To target the anterolateral aspect of the vertebral body, a 15 cm, 20 to 22 gauge needle is entered immediately below the transverse process. The needle is advanced until it reaches the targeted anterior margin of the vertebral body using intermittent biplane fluoroscopy. The needle entry site is estimated at 7 cm lateral from midline. The proceduralist will often “walk” the needle anteriorly and medially into the perivertebral space when they make contact with the vertebral body as the needle advances. Contrast material is injected after aspiration, looking for a craniocaudal longitudinal spread of the contrast agent in the perivertebral space. Once the correct injection site is confirmed, 3 to 5 mL bupivacaine 0.5% is injected to anesthetize the nerve root, before injection of the neurolytic agent (approximately 5 mL of absolute alcohol).

Numerous techniques on specifications of chemical neurolysis exist, and it has been shown that a 3-needle approach has superior efficacy while using less volume of the neurolytic agent.

**Radiofrequency Thermocoagulation**

Denervation is also possible with a percutaneous approach using radiofrequency(RF) thermocoagulation, also referred to as RF ablation. The initial setup is comparable to that of chemical neurolysis, as described above. The anatomical targets are largely similar as well; however, specialized needles and radiofrequency probes are used to perform thermocoagulation at the targets.

**Surgical Sympathectomy**

There are various surgical approaches that usually involve cutting or clipping the sympathetic chain. This procedure is typically at or below L2 to minimize sexual dysfunction side effects and complications that more often occur when performed at higher levels, such as the thoracic region.

It is essential to point out that lumbar sympatholysis is not a permanent effect. The interventional radiofrequency or neurolytic approaches typically last up to six months before the nerves can regenerate. Surgical lumbar sympatholysis can have effects lasting up to a few years.