Patients with low-risk syncope, as evaluated by history, physical, and screening ECG, can be discharged home. Without any high-risk features, the likely cause of the syncope is benign; vasovagal and dehydration are the most common. Orthostatic in young patients often delineate between vasovagal and dehydration. Patients can be rehydrated and discharged if symptoms resolve. If the young patient has recurrent syncope without high-risk features, a non-emergent echocardiogram can be scheduled for the patient as an outpatient. Management may include beta-blocker, compression stockings, or fludrocortisone.

Patients with high-risk syncope require further observation or workup. Specifically, studies have been conducted to investigate the utility of observation units in the emergency department for patients with syncope as a means to decrease health care expenditures. These studies have shown similar outcomes, adverse events, and a reduction in costs when compared to inpatient hospitalizations.

Testing done in observation units or as inpatient should be tailored to the patient’s syncopal evaluation and etiology. If there are signs and symptoms of acute coronary syndrome, such as chest pain or ECG ischemic changes, serial troponins should be done. Exercise stress testing may also be useful.

Patients with a worrisome cardiac history, such as significant coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, are at high-risk for structural abnormalities and arrhythmia. These patients should have an echocardiogram to evaluate for worsening structural abnormalities that would decrease left ventricular outflow.  The treatment may include an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (IDC). Patients with a history of ventricular dysrhythmias are at high risk for recurrence. Recurrence of syncope in six months may also indicate a dysrhythmia. Patients with an ICD or pacemaker already in place should have their device interrogated to determine further if a dysrhythmia occurred.

All patients with worrisome cardiac history should have 24-hour telemetry observation and evaluation for ICD placement. Patients with conduction disease on ECG, a new murmur on physical exam, or a concerning family history of sudden cardiac death should be evaluated for structural and valvular disorders with an echocardiogram, telemetry, and home telemetry. Often, these patients may require a pacemaker or ICD.

All patients with anemia as the cause of hypovolemia should have a complete blood count (CBC), type and screen, and evaluation for the etiology of the bleed.

Patients with concern for acute intracranial bleed as the cause of syncope should have a CT of their head and likely neurosurgical consultation.

Finally, patients with hypoxia should undergo a workup for pulmonary embolism.