Atopic dermatitis is a chronic skin disorder that can adversely affect the quality of life. While the condition can be managed with medical therapy, there are also non-medical remedies that can make a big difference in the quality of life. Both the pharmacist and nurse can play a vital role in educating the patient on nonmedical remedies to manage atopic dermatitis. The patient should be educated on wearing soft clothing- preferably cotton and avoid wool. The home temperatures should be kept low because the heat can cause sweating and exacerbation of the irritation. A humidifier should be used to prevent dryness in the home. All garments should be washed with a mild detergent with no fabric softener or bleach. When going outdoors, ample sunscreen and moisturizer should be applied. The patient should keep a diary of all the foods and avoid foods that trigger the attacks. The patient should avoid activities that cause excess diaphoresis. Finally, patients who have asthma should be compliant with their medications and avoid allergens.

**Outcome**

The majority of patients with atopic dermatitis do improve with age. About 30% of patients will develop allergic rhinitis, and 30% will develop asthma. A long-term study that evaluated patients with Atopic Dermatitis indicates that mild to moderate symptoms often persist for a decade or more. And about 80% of these patients will need topical medications to control the symptoms. Symptoms relief is usually seen after the 2nd decade of life, but this also means a drastic change in lifestyle that includes avoiding all triggers like tobacco, pet dander, wool, and certain soaps. Atopic dermatitis may not be life-threatening, but it can seriously affect the quality of life. The constant dryness and itching of skin not only leads to a high financial burden and often requires multiple hospital visits.