Understanding the molecular processes responsible for coordinating the window of implantation and facilitating normal embryo implantation is critical to developing diagnostic tests and treatments for receptivity defects that contribute to recurrent pregnancy loss, implantation failure, and infertility.

First and foremost, when an endometrial receptivity defect is due to an endometrial polyp or submucosal myoma, there is good evidence that removing these structures improves implantation and pregnancy outcomes.

When an asynchronous window of implantation is suspected based on a premature progesterone rise in fresh IVF cycles, conversion to a freeze-all cycle with a plan for a frozen embryo transfer (FET) is an efficient option to maximize the chance of pregnancy. This is supported by evidence that elevated progesterone in donor egg cycles did not affect the implantation rate in the recipient.

Regarding the prevention of a premature progesterone rise, researchers have suggested that using a mixed FSH/LH stimulation protocol is associated with a lower incidence of premature progesterone rise as compared to FSH-only protocols, likely due to LH activation of CYP 17 in theca cells, allowing for the conversion of rising progesterone to androgens, which are then subsequently aromatized to estrogen by granulosa cells.

Methods for assessing endometrial receptivity include transvaginal ultrasound imaging (TVUS), histologic evaluation by endometrial biopsy, endometrial receptivity array (ERA), and ReceptivaDx test (BCL6).

TVUS is a widely available tool that can be used to assess endometrial receptivity. TVUS can be used to measure the endometrial thickness, volume, and pattern. A recent meta-analysis found that endometrial thickness >7mm, endometrial volume >2mL, and trilaminar pattern had 99%, 93%, and 87% respective sensitivity for assessing endometrial receptivity.

Histologic evaluation of endometrial receptivity requires endometrial sampling. In the 1950s, the Noyes criteria were established to evaluate luteal phase deficiency (LPD). LPD is described as an abnormal luteal phase with a duration of less than or equal to 10 days and was one of the first known descriptions of endometrial receptivity.

The ERA is a molecular diagnostic tool used to identify a receptive endometrium via a specific transcriptomic signature present in both natural and hormone replacement therapy cycles. The technology has been applied clinically to identify a patient-specific window of implantation, which is then used to guide a personalized timing of embryo transfer for patients with recurrent implantation failure. This is done by taking an endometrial biopsy at specific times during the mid-luteal phase (LH surge+7 days in natural cycles, progesterone starts +5 days in hormone replacement/”artificial” cycles. The results of the ERA are then used to guide shifts in the timing of progesterone administration before embryo transfer in a future cycle. Most data evaluating ERA-timed embryo transfers and associated pregnancy rates have failed to see an improvement in the live birth rate in these cycles.

The ReceptivaDx test identifies endometrial receptivity defects associated with progesterone resistance. The BCL6 protein is overexpressed in women with endometriosis.