**Sertoli Cells**

Sertoli cells are epithelial supportive cells found in the seminiferous tubules. They support the germ cells by providing the required nutrients to complete spermatogenesis.

Also known as sustentacular cells, they are the only somatic cells in the entire seminiferous epithelium.

Sertoli cells have an epithelial nature. Sertoli cells are the target of hormones such as FSH and testosterone. This activity leads to the regulation of spermatogenesis through regulatory cross-talk between Sertoli cells and germ cells.

**Functions of The Sertoli Cells**

- Not only provide support to the developing germ cells but also house them, provide with required nutrition, and protect them.

- Secrete lipids, carbohydrates, vitamins, amino acids, and metal ions required for the proper development of the developing germ cells.

- Regulate cholesterol metabolism during spermatogenesis, which plays a vital role in sperm production and male fertility.

- Secrete hormone inhibin B, which helps in suppressing the secretion of FSH, thus bettering the function of Sertoli cells, spermatogenic status, and sperm number.

- Act as macrophages by engulfing the apoptotic bodies, bacteria, all the dead, and worn-out cells.

- Secrete an androgen-binding protein (ABP)

- Convey the mature germ cells to the lumen to be transported further.

**Leydig Cells**

The primary source of steroid hormones in a normal male is the Leydig cell. The normal function of the Leydig cell through the production of steroid hormones ensures normal reproductive function and fertility in males.

They are generally large polyhedral, pale cells with an eccentric nucleus lying in the connective tissue present between the seminiferous tubules. The cytoplasm contains rod-shaped Reinke's crystalloid bodies and vacuoles, which are yellowish in color containing various enzymes.