Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency leads to COPD, liver disease, and panniculitis. Other studies have linked it to several other conditions such as glomerulonephritis and certain cancers. Other associations like celiac disease, fibromuscular dysplasia, and pancreatitis. There is also approximately 15% of patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis who are found to have a ZZ genotype.

**Pulmonary Disease**

Pulmonary clinical manifestations are similar to the COPD of other etiologies; however, it has some certain characters such as early onset of symptoms, usually in the third or fourth decade and on CT the emphysematous involvement is mainly in the lung base. However, symptoms may not present until later, and the basilar changes may occur along with apical changes, thus making the symptoms or signs of ATTD similar to COPD unrelated to ATTD. Symptoms are mainly: dyspnea, cough, wheezing, and upper respiratory tract infections. The pulmonary symptoms can be aggravated by some risk factors like cigarette smoking, exposure to burning biomass materials, and respiratory infections. Such factors increase the unopposed elastase activity of neutrophils leading to the destruction of lung tissue and eventually COPD.

**Extrapulmonary Manifestations**

The accumulation of the ZZ protein and development of polymers leads to hepatitis in children, liver cirrhosis in adults, and increase the risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. Early in life infants may develop clinical hepatitis and AATD is the second most cause of liver transplant in children. As childhood continues liver inflammation subsides only to be replaced by smoldering inflammation in adults leading to cirrhosis in some, which in the majority of cases is subclinical. A small fraction of adults progress to liver failure and need a liver transplant. Panniculitis is a rare presentation of ZZ genotype and occurs in 1 per 1000 cases.