**Neoplasms**

Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis (RRP) is a benign laryngeal neoplasm seen in 4 per 100,000 children and 2 per 100,000 adults.

Chondromas of the larynx and granular cell tumor are two other benign neoplasms that may affect the vocal folds. Chondromas are rare neoplasms most commonly found in men that most often arise from the lamina of the cricoid. Over 85% of chondromas occur on the cricoid, thyroid or arytenoid cartilages.

**Reinke’s Edema (Polypoid Corditis)**

The superficial lamina propria is also known as Reinke’s Space, and it is composed of loose connective tissue. Due to the makeup of Reinke’s space, it is susceptible to fluid accumulation due to chronic irritation and inflammation secondary to smoking. Irritation and inflammation eventually lead to the formation of polyps on vocal folds contributing to difficulty in the inherent vibration seen during phonation. Thus, patients will present with altered voice, more commonly a deeper voice. Women will often present complaining they sound like a man. The mainstay of treatment is first to treat the underlying disease that led to polypoid corditis such as hypothyroidism, vocal abuse, laryngopharyngeal reflux or smoking. Surgical resection is an option for those that still do not improve.

**Sulcus****Vocalis**

When the damage to the superficial lamina propria is irreversible, it is possible that the formation of a scar or sulcus vocalis forms due to the loss of viscoelasticity. This theory is still open to debate, as a definitive explanation for the development of sulcus vocalis does not yet exist. Other theories include congenital development from branchial arch anomalies and other acquired etiologies such as laryngeal cancer or trauma.

**Benign Lesions**

There are several types of benign lesions encountered on the vocal fold. Among these benign lesions are vocal fold nodules. By definition, these lesions are always found on bilateral vocal cords and often seen in young women or children. The mechanism behind the development of these nodules is usually due to repetitive trauma resulting in inflammatory changes in the vocal cords. Initially, vocal fold nodules start as acute vascular vocal fold lesions that appear erythematous and edematous. Eventually, with chronic abuse, they become fibrotic and thickened white lesions. Data shows women and children have a higher incidence of vocal fold polyps because they have relatively higher frequency voices which in theory results in increased trauma caused by the repetitive collision of the vocal folds.

In comparison to vocal fold nodules, vocal fold polyps can be either unilateral or bilateral. These polyps are exophytic lesions most often seen at the anterior free edge of the vocal cords. Initially, the polyps can develop as translucent mucoid polyps from inflammation and chronic irritation much like vocal fold nodules. Some polyps may go on to undergo neovascularization and have a risk of hemorrhagic rupture into the vocal folds. The primary treatment of vocal fold polyps is similar conservative treatments as described above.

**Cysts**

Several cysts occur within the vocal folds and can secondarily disrupt the natural voice production. Vocal fold cysts are subepithelial in origin and can be either unilateral or bilateral. These cysts are usually secondary to chronic irritation and may also cause reactive changes on the opposite fold. Definitive therapy is micro flap resection. An acquired subglottic cyst presents with post-intubation stridor due to obstruction of the mucous glands by an ET tube. Saccular cysts were briefly referenced earlier. Due to the many mucous filled glands in the ventricular saccule, these cysts are most often mucous filled secondary to obstruction of the mucous glands from prolonged intubation. These cysts do not communicate with the laryngeal cavity, while a laryngocele does. Laryngocele is a dilation of air of the laryngeal ventricle and is more common in adults, compared to saccular cysts which are more common in children. Cysts can be either internal or external. Internal cysts lie within the thyroid cartilage and most often present with hoarseness. External cysts produce a laryngocele sac that protrudes the thyrohyoid membrane thus presenting with a compressible mass that will increase in size with increased pressure within the larynx.

**Vocal Fold Paralysis**

Many etiologies of vocal fold paralysis are known, but the most common of those include neural denervation of the ipsilateral vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerve and mechanical fixation of intra-laryngeal cartilage. Initial presenting symptoms of those with unilateral paralysis include hoarseness, aspiration, and even complete asymptomatic symptomatology. Those with bilateral paralysis will also have stridor. Initial workup includes both laryngoscopy and stroboscopy to asses the function of the folds. On laryngoscopy, pooling of secretions, anterior displacement of the arytenoids, and a paramedian vocal fold during phonation are the presenting features of vocal fold paralysis. Meanwhile, stroboscopy will show a glottic gap due to the insufficient vocal folds inability to close completely during phonation. Also, higher amplitude asymmetry values are often seen in vocal folds with paralysis.

Several management strategies are used to help patients with vocal fold paralysis. Approaches for unilateral vocal fold paralysis involve medialization of the vocal fold in situations where there is glottic insufficiency or to temporarily provide relief until reinnervation of the vocal fold occurs. Vocal fold medialization is done either by injection or thyroplasty and often arytenoid adduction accompanies thyroplasty medialization. Frequently, temporary medialization by injection is the first step in management through augmentation of the paralyzed vocal fold through injection of a variety of different materials. Materials used for temporary medialization are bovine gelatin, collagen products, hyaluronic acid, and carboxymethylcellulose.paresis, permanent injections with calcium hydroxyapatite and autologous fat can augment the vocal fold. Historically, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) paste was also used as a permanent injection material. However, its use has decreased due to the risk of granuloma formation.

Medialization via thyroplasty involves the injection of silicone elastomer, stretched PTFE, or hydroxyapatite, into the para-glottic space which then subsequently medializes the vocal fold through mass effect (known as a Type I thyroplasty). Advantages to this kind of medialization include the ease of reversibility and the maintenance of the physiological mucosal wave necessary to produce phonation. In a retrospective study done by Watanabe et al. they determined the most likely complication of medialization thyroplasty to be extrusion into the lumen, followed by granuloma formation.

In the acute setting of bilateral vocal fold paralysis, the first step is often to perform a suture lateralization to maintain airway competency while awaiting the return of the inherent motion of either or both sides of the vocal fold, which once achieved, unilateral or bilateral laser cordotomy may be employed in combination with arytenoidectomy to restore airway patency. This is usually done stepwise until the perfect balance between voice production and airway patency is achieved. In those cases of bilateral paramedian paralyzed vocal folds, augmentation and injection can be used as described above to restore the voice.