The optimal timing of surgical intervention is controversial, but many proposed that early reconstruction of larynx post-trauma gives a better prognosis for phonation and decannulation.

Securing the airway is the primary goal of early management. Intubation can be difficult and might lead to losing the airway if not performed with caution. Tracheostomy under local anesthesia is recommended if airway obstruction is severe.

- Nonsurgical/conservative (minor edema, hematoma, and mucosal laceration): Observation, delivery of humidified air, voice rest for group 1

- Surgical options: group 2 through 5, which includes endoscopy, endoscopy with exploration, and endoscopy with exploration with stenting

- Endoscopy alone: (if there is doubt in a degree of injury post-physical) Fiberoptic examination and CT.

- endoscopy with exploration: large mucosal laceration, exposed cartilage, multiple displaced cartilaginous fractures, vocal cord immobility, fractured cricoid cartilage, laceration of anterior commissure or free margin of vocal cord and disruption of cricoarytenoid joint

- Endoscopy with exploration and stenting: comminuted laryngeal fractures, massive mucosal injuries, and disruption of anterior commissures.

The literature has recommended keeping a patient under close observation for at least 24 hours as airway edema can occur several hours after the trauma.

Conservative management consists of observation, head of the bed elevation, steam inhalation, voice rest, and IV corticosteroid.

Tracheostomy is always the recommended intervention if a patient needs surgical exploration. Disruption of the laryngeal framework is an indication for surgical intervention. As per Hwan et al., an average timing of reconstruction suggested in the literature is 5.6 days (3 to 10 days).

Surgical exploration and correction of fractures are possible using different materials such as mini-plates, 3-D plates, or bioresorbable plates, and Montgomery intralaryngeal stent.

Whenever a conventional method of titanium mini-plates fails, especially in unossified cartilage because of the lack of uniformity, Titanium mesh may merit consideration as a safe and reliable method to fix fractured laryngeal unossified cartilage. Titanium mesh can be adjusted freely into various shapes, sizes, and positions, even with the complicated types of fractures.

Other modalities of treatment include resorbable plates.