# Continuing Education Activity

Post-traumatic headaches (PTHA) is a common sequela of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and may progress to chronic and possibly debilitating conditions. This activity reviews the evaluation, management, and treatment of post-traumatic headache. It highlights the role of the healthcare team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the various etiologies of post-traumatic headaches.
- Outline the common patient presentations of a patient with post-traumatic headache.
- Summarize the management considerations for patients with post-traumatic headache.
- Identify the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients affected by post-traumatic headaches.

# Introduction

Post-traumatic headaches (PTHA) is a common sequela of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and may progress to chronic and possibly debilitating conditions.

# Etiology

According to the latest International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-3), post-traumatic headaches are defined as a secondary headache with onset within seven days following trauma or injury, or within seven days after recovering consciousness, or within seven days after recovering the ability to sense and report pain.

**Military**

PTHA is a significant cause of debility in military personnel. Due to the immense physical and psychological toll compared to civilian trauma/injury, combat TBI and the subsequent sequelae warrants separate mention. There is a considerable increase in the overlap between PTHA and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Combat-related explosions are the most common causes of U.S. military personnel injury.

# Epidemiology

Headache is the most common physical complaint following TBI, with a prevalence ranging from 30% to 90%. Of those patients, 18% to 22% of patients reported post-traumatic headaches after 1 year. The wide range of prevalence may be because the majority of TBI cases are defined as mild TBI (mTBI), i.e., concussions, in which patients may not seek immediate medical attention. PTHA appears to be more frequent in patients recovering from mTBI than those who experienced moderate to severe TBI.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of post-traumatic headaches is still unknown; however, several theories have been proposed to explain the underlying cause of PTHA. These include impaired descending modulation, neurometabolic changes, and activation of the trigeminal sensory system.

**Impaired Descending Modulation**

This theory derives from the similarity between migraine and PTHA. A study by Schwedt et al. showed structural differences in cortical thickness and cerebral volumes in PTHA patients and healthy controls.

**Neurometabolic Changes**

Research suggests that TBI produces changes in brain metabolic activity. Physical trauma leads to cellular injury, resulting in an unregulated ion-exchange neurotransmitter release. The increased neuronal activity results in metabolic stress (lactate and free radicals), leading to axonal damage (secondary axotomy).

**Trigeminal Sensory System Activation**

The trigeminal sensory system may also be affected by neuroinflammation—inflammatory processes in the brain increase after TBI. Neuroinflammation may also increase the central nervous system (CNS) excitability resulting in CSD and subsequent activation of the trigeminal sensory system.

**Other Theories**

Additional possible contributions in PTHA include hyperadrenergic activity, activation of extracranial dural afferents, and meningeal irritation due to craniotomy.

# History and Physical

After TBI, whether mild or moderate/severe, patients should be evaluated and questioned about headaches. Per ICHD-3, post-traumatic headaches should occur within 7 days of acute insult. Patients with PTHA lasting more than 3 months are considered to have persistent PTHA. PTHA does not have a specific phenotype, and TBI patients report symptoms that bear similar characteristics to different primary and secondary headaches.

# Evaluation

Post-traumatic headaches, like other primary headaches, is a clinical diagnosis. Routine diagnostic imaging and laboratory tests are not required and offer little clinical value.

# Treatment / Management

Management and treatment for post-traumatic headaches involve a multifaceted approach that may include oral medications, musculoskeletal manipulation and treatment, interventional procedures, and behavioral therapy. A review of non-pharmacologic therapy modalities and biopsychosocial factors concluded that a multi-disciplinary approach was most effective in PTHA management. The modalities reviewed included cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), biofeedback, progressive muscle relaxation therapy, acupuncture, and physical therapy.

The pharmacologic management should be tailored to the specific PTHA phenotype if known. Several studies have investigated the role of oral and IV medication for acute and preventative treatments. Acute treatment modalities included oral and intravenous (IV) non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), triptans, and IV antiemetic medication. Preventative regimens included tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), anticonvulsants, and gabapentin. Among TCAs, amitriptyline showed benefit in a majority of patients; however, Cushman et al. showed that patients receiving gabapentin or amitriptyline showed similar improvements compared to the non-treatment group.

Several interventional procedures have been trialed for PTHA; however, the research lacks controlled trials. A retrospective review of 717 patients showed a reduction in headache severity and frequency at 6 months.

**Tension-type (TTHA)**

The preferred treatment for acute episodic tension-like PTHA is NSAIDs.

Craniomandibular headaches are considered a subtype of tension-type headaches. Intraoral devices can manage headaches related to craniomandibular dysfunction.

**Migraine-type**

Herbal and vitamin supplements have shown some benefit in managing migraine headaches. There is evidence that magnesium, feverfew, vitamin B2, CoQ10, and Petasites can help prevent migraine headaches.

**Neuralgias and Neuromas**

Patients with neuralgias (occipital and cervical) typically do not respond to oral medication or botulinum toxin injections.

**Cervicogenic-type (CHA)**

Similar to the neuralgia and neuroma phenotype, cervicogenic-type PTHA is typically refractory to oral pharmacological treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for post-traumatic headaches can be categorized into non-emergent and emergent conditions.

**Non-emergent Differential Diagnoses**

- Tension headache

- Migraine headache

- Neuralgias/neuromas

- Cervicogenic headache

- Medication overuse

- Craniomandibular headache

**Emergent Differential Diagnose**s

- Ischemic/hemorrhagic stroke

- Aneurysm

- Cervical artery dissection

- Hydrocephalus

- Cerebral neoplasm

- Temporal arteritis

# Prognosis

In a study by Hoffman et al., 71% of patients reported headache within the first year after moderate or severe TBI. 46% of patients reported headaches at initial evaluation, and 44% of patients reported new or persistent headaches at 1-year follow-up.

# Complications

Post-traumatic headaches can be a considerable psychosocial deterrent for patients returning to their baseline activity before TBI. Up to 35% of PTHA patients do not return to work after 3 months.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

No formal rehabilitation guidelines exist for post-traumatic headaches. Physical therapy is indicated for cervicogenic headache.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients who have experienced traumatic brain injury should be educated on the potential for post-traumatic headaches. While these headaches may be debilitating and possibly life-long, treatment options are available and include behavioral, pharmacological, and interventional. Furthermore, providers should reassure patients that post-traumatic headaches are not life-threatening. While there is no concrete clinical presentation for PTHA, patients and the care team should be aware that PTHA may take characteristics of primary and other secondary headaches.

# Pearls and Other Issues

The clinician should attempt to identify the primary phenotype or nociceptive driver for the headache since not all post-traumatic headaches are the same.

Future research in the treatment of post-traumatic headaches should investigate the efficacy of cervical trigger point injections as well as sphenopalatine nerve blocks. These therapies are currently being investigated for migraine headaches.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Post-traumatic headaches require an interprofessional team involving the patient, clinicians, pharmacists, and therapists. Providers need to identify, evaluate, and manage PTHA as it can be quite debilitating and can significantly affect the patient's quality of life after injury. While the IHS has attempted to classify PTHA based on chronology (acute versus persistent) and type of injury (mild vs. moderate/severe), there is a need to subdivide the various presentations of PTHA rather than simply by which characteristic primary headache fits the clinical presentation. Medical providers should seek to determine the primary headache phenotype and manage accordingly. Additionally, patients with chronic PTHA should be assessed for medication-induced headaches that may arise due to the overuse of abortive headache therapy. The IHS acknowledges the lack of characteristic qualities in diagnosing PTHA, and more research is needed to assist providers in its overall management.