# Introduction

Unique to the human body due to its acid-secreting ability, the parietal cell has always been a subject of interest for scientific research. Harbored in the gastric glands of the fundus and body, parietal cells are considered to be dynamic, as they undergo morphological transition during the resting and secretory states.Helicobacter pylori infection, among others.

# Issues of Concern

The prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection is approximately 50% worldwide, being as low as 30% in the United States and as high as 90% in developing countries.

# Structure

Considered to be a highly specialized epithelial cell,

# Function

Due to its essential role in digestion, the parietal cell is under rigorous modulation by numerous pathways. Gastric acid is necessary for the activation of pepsinogen, as well as for acidification of the gastric lumen that creates a barrier to the transit of possibly pathogenic bacteria.

Somatostatin, which is secreted by antral D cells, is the primary physiological suppressor of gastric acid secretion.

Intrinsic factor (IF) is a glycoprotein produced and secreted by parietal cells. It plays a pivotal role in the transportation and absorption of vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum.

# Tissue Preparation

Tissue samples from the gastric body are commonly washed with Ringer’s solution and posteriorly immersed in 3% glutaraldehyde in a sodium cacodylate buffer, with a pH ranging from 6.8 to 7.4 to preserve cell structure and organelles intact.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

Various histochemical tests can be performed on gastric mucosa to depict the composition of the parietal cell membrane. Research has demonstrated that parietal cells contain little to no acid mucosubstance. Even though acidic glycoproteins, such as sialoproteins and sulfated glycoproteins, are found on the surface of these cells, the only fundic cell found to have mucopolysaccharides is the chief cell.

# Microscopy, Light

Canalicular membranes can be observed in light microscopy and are found to form a network that extends throughout the cytoplasm.

# Microscopy, Electron

Through electron microscopy, the parietal cell has been observed to be rich in large mitochondria, with complex folding of the basal cell membrane.

# Pathophysiology

There are a variety of pathologies that affect parietal cell gastric acid secretion, as well as intrinsic factor secretion. The most common cause of gastric pathology worldwide is Helicobacter pylori infection.H. pylori have many virulence factors that promote cellular adhesion (BabA/B, sabA, OipA), evasion of the immune response (LPS), and cell damage mediated through disruption of tight junctions (Ure A/B).H. pylori correlate with hypochlorhydria mediated by interruption of interactions between parietal cells, G cells, ECL cells, and D cells.

Autoimmune gastritis is associated with the loss of parietal cells in the body and fundus, and it accounts for 10% of chronic gastritis cases.

Prostaglandins are responsible for protecting the gastric mucosa from injuries caused by hydrochloric acid. NSAIDs cause gastritis by inhibiting the production of prostaglandins, which gets mediated by inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase.

# Clinical Significance

Helicobacter pylori infection is one of the most common infections worldwide, and it is the leading global cause of gastritis. Nonetheless, recent studies have shown its prevalence is declining in the developed world.H. pylori infection correlates with acute gastritis, which may present as epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, or minimal dyspeptic symptoms.

Autoimmune gastritis symptoms vary throughout the disease, and patients with this disease do not have a higher risk of developing gastric or duodenal ulcers in comparison with acute gastritis.

Pernicious anemia can arise as a late complication of autoimmune gastritis, which normally precedes the former by at least 10 to 20 years.