Orbital apex syndrome (OAS) has multiple etiologies, and the management is directed toward the specific cause in each patient.

OAS can be caused by bacterial, fungal, viral, and parasitic infections. These organisms primarily involve the surrounding structures like the orbit or the paranasal sinuses, from where they spread contiguously to the orbital apex resulting in the typical clinical features.

**Bacteria**

Gram-positive cocci like Staphylococcus and Streptococcus pneumoniae and gram-negative bacilli like Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, Proteus, and anaerobic bacteria may cause sinusitis or orbital cellulitis that spreads to involve the orbital apex.Mycobacterium tuberculosis and spirochaetes have also been implicated in causing OAS.

**Fungi**

The most common fungi involved in OAS include Mucor and Aspergillus. They commonly occur in patients with uncontrolled sugars, immunosuppression, and patients undergoing treatment for various malignancies. They primarily affect the paranasal sinuses or the vertebrae and spread to the orbital apex by hematogenous spread. If left untreated, they may involve the central nervous system and may be fatal.

**Virus**

OAS can occur following herpes zoster ophthalmicus in immunocompromised individuals. The mechanism may be due to the direct cytopathic effect of viruses, immune-mediated damage, or due to inflammatory edema.

**Parasite**

Cysticercosis occurs due to infection with Taenia solium or Taenia saginatum. Though the central nervous system and the eye are the most commonly involved organs, the cysts may also affect the optic nerve or the orbital apex.



OAS may occur secondary to systemic autoimmune disorders like granulomatosis with polyangiitis, sarcoidosis, microscopic polyangiitis, Churg Strauss syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and giant cell arthritis. OAS may occur secondary to idiopathic orbital inflammation. Tolosa hunt syndrome is an idiopathic granulomatous inflammation affecting the orbital apex or cavernous sinus. Other systemic manifestations involving the kidneys, lungs, skin, and central nervous system may be present. Infectious causes must be ruled out before commencing treatment for inflammation.

**Benign**

Neurofibromas, dermoid cysts, epidermoid cysts, and fibrous dysplasia may cause OAS by compression of structures at the orbital apex.

**Malignant**

OAS may be caused by primary head and neck malignancies or by secondary metastasis. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma have been documented to be associated with OAS. The common sites of origin of metastasis to the orbital apex include breast, lung, and renal carcinoma and malignant melanoma. Leukemias and nonhodgkins lymphoma may also cause OAS.