The scapula is a site of attachment for many muscles and has several processes, projections, and surfaces for attachment. The scapula has three angles (superior/medial, lateral, inferior), three borders (medial, lateral/axillary, and superior), and two surfaces (ventral and dorsal). The scapula has three processes: the acromion, the spine, and the coracoid process. Muscle attachments to these landmarks are covered in the "Muscles" section.

The ventral surface of the scapula abuts the thoracic rib cage and has a large concavity called the subscapular fossa where the subscapularis attaches. Three ridges within this fossa allow for tendinous attachment. The dorsal surface divides into two unequal parts via the scapular spine which runs across from the posterior scapula before forming the acromion. Above the spine is the supraspinous fossa and below it is the infraspinous fossa. A ridge runs down the infraspinous fossa near the lateral border from the glenoid cavity to just above the inferior angle. This ridge separates the teres major and minor muscles from the infraspinatus muscle. The spinoglenoid notch connects the two fossae, which is situated under the acromion and is where the suprascapular nerve and artery run on the way to supplying the infraspinatus muscle. The acromion is an oblong continuation of the spine that runs laterally then anteriorly above the supraspinous fossa and is the summit of the shoulder on palpation. The superior border of the scapula extends from the superior angle to the coracoid process. The coracoid process is a hook-like structure that comes off anteriorly from the lateral superior aspect of the ventral side of the scapula. Like the acromion, it is an attachment point for muscles and ligaments.

At the base of the coracoid, there is a notch that is closed off by the superior transverse scapular ligament superiorly, forming a foramen. The suprascapular nerve runs through this foramen while the suprascapular artery runs just above the ligament. The lateral angle of the scapula is the location of the glenoid cavity; this is where the humeral head articulates with the scapula. At the margins of this cavity, a fibrocartilagenous structure called the glenoid labrum acts to deepen the cavity as to accommodate more of the humeral head. Just below the cavity is an impression called the infraglenoid tuberosity where the long head of the triceps brachii originates. The ligaments of the scapula are predominantly named based on the two points they attach. They are the transverse scapular ligament (discussed earlier), coracoacromial ligament, coracoclavicular ligament, coracohumeral ligament, glenohumeral ligaments, and acromioclavicular ligament.

The muscles that attach to the scapula allow it to perform six movements:

- Elevation: The upper trapezius and levator scapulae raise the scapula

- Depression: The lower trapezius brings down the scapula

- Upward rotation: The upper and middle trapezius rotate the scapula during upper extremity abduction

- Downward rotation: The rhomboids rotate the scapula when reaching behind the back and downward

- Retraction (adduction): The rhomboids and middle trapezius separate the scapula from the thoracic wall, active when performing rowing motions

- Protraction (abduction): The serratus anterior brings the scapula against the thoracic wall, active when reaching forward