**Physics Concepts and Terms Pertinent to Understanding Medical Imaging Safety**

As with a "standard camera" used to photograph a person, the general method by which all "medical cameras" work is to (1) exploit the human body's property of only partially absorbing energy passed through it from a concentrated energy source (2) detect (i.e., measure) energy and (3) create a map of the body's distortion of transmitted energy. Like standard cameras, most medical imaging technologies measure photon energy, termed electromagnetic energy or electromagnetic radiation. The exception is ultrasound, which measures the energy transmitted as pressure waves (i.e., vibrations per second). The terms "pressure wave" and "sound wave" can be used interchangeably with diligence to remember that not all sound waves are audible to humans.

Attention is drawn here to several other common, poorly understood concepts. The energy in motion can be described in terms of particles and waves or rays. The term "wave" is conventionally replaced with the term "ray" for electromagnetic energy waves having frequencies greater than those of visible light waves, such as x-"rays." Radio waves are a type of electromagnetic energy with frequencies less than visible light waves and are not a type of sound energy.

The System Internationale (SI) unit of energy is the Joule (J), but the standard for describing energy from ionizing radiation is always relative to one kilogram (kg) mass of matter, which is termed a Gray (Gy) when referring to one J of radiation energy deposited in one kg of matter and is termed a Sievert (Sv) when referring to a "biological effect of one J of radiation energy" deposited in one kg of tissue.

Additional basic science concepts pertinent to understanding potential bodily harm from imaging exams are discussed in brief below, but the reader who is not already familiar with certain topics will find the need to supplement these synopses. The article subsections are arranged primarily concerning the types of energy and substances used to perform the different types of imaging exams.

**Photon Transmission Medical Imaging Exams**

Photon transmission was the first and remains the most commonly used method to create medical images. Static single image radiography (plain films, X-rays, or XR), video radiography (fluoroscopy), and computerized tomography (CT) machines use the combination of a photon beam generator and a photon detector. The generator transmits high-energy photons through the anatomic area of interest. Differences in the density of the anatomic structures result in differences in attenuation (physical absorption) of the photons and in the proportion of photons that pass through the tissues to strike the detector. Using the regional differences in the photons detected, the photon density map can be used to create grayscale images.

At the mid to high ends of their energy scales, X-rays and other particles that induce ionization can damage deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA)****through direct****and indirect mechanisms, resulting in single and double-stranded breaks that, if not repaired, can lead to neoplastic cells.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging**

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines pass radio wave photons through the body. In this scenario, the wave component of the electromagnetic radiation particle-wave duality model is emphasized over the particle component. Though less than in X-rays, the energy of the waves can flip the orientation of some molecules, particularly hydrogen atoms, which make up a high proportion of the atoms in tissues containing water or fat.

First, MRI machines produce a static magnetic energy field (termed B) that is strong enough to accelerate nearby objects containing iron, cobalt, nickel, and other similar metals (termed ferromagnetic metals) toward the center of the field. This can damage the internal components of or disturb the position of any ferromagnetic medical or nonmedical implants (such as shrapnel) the patient may have. It can also turn nearby extracorporeal ferromagnetic objects into fast-moving projectiles, which has resulted in traumas and even deaths. A number of theoretically harmful effects of strong magnetic fields on tissues have been described, as reviewed by Schenck, who concluded that none of these effects result in patient harm.

Second, MRI machines produce a radiofrequency (RF) energy field that can heat tissue, especially tissue containing ferromagnetic objects. Shellock reviewed the thermal effects of RF gradients on tissue temperature and concluded that, although small changes in body temperature can be observed, these have no significant physiological consequences.

Third, MRI machines produce an electric energy field that can stimulate peripheral nerves and rattle the machine components themselves, creating noises in excess of 100 A-weighted decibels.

**Ultrasound**

Ultrasound (US) machines transmit pressure waves having higher frequencies than the range of pressure waves audible to humans. Body tissues reflect pressure waves having a range of distorted amplitudes and frequencies back into the US probe. Crystals in the probe convert the range of vibratory energies detected into a 2D or 3D spatial map of varying electrical energies that, as with the technologies described above, are used to produce an electrical image.

Ultrasound energy, like electromagnetic energy, causes thermal (heating/warming) and non-thermal effects on tissue. Non-thermal effects include phenomena termed acoustic cavitation and radiation pressure. However, as reviewed by Haar, neither of these effects result in tissue damage at energies used for standard medical imaging applications.

**Contrast Agents**

Contrast agents are molecules injected or ingested to improve visualization of particular tissues and improve the diagnostic potential of the images being acquired. Contrast agents, with few exceptions, are without direct therapeutic value. Depending on the contrast agent, like many therapeutic drugs, a contrast agent may redistribute from a hollow channel (such as the GI tract or a blood vessel) into cells. Thus, contrast agents undergo similar pre-market testing and can be considered a subset of pharmaceuticals. XR predominantly uses barium or iodine-based agents, CT predominantly uses iodine-based agents, and MRI predominantly uses gadolinium-based agents. Some US (and XR) applications use injected gas.

Contrast agents can cause two primary types of tissue injuries: direct physiologic toxicity and immune system-mediated toxicity.

Contrast-induced nephrotoxicity (CIN) is a physiologic injury to glomeruli best understood as an acute deterioration of glomerular filtration in the absence of another nephrotoxic event.

Extravasation refers to the efflux of a solution out of a vessel into adjacent (primarily interstitial) tissue resulting in pathophysiologic and pathologic sequelae. Contrast extravasation commonly results in temporary localized discomfort and swelling and rarely results in tissue necrosis or compartment syndrome.

**Nuclear Medicine, Interventional Radiology, and Other Issues**

Nuclear medicine (NM), which can be used for imaging or disease therapy, involves the placement of unstable isotopes within the body, either through injection or ingestion. Most NM exams use isotopes that release gamma rays. Other NM exams use isotopes that emit positrons, which combine with electrons in the body to create photons. Energy from gamma rays and other photon energies can be absorbed by crystals in NM scanners and converted into images. Some radiopharmaceuticals are used intentionally to damage tissue, such as by releasing beta particles. However, the vast majority of radiopharmaceuticals used for medical imaging have no direct harmful effect on tissues other than ionizing radiation. Some exams result in ionizing radiation in the upper ranges produced by CT.

Interventional radiology (IR) combines the imaging techniques described above with other equipment (such as needles and catheters) placed into the body, usually for the purposes of removing non-dermatologic samples, opening or closing tubular structures within the body (such as vessels), or intentionally damaging tissues (such as tumors).

NM and IR contain their own sets of particular safety issues concerning their specialized equipment and drugs. Safety issues concerning NM, IR, cardiovascular imaging, and many other medical imaging subcategories are beyond the scope of this article.   However, all of the principles discussed in this article also apply to those aspects of medical imaging. Safety issues specifically related to imaging of pregnant women and potential impacts on fetal development are mentioned briefly below.

**Communication of Safety Issues by HCPs Before Medical Imaging Exams**

Risk communication is a field of study unto itself. As with other fields, it can be discussed both with respect to objective, quantifiable issues and concerning subjective, philosophical issues, but in risk communication, the distinction between the two is particularly blurred. When deciding whether or how to communicate quantifiable risks, which part of that decision is objective, and which part is subjective? Which part comes first or takes precedence? Each factor affects and potentially reinforces the other. Thus by necessity, the discussion must interlace the two.

Despite evidence-based arguments supporting paternalistic framing as a preferred first-line approach to informing patients about risks due to patients' statistical illiteracy, counterfactual research indicates that many patients choose preferentially to make medical decisions based on their data assessment based on their doctors' opinions.

Rather than blaming communication limitations on patients, HCPs should focus on their own deficiencies. Research has shown that physician statistical literacy is low.

All legal issues of concern in this article are discussed concurrently with related risk management interventions below.

**Provider Benefit vs. Patient Benefit Conflict in Medical Imaging**

Particularly in the United States, HCPs continue to use medical imaging in large part or in whole to benefit themselves, such as from a desire to obtain as close to absolute certainty in making a diagnosis as possible, to attempt to prevent an accusation of malpractice for a missed diagnosis or to attempt to gain additional income. Measures can and have successfully been employed to reduce this practice, termed overutilization of medical imaging, which is an extensive topic reviewed elsewhere.

**Patient Safety Standards Set by Organizations Tasked with Preserving Public Safety in the United States**

Training and knowledge standards for care for radiologists in the United States are set by the American College of Graduate Medical Education and the American Board of Radiology. Standards of practice for radiologists and other HCPs performing medical imaging in the United States are primarily set by the American College of Radiology (ACR) and its associated groups (such as the Society of Interventional Radiology). As of 2022, the ACR on its website states that its core purpose is "to serve patients and society by empowering members to advance the practice, science, and professions of radiological care." The ACR fulfills this purpose in part by publishing (and offering for free public distribution on its website) its:

- Practice Parameters and Technical Standards (PPTS). The PPTS website states that the purpose of the PPTS is to "promote the safe and effective use of diagnostic and therapeutic radiology by describing specific training, skills, and techniques. The goal is to narrow the variability among radiology practices and provide guidance to achieve quality in radiology."

- Appropriateness Criteria (AC). The AC website states that the AC "are evidence-based guidelines to assist referring physicians and other providers in making the most appropriate imaging or treatment decision for a specific clinical condition. Employing these guidelines helps providers enhance quality of care..."

The ACR Practice Parameter for Communication of Diagnostic Imaging Findings (last updated in 2020) addresses several real communication and patient safety problems in the practice of radiology, including the following statements, which are direct quotes unless enclosed in parentheses:

- Duties of the referring HCP

There is a reciprocal duty of information exchange. The referring physician or other relevant health care provider also shares the responsibility for obtaining the results of imaging studies ordered and appropriately acting on them. Formulating an imaging interpretation requires the commitment and cooperation of administrators, referring physicians, interpreting physicians, and other health care providers. An imaging request should include relevant clinical information, including pertinent signs and symptoms. In addition, including a specific question to be answered can be helpful. Such information helps tailor the most appropriate imaging study to the clinical scenario and enhances the clinical relevance of the report, thus promoting optimal patient care.

(The referring HCP and/or patient should provide the radiologist with prior examinations relevant to the current clinical issue). Comparison with relevant examinations and reports should be part of the radiologic consultation and report when appropriate and available.

The referring physician or other relevant health care provider also shares the responsibility to obtain the results of imaging studies ordered.

- Failure of the HCP obtaining/acquiring/performing the images, the referring HCP, or patient to provide quality images and information for the radiologist to answer the clinical question

The report should, when appropriate, identify factors that may compromise the sensitivity and specificity of the examination.

The report should address or answer any specific clinical questions. If factors prevent answering the clinical question, these should be stated explicitly.

- Curbside consults by HCPs that result in conflicts with formal documentation in the medical record

Informal communications carry inherent risk, and frequently the referring physician's/health care provider's documentation of the informal consultation may be the only written record of the communication. Interpreting physicians who provide consultations of this nature in the spirit of improving patient care are encouraged to document those interpretations. A system for reporting outside studies is encouraged.

- Need for nonroutine communication channels when there are urgent or emergent findings

In emergent or other nonroutine clinical situations, the interpreting physician should expedite the delivery of a diagnostic imaging report (preliminary or final) in a manner that reasonably ensures timely receipt of the findings. This communication will usually be to the referring physician/health care provider or their designee. When the referring physician/health care provider cannot be contacted expeditiously, it may be appropriate to convey results directly to the patient.

The ACR denies that its standards set a legal precedent but warns that:

A practitioner who employs an approach substantially different from the guidance in this document is advised to document in the patient record information sufficient to explain the approach taken.

The information contained within this section on standards set by organizations for communication and safety in radiology is by no means exhaustive. The reader is advised to seek further information from the resources discussed above and whatever other regulating and legislative bodies may be pertinent to their jurisdiction.