**Diabetes Mellitus**

The pancreas senses glucose concentrations in blood and some amino acids, such as arginine and leucine. High levels in these substances indicate nutritional repletion, and this message is sent to the body by the pancreas in the form of insulin. Insulin is the unique metabolic hormone in charge of the disposition of nutrients in the body, which means that insulin deficiency implicates pleiotropic changes in human metabolism. With insulin deficiency, there is less inhibition of catabolic responses; this drives a net mobilization of substrates from tissues. Pancreas senses metabolite status, peripheral tissues sense insulin concentration status. When peripheral tissues sense a fall in insulin, they become catabolic, and substrates start to mobilize. The liver responds to low insulin by increasing glucose synthesis with gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. As seen in amino acid metabolism, the principal gluconeogenic substrate is alanine, resulting from muscle waste and proteolysis. Adipose tissue responds as well, augmenting lipolysis leading to fatty acid accumulation and glycerol. Increased delivery of non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) to the liver increases ketogenesis.

**Sepsis, Trauma, and Burns**

Catabolism can also initiate from an excessive inflammatory reaction, characterized by the upregulation and expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alfa, IL-6, and IL-1. This process is called a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). It has three phases regarding metabolism; the ebb or shock phase, the catabolic phase, and the anabolic phase. In these scenarios, there is a considerable mobilization of substrate throughout the body.

**G6PDH Deficiency**

It is a deficiency well distributed in equatorial regions. It is X-linked and reduces levels of NADPH, hence decreasing levels of the active form of glutathione and increased oxidative stress for red blood cells; this leads to hemolysis presented as a crisis, depending on the insult. It appears as Heinz bodies and blister cells on a peripheral blood smear.