The early development of the uterus is quite complex. At about eight weeks of gestation, primordia for both female and male internal genitalia paramesonephric (Mullerian) and mesonephric (Wolffian) ducts appear. The sexual differentiation process involves a series of steps that occur due to growth factors, hormonal signals, and inherited genetic influences.

The paramesonephric ducts of both sides extend caudally until they reach the urogenital sinus, where they project into its posterior wall to become the Mullerian tubercle. The Mullerian duct has three parts.

- The first part is verticle and runs parallel Wolfian duct on its lateral side.

- The second part of Mullerian ducts lies horizontally and crosses the ipsilateral Wolfian duct anteriorly.

- The third part is vertical, which joins its counterpart in the midline.

The first two portions of Mullerian ducts make the fallopian tube. The third part canalizes after fusion with its counterpart to form the uterus, cervix, and upper 1/5th of the vagina.

In the female embryo, because of the absence of a Y chromosome and lack of testosterone from any testicular tissue, the typical sequence of developmental events results in canalization and fusion of the paramesonephric (Mullerian) ducts in the middle of the pelvis, which gives rise to the female pelvic organs. At this time, the mesonephric (Wolffian) ducts regress. Any abnormality that occurs during this phase of development may result in a variety of paramesonephric anomalies.