Management of a joint injury requires an interprofessional team of healthcare providers. These providers include EMS/first responders, medical technicians, nurses, emergency physicians, and at times subspecialty physicians such as trauma and orthopedic surgeons. Without the collaboration of these medical professionals, injury management can be suboptimal and can lead to worsened clinical outcomes. When looking at joint injuries, especially when involving more significant trauma, there are possible complications such as neurovascular compromise and prolonged dislocation that can lead to severe complications. It is important for prehospital personnel not only to recognize these injuries but communicate them effectively to the emergency medicine team. This communication allows the hospital-based team to prepare for the incoming injury. This could be coordinated in the following manner:

- EMS arrives on the scene, recognizes, and stabilizes/immobilizes the injury.

- EMS calls medical command if necessary or speaks to emergency department personnel.

- Analgesic medication is given - either by EMS, primarily, or command physician.

- Emergency department physicians can coordinate with nursing, medical technologists, X-ray/radiology department, and possibly even subspecialty surgeons (vascular/orthopedics/trauma) if there is a concern for complications related to the injury.

- The patient arrives, and the initial assessment is made.

- If there is a concern for bony injury, radiology is contacted to perform imaging.

- If there is any concern for neurovascular compromise, fracture, or severe irreducible dislocation, surgical subspecialties are consulted, and the patient is taken for urgent operative repair if necessary.

- If a stable injury is present, the ED team manages care at the bedside by splinting/immobilizing the injury and preparing the patient for final disposition.

The care of joint injuries does not stop in an emergency setting. To allow for appropriate rehabilitation and return of baseline function in the affected joint, the patient's care must continue through their primary care network, subspecialty surgical follow-up (if necessary), and physical therapy. The patient should be referred to these medical providers to receive ongoing care and strengthening to ensure the best long-term outcome from the injury sustained.