The initial assessment for sacral dysfunctions begins with an evaluation for sacral motion restrictions by performing the seated flexion test. With the patient seated, this stabilizes the ileum, allowing in the assessment of sacral motion without the influence of the innominate bones. The seated flexion test is performed with the patient in a seated position with feet flat on the floor. The clinician monitors the motion with their thumbs just inferior to the patient’s PSIS as the patient flexes forward. The side of the dysfunction is noted by the PSIS that moves the most superior or cranial, indicating a positive seated flexion test.

After assessing the side of the sacral dysfunction, palpation over the sacral base and ILAs will help to determine which portion is more posterior when comparing sides. Place the pads of the thumbs over the sacral base and assess for any asymmetry between thumb heights and notate which side is more posterior (or shallow). Then palpate over the dorsal surface of the sacrum, moving inferiorly until there is a drop-off. This last portion, just superior to the coccyx is the ILA. Again, place the pads of the thumbs along the inferior margin of each ILA and compare for asymmetry, noting which side appears to be more inferior or posterior. To treat the dysfunction appropriately, the clinician must understand the findings from the testing discussed above and name the dysfunction.

**Diagnosis and Nomenclature**

**Anterior Torsions**

Anterior torsions are physiologic and occur during the walking cycle; however, they can become dysfunctional when restrictions develop. Nomenclature for anterior torsions involves rotation of the sacrum in the same direction as the oblique axis originates. They are either left rotations about the left oblique axis, or right rotation over the right oblique axis. Again, the side of the positive seated flexion indicates the dysfunctional side and tells you the rotation is on the oblique axis of the opposite side. Therefore, a positive seated flexion test on the left indicates rotation on the right oblique axis. If both the sacral base and ILA on the right are more posterior compared to the left, the sacrum is then rotated right about the right oblique axis.

**Posterior Torsions**

Bending, twisting, and lifting motions are the most common causes of posterior torsions. These dysfunctions are again identified by performing the seated flexion tests and palpating the sacral base and ILAs. Posterior torsions are named as such due to the sacrum being rotated posteriorly in the same direction as the dysfunctional side over the opposite oblique axis. So if the seated flexion test is positive on the right side, indicating rotation on a left oblique axis, and the sacral base and ILA are posterior on the right side, this represents a right rotation over the left oblique axis.

**Unilateral Dysfunctions**

Unilateral flexions or extensions result from a loaded, unbalanced side-bending motion of the trunk. Unilateral dysfunctions are easily identifiable when palpation over the sacrum reveals a posterior sacral base and posterior ILA on opposite sides. Unilateral flexions will have an anterior sacral base on the same side as the positive seated flexion test, with a posterior ILA on the opposite side. Unilateral extensions, on the other hand, will have a posterior sacral base on the side of the seated flexion test with the opposite ILA noted to be posterior.