Corticosteroids are the initial therapy and cornerstone in managing both polymyositis and dermatomyositis (PM/DM).

Steroid-sparing therapy like methotrexate and azathioprine can be used in patients who develop adverse effects to steroids or those having trouble with tapering the steroids in patients with normal thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) activity. They are also used in patients with inadequate responses to steroids. Methotrexate is effective in treating muscle and joint symptoms but should be used cautiously in patients with lung involvement because of its potential lung toxicity. Calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine and tacrolimus) are effective in treating skin manifestations and, along with mycophenolate mofetil, are recommended for treating interstitial lung disease. Cyclophosphamide can be used in severe and rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease. Treatment with cyclophosphamide carries the risk of infertility. Intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) have also been shown to be beneficial in treating dermatomyositis.

**Biologics**

Rituximab, an anti-CD 20 monoclonal antibody, is effective in treating myositis and myositis-related interstitial lung disease. Rituximab is preferred over cyclophosphamide by many clinicians due to its better tolerance and adverse effect profile. Although some patients might respond to anti-TNF agents, the studies on etanercept and infliximab have shown conflicting results. Few cases report tocilizumab (anti-IL-6 antibody), anakinra (anti-IL one antibody), alemtuzumab (anti-CD-52), tofacitinib, and ruxolitinib (JAK-inhibitors) as effective agents in treating autoimmune myositis. However, no confirmatory studies exist, and these drugs are used only in resistant cases.

Tailored physical exercise programs and rehabilitation under a physiatrist or physical therapist are shown to improve muscle strength and decrease disability, even in patients with acute inflammatory myopathy. Supportive treatment for PM/DM includes sunlight avoidance, the use of sunscreens in dermatomyositis, and aspiration precautions in patients with oropharyngeal myopathy.