The skin lesions may need treatment with topical antibiotics, but in some cases, one may need oral antibiotics if there is evidence of a severe infection.

The underlying mental health disorder must be addressed and treated. The usual drugs include antipsychotics, antidepressants, and sedatives. NSAIDs may be prescribed, but opiate and other prescription analgesics should be avoided for fear of inducing addiction and physical dependence.

If the individual has evidence of depression, then reports indicate that SSRIs should be the drugs of choice. Tricyclics also are helpful for patients with itching and insomnia. Tricyclics also help relieve pain and depression.

Prolonged use of antipsychotics should be avoided because they also have potent side effects. However, in patients with delusional and psychotic features, antipsychotics can be beneficial.

The patient's denial of psychological distress and negative feelings aroused in healthcare personnel make management difficult. The doctor should create an accepting, empathic, and non-judgemental attitude and avoid confrontation. Close supervision and good symptomatic care of skin lesions permit the development of a therapeutic relationship in which psychological issues may gradually be introduced, which may occasionally permit a psychiatric referral. When the patient refuses a psychiatric referral, the use of psychotropic drugs by dermatologists is helpful and appropriate

Dermatitis artefacta is a long-term disorder, and patients need regular follow up with a dermatologist and a psychiatrist because relapses are common. Many patients are noncompliant with treatment and often fail to follow up.