The biosimilar's mechanism of action mimics and produces effects highly analogous to their reference products and do not pose any clinically significant differentiation concerning safety and effectiveness.

**Bevacizumab**

Bevacizumab-bvzr and bevacizumab-awwb are classified as anti-vascular endothelial growth factor A (anti-VEGF) monoclonal antibody rendering them biosimilar to their reference product bevacizumab, also a vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor. Similar to bevacizumab, the biosimilars possess no differences in exerting their mechanism of action, binding VEGF, and hindering its interplay with its target receptors Flt-1 and KDR located on the surface of endothelial cells. The activity further inhibits VEGF-mediated endothelial cell proliferation and preventing new blood vessel formation (angiogenesis).

Although the biosimilar agents are indicated for non-small cell lung cancer, colorectal cancer, glioblastoma multiforme, renal cell carcinoma, and cervical cancer similarly to their reference product (bevacizumab), their indications are not currently approved for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer like their reference product (bevacizumab).

**Etanercept**

Etanercept-ykro and etanercept-szzs are classified as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers making them biosimilar to their reference product etanercept, also a TNF blocker. Alike their reference product (etanercept), biosimilars etanercept-ykro and etanercept-szzs are dimeric soluble formations of the p75 TNF receptor, which exerts their actions by preventing the binding of TNF-alpha (α) and TNF-beta (β), also known as lymphotoxin alpha (LT-α) to their target surface receptors.

The blocking of TNF-α and TNF-β to TNF receptors puts TNF in a biologically inactive state, further decreasing its role in inflammatory processes and immune responses. Increases in TNF are seen in inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and plaque psoriasis, making etanercept and its biosimilar products indications use.

**Epoetin alfa**

Epoetin alfa-epbx is classified as an erythropoiesis-stimulating agent (ESA), rendering them biosimilar to its reference product epoetin alfa, also an ESA. Epoetin alfa-epbx exerts the same mechanism of action as its reference product (epoetin alfa) and endogenous hormone erythropoietin (EPO). The human recombinant EPO, epoetin alfa-epbx, and its reference product (epoetin alfa) comprise the same amino acid sequence as isolated endogenous EPO. The further agents bind the Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway binding receptor on the surface of their target cells.

The receptor-binding further signals intracellular phosphorylation activating transcription factors to regulate gene expression, influencing erythropoiesis in a dose-dependent fashion. Epoetin alfa-epbx, and its reference product (epoetin alfa) share identical indications for use in anemia precipitated by chronic kidney disease and chemotherapy and HIV-infected subjects treated with zidovudine causing anemia.

**Trastuzumab**

Trastuzumab-anns, trastuzumab-qyyp, trastuzumab-dttb, trastuzumab-pkrb, and trastuzumab-dkst are classified as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)/neu receptor antagonist making them biosimilar to their reference product trastuzumab, also a HER2/neu receptor antagonist. Analogous to its reference product (trastuzumab), the biosimilars are a monoclonal antibody directed against HER2 proto-oncogene extracellular receptor and hinder the HER2 homodimerization, further halting its HER2-mediated signaling.

Human tumors cells demonstrating overexpression of HER2, trastuzumab, and its corresponding biosimilars agents have been shown to inhibit proliferation and tumor cell growth and promote antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), inducing cell death of HER2 expressing human cells. Trastuzumab biosimilars share the same indications as their reference products, making them useful in treating HER2-overexpressing breast cancer and HER2-overexpressing stomach cancer.

**Adalimumab**

Adalimumab-fkjp, adalimumab-afzb, adalimumab-bwwd, adalimumab-adaz, adalimumab-adbm, and adalimumab-atto are classified as a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blocker rendering them biosimilar to their reference product adalimumab, which is also a TNF blocker. Parallel to their reference product (adalimumab), the biosimilars are an immunoglobulin G (IgG) anti-TNF alpha monoclonal antibody that binds respectively to the TNF-alpha, further hindering its interplay with its target cell surface TNF receptors TNFR1(p55) and TNFR2 (p75).

Adalimumab and its biosimilars, although a TNF-inhibitor, the agents do not bind or inactivate TNF-beta (lymphotoxin), as TNF-inhibitor etanercept and its corresponding biosimilars. The TNF inhibition restrains the receptor activator of NF-κB (RANK) ligand (RANKL) protein, further halting the consequent destruction of cartilage and bone, providing its effectiveness in inflammatory arthritic diseases. TNF is an endogenous cytokine present in common inflammatory and immune responses. Increased amounts of TNF are observed in the synovial fluid of subjects with rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis, making adalimumab and its corresponding biosimilars indications for its use.

Although the biosimilars of adalimumab exert the same mechanism of action, they differ in their indications for uveitis (UV), hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), and pediatric Crohn disease (CD). As the conventional biologic (adalimumab) is indicated and approved for these uses, the biosimilars are not approved for UV, HS, and pediatrics CD.

**Pegfilgrastim**

Pegfilgrastim-apgf, pegfilgrastim-bmez, pegfilgrastim-cbqv, and pegfilgrastim-jmdb are classified as leukocyte growth factors making them biosimilar to their reference product pegfilgrastim, also a leukocyte growth factor. Reference agent pegfilgrastim and its comparable biosimilars are granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (G-CSF) exerting their effects by binding distinct target cell surface receptors on hematopoietic cells.

The biosimilars and their reference agent (pegfilgrastim) also halt cell activation and further promote mature neutrophils' survival and are indicated to decrease the occurrence of febrile neutropenia in subjects with cancer receiving chemotherapy. Unlike their reference product (pegfilgrastim), its biosimilars are not indicated and approved for its use in subjects acutely exposed to myelosuppressive dosages of radiation, also known as "hematopoietic subsyndrome of acute radiation syndrome (ARS)."

**Filgrastim**

Filgrastim-aafi and filgrastim-sndz are classified as leukocyte growth factors rendering them biosimilar to their reference product filgrastim, also a leukocyte growth factor. Like its reference product, filgrastim biosimilars are human recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) glycoproteins exerting their function by binding to their target receptors located on the cell surface, promoting cell maturation and proliferation of neutrophil progenitors.

Within the body, endogenous G-CS is generated by specific cells such as monocytes‚ fibroblasts, and endothelial cells and functions as a lineage-specific colony-stimulating factor. The G-CSF function inside the bone marrow targets neutrophil progenitor proliferation and coordinates the generation and differentiation of neutrophils and functional end-cell activation and further promotes mature neutrophils' survival, and are indicated to decrease the occurrence of febrile neutropenia in subjects with cancer receiving chemotherapeutics.

**Infliximab**

Infliximab-axxq, infliximab-qbtx, infliximab-abda, and infliximab-dyyb are classified as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) - alpha (α) blockers making them biosimilar to their reference product infliximab, also a TNF-α blocker. Similar to their reference product (infliximab), the biosimilars are an immunoglobulin G (IgG) anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody that binds respectively to the soluble and transmembrane forms of TNF-α, further hindering its interplay with its target cell surface TNF receptors TNFR1(p55) and TNFR2 (p75).

Infliximab and its biosimilars, although a TNF inhibitor, the agents do not bind or inactivate TNF-beta (LT-α). The binding and neutralization of TNF-α reduces its biologic function such as initiation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and acute-phase reactants such as interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-6, decreases endothelial layer permeability, further diminishing leukocyte migration, decreases functional action of neutrophils and eosinophils, and decreases synoviocytes and chondrocytes enzymes affecting tissue degradation. Infliximab and its biosimilars exert the same mechanism of action and share the same disease indications such as Crohn disease, pediatric Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and plaque psoriasis.

**Rituximab**

Rituximab-arrx, rituximab-pvvr, and rituximab-abbs are classified as CD20-directed cytolytic monoclonal antibodies, rendering them biosimilar to reference product rituximab, also a monoclonal antibody targeting CD20. Rituximab and its biosimilars exert their effects by targeting pre-B-lymphocytes and mature B-lymphocytes expressing the CD20 antigen on its cell surface, further prompting cell lysis of the targeted B-lymphocytes. Cell death/lysis mechanisms include antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and complement-mediated-cytotoxicity (CDC).

Other causes of cell lysis include direct influences of rituximab and its biosimilars when bound to CD20 and antibody-dependent phagocytosis (ADP). B lymphocytes are understood to function in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and autoimmune diseases in various methods such as proinflammatory cytokine generation, rheumatoid factor (RF) composition, and decreasing activation of T-lymphocytes and plasma cell production.

Rituximab and its biosimilar's effects on CD20 B cells make them useful and indicated for the treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) (Wegener granulomatosis), microscopic polyangiitis (MPA), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), and CD20-positive B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Unlike their reference product, the biosimilars are not approved or indicated to treat pemphigus vulgaris (PV).

**Insulin glargine**

Insulin glargine-yfgn is classified as a long-acting human insulin analog, making it biosimilar to its reference product insulin glargine, also a long-acting human insulin analog.

The beta subunits further stimulate phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3k), initiating kinase B, which controls the action of the glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) receptor, protein kinase C (PKC), and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK).