Pepsin plays a role in the pathophysiology of laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR), a disease that originates from the digestive tract and significantly impacts the upper airway structures. Consider LPR in the differential diagnosis of a patient presenting with hoarseness, mild dysphagia, chronic cough, and non-productive throat clearing.

In an ideal digestive tract, pepsin is active only in the stomach, especially when the pH is between 1.5 and 2. This low pH occurs when the gastrointestinal (GI) tract senses a food bolus, properly releasing the three principal stimulants of proton pumps in parietal cells: gastrin, histamine, and acetylcholine.

A weak lower esophageal sphincter (LES) allows gastric juice to travel retrogradely from the stomach up to the esophagus. If the upper esophageal sphincter (UES) fails as well, gastric juice might reach the larynx. In the larynx, hydrochloric acid and pepsin can damage critical structures, such as the vocal cords. It might even move past the larynx to affect the lungs themselves. In healthy people, the larynx contains dense neural tissue that prevents critical damage to structures in the larynx by inducing the cough reflex upon exposure to caustic stimuli. Unfortunately, patients with laryngopharyngeal reflux have altered neural sensitivity and cannot appropriately cough in response to acidic injury. Without an intact defense mechanism, acid and pepsin can readily enter the lower airways and damage the larynx. These structures are susceptible to gastric juice, and epithelial damage rapidly ensures, leading to hoarseness, dysphagia, and chronic cough.

In a patient with a weak UES, an increase in intraabdominal pressure further reduces the sphincter's function and predisposes to LPR symptoms. Thus, symptoms are more likely to occur in the upright position upon exertion, such as during exercise or when doing the Valsalva maneuver.

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is similar to LPR in that both disorders occur due to the reflux of the acidic contents from the stomach. However, two critical differences exist between GERD and LPR. The first is an anatomical difference as patients with GERD have weak LES while patients with LPR have weak LES and UES. The second is that pepsin plays a critical role in the pathophysiology of LPR while playing a minimal or unknown role in GERD.

It may be helpful to think of GERD and LPR as two separate diseases on the same spectrum. A variety of food, including chocolate, peppermint, alcohol, fatty foods, and coffee, can impair the function of the upper and lower esophageal sphincters secondary to delayed gastric emptying. Avoidance of these foods plays a crucial role in decreasing the incidence of GERD and LPR.