Before considering this procedure, obtaining informed consent is necessary. Photo documentation is encouraged after dedicated patient consent for comparison. Post-peel expectations require discussion with the patient. A complete history and physical examination must exclude any contraindications for the procedure as listed above.

The first step is choosing the appropriate depth of peel according to the patient's skin type and condition requiring treatment. One commonly used classification of skin phototypes is the Fitzpatrick classification.

- Type I: very fair skin, blue eyes, freckles, and light hair. Skin burns with sun exposure and does not tan

- Type II: fair skin, hazel/green/blue eyes, and light hair. Can tan with difficulty, but frequently burns

- Type III: white skin, any eye, or hair color. Can tan gradually, mild burn sometimes with sun exposure

- Type IV: brown or Mediterranean skin, tan easily and do not routinely burn

- Type V: dark brown or Middle-eastern skin, tan very easily and infrequently burn

- Type VI: black skin, almost never burns and tans very easily

Generally, light or very light peels are appropriate for all Fitzpatrick skin types. The perfect patient for medium or deep chemexfoliation is a female with fair skin and blue eyes (i.e., Fitzpatrick I). Fitzpatrick III-VI patients may be prone to aberrant pigmentation or dyschromasia.

Another way to categorize skin is by using the Glogau classification, which assesses photoaging

- Type I: early aging changes with no to minimal wrinkling

- Type II: smile lines form (i.e., wrinkles in motion)

- Type III: wrinkles at rest

- Type IV: widespread wrinkles

Special considerations in male patients are often needed as they tend to have thicker skins with less predictable peeling outcomes.

The clinician should perform priming should to facilitate effective peeling. Adequate priming should be started 2 to 4 weeks before the procedure and involves the application of a topical agent on the skin to thin the stratum corneum layer, which increases the depth of penetration.

The clinician must stress the importance of protection against UV rays (pre and post-treatment) to the patient. Patients are advised to avoid procedures that could traumatize the skin such as dermabrasion and waxing. On the day of the procedure, they should be instructed to cleanse their skin and not to apply any skincare or makeup products.