The care of amebic liver abscess depends on the complexity of the liver abscess. The treatment of amebic liver abscess requires an interprofessional team to lower the morbidity and mortality of the disorder.

- The laboratory technologist is essential for the diagnosis. Serum antigen detection and stool microscopy are often the first laboratory studies ordered to make the diagnosis and rule out other pathologies.

- For complex abscesses, Interventional radiologist will need to be consulted for image-guided drainage.

- If the abscess is multi-locular, then the general surgeon may have to perform an open or laparoscopic surgery to help drain the collections.

- Because many of the drugs used to treat amebic liver abscess have adverse effects, the pharmacist will need to monitor the patients. Emetin is used as a second-line drug, but it is important to monitor the patient as the drug can cause cardiac arrhythmias.

- The nurse may need to monitor the patient in outpatient clinics to ensure that the patient is symptom-free. More importantly, the nurse plays a vital role in public education regarding sanitary measures, personal hygiene, and food washing.

- Patients considering travel to areas where amebiasis is endemic may wish to schedule an infectious disease consult on precautions to take such as boiling drinking water, washing food regularly, and changing sexual practices to avoid fecal-oral contamination.

**Outcomes**

When an interprofessional team approach is undertaken, the prognosis for most patients with an amebic liver abscess is excellent.