Three-phase bone scanning has a narrower scope than traditional single delayed phase imaging. These indications include but are not limited to the following:

- Evaluation for osteomyelitis: Skeletal scintigraphy has an approximately 95% overall sensitivity for detection of osteomyelitis and can detect changes days or weeks before osseous changes are visualized on standard radiographs.

- Differentiation between osteomyelitis and cellulitis: Cellulitis shows increased perfusion and diffusely increased soft tissue activity on early images without increased bony activity on delayed images. Osteomyelitis will demonstrate increased activity on the flow, blood pool, and osseous uptake on the delayed phase.

- Complex regional pain syndrome (previously referred to as reflex sympathetic dystrophy): This entity consists of pain, tenderness, swelling, and vasomotor instability in the affected limb, usually precipitated by trauma.

- Evaluation of inflammatory arthritides: Angiogenesis has been found to be an essential event in maintaining inflammatory and immune responses, resulting in increased blood flow to the area. The addition of perfusion and blood pool phases in skeletal scintigraphy improves the diagnostic accuracy of the exam.

- Evaluation of orthopedic prosthetic infection versus loosening: –The overall accuracy of skeletal scintigraphy in the evaluation of orthopedic prosthetic joints is about 50% to 70%, but is a useful screening tool due to its high negative predictive value.

- Evaluation of myositis ossificans (also known as heterotopic ossification): Non-specific increased uptake on flow and blood pool images is seen early in the development of the lesion and gradually decreases as the lesion matures.