Avoidance of triggers, especially in those with seasonal symptoms, is encouraged, although it is not always practical, such as in the case of allergy to pollens. Precautions can be taken to avoid dust mites, animal dander, and upholstery. If removal of a pet from home is not feasible, isolating the pet to a single room in the house may be an option. It is important to note that it may take up to 20 weeks to completely eliminate cat dander from home even after removal.  It is also recommended to use allergen-impermeable bedding covers, wash sheets in hot water, and use a vacuum cleaner with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters.

Pharmacological options include antihistamines, intranasal steroids, leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs), and immunotherapy. First-generation antihistamines include diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, and hydroxyzine; whereas, fexofenadine, loratadine, desloratadine, and cetirizine are examples of second-generation antihistamines. Both first- and second-generation antihistamines are effective at controlling symptoms of AR, but first-generation antihistamines can be quite sedating due to their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier. These agents also act on muscarinic receptors, causing side effects of dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation, and/or tachycardia. Second-generation antihistamines have improved H1 selectivity, are less sedating, and have longer half-lives (12 to 24 hours) compared to those of the first-generation. Fexofenadine has no sedating effects, but loratadine and desloratadine may be sedating at higher doses. Cetirizine has the most potential for sedation of all second-generation antihistamines. In terms of symptom relief, there is no one agent recommended over others.

Intranasal corticosteroid therapy can be as monotherapy or in combination with oral antihistamines in patients in patients with mild, moderate, or severe symptoms. Studies have shown intranasal corticosteroids are superior to antihistamines in effectively reducing nasal inflammation and improving mucosal pathology.

Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) such as montelukast and zafirlukast can be beneficial in patients with AR, but they are not as efficacious as intranasal corticosteroids.

Oral decongestants such as pseudoephedrine are useful in relieving symptoms but are not recommended for extended daily use due to their side-effect profile. Intranasal decongestants such as xylometazoline are alpha-agonists that are delivered directly to nasal tissue to produce vasoconstriction. Prolonged use of intranasal decongestants have a risk of causing rebound nasal congestion (rhinitis medicamentosa) and, therefore, should not be used for more than a week.