Prostate cancer is one of the most frequently detected cancers n males, comprising approximately 1.4 million cases worldwide.

One of the best ways to screen, diagnose, stage, assess therapeutic response, and predict prostate cancer is to use various biomarkers in the serum or urine. According to the National Cancer Institute (NCI), a biomarker is a biological molecule detected in blood, urine, other body fluids, or tissues. It is a marker of an unhealthy process, condition, or disease.

When properly utilized, Biomarkers enable healthcare professionals to tailor various diagnostic modalities to the patient while avoiding unnecessary diagnostic procedures and overtreatment.

The Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) is the National Cancer Institute's initiative to identify, develop and validate future biomarkers and newer technologies for earlier and more accurate cancer diagnosis. These biomarkers could be proteins, DNA, mRNA, metabolites, prostate cancer cells or derivatives, exosomes, or measurements of various cell cycle processes like cellular proliferation or apoptosis.

Several commercial risk-stratification biomarkers for patients with persistently elevated PSA levels and suspected prostate cancer are now available.

Instead of a clinical endpoint, surrogate biomarkers can potentially evaluate a particular patient's response to a new drug, procedure, or therapy and determine its utility for that individual. In this way, a biomarker can track the effectiveness of a treatment for a specific disease or condition. Such validated surrogate biomarkers can often prevent patients from undergoing lengthy clinical trials, unnecessary biopsies, expensive imaging tests, or other invasive tissue diagnostics to ascertain the clinical benefit of the therapy.

An ideal biomarker should be highly sensitive and specific, easy to use and interpret, cost-effective, readily available, reproducible, and quantifiable from an easily extractable specimen. In addition, it would have a high negative predictive value of at least 90%, be FDA (Food and Drug Administration) and CLIA (Clinical Laboratory improvement amendments) approved, and be recommended by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN.)

Prostatic risk stratification biomarkers are intended for use primarily in lower-risk and selected borderline patients with marginally elevated PSA levels (typically 4 ng/mL to 10 ng/mL) where an adverse finding would likely result in the avoidance of immediate further testing, prostatic imaging, biopsies, or other diagnostic procedures.