Sequelae and complications of spinocerebellar ataxia present late and depend upon the spread of disease as well as parts of CNS involvement. Most of the subtypes of spinocerebellar ataxia spread beyond the cerebellum and spinal cord. In many cases, discrepancies between symptoms and complications are arbitrary yet symptoms may be considered when it is mild but complications are the late consequences of symptoms when it severe that interfere the normal life activities.

**Parkinsonism**

Due to associated neurodegeneration of dopaminergic neurons of substantia nigra and most commonly seen in SCA2, and rarely in SCA3 and SCA17.

**Progression of Dystonia, Tremors, and Movement Disorders**

Ataxia accompanied by dystonia increases the severity of the disease.

**Depression, Dementia, and Cognitive Disorders**

Depression is the primary long-term factor affecting the subjective health notion of patients in neurodegenerative diseases including SCAs with impairment of emotional function.

**Ophthalmic Complications**

Impaired ocular motility and retinopathy are the common ocular features in SCA7. Central retinal degeneration involving the macula with subsequent spread towards the periphery has been reported. So, central vision impairment followed by progressively complete visual loss can be present.

**Dysphagia and Dysarthria**

Degeneration of motor nuclei in the brainstem leading to difficulty in swallowing and slurring of voice can be seen in SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, and SCA7 subtypes. Death due to aspiration pneumonia is common in these patients.

**Seizure and Narcolepsy**

Pentanucleotide repeats expansions of SCA10 increases the chances of epilepsy by 6 to 10 fold.