Proper pharyngeal pouch development ensures appropriate tissue formation in vital processes such as hearing, appropriate immunity, and regulation of calcium homeostasis. Pharyngeal pouch development also plays a critical role in the correct formation of pharyngeal arches. Failure of development from any of the pharyngeal pouches has clinical consequences contributing to syndromes such as DiGeorge syndrome and branchio-oto-renal syndrome, as well as additional pathologies.

Hearing loss is a common consequence of failure in the first pharyngeal pouch formation. Failure to form the middle ear cavity lining inhibits the formation of ciliated epithelial cells. Consequently, middle ear debris cannot be removed into the nasopharynx, resulting in recurrent otitis media infections with effusions. Malformation of the middle ear lining surrounding the ossicles results in decreased vibration transmission from the stapes to the oval window of the inner ear. The cochlear nerve will receive less stimulation resulting in decreased quality of hearing. Failure of eustachian tube development causes damage to fragile inner ear structures with changing atmospheric pressure causing progressive hearing loss.

Errors in the second pharyngeal pouch formation affect palatine tonsil formation. Failure of palatine tonsil formation results in a lack of lymphoid tissue use to stimulate an immune response at the junction in the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts.

The thymus is an essential lymphoid organ in which T cell maturation and selection occurs, orchestrating the adaptive immune response in humans. The thymus enhances cell-mediated immunity with the production of T-cells that can generate an adequate immune response to various viral and fungal pathogens.

The parathyroid gland secretes parathyroid hormone in response to lower plasma calcium levels. Failure of gland development results in an inappropriate response by the body to low calcium levels. Parathyroid hormone acts on the intestines, kidneys, and bones to increase serum calcium. Abnormally low plasma calcium levels can present as numbness or tingling of the feet, hands, or lips, muscle cramps, decreased heart rate, facial twitching, weak nails, and individuals that are more prone to fracturing bones.

Failure of the fourth pouch results in the impaired formation of the ultimobranchial bodies of the thyroid. These cells are responsible for calcitonin secretion in response to high serum calcium levels, downregulating osteoclast function, and calcium reabsorption in the kidneys. Failure of parafollicular cell development could result in high serum calcium levels. Hypercalcemia affects brain function resulting in lethargy, fatigue, and confusion causes gastrointestinal upset, and can induce cardiac arrhythmias. On EKG, hypercalcemia is observable by a shortened QT interval (<300ms).