The left ventricular performance (Frank-Starling) curves relate preload, measured as left ventricular end-diastolic volume (EDV) or pressure, to cardiac performance, measured as ventricular stroke volume or cardiac output. On the curve of a normally functioning heart, cardiac performance increases continuously as preload increases. During states of increased left ventricular contractility, for example, due to norepinephrine infusion, there is a greater cardiac performance for a given preload. This is represented graphically as an upward shift of the normal curve. Conversely, during states of decreased left ventricular contractility associated with systolic heart failure, there is decreased cardiac performance for a given preload as compared to the normal curve. This is represented by a downward shift of the normal curve. Decreased contractility also can result from a loss of myocardium as with myocardial infarction, beta-blockers (acutely), non-dihydropyridine Ca++ channel blockers, and dilated cardiomyopathy.

Changes in afterload, which is the force of resistance that the ventricle must overcome to empty contents at the beginning of systole, will also shift the Frank-Starling curve. A decrease in afterload will cause an upward shift of the ventricular performance curve in a similar fashion to an increase in inotropy. Conversely, an increase in afterload will cause a downward shift of the curve in a similar fashion to a decrease in inotropy.

An increase in catecholamines, such as norepinephrine, during exercise, will result in an upward shift of the Frank-Starling curve. Catecholamines achieve this increase by binding to a myocyte beta1-adrenergic receptor, a G protein-coupled receptor, ultimately resulting in increased Ca++ channel release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which enhances the force of contraction.