**Esophageal Cancer**

Following histological confirmation of malignancy, esophageal cancer is staged through TNM classification. While early tumors can undergo surgical resection with or without neoadjuvant therapy, chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery is the standard of care for locally advanced esophageal cancers.

Esophageal cancers generally produce focal or segmental areas of increased FDG uptake compared to low diffuse uptake seen in esophagitis (Figure 1). The T staging of early tumors is better performed with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) due to its ability to differentiate between esophageal wall layers. EUS can also assess the immediate peri-esophageal lymph nodes with confidence. Contrast-enhanced CT scan has a complementary role in this regard. For non-locoregional and distant lymph nodes, PET/CT is the most sensitive modality and thus has a central role in the primary staging of FDG avid esophageal tumors.

Between the two main histological subtypes of esophageal cancers, squamous cell carcinoma primarily involves the upper and mid esophagus and is strongly associated with alcohol consumption and smoking. It generally shows intense FDG uptake as opposed to adenocarcinoma, which predominates in the lower esophagus, has an association with reflux and smoking, and can show highly variable FDG uptake. The incidence of adenocarcinoma is on the rise, and it is now the commonest subtype of esophageal cancer.

The PET/CT report must include the location, length, and SUV max of the tumor; tumor length is an independent prognostic factor for overall survival.

PET/CT is an excellent modality to rule out new metastases or recurrence at distant sites after curative treatment of esophageal cancers. The PET/CT sensitivity to detect disease recurrence is high (pooled sensitivity estimate around 96%), but the specificity is low (pooled specificity estimate 78%) due to post-operative inflammatory change and radiation pneumonitis, giving false-positive results.

**Colonic Cancer**

The colonic cancers can produce focal intermediate to high intensity eccentric or short segment radiotracer uptake, but the assessment is challenging due to background physiological colonic uptake, bowel movement with misregistration, and FDG uptake in fecal matter. Diffuse high colonic uptake is often seen with metformin intake and can mask the underlying pathology.

Adenocarcinomas show variable uptake but generally have high SUV max except for the mucinous variety, which shows poor FDG avidity due to low cellularity and scarce expression of GLUT-1 transporters.

PET/CT is not routinely performed to assess primary colorectal cancers and local lymph nodes due to poor spatial resolution of the PET photon detectors and limited inherent bowel contrast.

MRI is generally performed for the local staging of rectal cancer and CECT for the remaining colonic cancers. Metastatic disease is seen in 20% of colonic cancers at presentation.

However, if surgery is considered for liver metastases, planning an MRI of the liver is mandatory. The lung metastases require assessment with a breath-hold CT scan for accurate quantification and characterization. The peritoneal metastases on PET/CT can show focal uptake or diffuse perihepatic curvilinear uptake, often correlated with CT findings of peritoneal nodules or fat stranding. Ascites is commonly associated with peritoneal disease, which may or may not show high FDG uptake.

PET/CT has an established role in detecting disease recurrence in patients with new clinical symptoms, abnormal exam findings, rising tumor markers, or indeterminate presacral lesion on conventional imaging. The differentiation between recurrent disease and post-therapy change can be challenging on PET/CT. Generally, high-intensity focal uptake that persists several months after surgery is concerning for residual or recurrent disease. Low-intensity, ill-defined uptake after surgery is expected and related to inflammatory change.

There is not enough data to support the definite role of PET/CT in assessing complete responders. In assessing response to liver-directed therapies like selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT), FDG-PET can be helpful as the metabolic response can be greater than the morphological response.

**Anal Cancer**

Anal cancers are rare and account for less than 2% of large bowel malignancies, although their incidence is increasing over the past few years in developed countries.

Due to the very high FDG affinity of primary anal squamous cell cancer (SCC), PET/CT is routinely indicated in the primary staging of anal cancer to rule out lymph nodal and hematogenous metastases (Figure 3). The local staging of anal cancers is generally performed with MRI. Further proposed roles of PET/CT in anal cancer management include radiotherapy planning (especially with increasing consideration of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)), response assessment, and detection of recurrence.

**Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors**

Advancements in imaging techniques for detecting neuroendocrine tumors could partly be responsible for their rising incidence.

The well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (G1, G2) and their metastases are primarily assessed with 68Ga DOTA NOC PET/CT due to their expression of somatostatin receptors (SSTR). Contrary to popular belief, even the most well-differentiated and indolent neuroendocrine tumors can metastasize (Figure 4). FDG-PET/CT is indicated in selected patients with poorly differentiated high-grade tumors (G3) as these tumors generally lack SSTR and demonstrate up-regulation of glucose metabolism, which can be mapped through FDG-PET/CT.

In some patients with metastatic neuroendocrine tumors, there can be mixed proliferation profiles at different disease sites, which often becomes apparent after receptor-targeted therapy; the gallium scan shows stable or regressive disease, but the CT component of the study shows an enlargement of some non-gallium avid areas of disease.

The knowledge of Ga68-DOTA peptide biodistribution is crucial for the accurate interpretation of pathological uptake sites. Normal radiotracer uptake is seen in the spleen, adrenal glands, pancreas, pituitary gland, liver, kidneys, thyroid, and salivary glands. Unlike FDG-PET/CT, the uptake in background soft tissue and muscles is minimal, improving the contrast of the pathologies against the background.