**Structure**

The mammary gland structure is divided into three parts: the skin, the parenchyma, and the stroma.

**Skin:**It consists of a nipple and areola.

- **Nipple**– It is a conical eminence, present in the fourth intercostal space. 15 to 20 lactiferous ducts pierce the nipple. The nipple contains circular and longitudinal smooth muscle fibers and is rich in the nerve supply. These smooth muscles help in erecting the nipple upon stimulation. The nipple does not contain any sweat glands, fat, and hairs over it.

- **Areola**– The dark pinkish-brown pigmented area around the nipple is called the areola. It is rich in modified sebaceous glands (called**tubercles of Montgomery**in pregnancy and lactation). These glands secrete oily secretion that prevents cracking of the nipple and the areola. Notably, the areola is devoid of fat and hair.

**Parenchyma**– The mammary gland's glandular tissue is made up of branching ducts and terminal secretory lobules. There are 15 to 20 lobes, and a lactiferous duct drains each of them. These ducts enlarge to form the lactiferous sinus before they open separately into the nipple. The milk is collected in the lactiferous sinuses and let out on the suckling of the baby. The lactiferous ducts are arranged radially in the nipple. Hence the surgeon needs to take radial incisions to avoid cutting through multiple lactiferous ducts.

**Stroma -**This is the supporting framework of the breast around the parenchyma.

- **Fibrous stroma**– This gives rise to septa called**suspensory ligaments of Cooper,**which separates lobes and suspends the mammary gland from the pectoral fascia.  In patients with breast cancer, shortening and pulling of these ligaments causes rigidity of the organ and puckering of the skin over it. In association with cutaneous edema, the shortening of ligaments gives rise to a typical appearance that looks like an orange peel. Hence, it is called**Peau d' orange**appearance.

- **Fatty stroma**– Even though the nipple and the areola are devoid of fat, the mammary gland's main bulk is filled with variable amounts of fat.

Till puberty, the development of breasts is minimal and comparable in both the sexes. At puberty, under the influence of spurting estrogen and growth hormones, the breast develops faster in females with the massive development of adipose tissue, which gives smooth contour to the breasts. Similarly, in early pregnancy, the breast rapidly increases in size due to increased parenchymal growth and branching in the ductal system. These changes are due to the surge in estrogen and progesterone hormones. Secretory alveoli start developing at duct terminals and get surrounded by connective tissue. In the later stages of pregnancy, these alveoli are filled with milk under the influence of prolactin. After lactation ends, the secretory alveoli start shrinking and decrease in number and size and subsequently disappear. But the mammary gland never returns to the pre-pubertal stage. In later stages of life, especially after menopause, the breast shows severe regression in size and almost atrophies with a drop in circulating estrogen level.

**Function**

- The primary purpose is to secrete milk, which helps in the breastfeeding of the infants.

- It also plays an essential role in female sexuality.