Locked-in syndrome may be ambiguous in presentation, leading to a difficult and often missed diagnosis. It is first and foremost to stabilize the patient's airway, breathing, and circulation in the acute setting. Examining consciousness and alertness should be done in conjunction with a physical exam to help localize and watch out for the progression of the symptoms. Imaging studies should be obtained to further characterize the causative agent. An EEG can be ordered to confirm consciousness.

Post-stabilization rehabilitation therapy in the form of speech and physical therapy is recommended in the subacute and chronic stages of recovery.

The long-term outcomes and complications should be discussed with the family and those providing support after discharge. A coordinated effort from the family and medical team to schedule and follow up with speech and physical therapy is important for patients who are severely disabled to gradually recover to an acceptable semi-dependent state. A discussion about the realistic goals of therapy should not be missed. Patients may also benefit from assisted technology such as infrared eye movement sensors or computer modulated voice prosthetics to properly track outcomes and progression while in therapy.

Overall, coordination between providers, nurses, and the therapists responsible for patient care can largely improve outcomes in these patients and reduce the delay to the formal diagnosis. Such a patient-centered approach allows for an improvement in patient safety during and after the patient's hospital stay while helping to improve recovery.