Since ocular and orbital injuries can often occur in tandem with other head, neck, and bodily injuries, CT scans of the head, neck, and abdomen are generally ordered to evaluate for life-threatening injuries. Once those injuries have been addressed and managed, a complete ophthalmic exam can be performed. A comprehensive, 8-part ophthalmic exam is performed by an ophthalmologist or ophthalmologist-in-training. **However, if an open globe is suspected, the single most important action nursing and emergency room staff can perform is to place a rigid shield over the affected eye.**Signs of a ruptured globe, such as exposed uveal tissue, can halt a comprehensive ophthalmic exam until the primary repair is performed to prevent further damage and loss of vision.

Dedicated orbital or facial CT scans with 1-3 mm slice thickness help assess the bony orbit and extent of EOM and surrounding tissue injury. MRI, particularly dynamic (multi-positional) scanning, which has the patient looking in different gazes, provides detailed information of the entire length, contractility, and location relative to other orbital structures. Retained ferromagnetic (metallic) foreign bodies MUST be excluded before MRI. In the emergency setting, CT is more readily available than MRI.

Surgical trays for consideration:

- Globe exploration tray (if open globe or open globe suspect)

- IOFB removal tray (if IOFB is suspected based on history or imaging)

- Orbital tray (if orbital fracture)

- Strabismus tray (to isolate extraocular muscles)

While the type of surgical tray will vary depending on other orbital or ocular trauma, general instrumentation and supply for EOM management include:

- 0.12 mm, 0.3 mm, or 0.5 mm non-locking Castroviejo forceps

- 0.5 mm locking Stern-Castroviejo forceps

- Blunt Westcott scissors

- Eyelid speculum

- Curved needle holder

- Caliper

- Muscle hooks (Jameson, Green, Von Graefe, Stevens, Wright)*

- 4-0 silk suture (for traction)

- 5-0 or 6-0 absorbable polyglactin suture, double-armed with spatulated needles**

- 6-0 plain gut or 8-0 polyglactin suture (for conjunctival closure)

*When isolating muscles, having a variety of strabismus muscle hooks, ranging in size from larger muscle hooks with bulbous tips (such as a Jameson muscle hook) or flattened tips (like the Green and Von Graefe hooks) to smaller, curved tenotomy hooks (such as the Stevens hook), available can be helpful. Additional muscle hooks with a specialized groove to protect the sclera during muscle imbrication are also available (Wright hook).

**When detaching EOMs, a double-armed spatulated needle (typically 6-0 polyglactin suture) is useful. The double-armed nature facilitates easy reattachment to the globe. In addition, the spatulated needle has a flat top and bottom, which reduces the risk of inadvertent scleral perforation, especially when passing posterior to the rectus muscle previous insertion where it is thinnest.