So far, no antidote has been developed against PTX toxicity. Additionally, there is no defined and harmonized medical protocol for the treatment of PTX associated with corals. In general, the management is mainly symptomatic and focused on reducing or limiting the signs and symptoms of toxicity and limiting further damage. Hence, they are defined case by case. Following dermal and ocular exposure, rinsing the affected area with water is useful to reduce the toxicity.

Many approaches regarding inhalational exposure of PTX have been under study. One approach focuses on the usage of nebulized β-agonists or corticosteroids and/or systemic corticosteroids. Another approach is based on the association of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and nebulized β-agonists or a combination of corticosteroids and antihistamines. For cutaneous exposure, treatment with supportive intravenous fluids infusion, corticosteroids, and antihistamines is mandatory. For ocular exposure and limited toxicity, artificial tears, steroids drops, and/or antibiotics are common choices. More serious damage to the eye like keratitis and ulcers may require surgical exploration and management, such as amniotic membrane transplantation.

For patients arriving at the emergency department with dyspnea, cyanosis, and respiratory difficulties, progression to respiratory failure should be anticipated, and intensive care should be made available. Also, the toxic effects of PTX to the heart should receive proper attention, using an electrocardiogram.

Animal studies using vasodilators, papaverine, and isosorbide dinitrate have shown that these can serve as antidotes. But the animal experiments showed benefit only after the injection of these agents directly into the heart immediately after exposure.