NIOSH classifies the types of workplace violence based on the relationships of those involved. Healthcare workers are most susceptible to being attacked by patients and coworkers, but may also be subject to attack from those they know outside of work and by those carrying out completely random acts of violence.

All workers are potential victims to these sorts of acts, but those who work with high acuity and unscreened patients such as those in the emergency department or on-scene calls can be particularly at risk, from patients, family members, or third parties. Screening and prevention are the best techniques to reduce harm to those trying to aid patients.

All workplaces should have written and enforced policies and guidelines concerning workplace violence and prevention. High-risk environments such as those mentioned should implement active screening techniques tailored to their environment. Security personnel and metal detectors are just some of the possible tools to consider.

No matter one’s thoughts on the likelihood of violence occurring to them, or any perceived invulnerability, or the undesirableness of having to take any precautions at all, there will always be a risk to any worker. As such, workers must maintain prudent practices in every patient encounter.

Surveying the scene and being able to recognize potentially unsafe conditions remains the primary intervention. EMS crews may call for police escort prior to entering. Hospital workers should call for security before a situation escalates. Having proceeded cautiously, it is essential to recognize that situations may change and that patients still need to be treated. Simple, implementable acts that are useful in any encounter should be practiced and become second nature; this includes placing yourself between the patient (and onlookers) and an exit so that it cannot close behind you. Maintain physical distance if you are uncomfortable at all and continually reassess the situation to see if you should leave the area immediately. Additionally, it is important to recognize that some patients will not be calm regardless of what anyone else does. Verbal de-escalation should always be the first attempted action. De-escalation techniques and responding to hostile patients in a tiered, controlled manner is beyond the scope of this article, but it should always be rehearsed and practiced for the safety of both staff and patients.