CO is readily absorbed through the lungs and binds to the hemoglobin molecule in red blood cells with an affinity 240 times that of oxygen. The amount of carboxyhemoglobin formed is dependent on the amount of CO in the environment, duration of exposure, and minute ventilation. The COHb impairs the offloading of the remaining oxygen bound to the hemoglobin molecule (usually, when fully oxygenated the hemoglobin molecule can carry four oxygen molecules). The result of this impairment is decreased oxygen delivery to the tissues and relative hypoxia. Not only is the oxygen delivery impaired, but 10% to 15% of the CO binds to myoglobin, cytochromes, and NADPH reductase impairing oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria of the cells. This is especially toxic to the heart muscle and the brain.  This results in the classic symptoms of headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, flu-like symptoms, fatigue, shortness of breath, impaired judgment, and cognitive dysfunction. The patient may also develop chest pain, agitation, abdominal pain, drowsiness, loss of consciousness, visual changes, and seizures. The sequelae of CO poisoning can include depression, memory problems, ataxia, behavior problems, and impaired cognitive function. The cause of the delayed neurologic sequelae is believed to be linked to the lipid peroxidation by toxic oxygen species generated by xanthine oxidase in the brain. This enzyme is released by neutrophils adherent to the damaged endothelial cells of the blood vessels in the brain due to CO toxicity. This creates a common pathway that is seen with ischemia-reperfusion injuries.