Procedures are a common denominator in medical practice. Some areas of medicine involve complex and risky types of procedures to be performed on patients. Simulation-based procedural skills training offers a safe environment where students can learn and practice procedures without representing a risk to the patient. This is particularly important for high-risk and low-volume procedures. Some of the important steps in developing a procedural skill include theoretical knowledge, instrumentation knowledge, instruction, teacher's feedback, and technique correction.

Skills assessment represents an important tool to protect the patients by evaluating the learner's proficiency and capabilities. Assessment of procedural skills is not standardized, but different methods have been described to serve the purpose. These are some of the tools that can be used to assess procedural skills:

**Questionnaires:**The purpose of a questionnaire in simulation-based training is to obtain feedback on a perceived feeling of knowledge or comfort when performing a procedure. They provide valuable information about the perceived usefulness of the educational activity. Questionnaires are low-cost, easy to apply and interpret. However, this tool is not ideal for testing procedural proficiency since its basis is self-report. Validating questionaries can be challenging because of their subjectivity and concomitant biases.

**Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skill (OSATS)**: The OSATS consists of observers evaluating a trainee performing a procedure and filling out a checklist containing the essential maneuvers or actions necessary for the specific procedure. This evaluation method allows the teacher to obtain a quantitive evaluation of the trainee's performance. When more than one observer is evaluating the procedure, training and standardization increase the interobserver reliability. OSATS are great tools to evaluate essential actions needed to perform a procedure. However, this method is not capable of assessing finesse or action quality.

**Global Rating Scale (GRS):**GRS is an assessment instrument that contains items that are considered relevant to each procedure, and every item has a scale to grade it. GRS is a commonly used tool to assess surgical procedures along with OSATS and can serve to assess the finesse or characteristics of a specific surgical action. For example, GRS can evaluate force used in a movement, respect for soft tissue, instrument handling, the fluidity of movement, etc., with a rating scale like the Linkert scale. Even though OSATS and GRS are different measurement tools, they are often used together to achieve a comprehensive assessment.

**Motion Tracking and Analysis (MTA):**The use of metrics to assess procedure performance has been widely used in surgical simulation. The most common metrics used to test a trainee are time and accuracy. These two parameters can provide objective information about expertise and familiarity with the procedure. MTA refers to the use of technology capable of sensing movements to evaluate and measure different motions. The main disadvantage of this method is the need to attach sensors to surgical instruments or wear equipment by the trainee, which can be impractical and/or cumbersome.

**Video Recording (VR):**Video Recording of a trainee performing a procedure has many advantages. OSATS and GRS can be used to evaluate the trainee's performance by different observers at different moments and physical spaces. Also, the video allows the trainer to provide feedback to the trainee with images of the performance.

**Crowd-Sourced Assessment of Technical Skills (C-SATS):**Crowdsourcing refers to a model used by an organization in which unbiased observers or "the crowd"  perform a service. In procedural skills assessment, a video recording of the performance is shared with the crowd, and then they are asked to evaluate the performance using an assessment instrument. The crowd is usually comprised of a significant number of observers trained to examine the videos using the same instructions. The size of the crowd significantly decreases interobserver variability and increases objectivity. Increasing evidence shows that the crowd assessment correlates with surgical experts, demonstrating that crowd-sourcing can be used as an objective evaluation method.