The change in the decussation of the fascial fibers at the arcuate line creates a weakness in the abdominal wall at the juncture of the arcuate line and the lateral rectus sheath. Herniation through this area is called a Spigelian hernia.

The arcuate line is also significant in that hematomas within the rectus sheath can expand intra-abdominally with relative ease inferior to the arcuate line, since there is no strong posterior fascia. Rectus sheath hematomas are most commonly associated with therapeutic anticoagulation. CT scan or ultrasonography are viable diagnostic tools, with CT demonstrating greater accuracy than ultrasound. Management is typically non-operative with the cessation of anticoagulation, rest, ice, compression, and analgesia being effective in a majority of patients. If the patient is unstable, transfusion and/or angioembolization are indicated for treatment. Surgical management is generally contraindicated, especially in the setting of coagulopathy.

The use of local anesthesia for postoperative pain control in abdominal operations is gaining favor in the surgical community. A rectus sheath block (RSB) involves placing a local anesthetic in the plane between the posterior sheath and the rectus abdominis muscle. This type of block works well for midline abdominal pain near the umbilicus. A transversus abdominis plane block (TAP) is also an option. In this method, a local anesthetic is placed in the neurovascular plane, more posteriorly on the nerves, in the posterior lumbar triangle. However, the TAP block affects a broader area than the rectus sheath block, thus making it a viable option for a greater range of surgical procedures.