A critical differential to rule out is actual disc edema or papilledema (bilateral disc edema). Imaging modalities can help make this distinction. It is also important to remember that real edema can be present in addition to nerve drusen. OCT will reveal NFL thickening in cases of the presence of disc edema.

Fluorescein angiography will reveal early diffuse hyperfluorescence with late leakage on and near the disc in cases of edema. On B-scan, calcified drusen maintain signal intensity despite a decrease in the gain setting, while in cases of true edema, the signal intensity decreases as the gain decreases.

Pseudopapilledema from other etiologies such as congenital anomalies, infiltrative lesions, vitreopapillary traction, and genetic disease such as Lebers hereditary optic neuropathy are other important differentials to keep in mind. History and the greater clinical picture, in addition to imaging modalities, can assist the physician in distinguishing between these entities.

Other differentials include peripapillary hyperreflective ovoid mass-like structures (PHOMS), tilted discs, myelinated nerve fiber layer, crowded discs, and idiopathic intracranial hypertension. In the case of idiopathic intracranial hypertension, certain characteristic imaging findings on MRI can aid in diagnoses such as flattening of the posterior globe, kinking of optic nerves, empty sella, tonsillar ectopia, slit-like ventricles, and other findings. Lumbar puncture is another key tool in diagnosing idiopathic intracranial hypertension.