**Initial Evaluation**

Listed below are the indications for initial outpatient pediatric cTTEs according to the 2014 Appropriate Use Criteria (AUC) Report published by the American College of Cardiology (ACC) AUC Task Force.  A total of 113 indications were mentioned, each labeled with an appropriate use rating of “appropriate,” “may be appropriate,” “rarely appropriate.” Only the indications labeled “appropriate” will be mentioned below. Furthermore, in-depth information, including the entire list of indications and symptom-based algorithms, can be found here.

Palpitations with:

- Known cardiomyopathy or family history of cardiomyopathy.

- Family history of sudden death or cardiac arrest and/or implantable defibrillator or pacemaker placed all occurring <50 years of age.

Arrhythmia with:

- electrocardiogram (ECG) findings of supraventricular tachycardia or ventricular tachycardia.

Syncope with:

- Family history of cardiomyopathy.

- Family history of sudden death or cardiac arrest, and/or implantable. Defibrillator or pacemaker placed all occurring <50 years of age.

- Abnormal ECG.

- Exertional and/or following exertion with an unexplained etiology.

Chest Pain with:

- Family history of cardiomyopathy or sudden unexplained death.

- Exertion or abnormal ECG (regardless of the exertional component).

Murmur with:

- History concerning cardiovascular disease (CVD).

- Pathological acoustic characteristics.

Outpatient Neonates without post-natal cardiac evaluation with:

- Maternal phenylketonuria.

- Maternal infection with potential fetal/neonatal cardiac sequelae during pregnancy/delivery.

- Concerning fetal echocardiogram suspicious for cardiovascular abnormality.

Other Signs and Symptoms of:

- Central cyanosis.

- Endocarditis, regardless of blood culture results.

- Congestive heart failure.

Patients without confirmed or suspected cardiac diagnosis and have a family history of:

- Cardiomyopathy (e.g., hypertrophic, non-ischemic dilated).

- High-risk genetic disorder for CVD (e.g., Loeys Dietz, Marfan).

- Heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Prior Test Results of:

- Abnormal chest X-ray or chromosomal pattern suggestive of CVD.

- Abnormal ECG in an asymptomatic patient.

- Abnormal cardiac biomarkers.

- Abnormal bronchoscopy or barium swallow suggesting vascular ring.

- Positive blood cultures concerning infective endocarditis.

- Genotype positive for cardiomyopathy.

- Desaturation demonstrated on pulse oximetry.

- Previously normal TTE with a new family history suggestive of heritable heart disease and/or a change in cardiovascular status.

Systemic Disorders of:

- Suspected or confirmed CHD, connective tissue disorders, Kawasaki disease, Takayasu arteritis, pulmonary hypertension, acute rheumatic fever.

- Abnormalities of cardiac or visceral situs.

- Cancers requiring chemo.

- Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection.

- Confirmed storage diseases, mitochondrial/metabolic disorders, stroke, hemoglobinopathies, autoimmune disorders, Muscular Dystrophy, systemic hypertension, renal failure.

**Follow-up Evaluation for CHD**

Listed below are the indications for CHD follow-up cTTEs according to the 2020 AUC Report published by the ACC AUC Task Force.  A total of 23 CHD defects were mentioned, all with specific unrepaired and post-procedural indications. Similar to above, each indication was labeled with an appropriate use rating of “appropriate,” “may be appropriate,” “rarely appropriate.” Of the 324 indications mentioned, all but 15 received an “appropriate” rating for TTE indication. For simplicity purposes, below, we will list the CHD defects covered with an “appropriate” rating in all scenarios followed by a list of CHDs, only noting the scenarios where the indication was labeled less than “appropriate.” More detailed information, including a full list of all 324 indications can be found here.

CHDs with “appropriate” ratings for cTTE in all pre and post-repair scenarios:

- Single ventricle heart disease

- Tetralogy of fallow

- Truncus arteriosus

- Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum

- Pulmonary stenosis

- Congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries

- Double outlet RV

- Aortic coarctation and interrupted aortic arch

- Ebstein anomaly and tricuspid valve dysplasia

- Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection

- Atrioventricular septal defects

CHDs with “appropriate” ratings for cTTE in all Pre and Post repair scenarios except listed below:

- **Patent Foramen Ovale**
- “Rarely Appropriate” for routine surveillance in an asymptomatic patient.

- **Atrial Septal Defect (ASD) and Partial Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection (PAPVC)**
- “Maybe appropriate” for routine surveillance (1-2 years) of an asymptomatic patient with an unrepaired small ASD or PAPVC involving one pulmonary vein.
- “Maybe appropriate” for annual routine surveillance of an asymptomatic patient following surgical PAPVC repair or ASD closure.

- **Ventricular Septal Defects (VSD)**
- “Rarely appropriate” for routine surveillance (1-2 years) of an unrepaired small muscular VSD in an asymptomatic patient.
- “Maybe appropriate” for annual surveillance of surgical VSD closure in an asymptomatic patient.

- **Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA)**
- “Rarely appropriate” routine surveillance of an unrepaired silent PDA in an asymptomatic patient.
- “Rarely appropriate” for routine surveillance of an asymptomatic patient following surgical PDA closure >2years prior.

- **Eisenmenger Syndrome (ES)**
- “Maybe appropriate” for routine surveillance every 3 months for ES in a stable child.
- “Rarely Appropriate” for routine surveillance every 3 months for ES in a stable adult.

- **Pulmonary Hypertension (PH) Associated with CHD**
- “Maybe appropriate “ for routine surveillance every 3 months in a post-repair PH stable adult.

- **Mitral valve Disease, i.e., Congenital Mitral Stenosis (MS), Prolapse (MVP), Regurgitation (MR)**
- “Maybe appropriate” for routine surveillance every 1-2 years of an unrepaired congenital mitral valve prolapse or congenital mitral valve regurgitation in an asymptomatic child.

- **D-loop Transposition of the Great Arteries**
- “Rarely appropriate” for routine postoperative surveillance every 6 months in an asymptomatic patient following an Atrial Switch Operation.

- **Coronary Anomalies**
- “Rarely appropriate” for routine annual surveillance of an unrepaired anomalous right coronary artery (RCA) from the left aortic sinus or a small coronary fistula in an asymptomatic patient.

- **LVOT lesion, i.e., Aortic Valve Stenosis (AS), Regurgitation (AR)**
- “Rarely appropriate” for routine surveillance of an unrepaired mild aortic valve stenosis (AS) and/or mild aortic valve regurgitation (AR) in an asymptomatic patient without aortic dilation.