Left ventricular ejection fraction is a powerful predictor of cardiac mortality. In clinical practice, LVEF has become the primary criterion used for defibrillator placement. The MADIT II (Second Multicenter Automated Defibrillator Implantation) trial has demonstrated a significant reduction in sudden cardiac death and all-cause mortality after implantable cardioverter-defibrillator device (ICD) placement among patients with previous myocardial infarction and LVEF of less than 30%. LVEF now occupies a central position in guidelines for the use of ICD when recommended for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death.

Higher LVEFs were associated with a linear decrease in mortality up to an LVEF of 45% among heart failure patients. However, increases above 45% were not associated with further reductions in mortality. Although LVEF is a strong independent predictor of mortality in heart failure patients, the prognostic value of LVEF should be interpreted in the context of other established risk factors. Current American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend the routine assessment of LVEF in heart failure patients to guide therapy but fall short of defining a relationship between LVEF and prognosis.

LVEF is an important parameter to monitor LV function in the course of cardiotoxic chemotherapy. Echocardiography is the method of choice for the evaluation of patients before, during, and after cancer therapy. LVEF<53% at baseline should prompt cardiology consultation to discuss the risk/benefit ratio. The integrated approach of LV function assessment also recommends measurements of global longitudinal strain and troponins. If during chemotherapy, LVEF decreases > 10% from baseline to a final LVEF below 53%, patients must be referred to the cardio-oncology unit to consider heart failure therapy and cancer treatment strategy reevaluation.

In patients with valvular diseases, LVEF is also used as one of the criteria to determine management. Aortic valve replacement is recommended for asymptomatic patients with severe aortic stenosis or chronic severe aortic regurgitation and LVEF less than 50%. Mitral valve surgery is considered for asymptomatic patients with LVEF ≤ 60%.