**Macroscopic examination:**

Esthesioneuroblastomas are usually unilateral, polypoid, glistening, soft, reddish-grey masses with an intact mucosa; the cut surface appears greyish-tan to pinkish-red and hyper vascularized. The tumors range from under 1 cm in size to large masses involving the nasal cavity and intracranial region. They frequently expand into the adjacent paranasal sinuses, orbit, and cranial vault.

**Macroscopic examination:**

Low-grade esthesioneuroblastoma form submucosal, sharply demarcated nests, lobules, or sheets of cells, often separated by richly vascular or hyalinized fibrous stroma. Pseudorosettes (Homer-Wright rosettes), with neoplastic cells palisading or cuffed around the central delicate fibrillar neural matrix, may be seen. The tumor cells are often uniform, with sparse cytoplasm and round or ovoid nuclei with punctate salt-and-pepper chromatin and nucleoli that are either small or absent. Esthesioneuroblastoma characteristically demonstrates fibrillary cytoplasm and interdigitating neuronal processes (neuropil), created by a syncytium of cells. Higher-grade tumors show tumor necrosis, pleomorphism, increased mitoses, decreased to absent neuropil, and a less overt lobular growth pattern. The tumor cells can arrange in gland-like rings or tight annular formations with a true lumen (Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes). Rosettes alone are not diagnostic of esthesioneuroblastoma, although the Homer Wright rosettes are nearly pathognomonic in the nasal cavity when containing true neuropil. The mitotic rate is variable, but is usually low, especially in lower-grade tumors. Calcifications (concretion-like or psammomatous) may be seen, less frequently as the grade increases. Melanin pigment, ganglion cells, rhabdomyoblasts, divergent differentiation as islands of true epithelium (squamous pearls or gland formation), and clear-cell change may occasionally present in esthesioneuroblastoma.****

**Immunohistochemical study:**

The typical immunohistochemical profile includes diffuse staining for neuron-specific enolase,