**Physiology**

The time-varying current flow passing to the coil creates the magnetic field around the coil. When the pulse of the magnetic field passes into the body, it will induce a voltage difference between any two points. This creates an electric field and induces electrons to flow between these two points. Unlike electrical stimulation, magnetic stimulation does not need a traverse of electric current through electrodes, skin, and tissue interface. The magnetic field acts as the vehicle to induce ions to flow, and it does not stimulate the nervous tissue itself. However, once the ion flow is created, the mechanism of both electrical and magnetic stimulation at the neural level is the same; these are axon depolarization and the initiation of the action potential.

The magnetic field provides many advantages. First, the magnetic field can pass any medium, even a vacuum space, without attenuation of energy. This allows penetration to deep tissue such as spinal nerve roots or deep muscles. The magnetic field only decreases inversely proportional to the distance away from the generator coil. Owing to this characteristic, no mechanical contact is necessary, making it applicable to patients with extreme hypersensitivity or allodynia to skin touch. Similarly, because the magnetic field can pass through clothing, the patient does not need to undress. Moreover, due to no charged particles being injected into the skin and superficial tissue and the weak recruitment ability of cutaneous sensory afferent fiber, magnetic stimulation rarely causes pain during clinical practice.

**Possible Mechanisms of Action**

Many researchers have been trying to identify the mechanisms of action underlying the effect of peripheral magnetic stimulation; however, no clear conclusion has been made. The one strong postulate is that peripheral magnetic stimulation can recruit peripheral afferents, potentially influencing cerebral activation and neuroplasticity. Peripheral magnetic stimulation is thought to be another useful method to induce proprioceptive afferents resembling movement therapy that has already been demonstrated to increase motor control in stroke patients. Peripheral magnetic stimulation triggers massive proprioceptive afferents when applied to muscles via two pathways.

**Device**

The equipment consists of a high current pulse generator able to produce a large electric discharge current (several thousand amperes).

Many types of coils have been manufactured. Two frequently used are the round coil and figure-8 coil. The choice of the coil depends on the focality and depth of penetration on the target. The round coil is less focal but produces a deeper magnetic field with a stimulated area equivalent to its diameter. The figure-8 coil produces a stronger magnetic field at the center with an accurate focus. When the coil is distant from the target, the magnetic field from the figure-8 coil declines faster than the round coil. The orientation of the coil also matters. Placing the coil in a flat, tangential orientation with the longitudinal axis of the conductive structure is the most effective way to stimulate structures beneath.

**Parameter**

Different parameters have been speculated to create different preferential activation. Until now, there is no consensus regarding a standardized protocol of peripheral magnetic stimulation. The following are common parameters for peripheral magnetic stimulation:

**Duty Cycle: On and Off Periods**

Two different protocols regarding the duty cycle include (1) the continuous protocol (only “on” during the whole treatment session), which is hypothesized to briefly inhibit overactive spinal circuits of muscle spasticity, and (2) the intermittent protocol, which imitates physiological muscle contraction and relaxation and generates proprioceptive afferent inducing neuroplasticity. However, the optimal length of the "on" and "off" period in the intermittent protocol has not been determined. The increase in the "off" period during treatment may reduce the risk of excessive heating originated from the coil.

**Total Number of Stimuli**

For transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), the total number of magnetic pulses obtained is one important factor to determine effectiveness; however, its role in peripheral magnetic stimulation has not been determined.

**Frequency**

As is the case with the total number of stimuli, frequency is another major factor of TMS. Low-frequency stimulation (less than 1 Hz) has inhibitory effects, while high-frequency stimulation (more than 5 Hz) initiates excitatory effects in the brain.

**Intensity**

Peripheral magnetic stimulation intensity is indicated by using tesla units or a percentage of the maximal stimulator output. But the real magnetic field strength that reaches the target structure cannot be determined. Factors affecting the strength are the type of coil used for stimulation, depth of target tissues, and geometry of the area beneath the coil. Therefore, the intensity is roughly measured by observing whether there is a muscle contraction, and it would be reported as subthreshold and suprathreshold stimulation. Almost all studies used for suprathreshold stimulation are based on the rationale that muscle contraction would produce proprioceptive afferents to induce neuroplasticity.