Among children and neonates, ECMO circuits and cannulas must cater to their variations in weight. Additionally, the sites where cannulae are placed differ between the adult and pediatric populations. In adults, the femoral vessels are generally utilized. In particularly young children, the femoral vessels have not developed enough to qualify for ECMO cannulation, so vascular access in pediatric ECMO cannulation is preferentially located in the larger neck vessels. The optimal age to transition from neck to femoral cannulation has been largely debated and requires further study.

Upon placement of the cannula, the circuit’s pump must be decided. Presently there are two main types of pumps to provide blood flow: roller pumps and centrifugal pumps. Roller pumps advance blood through tubing to a circular plate with a rotating lever arm that generates high pressure distally. This pump housing is dependent on gravity drainage to maintain preload. Suppose there is any interruption to flow, whether due to kinking or obstruction, detrimental circuit rupture may occur. There are built-in safety measures that terminate the pump if line pressures get too high. Roller pumps are currently predominantly used in the neonatal population (85%) because such patients with lower birth weights require a low perfusion rate, and roller pumps do not need a set flow rate to generate flow.

Centrifugal pumps use a rapidly rotating vortex to create differences in pressure to propel blood. Blood flow is driven by these pressure gradients, so there is minimal risk for rupture. Compared to earlier models, newer generation models have shown a smaller risk of thromboembolic complications and hemolysis. In certain instances, ECMO can be performed without a pump if blood flow can be driven by a patient’s blood pressure or in patients with severe pulmonary hypertension.

A bridge is a component that can be incorporated within the ECMO circuit as well. It is placed between the drainage and infusion limbs and allows patients to be taken off while keeping the circuit open. This may be indicated during weaning, needing to change part of the ECMO apparatus, or in emergencies like massive hemorrhage or circuit contamination from air or thrombus.