**Cell Necrosis**

Irreversible injury to cells as a result of encounters with noxious stimuli invariably leads to cell death. Such noxious stimuli include infectious agents (bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites), oxygen deprivation or hypoxia, and extreme environmental conditions such as heat, radiation, or exposure to ultraviolet irradiation. The resulting death is known as necrosis, a term that is usually distinguished from the other major consequence of irreversible injury, known as cell death by apoptosis. Apoptosis is a programmed or organized cell death which could be physiological or pathological. Additional information regarding this form of cell death is outside of the scope of this chapter. Necrosis as a form of cell death is almost always associated with a pathological process.

When cells die by necrosis, they exhibit two major types of microscopes or macroscopic appearance. The first is liquefactive necrosis, also known as colliquative necrosis, is characterized by partial or complete dissolution of dead tissue and transformation into a liquid, viscous mass. The loss of tissue and cellular profile occurs within hours in liquefactive necrosis. In contrast to liquefactive necrosis, coagulative necrosis, the other major pattern, is characterized by the maintenance of normal architecture of necrotic tissue for several days after cell death.

Liquefaction derives from the slimy, liquid-like nature of tissues undergoing liquefactive necrosis. This morphological appearance is attributable in part to the activities of hydrolytic enzymes which causes dissolution of cellular organelles in a cell undergoing necrosis. The enzymes responsible for liquefaction are derived from either bacterial hydrolytic enzymes or lysosomal hydrolytic enzymes.

**Other types of Necrosis**

In addition to liquefactive and coagulative necrosis, the other morphological patterns associated with cell death by necrosis are:

- Caseous Necrosis

- Fat Necrosis

- Gangrenous Necrosis

- Fibrinoid necrosis

The other types of necrosis listed above do not represent distinct pathological entities. Rather, they are descriptive terms that are widely used to describe necrosis occurring in specific clinical scenarios or organ damage.

**Coagulative**

This is the default pattern of necrosis associated with ischemia or hypoxia in every organ in the body except the brain.****

- Gross Appearance: tissue is firm and architecture is maintained for days after cell death.

- Microscopic: Preserved cell outlines without nuclei.

**Liquefactive**

The pattern of necrosis seen with infections. Also, the pattern is seen following ischemic injury in the brain. While the reason for liquefactive necrosis following ischemic injury in the brain is poorly understood, the release of digestive enzymes and constituents of neutrophils is the reason for liquefaction in infections.

- Gross Appearance: The tissue is in a  liquid form and sometimes creamy yellow because of pus formation.

- Microscopic: Inflammatory cells with numerous neutrophils.

**Caseous**

A unique type of cell death seen with tuberculosis.

- Gross Appearance: White, soft, cheesy-looking (caseating) material

- Microscopic: A uniformly eosinophilic center (necrosis) surrounded by a collar of lymphocytes and activated macrophages (giant cells, epithelioid cells). The entire structure formed in response to tuberculosis is known as a granuloma.

**Fat Necrosis**

Fat necrosis occurs from acute inflammation affecting tissues with numerous adipocytes such as pancreas and breast tissue. Damaged cells release digestive enzymes which break down lipids to generate free fatty acids.

- Gross Appearance: Whitish deposits as a result of the formation of calcium soaps.

- Microscopic: Anucleated adipocytes with deposits of calcium (Seen on H&E as areas of bluish stains).

**Fibrinoid Necrosis**

This is a pattern associated with vascular damage (autoimmunity, immune-complex deposition, infections (viruses, spirochetes, rickettsiae)).

- Gross Appearance: Usually not grossly discernible.

- Microscopic: Deposition of fibrin within blood vessels.

**Gangrenous Necrosis**

Clinical use, to describe ischemic necrosis of the lower limbs.(sometimes upper limbs or digits).

- Gross Appearance: Black skin with varying degree of putrefaction.

- Microscopic: Combination of coagulative necrosis, due to ischemia (dry gangrene); and liquefactive necrosis (wet gangrene) if a bacterial infection is superimposed.

These all represents morphological patterns which are visible grossly and microscopically. Fibrinoid necrosis is usually visible only microscopically. We discuss the characteristic gross and microscopic findings in liquefactive necrosis in subsequent paragraphs.