Over the last 50 years, many different techniques for neck-lifting/platysmaplasty have been described to rejuvenate the aging neck. Platysmaplasty is usually combined with submental liposuction and a full face-lift, if indicated. Other ancillary procedures performed along with platysmaplasty, when indicated, include supraplatysmal fat reduction, subplatysmal lipectomy, submandibular gland reduction, and partial digastric myectomy. A wide array of platysmaplasties have been described in the literature, such as the midline platysmaplasty, corset platysmaplasty, several suture techniques (plication, imbrication, overlap, suture suspension, sling platysmaplasty, and pursestring sutures), lateral platysmapexy, transverse platysma myotomy, and partial platysma myectomy.

**Anterior (Medial) Platysmaplasty**

This is the most commonly employed technique and entails midline approximation of the platysmal diastasis from the chin to the thyroid cartilage. A transverse skin crease incision is made just caudal to the submental fold, and the skin is undermined caudally to the cricoid cartilage and beyond. Next, the platysmal bands are corrected by separating the muscle in the midline and from the anterior bellies of the digastrics.

Before approximation, the redundant medial muscle borders are trimmed and sutured together without invagination or imbrication in a smooth edge-to-edge fashion (see figure). At this stage, depending on the patient, a decision is made intraoperatively whether to excise the subplatysmal fat. The anterior platysmaplasty is not ideal for treatment of excess subplatysmal fat, prominent submandibular glands, bulky anterior bellies of the digastric muscles, or 'hard' dynamic platysmal bands. When concomitant face-lift and neck-lift is performed, platysmaplasty should be performed after cheek-SMAS flap dissection and suspension, as it provides optimal correction of cheek folds and jowls when executed last.

**Lateral Platysmapexy/Platysmaplasty**

Lateral platysmapexy is performed when there is a mild horizontal redundancy of the platysma. This procedure is usually performed after medial platysmaplasty and involves the suturing of the platysma to the upper quarter of the SCM fascia. Some authors advocate anchoring the lateral border of the platysma to the preauricular platysma auricular fascia, giving a more vertical vector to the support and lift. This ensures an even, smooth neck contour and consolidates the neck-lift.

When horizontal platysmal redundancy is excessive, a postauricular transposition flap (PATF) of cheek SMAS-platysma is planned. The PATF is sutured to the mastoid fascia on both sides, and this leads to an optimal reduction of horizontal platysma redundancy even when the patient looks down. This procedure is usually combined with a face-lift and should be performed only after anterior/medial platysmaplasty has been completed.

**Corset Platysmaplasty (Feldman)**

This is a type of anterior platysmaplasty wherein the medial borders of the platysma, after trimming, are sutured with a continuous monofilament suture that is run up and down the midline neck until the desired result is obtained (see figure). Some authors prefer buried, interrupted sutures and may do this in conjunction with a full face-lift and lateral platysmapexy, depending on the indication. Performing just a corset platysmaplasty without lateral and superior support runs the risk of bringing the platysma downwards, potentially resulting in failure of the procedure.

**Hammock Platysmaplasty (Platysmal Overlap)**

Fuente del Campo first described this technique of platysma overlapping in the midline; he called it "hammock platysmaplasty." It consists of overlapping the platysma in a double-breasted fashion in the middle of the neck and provides good functional muscular reconstruction and cosmesis. It was subsequently modified by Gentile, in which he used interlacing sutures through the platysma, resulting in a medial to lateral plication.

**Pursestring Platysmaplasty**

This technique involves interlacing a suture through the platysma in a circular fashion. When the suture is tightened, the platysma inverts and folds, thereby reducing its surface area and deepening the fold just below the mandibular border, which in turn improves jawline definition. Three varieties of pursestring platysmaplasty have been described:

Type I Pursestring platysmaplasty simply involves placing interlacing sutures just below the angle of the mandible and following its border to define it further.

Type II Pursestring platysmaplasty involves overlapping sutures on the medial border of platysma, simulating a hammock platysmaplasty.

Type III Pursestring platysmaplasty – in this type, continuous interlacing sutures are placed starting from the mastoid fascia on one side to the contralateral side and back again. Initially, non-absorbable sutures were used, but now expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) and barbed sutures are often preferred.

**Suture Sling Platysmaplasty**

In this technique, after plication and suspension of the SMAS-platysma complex, a suture or broader material (ePTFE implant) may be used to offer additional intrinsic and extrinsic support. Conrad was the first to describe placing an ePTFE implant, which is used as a sling to support the submental structures, leading to a sharper, more defined CMA. This evolving cervical sling technique yields excellent and predictable results for the correction of an obtuse CMA; an added advantage is that secondary adjustments are possible for recurrent laxity of neck tissue and submental redundancy.

Recent advances include the use of absorbable bioimplants, such as polymeric ribbon suspension devices made of polylactic acid and polyglycolic acid, which are inserted using minimal incisions and used to redrape the platysma to improve neck contour.****

**Transverse Platysma Myotomy**

This technique is indicated to eliminate dynamic platysmal banding or striations that appear during conversation and with animation. Platysmal myotomy must be performed only after anterior platysmaplasty and lateral platysmapexy have been completed to ensure a uniform redraping and smooth redistribution of platysma around the neck. Platysma myotomy is usually performed low in the neck, at the level of cricoid cartilage, as at this level the muscle is thin and is less likely to bleed. Furthermore, a smooth transition to the CMA is obtained, and more importantly, lower lip weakness is avoided.

**Partial Platysma Myectomy**

Partial platysma myectomy involves the excision of a part of the platysma muscle with a full-width transection at a high mid-thyroid cartilage level. This procedure is the most effective way to restore a smooth contour in difficult necks of patients who have undergone multiple previous invasive and non-invasive skin tightening procedures, but who return with irregularities, dense subcutaneous fibrosis, muscle fibrosis, or an elderly 'skin on muscle' appearance. Such patients are refractory to the traditional platysmaplasties and will require partial platysma myectomy and secondary fat grafting at a later date.

An important point to note is that when performing a partial platysma myectomy, one must maintain a cuff of muscle posteriorly at the CMA in order to avoid injuring the marginal mandibular and cervical branches of the facial nerve.

**Final Closure and Assessment**

Once the neck-lift and/or face-lift has been completed, the final contouring of the superficial cervicofacial fat is performed. It is usually done under direct visualization using scissors. Still, it is vital to avoid over resection of fat as it can lead to a skeletonization of the neck and an unnatural result. This final fat sculpting ensures an even, smooth contour to the neck and a predictable outcome. It is followed by drain placement, which is routinely performed in all primary and secondary neck-lifts to avoid troublesome postoperative hematomas and seromas. After final confirmation of adequate hemostasis and neck contour, the submental incision is closed in two layers.

The patient's hair is washed and shampooed in the recovery room, allowed to dry, and tied; a final inspection is made of all the suture sites and drains. Typically no dressing is required, and patients are discharged the same day, prescribed oral antibiotics and analgesics for a week, advised to avoid direct sunlight for a few days, to sleep in a head-up position, and to call the surgeon's office if there is any bleeding, hematoma or infection in the wound.