The mechanism of flexor tendon lacerations, including that of FPL, is most often due to a slice injury from a knife, shards of glass, or sharp metal. Primary tendon repair refers to end-to-end reconnection of the severed tendon.

Flexor tendon injuries of the hand are divided into different zones. The thumb has 3 zones beginning distally: T1 is from the FPL tendon insertion to the A2 pulley, T2 is from the A2 pulley to the A1 pulley, and T3 is from the A1 pulley to the carpometacarpal joint.

Damage to the FPL tendon can result in either a complete or partial laceration.

Treatment of partial flexor tendon lacerations varies depending on the percentage of the tendon diameter that is compromised

**Nonoperative Management**

- Indicated in the setting of partial lacerations (less than 50% to 60% of tendon width involvement)

**Surgical repair indications**

- Greater than 75% to 80% of the tendon is lacerated

- Greater than  50 % to 60% of the tendon is lacerated with triggering

Following a complete FPL tendon laceration, the proximal tendon can retract proximally making tendon retrieval more difficult.

For zone I injuries, if the distal tendon stump is greater than 1 cm, then primary tendon repair can be performed. However, if there is less than 1 cm of distal tendon stump, then the proximal tendon must be fixed to cancellous bone to allow adequate healing.

There are numerous suture techniques used to anastomose the two tendon ends. The number of sutures within the tendon correlates directly with the strength of the tendon postoperatively. Therefore, the most commonly used core suture repair techniques involve the use of numerous strands of epitendinous suture to ensure a strong connection and smooth gliding through the flexor tendon pulley system. There are no studies that have led to a consensus standard multi-strand core suture technique.

A specific type of FPL rupture, termed Mannerfelt’s lesion, occurs within the carpal tunnel from chronic tendon attrition.