Information on PaO2 and PaCO2 gets relayed to the respiratory center as feedback impulses from central and peripheral chemoreceptors. Cells in the pre-Botzinger complex are intrinsically chemosensitive to hypoxia.

Feedback from stretch receptors of muscles, tendons, and joints pertaining to the elastic recoil of the lung and the thoracic wall will modify the respiratory rate in a way that the lung will optimize the respiratory work; maximize the gas exchange and minimize the mechanical breathing work. Such feedback impulses also get relayed by parenchymal lung receptors. The Hering-Breuer reflex prevents excessive distension of lung parenchyma; lung over-inflation stimulates parenchymal stretch receptors and via the vagus nerve, inhibits the respiratory center and also prevents the apneustic center in medulla from sending activating impulses to the respiratory center. The result of these processes is expiration.

Higher cortical centers, as stated earlier, also account for changes in respiratory rate. Alterations in respiratory rate encountered in anxiety state or even the differences in respiratory rate during sleep and non-sleep states are related to higher cortical centers. Psychological stress can result in respiratory patterns that are different from the ones produced by metabolic needs. Limbic, cortical, and forebrain regions receiving unpleasant feedback from the environment have a direct stimulatory effect on respiratory motor neurons of the spinal cord, thereby increasing ventilation.