Multiple cells play a role in liver cirrhosis, including hepatocytes and sinusoidal lining cells such as hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), sinusoidal endothelial cells (SECs), and Kupffer cells (KCs). HSCs form a part of the wall of the liver sinusoids, and their function is to store vitamin A. When these cells are exposed to inflammatory cytokines, they get activated, transform into myofibroblasts, and start depositing collagen, which results in fibrosis. SECs form the endothelial lining and are characterized by the fenestrations they make in the wall that allow the exchange of fluid and nutrients between the sinusoids and the hepatocytes.

The major cause of morbidity and mortality in cirrhotic patients is the development of portal hypertension and hyperdynamic circulation. Portal hypertension develops secondary to fibrosis and vasoregulatory changes, both intrahepatically and systematically, leading to collateral circulation formation and hyperdynamic circulation.

Intrahepatically, SECs synthesize both nitric oxide (NO) and endothelin-1 (ET-1), which act on HSCs, causing relaxation or contraction of the sinusoids, respectively, and controlling sinusoidal blood flow. In patients with cirrhosis, there is an increase in ET-1 production, as well as an increase in the sensitivity of its receptors with a decrease in NO production. This leads to increased intrahepatic vasoconstriction and resistance, initiating portal hypertension. Vascular remodeling mediated by the contractile effects of HSCs in the sinusoids augments the increase in vascular resistance. To compensate for this increase in intrahepatic pressure, collateral circulation is formed.

In systemic and splanchnic circulation, the opposite effect happens, with an increase in NO production, leading to systemic and splanchnic vasodilation and decreased systemic vascular resistance. This promotes the activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), leading to sodium and water retention and resulting in a hyperdynamic circulation. Thus, in cirrhosis with portal hypertension, there is depletion of vasodilators (predominantly NO) intrahepatically but an excess of NO extrahepatically in the splanchnic and systemic circulation, leading to sinusoidal vasoconstriction and splanchnic (systemic) vasodilation. The collaterals also contribute to the hyperdynamic circulation by increasing the venous return to the heart.