Emergency Medical Services (EMS) is the system tasked with providing rapid medical care and transport in the pre-hospital setting. Different forms of EMS have existed throughout history from the Knights Hospitaller during the middle ages to the first ambulance service in the United States in Cincinnati in 1865. The current organization of EMS in the US began after a report titled “Accidental Death and Disability” was published in 1966 by the National Academy of Sciences detailing the state of EMS in the United States and areas for improvement. The National Highway Safety Bureau, now the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, was created in 1970 as a response. Among its first actions was to create the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians to establish training and education standards for the industry.

Simulation in medical education is defined as the imitation of clinical experience. It can be used both as an educational tool and a skill assessment tool. As an educational tool, there are multiple modalities available, both high- and low-fidelity; these include the human patient simulators like the electronic adult-sized mannequins, the task trainers such as the IV arm trainer, standardized patients, or virtual or augmented reality.

Skill assessment is the evaluation of an individual to gauge their ability to perform a task. In EMS, the ultimate goal is to assess a trainee’s ability to perform a skill in the field on patients as the need arises. There are numerous methods in use to evaluate skills, including simulation. Other popular assessments include the multiple-choice question test & field observation.