The clinical presentation of cerebral edema can easily be mistaken for other issues, such as intoxication, stroke, infection, or post-ictal state.  It requires a high index of suspicion, particularly in milder cases.  In more severe cases, close neurological monitoring and consultation with neurology and neurosurgery are important.  Communication regarding indications/risks/contraindications for ICP monitoring or craniotomy needs to be ongoing, particularly with respect to goals of care.  Nursing care must pay close attention to changes in neurologic status, any change in vitals such as an increasingly erratic heart rate, development of bradycardia, accurate and equal intake and output when having diuresis, and maintenance of proper blood pressure with immediate reporting to the team leader of any significant changes.  Patients at bed rest need DVT and pressure sore prophylaxis. As the patient recovers, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech-language pathology can help the patient maximize function after the brain injury and to evaluate patient safety both before and after discharge.

Patient education regarding avoidance of future complications should come from all team members, with social work involvement to ensure home safety after discharge, and the patient's primary care provider should be updated, to the appropriate follow-up.  In cases of vasogenic edema due to brain tumor, both oncology, radiation oncology and neurosurgery should be consulted to co-manage the evaluation and management of the neoplasm, determine the best treatment for the tumor (resection/radiation/palliation) based on the tumor type/stage, and follow up with the patient after discharge.  And, finally, the patient and the patient's family and care providers should be educated about what to watch for that may suggest the need for re-evaluation because of recurrence, or complications from any of the interventions.