Electrodiagnostic studies for evaluating myopathies include nerve conduction studies (NCS) and needle EMG (EMG).

**NCS**

Routine Nerve conduction studies include sensory and motor studies, analyzing distal latencies, amplitudes, and conduction velocities for tested nerves. Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) are usually normal in disorders of muscles unless there is a superimposed sensory polyneuropathy or disorder affecting muscle and nerve simultaneously (critical illness neuropathy/myopathy, amyloidosis).  Compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) are normal in proximal myopathies but can be abnormal in distal myopathies when significant muscle atrophy is present.

**EMG**

Electromyography can be performed using a needle electrode or surface electrode.

- Only needle EMG is used for assessment of myopathy, as it allows analysis of individual MUAPs as the needle is positioned close to the muscle membrane.

- Needle electrode recording of muscle electrical activity is performed at rest and with muscle activation. The exact muscles that are studied are chosen based on the clinical picture and patient-related limitations. In myopathies, clinically weak muscles must be tested. If a muscle biopsy is considered, then search for moderately affected muscles rather than normal or severely affected muscles should be performed to identify suitable muscle biopsy targets. EMG can guide the identification of affected muscle that is not clinically apparent. In such cases, needle EMG should be performed only on one side, leaving the non-dominant side for biopsy.

- The needle electrodes have a small recording area that can pick up several motor unit action potentials. It is recommended to sample several sites in the muscle and record at least 20 MUAPs for analysis.

EMG analysis includes assessing spontaneous activity, motor unit potential configuration, and a pattern of recruitment.

**Spontaneous Activity**

There is no spontaneous activity in normal muscle, with the exclusion of potentials that could be recorded if the needle is positioned near a neuromuscular junction (end-plate noise and end-plate spikes). The most common abnormal spontaneous potentials seen in myopathic disorders include fibrillations, positive sharp waves, complex repetitive discharges, and myotonic discharges.

- Fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves are potentials that are generated by individual muscle fibers. They are usually associated with denervation but can be present in myopathies thought to be due to segmental necrosis and inflammation of the muscle fibers separating it from the end-plate zone. They have a rhythmical firing pattern, and their sound is described as a “ticking clock.”

- Complex repetitive discharges are initiated in one muscle fiber and then spread through the ephaptic transmission to neighboring muscle fibers, generating complexes of spikes that fire in a rhythmical fashion, producing sound resembling a “jackhammer.” They can be seen in chronic neuropathic and myopathic conditions.

- Myotonic discharges are also generated by individual muscle fibers and can be triggered by the movement of the needle or tapping of the muscle. They have a very distinct sound, described as a “dive bomber” sound and characterized by a typical waxing and waning change of amplitude and frequency of spontaneous spikes. Electrical myotonia can be seen with and without clinical myotonia.

**Configuration of MUAPs and Motor Unit Recruitment**

- With volitional activation, MUAPs can be recorded, and several parameters calculated, including amplitude, duration, number of phases, and firing rate. With minimal contraction, there are usually only a few motor units activated. With an increase of force, more motor units are recruited in an orderly fashion as a function of increasing firing rate. With maximal contraction, the numerous MUAPs fill the baseline, and this is called full recruitment.

- In myopathies, the number of motor units remains the same.  However, the number of normally functioning muscle fibers is reduced, causing MUAPs to become small in duration and amplitude. The asynchronous firing of affected fibers creates a polyphasic appearance. To generate force with minimal volitional contraction, many motor units are getting activated earlier than expected. This is described as an early or rapid recruitment pattern and is typical for myopathic processes.