Demographic data is essential to collect, including age, gender, ethnicity, and race. Systemic medical history is also vital to ascertain possible etiologies: history of recent illness, history of autoimmune or inflammatory disease, history of cancer or chemotherapy and/or radiation, history of systemic immunosuppression, history of prior trauma or surgery. A comprehensive review of systems may pick up on systemic autoimmune or inflammatory disease associations.

Obtain a thorough ophthalmologic history regarding blurry vision, double vision, change in outward appearance or facial symmetry, pain, light sensitivity, pain with eye movement, eyelid swelling or redness, discharge, tenderness, tearing, dryness. Consider comparing old photographs to evaluate changes in eye or eyelid position or appearance.

A complete eye exam by a trained optometrist, ophthalmologist, or oculoplastic and orbital surgeon should be performed. This includes checking visual acuity for decreased vision, pupillary light reflexes for adequate responses and the presence of a relative afferent pupillary defect (rAPD), and other signs of optic neuropathy such as color vision deficits, red light saturation, and visual field defects.

Evaluating ocular motility can provide the degree of any limitations and the presence and pattern of diplopia. It is also prudent to assess any globe malposition, especially inferiorly and medially for lacrimal gland tumors, and perform exophthalmometry to evaluate proptosis. Digital palpation of the orbit and lacrimal gland may identify masses, and there may be resistance to retropulsion of the globe if a mass is present.

Palpation of regional lymph nodes can reveal lymphadenopathy. Hypoesthesia of the first or second divisions of the trigeminal nerve should be checked to evaluate for orbital nerve compression or invasion. There may be eyelid edema, erythema, or warmth and a directly visualized enlarged and tender lacrimal gland with secondary upper lid ptosis or S-shaped lid deformity. The conjunctiva may be injected, especially overlying the area of the lacrimal gland. An intraocular exam is also needed to evaluate for signs of uveitis.