FDA-boxed warnings for tobramycin are ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and neuromuscular blockage.

**Ototoxicity**

Ototoxicity occurs from the loss of hair cells in the inner ear.

**Nephrotoxicity**

Nephrotoxicity, unlike ototoxicity, is a reversible adverse reaction. In a double-blind study completed at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, researchers noted that aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity occurred independently.

As with preventing ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity is avoidable by longer dosing intervals. Tobramycin can cause both direct nephrotoxicity (dose-related) and hypersensitivity reactions. Tobramycin activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and can cause permanent vasoconstriction in the kidneys, resulting in an oliguric state with minimal urine output. The toxic changes caused by tobramycin are observable in the proximal tubule. Vacuolation and myeloid bodies can be observed in the tubular epithelial cell lysosomes under electron microscopy. Granular casts, microscopic hematuria, and proteinuria are also often present.

Close monitoring of kidney function is crucial to minimize nephrotoxic effects.

**Neurotoxicity**

Tobramycin causes neuromuscular blockade by interfering with acetylcholine release. Patients with diseases affecting the neuromuscular junction, such as myasthenia gravis (MG), should not take aminoglycosides. This group of antibiotics can trigger or exacerbate symptoms of MG. If a patient with MG starts to deteriorate after tobramycin therapy, it is best to discontinue or reduce the dosage.

**Overdose**

Patients overdosed on tobramycin with normal renal function should be hydrated adequately to preserve urine output of 3 to 5 mL/kg/h. Fluid and electrolyte balance, creatinine clearance, and tobramycin serum concentrations should be monitored closely until the serum tobramycin concentration falls below 2 mcg/mL. Patients with a tobramycin elimination half-life exceeding 2 hours or impaired renal function may require aggressive therapy, including the potential benefit of hemodialysis. It is crucial to note that inhaled tobramycin can cause systemic toxicity in patients with renal dysfunction.