**Refraction Through a Toric Surface**

When rays of light pass through a toric surface, they undergo refraction in a configuration referred to as the conoid of Sturm. In the case of a toric surface, where the vertical meridian has a greater focusing power than the horizontal meridian, the vertical rays of light are bent more than the horizontal rays of light. These vertical rays will focus at a point closer to the toric surface than the horizontal rays. Thus, there are two lines of foci that are formed.

The separation between these two focal lines is referred to as the focal interval of Sturm. If a screen is placed at any point other than these two focal lines, the image formed on the screen will be a circle or an oval with varying dimensions.

Light images can be recorded at different points within and outside the conoid of Sturm: [see image on - Conoid of Sturm]

- At A, the vertical rays are more converging (as the vertical meridian is more curved) than the horizontal rays. The more converging the rays are, the smaller will be the image produced by them. The image obtained will be an oval with the vertical diameter being smaller than the horizontal diameter, i.e., a horizontal oval ellipse.

- At B, the vertical rays are converged to focus while the horizontal rays are still converging. A horizontal line is formed.

- At C, the vertical rays now start diverging while the horizontal rays are still converging. The amount of divergence of the vertical rays is less than the convergence of the horizontal rays. The image obtained is again a horizontal oval/ oblate ellipse.

- At D, The vertical rays are diverging and horizontal rays are converging. The amount of diverging by vertical rays equals the amount of convergence by the horizontal rays. The image obtained is a perfect circle called the circle of most minor confusion. This is sometimes called the circle of least diffusion.

- At E, the vertical rays are diverging and horizontal rays are converging. The amount of divergence by the vertical rays is more than the amount of convergence by the horizontal rays. The image formed is a vertical oval ellipse.

- At F, The vertical rays are diverging, but the horizontal rays come to focus. The image formed is a vertical line.

- At G, The vertical rays and horizontal rays are diverging. The amount of divergence of the vertical rays is more than the divergence of the horizontal rays. The image obtained is a vertical oval ellipse.