Glucagonoma should be suspected in patients with NME associated with or without the other symptoms discussed above.

- A fasting plasma glucagon level should be drawn. Fasting plasma glucagon levels are abnormally elevated usually greater than 500 pg/mL. Normal fasting plasma glucagon levels are less than 150 pg/mL. It is important to note that different glucagon assays may exhibit variable cross-reactivity with different isoforms of glucagon, not all of which (nearly 70%) are biologically active. Serial measurements should, therefore, always be performed using the same assay directed against the C-terminus.

- Serum concentrations of amino acids and zinc should be checked to evaluate the nutritional status. The laboratory abnormalities with glucagonoma can include hypoaminoacidemia (due to targeting of amino acids into metabolic pathways in the liver by excessive hyperglucagonemia) and low zinc levels.

- A complete blood count (CBC) should be obtained to check for concurrent normocytic anemia. A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) should be checked to detect other metabolic abnormalities.

- Obtaining serum parathyroid hormone, gastrin, insulin, pancreatic polypeptide, serotonin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), prolactin and ACTH levels is important as glucagonoma can rarely be associated with the MEN1 syndrome.

- Skin biopsy of the NME lesion shows small bullae consisting of acantholytic epidermal cells along with lymphocytic and neutrophilic infiltrate. The dermis contains a perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with an intact epidermis.

**Imaging Studies**

Tumor localization is typically started with a helical multiphasic contrast-enhanced CT scan.  The sensitivity of multiphasic CT scans is significantly high at greater than 80% for detecting intrapancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

MRI is performed in case of indeterminate lesions and may have a better sensitivity to detect liver metastases.

Glucagonomas express abundant somatostatin receptors as compared to other pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Hence, they are suitable for localization using somatostatin analogues like octreotide. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) was positive in 97% of glucagonoma patients, as noted in a study by Kindmark et al.

Functional PET imaging technique with DOTA peptides like DOTATATE, DOTANOC, DOTATOC could be used in the localization of non-metastatic tumors. They offer higher spatial resolution as compared to the SRS and provide higher sensitivity, particularly in the detection of smaller lesions.