Various pathological processes can compromise the functioning of explicit memory in its components.

**Alzheimer Disease (AD)**

Dementia is an acquired progressive cognitive impairment that affects the daily activity, and the single major cause of dementia is Alzheimer's disease (AD) accounting for 50 to 75 % of all cases of dementia. The majority of AD appears in a sporadic pattern and seems to result from a complex interplay between environmental and genetic factors. The two cardinal features that characterize AD are the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. The amyloid plaques are abnormally folded AB proteins that accumulate extracellularly; on the other hand, and the neurofibrillary tangles are paired helical filaments that contain hyperphosphorylated tau.Most patients with AD complain of gradual progressive impairment in explicit memory, and they may also experience behavioral change, disability, hallucinations, and even seizures. The expected death of AD patients is 8.5 years after the first presentation.

**Transient Global Amnesia (TGA)**

Transient global amnesia (TGA) is a clinical syndrome characterized by the sudden onset of temporary anterograde amnesia lasting no more than 24 hours without any other neurological deficits. TGA affects middle-aged and older adults, occurring in 3.4 to 10.4 per 100000 people. The cause and mechanism of TGA are still unclear, but some research suggests jugular vein valve incompetence as a potential mechanism.

TGA is a clinical diagnosis, relying only on a detailed history and physical examination. Patients with TGA are often brought by someone who witnessed the event because TGA patients are not aware of their problem. On physical examination, TGA patients have normal sensory, motor, and cognitive abilities except for the ability to store new information. Other diagnostic tests like EEG and imaging are not routinely performed unless an alternative diagnosis has been suspected, like epilepsy or transient ischemic attack (TIA).

There is no particular treatment for TGA, as this syndrome is self-limited and temporary. Overall, recurrent TGA is relatively uncommon, although it can happen over the years. Patients with TGA have no increase in long term risk for cerebrovascular events.