There are several things to consider before choosing an appropriate imaging modality for the wrist. A good simple rule is to start with plain radiographs for a baseline assessment. Remember to request dedicated navicular views to assess for "snuffbox" tenderness, especially with a fall on the outstretched hand (FOOSH) mechanism of injury. Further imaging decisions are influenced by the clinical symptoms and findings, both positive and negative, seen on plain film imaging. Consider the limitations of artifacts on cross-sectional imaging if retained ferromagnetic material is imaged. Plain films may give the best assessment. In the setting of advanced arthrosis (osteoarthritis or inflammatory arthropathy), advanced imaging such as MRI or CT may not change the treatment plan. In these cases, consultation with a specialist before imaging may be indicated to decrease unnecessary imaging.

An additional consideration is that of contrast allergy screening before requesting angiography. It may be appropriate to forego contrast all together or possibly pre-medicate using standard Americal College of Radiology (ACR) protocols before administering the contrast.

Screen for retained metal, cardiac pacemakers, and programmable ventriculoperitoneal shunts before ordering MRI imaging. Patients with implantable devices should be provided documentation describing the specific device (manufacturer), limitations, and imaging conditions for MRI compatibility. Just because a patient was previously scanned without complication does not indicate the device is safe and compatible for MRI imaging. All MRI protocols are not equal; on a previous scan, the device may not have been in the isocenter of the MRI scanner and thereby not exposed to the same magnetic fields and/or electrical currents. Also, while the implanted device or hardware may be MRI compatible, it may interfere with adequate imaging, and a different modality may be more appropriate.

In closing, here are a few specific wrist pathologies with suggested imaging considerations:

- Trauma, including suspected distal radius and ulna fractures - Start with plain films and consider further characterize with CT if the fracture is complex. Follow-up and postsurgical imaging can be accomplished with plain film and limited CT as needed. If the patient remains symptomatic despite conservative treatment, repeat radiographs in 10 to 14 days can help to assess for signs of osseous remodeling. Alternatively, a rapid MRI protocol (limited exam) could be performed to evaluate for occult fractures if patient management will be impacted.

- Scaphoid fracture - Always remember to request a specific scaphoid view with plain radiographs. Additional imaging with CT for boney detail, osseous alignment, and evaluation of healing progression is sometimes required. NM bone scintigraphy or MRI are both options for the assessment of occult fractures in the appropriate clinical setting. NM has the highest sensitivity for detecting occult fractures but less specificity, leading to overtreatment more often than when CT and MRI are used. MRI has the added benefit of evaluation of surrounding soft tissues and lack of exposure to ionizing radiation.

- Arthritis - Plain films can identify arthritis and degenerative changes and even differentiate inflammatory arthropathy such as rheumatoid from osteoarthritis. Serial radiographs help follow the progression of the disease. Again, CT or MRI can further characterize the processes as needed. Advanced imaging is appropriate in the assessment of early inflammatory arthropathy or osteoarthritis in young patients who may benefit from cartilage replacement procedures. CT or MRI is rarely indicated in advanced osteoarthritis.

- Scapholunate dissociation - This condition is initially identifiable with plain films and further characterized by MRI.

- Carpal dislocations - Again, plain films are used to identify the particular pathology, and CT or MRI are used to characterize the extent of ligamentous involvement and further surgical planning.

- Distal radioulnar joint dislocation or instability – Initial evaluation with radiographs to assess osseous alignment and coexistent fracture followed by MRI to assess ligamentous involvement.

- Osseous and non-osseous carpal coalition - Osseous coalitions are identifiable on plain film. If a non-osseous (fibrous) coalition is suspected, MRI or CT can better identify the presence of such findings, while MRI may identify associated soft tissue or bone marrow edema, which would support a clinical diagnosis of a symptomatic fibrous coalition.

- Kienböck disease and avascular necrosis - Serial imaging with plain film can identify and follow the progression. MRI is more sensitive and specific for early detection. NM can exclude but is not specific for the diagnosis even if the scan is positive.

- TFCC tear - As usual, a good place to start is with plain film assessment. Radiographs are helpful for the diagnosis of soft tissue mineralization such as HADD or chondrocalcinosis, which can be difficult to appreciate on MRI. Additionally, unsuspected fracture or arthritis may be identified on radiographs and thereby explain ulnar-sided pain without the need for advanced imaging. CT arthrogram or MRI with or without arthrogram can identify the presence and type of TFCC tear or identify other potential causes of ulnar-sided wrist pain such as tenosynovitis or intersection syndrome.

- Carpal tunnel syndrome - There is a dedicated plain radiograph to assess the osseous carpal tunnel, but it is limited in identifying the most pathologic causes of this process. Start with plain films, specifically requesting a carpal tunnel view, then proceed to cross-sectional imaging with CT if osseous pathology is expected or US and MRI for soft tissue evaluation. MRI or US can identify imaging findings to support the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome, such as median nerve enlargement, as well as identify important anatomic variants essential to safe surgical planning, such as a persistent median artery. Advanced imaging may also identify soft tissue causes for carpal tunnel, such as accessory muscles or soft tissue masses like ganglion cysts.

- Humpback deformity of the scaphoid - Again, this process will be evident on most plain film imaging studies (lateral view particularly) and further characterized with CT for surgical treatment planning.

- Osteomyelitis – Radiographs are relatively insensitive for early osteomyelitis however are complementary to advanced imaging. Radiographs may show periostitis or cortical destruction. Both MRI and NM imaging are more sensitive for the detection of osteomyelitis than radiographs. MRI has the advantage of being able to identify the extent of the process, coexistent septic arthrosis, and soft tissue involvement (cellulitis, fasciitis, or abscess).

- Metastasis – Osseous lesions can be identified on radiographs when there is advanced destruction; however, the infiltrative marrow-replacing process can be occult on radiographs. Soft tissue masses can soft times be appreciated on radiographs, especially if there are associated osseous remodeling/changes. CT and MRI have a higher sensitivity for the identification of metastasis and better evaluates the extent of the disease.

- Bone lesions – Radiographs help determine the presence and type of matrix present in a bone lesion (chondroid versus osteoid). Some bone lesions have a characteristic or pathognomic appearance on radiographs, and further imaging is not indicated, such as non-ossifying fibroma (NOF). As previously described, advanced imaging such as CT and MRI better evaluates the extent of disease (i.e., joint or soft tissue involvement) as well as better characterization of the lesion, thereby narrowing the differential diagnosis and allowing for the determination of indication for tissue sampling. CT and MRI also aides in surgical and biopsy planning.

"The view(s) expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or position of Brooke Army Medical Center, the US Army Medical Department, the US Army Office of the Surgeon General, the Department of the Army, the Department of the Air Force, or the Department of Defense or the US Government."