Flumazenil is for intravenous (IV) infusion. The solution is stable for 24 hours if drawn into a syringe or mixed with solutions such as D5W, LR, or NS. The administration is done by freely running IV infusion into a large vein or a series of small injections.

**Dosing: Adult**

FDA Dosage for management of benzodiazepine overdose

- The clinician should give the initial dosage of 0.2 mg IV for 30 seconds

- If the desired level of consciousness is not obtained after 30 seconds, the clinician can give an additional dose of 0.3 mg IV over 30 seconds

- May repeat doses of 0.5 mg IV over 30 seconds at 1-minute intervals to a maximum total cumulative dose of 3 mg

- Patients with partial response to 3 mg may require additional slow titration up to a total dose of 5 mg. If there is no response after administration of 5 mg, the primary cause of sedation is not benzodiazepine-related, and further treatment with Flumazenil will be ineffective.

- In reoccurrence, sedations repeat doses may be given at 20-minute intervals, not to exceed 1 mg (0.5 mg/minute) per dose or 3 mg/hour.

FDA dosage for benzodiazepine reversal when used in conscious sedation or general anesthesia

- The initial dosage of 0.2 mg IV over 15 seconds

- If the desired level of consciousness is not obtained after 45 seconds, 0.2 mg IV may be repeated at 1-minute intervals as needed. A maximum of four additional doses may be given if required.

- The maximum total cumulative dose of 1 mg

- In the reoccurrence of sedation, repeat doses may be given at 20-minute intervals, not to exceed 0.2 mg/min per dose or 3 mg/hour total.

**Dosing: Pediatric (children 1 year and older and adolescents)**

FDA dosage for benzodiazepine reversal when used in conscious sedation or general anesthesia

- The initial dose of 0.01 mg/kg given over 15 seconds (up to a maximum dose of 0.2 mg)

- If the desired level of consciousness is not obtained after 45 seconds, repeat 0.01 mg/kg (up to 0.2 mg) at 1-minute intervals as needed, up to four additional doses.

- The maximum total cumulative dose of 1 mg or 0.05 mg/kg, whichever is lower

- Mean total dose of 0.65 mg was administered during the clinical trial (range: 0.08 to 1 mg)

Hepatic dosing is necessary for patients with hepatic insufficiency.