Most patients are asymptomatic, and no treatment or management is necessary for patients with isolated PLD. For symptomatic patients, the principal aim of treatment is to reduce symptoms by decreasing cyst volume and liver size. These interventions can divide into three broad categories: medical therapy, surgical therapy, and liver transplant as a last resort.

**Medical Therapy**

There is a lack of adequate medical treatment options available for patients with PLD and are currently under investigation in clinical trials.

**Somatostatin Receptor Antagonist**

Octreotide is a somatostatin receptor antagonist that has been shown to affect patients with PLD positively. cAMP plays a vital role in the development of cell proliferation and fluid secretion. Octreotide inhibits cAMP in cystic cholangiocytes and therefore leads to decreased fluid production and cell proliferation. Clinical trials have demonstrated its success in reducing liver volume and improving patient symptoms.

**Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) Inhibitor**

mTOR is inappropriately activated in patients with PLD and is thought to be responsible for cystic epithelium proliferation. Also, it increases the synthesis and secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), leading to the growth of cystic epithelium. The mTOR inhibitor sirolimus has been demonstrated to block the disordered, unregulated proliferative response of polycystic epithelial cells.

**Vasopressin-2-receptor Antagonists**

Vasopressin-2 receptor, when stimulated, increases cAMP production and can lead to the growth and formation of cysts. Several studies have shown that using antagonists to block this receptor can slow down cyst formation and growth. One of the larger studies completed by Torres et al.

**Estrogen Receptor Antagonists**

The current belief is that estrogen plays a role in cyst growth, and as a result, the disease tends to affect women more than men. However, there have been no formal studies conducted besides anecdotal reports that look at the effects of estrogen receptor antagonists in both forms of PLD.

**Surgical Therapy**

**Percutaneous Cyst Aspiration and Sclerotherapy**

It involves aspiration of a cyst under ultrasound or CT guidance followed by injection of a sclerosing agent that leads to the destruction of the epithelial lining, inhibiting fluid production.

**Laparoscopic Cyst Fenestration**

It involves aspiration and deroofing of the cyst in a single procedure. The main advantage of the procedure that multiple cysts are treatable at the same time. Indications for this procedure are when there are a few large dominant cysts in the anterior segments of the right lobe or the left lateral segments. The main complications include post-procedure drainage, ascites, pleural effusion, arterial or venous bleeding, and bile leaks.

**Segmental Hepatic Resection**

Segmental hepatic resection merits consideration in patients whose cysts are clustered to individual segments but have enough remnant liver with normal liver parenchyma. The procedure is usually only for patients with massive hepatomegaly with severe symptoms and when liver transplantation is unwarranted.

**Liver Transplantation**

Liver transplantation is generally only for symptomatic patients where resection is not a feasible option due to diffuse cystic disease; this is also recommended in the rare scenario where there is impaired hepatic function. The current guidelines for liver transplant rely on the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD). Patients with PLD have low MELDs due to the preserved synthetic function of the liver. They can, however, achieve exception points if there is evidence of malnutrition and failure to thrive.

Patients are proposed for transplant if they have high symptomatic PLD, have failed alternative interventions, and have severe malnutrition. Severe malnutrition is defined as a serum albumin level less than 2.2 g/dL, or mid-arm circumference in the non-dominant arm of less than 23.1 cm in a female and less than 23.8 cm in a male. This patient will receive an initial MELD of 15 if their creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/minute or a score of 20 if the creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. While listed, their score increases three points every three months. Patients with ADPKD should consider evaluation for both a liver and kidney transplant. Patients receiving a liver transplant have a five-year graft survival rate of 87.5% and an overall survival rate of 92.3%.