The nerves of the arm are responsible for providing motor innervation to all of the muscles within the upper extremity.  Specifically

- The axillary nerve innervates the deltoid and teres minor.

- The musculocutaneous nerve is responsible for innervating the flexors of the arm, including the biceps brachii, coracobrachialis, and the medial aspect of the brachialis.

- The radial nerve innervates the triceps brachii, lateral aspect of the brachialis, anconeus, brachioradialis, and extensor carpi radialis longus. Through its deep branch, it innervates the extensor carpi radialis brevis and supinator. Through the posterior interosseous nerve, it innervates extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi, extensor carpi ulnaris, abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor pollicis longus, and extensor indicis.

- The ulnar nerve does not innervate any of the muscles of the arm. In the forearm, it innervates the flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial half of the flexor digitorum profundus. In the hand, it innervates the hypothenar muscles, medial two lumbricals, interossei, adductor pollicis, and the deep head of the flexor pollicis brevis via its deep branch.  It innervates palmaris brevis through its superficial branch.

- The median nerve does not innervate any of the muscles of the arm. In the forearm, it innervates the pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, and flexor digitorum superficialis. Through the anterior interosseous nerve, it innervates the flexor pollicis longus, pronator quadratus, and the lateral half of the flexor digitorum profundus. In the hand, it innervates the thenar muscles and the lateral two lumbricals.