The brachial plexus is formed from the C5 to T1 nerve roots. These roots join above the clavicle to form the superior (C5, C6), middle (C7), and inferior trunks (C8, T1). The trunks pass under and in close proximity to the clavicle; they can easily be blocked at this level. Distal to the clavicle, the trunks split into the lateral (C5 to C7), posterior (C5 to T1), and medial (C8, T1) cords, found adjacent to the axillary artery. Finally, the terminal nerve branches are formed from the cords in the axilla.

The median nerve is formed from the medial and lateral cords and is usually superficial to the axillary artery. The ulnar nerve is formed from the medial cord and is generally located lateral to the axillary artery. The radial nerve is located deep and lateral to the axillary artery. The last terminal branch, the musculocutaneous nerve, branches off from the lateral cord and pierces through the coracobrachialis in the proximal axilla.

The brachial plexus can be blocked at multiple sites for varying effects. Therefore, familiarizing oneself with multiple approaches given variant patient anatomy and indications is beneficial. The various brachial plexus blocks include:

- Interscalene

- Superior trunk, a potentially phrenic nerve-sparing alternative to the interscalene approach

- Supraclavicular

- Infraclavicular

- Traditional
- Retrograde approach (RAPTIR)

- Axillary

The interscalene block providing shoulder, arm, and forearm anesthesia is the most commonly used brachial plexus block. It is performed by injecting local anesthetic around the brachial plexus at the level of the nerve roots, which are located between the anterior and middle scalene muscles. The needle is inserted in a cephalad direction towards the neck until it contacts the bone.

The supraclavicular block provides anesthesia and analgesia to the upper extremity below the shoulder. It is an excellent choice for elbow and hand surgery. This approach involves inserting a needle into the supraclavicular fossa just lateral to the clavicle. Local anesthetic can be injected around the brachial plexus at its junction with the subclavian artery.

The infraclavicular block is used for procedures involving the lower arm and hand. This approach involves inserting a needle into a depression just medial to the scapular coracoid process, where local anesthetic can be injected around the brachial plexus at its junction with the axillary artery.

The traditional axillary block is used for procedures involving lower arm and hand nerves. This approach involves inserting a needle into the axilla in line with the humerus, where local anesthetic can be injected around the brachial plexus at its junction with the axillary artery.