Treatment of hydrazine exposures involves decontamination, supportive care, and administration of pyridoxine for neurological sequelae, especially seizures. Patients should be removed from the site of exposure to a minimum of 75 feet away. Full decontamination, including removing all clothing and copious irrigation of exposed skin and/or eyes with water for a minimum of 15 minutes.

First responders and emergency medical services at the site of hydrazine exposure should wear Level A personal protective equipment against vapors, skin, and eyes. Caustic burns to the skin should be treated similarly to soft tissue injuries and may require special management at a burn center.

Inhalational exposures to hydrazine are managed by supportive care, including supplemental oxygen and close airway observation. Delayed pulmonary edema may occur, and observation for 24 to 48 hours may be required.

Oral ingestions of hydrazines may cause caustic injury to the upper airway and gastrointestinal tract; thus, activated charcoal is not recommended in this situation. Since hydrazines are rapidly absorbed when ingested, activated charcoal administered after arrival to the emergency department may be futile. Early activated charcoal decontamination is recommended for acute isoniazid and gyromitra ingestions.

Hydrazine neurotoxicity ranging from coma and seizures has been treated successfully with pyridoxine.

For the actively seizing patient, pyridoxine may be given 0.5 g/min until the cessation of seizure or the maximum dose is reached. After seizure control, the remainder of the dose may be infused over 4 to 6 hours to maintain pyridoxine concentrations while INH is eliminated.

Methemoglobinemia should be treated with standard treatment with methylene blue.