**Improper Color Vision Recognition/Color Blindness**

Many forms of color vision recognition abnormalities are present in the population, with most having a genetic origin (congenital). Very few individuals are truly color blind, but instead, see a disrupted range of colors. The most common forms are protanopia and deuteranopia, conditions arising from loss of function of one of the cones, leading to dichromic vision. Protanopia is the loss of L cones (red) resulting in green-blue vision only. Deuteranopia is the loss of M cones (green) resulting in red-blue vision only. Both are X-linked alleles, therefore almost exclusively occurring in males, occurring with a prevalence of 1%. Loss of S cones does rarely occur in 0.01% of males and females. In these cases, one of the cones is not expressed, and physically in its place, one of the others is expressed.

Similar to above, but not as severe in its symptoms, is the condition anomalous trichromatic vision (tritanomaly), where all three cones are present but the color vision is aberrant. The two common forms, protanomaly, and deuteranomaly result in L or M cones, respectively, being replaced with a cone of intermediate spectral tuning. Both are X-linked and occur in 7% of males.

**Non-Color Vision Associated Diseases Affecting the Cones**

In addition to disorders of proper color recognition, many diseases in vision display phototransduction defects affecting many portions of the signal pathway and its regulation. Here, not only is color vision function lessened but scotopic (low-light, rod-associated) vision as well.

**Stationary Night Blindness (CSNB)**

One such disease is congenital stationary night blindness. It is a genetic defect resulting in functional cones but dysfunctional rods. In this disease, many potential culprits have been identified including abnormal rhodopsin, arrestin, rod transducin, rod phosphodiesterase, and rhodopsin kinase. Studies have demonstrated that in some populations of this disease rods are stuck permanently outputting light signal. There are currently no treatments for this disorder. In CSNB, b-waves are reduced (in CSNB type 2) or absent (in CSNB type 1) during an electroretinogram (ERG).

**Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP)**

Another disease affecting rod function is retinitis pigmentosa, which is a progressive degeneration of the retina leading to blindness, of genetic origins. Frequently, it begins in early phase as night blindness and eventually progresses to loss of vision of mid-periphery leading to the center, manifesting as tunnel vision. These clinical manifestations are associated with faulty rod functioning; if cones begin to be affected then, blindness eventually results. RP is characterized by reduced or absent A-waves and b-waves during an ERG. It has a prevalence of 1 in 3500 individuals.

**Malnutrition-Associated**

Deficiency in the essential nutrient vitamin A leads to night blindness, and can eventually lead to permanent blindness through the deterioration of the receptor outer segments.

**Experimental Therapies**

Currently, there are no FDA-approved treatments for CSNB or RP. However, there is the promise of gene-therapy interventions on the horizon. The recent completion of several phase I/II clinical trials of retinal gene therapies utilizing adeno-associated virus (AAV) have shown moderate success in preventing disease onset and progression for several years following treatment. At present, knowledge of specific abnormal phototransduction genes for a given disease is key to even minimal treatment.

**Common Reversible Causes**

**Alcoholism**has been associated with worsened scores on color blindness aptitude tests, case reports of which improved during and after hospital stays.

**Ethambutol Toxicity**(TB treatment) can result in severe red-green color blindness. Full color vision usually returns several months after stopping the drug.

**Phenytoin Toxicity**has been reported to cause long-standing but reversible loss of color vision. Typically, normal acuity does return until about a year after discontinuing the drug.

**PDE5 Inhibitors**such as**sildenafil**and**tadalafil**have been reported to rarely cause transient loss of color vision. This is thought to be due to cross-reactivity to the PDE6 present in retinal photoreceptors. In a case report, full-color acuity as demonstrated by Isahara plate tests returned 1-week post-administration.

**Obstructive jaundice**can cause transient loss of color vision which returns once the underlying jaundice is corrected. It is thought that the elevated bilirubin is the mechanism involved.

Poorly-controlled **Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)**can lead to chiasmal disease (optic neuritis) which manifests as temporal hemifield defects, decreased visual acuity as gaged by a Snellen test, and variable loss of color vision ability. Full return to baseline acuity is common with aggressive treatment of the SLE.

Acute occupational exposure to **toluene**causes reversible loss of color vision in about 25 percent of people, specifically confusion in the blue-yellow spectrum. Return to baseline typically occurs 3 days after the last exposure.