The optimal care for muscle and myocutaneous flap patients involves an experienced microsurgeon, anesthesia, and operating room staff familiar with complexities of flap surgery, nurses attentive to flap monitoring, and a facility with appropriate instrumentation and support. Preoperatively, access to CT angiogram allows for confirmation of recipient vessels and evaluation of proposed flap vascular anatomy in cases of prior surgery. Intraoperatively, communication between the anesthesia and surgical team is vital to minimize hemodynamic fluctuations and maintain paralysis. Surgical-specialty nursing can be of great benefit during the procedure, especially if they have training or experience in flap procedures.

Postoperatively, wound-management specialty-trained nurses familiar with managing flap patients are instrumental in quickly identifying flap issues that may require reintervention. With their additional training, they can be more aware of situations that may require intervention and notify the surgeon or managing physician promptly. Likewise, updating other providers, pharmacists, and therapy teams will ensure that appropriate medication and therapy restrictions are in place during the perioperative period. If physical therapy is needed, the PT should keep the entire team abreast of progress and coordinate with the nurse or physician on continued care leading to release from active care.

The use of muscular and musculocutaneous flaps in surgical interventions requires the coordination and communication of the entire interprofessional healthcare team so that the patient receives the best possible care leading to optimal results. [Level 5]