General steps may be applied when placing a splint

- Ensure adequate analgesia before splint application. This will ensure muscle relaxation and facilitate fracture reduction, if necessary.

- Ensure that any soft-tissue injuries are addressed before splint placement.

- Apply a stockinette circumferentially to the injured area. This should span both proximally and distal to the injured area, protecting the skin from irritation by the plaster or fiberglass.

- Pad bony prominences such as the elbow, knee, or calcaneus with at least 1 cm to 2 cm of soft cast padding. Soft tissue protection is essential to prevent future skin irritation or necrosis. The thickness of this padding will depend on body habitus.

- Apply 2-3 layers of cast padding (0.25 cm to 0.5 cm) circumferentially to the remaining area of immobilization.

- Reduce any fracture by restoring the bone length, rotation, and alignment. This may require radiographic confirmation before support material application.

- Activate the supportive plaster or fiberglass layers by saturating them in the water bucket. Laminate the sheets by pressing them together before application, as this increases the strength and adhesion between the layers.

- Mold the supportive material around the area of injury. The specific molding approach will depend on the type of injury; however, as a general rule, the splint should be molded to resist any deforming angulation.

- Ensure the supportive material does not circumferentially encase the injured area to accommodate any soft-tissue swelling. If there is circumferential overlap, this should be addressed by cutting the splint once the supportive material has set.

- Fold the stockinette over the plaster or fiberglass to protect the patient's skin from its sharp edges.

- Circumferentially apply an elastic bandage around the splint. This aids in the molding of the splint material to the injured area and holds the support material in place until it has hardened. Direct placement on the skin should be avoided and is a commonly observed mistake.

- Repeat the physical exam to ensure that there is no significant change in the patient's neurovascular status. Any change in the physical exam should prompt the rapid removal of the splint and reassessment.

- Counsel the patient on proper splint care and follow-up instructions.

Common upper extremity splints include:

- Coaptation splint, sugar tong splint, posterior long arm elbow splint, ulnar gutter splint, radial gutter splint, volar or dorsal short arm splint, thumb spica splint

Common lower extremity splints include:

- Posterior long leg splint, posterior short leg splint, posterior short leg splint with stirrups

These specific splinting approaches are well described elsewhere.