# Continuing Education Activity

Ixazomib, a second-generation proteasome inhibitor, is used primarily in the treatment of multiple myeloma. This activity outlines the mechanism of action, indications, and contraindications for ixazomib as a valuable agent for treating multiple myeloma. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent for members of an interprofessional team managing the care of patients with multiple myeloma and its related conditions and sequelae.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for ixazomib therapy. 
- Identify the most common adverse events associated with ixazomib therapy.
- Explain the importance of monitoring for patients on ixazomib therapy, including what factors should be monitored specifically. 
- Summarize the risks associated with initiating ixazomib and summarize key patient counseling points.

# Indications

Ixazomib is an oral proteasome inhibitor used in the treatment of multiple myeloma.

Ixazomib is also currently being studied in a phase II clinical trial involving patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.

# Mechanism of Action

Ixazomib falls under the drug class of proteasome inhibitors. It is made up of an alanine leucine dipeptide core, and it is specifically a reversible inhibitor of the 20S proteasome and also inhibits the chymotrypsin-like subunit of the proteasome.

# Administration

Patients take ixazomib by mouth; based on the drug approval study, it should be taken weekly on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle.

It is also important to keep in mind that ixazomib should be given with dexamethasone and lenalidomide, which have their specific dosing schedules within a cycle. Both ixazomib and dexamethasone are given on days 1, 8, and 15; hence it is important to separate them since ixazomib should not be taken with food, whereas dexamethasone should be.

Ixazomib should be taken either two hours after eating or one hour after eating, with a full glass of water. The drug should be taken on the same day and hour of the week, and if a dose is missed, it should only be replaced if there are more than or equal to 72 hours till the next dose.

# Adverse Effects

The most common adverse reactions seen with ixazomib are thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, rash, peripheral neuropathy, peripheral edema, and back pain. These effects occurred in more than twenty percent of patients in the TOURMALINE MM1 study, with the most common severe side effects being thrombocytopenia and diarrhea.

Different eye disorders were also seen in some patients taking ixazomib and included blurred vision, dry eyes, and conjunctivitis.

In relation to nausea and vomiting that occurs with ixazomib, it was seen primarily in the first three months of treatment during the first cycle during the drug approval study. Antiemetics were added to the regimen in some cases, and some patients also received prophylactic antiemetics. The first instance of diarrhea was also highest during the first three months of treatment, and the occurrence decreased as time went on. Antidiarrheal medications were given to some patients, loperamide being the most common. In terms of constipation that occurred in some patients, the use of opioids as a possible cause due to bone pain cannot be ruled out. Rashes that occurred using ixazomib were commonly erythematous, macular, and/or papular lesions or generalized eruptions. Like nausea and diarrhea, the emergence of rashes was highest during the first three months of treatment and was managed with antihistamines, steroids, or dose reduction.

# Contraindications

There are no specific contraindications to prescribing ixazomib; however, many warnings and precautions are necessary for patients taking this drug. For example, ixazomib should not be prescribed alongside cytochrome P3A inducers. Also, female patients should not take ixazomib during pregnancy due to the possibility of harming the fetus.

Patients should avoid pregnancy while taking ixazomib, and contraception should be used while using the drug, as well as for the ninety days following the final dose of ixazomib. This measure applies to both males and females. Furthermore, due to the unknown effects of ixazomib on breast milk, the drug should be avoided in breastfeeding women. More caution is necessary for patients with renal or hepatic impairment as higher levels of ixazomib are circulating in the blood; therefore, clinicians should reduce the dose of ixazomib is usually decreased, as was mentioned earlier. In the geriatric population, ixazomib can be dosed normally as research has shown no differences between varying age populations. On the other hand, the safety and use of ixazomib in pediatric populations are unknown.

# Monitoring

Patients on ixazomib require close monitoring. Specifically, liver function tests need to be carried out periodically due to the risk of hepatotoxicity. There have been reports of patients taking ixazomib who experienced hepatic steatosis, hepatitis cholestatic, hepatocellular injury, and drug-induced liver injury. Hence, liver function must be monitored, and dose reductions made if necessary. Similarly, patients on ixazomib should have their platelets and absolute neutrophil count monitored at least monthly due to the risk of thrombocytopenia.

During the first three cycles of treatment with ixazomib, the platelet count should be monitored weekly as drug levels will not be stable. If any adverse effects occur in regards to platelet or neutrophil count, dose modification can be considered. Do not start the medication unless ANC >1000, platelets > 75,000. Lastly, patients on ixazomib should be monitored for any signs of infection as reactivation of herpes zoster virus has been reported in some patients. To avoid this, patients should receive prophylactic antivirals while on ixazomib.

# Toxicity

Some of the toxicities involved with ixazomib include hematological and hepatic toxicities. Hematological toxicities include thrombocytopenia, which was seen primarily during the first three months of treatment in the drug approval study. Platelets usually drop after a dose of ixazomib and then rise again before the next cycle of treatment. Also, during the study, a small percentage of patients had to be taken off of ixazomib therapy due to thrombocytopenia.

Furthermore, unlike other proteasome inhibitors previously reported to cause cardiac toxicity, ixazomib is not known to cause an increase in cardiac events, toxicities, or prolonged QTc interval.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Ixazomib is currently the only oral proteasome inhibitor being used in treating multiple myeloma, so all interprofessional healthcare team members, including clinicians, specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists, should be aware of this drug, its indication, dosing, adverse event profile, potential drug-drug interactions, and requisite monitoring. Due to increasing use and the many adverse effects of ixazomib, there needs to be diligent patient monitoring by the entire interprofessional team, irrespective of their specific discipline. It is crucial to remember to monitor patients' liver function tests as well as platelet and neutrophil count. The healthcare team should coordinate their activities and share information for patients on ixazomib if they are experiencing any rashes, feeling unwell, diarrhea, and other possible adverse reactions that dose modifications or other therapeutic alterations can be made in time. This approach will permit patients to carry on with their triple therapy that includes dexamethasone and lenalidomide and optimize outcomes. [Level 5]