# Continuing Education Activity

Hip pain is a common clinical complaint and a source of disability with an incidence of 12 to 15 percent among all adults over the age of 60 years. Therapeutic hip joint injection with corticosteroids, hyaluronic acid, and plasma-rich platelets have formed the cornerstone of non-surgical management of hip pain. This activity outlines and explains the role of the fluoroscopy-guided hip joint injections, and the technique required for therapeutic hip joint injections for patients.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the steps involved in performing a hip joint injection in patients with hip pain and summarize key patient safety points.
- Describe the typical imaging findings associated with hip joint arthrography.
- Outline the importance of proper technique when performing a hip joint injection.
- Review the importance of collaboration between interprofessional team members caring for patients requiring hip joint injections, to improve clinical outcomes.

# Introduction

Hip pain is a common clinical complaint and a source of disability with an incidence of 12 to 15 percent among all adults over the age of 60 years.

The important aspects of a fluoroscopic guided hip joint injection include:

- Minimize patient discomfort

- Maintain patient safety

- Maintain proper needle technique in accessing the intraarticular joint space

# Anatomy and Physiology

The hip joint is composed of the articulation of the femoral head and the acetabulum. The femoroacetabular joint is a ball-in-socket synovial joint and is stabilized by accessory elements that include different ligament restraints.

# Indications

The indications for access to the hip joint include:

- Alleviation of pain

- Diagnostic evaluation to determine the source of pain

- Joint aspiration

# Contraindications

Absolute contraindications include, but are not limited to:

- Septic arthritis

- Cellulitis at or near the skin entrance of the injection needle

- Bacteremia

- Acute fracture

- Anaphylaxis/allergy to injected therapeutic agents

# Equipment

Equipment, including needle gauge, and pharmacotherapeutic mixtures vary institutionally and can be operator-specific. The following list includes a brief overview of possible equipment used for the described procedure.

Potential equipment for a femoroacetabular joint injection include:

- Fenestrated drape or towel drapes

- Fluoroscopy machine

- 1 milliliter (mL) to 3 mL of 1% lidocaine hydrochloride for local anesthesia

- 23-gauge spinal needle

- 2 mL to 4 mL of iodinated contrast

- For corticosteroid injections: Approximately 3 mL of a mixture of 1% lidocaine (2 mL) and triamcinolone 40 mg/mL (1 mL)

# Personnel

Personnel includes:

- Clinician performing the injection

- A radiology technologist trained in using the fluoroscopy machine

# Preparation

A thorough discussion with a patient prior to the procedure includes the following:

- A detailed explanation of the procedure

- The expected level of discomfort

- A thorough evaluation of the skin entry site

- Prior medical conditions or surgeries that might affect the procedure, to include joint prosthesis

- Potential diagnoses resulting from the procedure

- Potential complications of the procedure

Prior to beginning the fluoroscopic procedure, appropriate lead aprons are worn by all personnel involved. The patient is placed in a comfortable supine position. The patient's lower extremity is placed in either neutral position or is slightly internally rotated to around 10 degrees. Small weights can be placed lateral to both feet to limit motion and to maintain a neutral leg position throughout the procedure. A brief fluoroscopic image is obtained with a metallic marker stick overlying the lateral aspect of the femoral head-neck junction in order for the operator to visualize and plan the proposed needle trajectory. The skin is then marked at the proposed site of entry.

# Technique or Treatment

After the skin is marked, the local subcutaneous soft tissues are anesthetized with 1 mL to 3 mL of 1% lidocaine hydrochloride for local anesthesia. A 23-gauge 3.5-inch spinal needle is then used with a stylet in place with an anterior/vertical approach entry through the soft tissues until the femoral head-neck junction cortex is reached. Intermittent fluoroscopy allows for careful centering of the needle hub over the needle tip to ensure a precise perpendicular approach into the joint space. The needle is slightly retracted to avoid immediate termination within the femoral neck hyaline cartilage. The stylet is removed, and a small volume of anesthetic is then injected to ensure low-pressure intra-articular placement and anesthetization of the cortical surface. A test contrast injection with approximately 0.5 mL to 2 mL of contrast ensures that the needle does not terminate within an adjacent bursa and is truly intra-articular. A syringe containing the corticosteroid with or without a connecting tube is then attached to the 23-gauge needle, and the corticosteroid is subsequently injected into the joint.

# Complications

Complications are rare and include:

- Exacerbation of baseline pain, especially the night of the procedure which may be related to bland synovitis

- Allergic reaction

- Small vessel injury

The patient's prior imaging should be reviewed to assess for aberrant/variant anatomy.

# Clinical Significance

Hip pain is one of the most common outpatient musculoskeletal complaints with a reported prevalence of 19% for those above the age of 65 years.

Nonpharmacological therapies include low impact activity exercise regimens such as aquatic exercises.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The role of a radiology technologist is exceptionally important in helping the operator during the procedure. Patient comfort is critical in properly performing the procedure as significant patient movement can affect satisfactory targeting of the hip joint. Movement can also affect needle trajectory with a potential injury of the femoral neuro-vasculature. The technologist plays an important role in assisting in fluoroscopic image acquisition. Documentation of immediate pain relief is important for the referring provider, as this can help further manage treatment.