Angiodysplasia is usually diagnosed as an incidental finding during colonoscopy for colorectal cancer screening exams or when evaluating the patient for acute or chronic blood loss related anemia. The initial diagnostic modality depends on the characteristics of bleeding and suspicion for the location of the source. Slow bleeding from the stomach or small bowel may present as melena, while a colonic origin may present as fresh red blood per rectum. The clinician should be mindful that sometimes heavy bleeding from the upper GI tract may also show fresh blood per rectum. Evaluation of a patient should include vitals assessment to ensure hemodynamic stability. Initial investigation of complete blood count, liver function test, coagulation studies, and renal function test is usually required to know the severity of anemia and diagnose any underlying medical condition associated with bleeding such as end-stage renal disease, congenital or acquired coagulation disorders such as in cirrhosis. Because angiodysplasia is omnipresent throughout the GI tract, a combination of studies with endoscopy may be necessary.

Upper GI endoscopy and colonoscopy are common initial diagnostic tools. Angiodysplasia on direct visualization from endoscopy or colonoscopy looks like 5 to 10 mm flat cherry-red fern-like projecting vessels originating from a central artery.

Small bowel angiodysplasia as a source of obscure GI bleeding may require further evaluation with wireless video capsule endoscopy or deep bowel enteroscopy (single or double-balloon enteroscopy) if the initial workup is negative.

Radionuclide scanning images are the most sensitive radiologic diagnostic tool during active bleeding, which can detect bleeding up to 0.1 to 0.5 ml/min. It is done with two types of nuclear scans 99m Tc pertechnetate autologous red blood cell and technetium sulfur colloid. Technetium red cell scintigraphy is now commonly used because of its longer half-life allow to obtain imaging at definite time interval up to 24 hours after initial injection increasing its yield to diagnose intermittent active bleeding compared to technetium sulfur colloid test.

CT angiography and magnetic resonance angiography are also useful investigative tools to investigate further if the conventional investigation does not show bleeding sources. Helical CT angiography sensitivity and specificity are 70 and 100 percent, respectively. However, it yields more results during active bleeding, with a minimum rate of bleeding is 0.3 to 0.5 ml/min.

Angiography is usually necessary for actively bleeding unstable hemodynamically patients or patients in whom the active source of bleeding remains unidentified with conventional diagnostic methods. Angiography requires 0.5 to 1 ml/min blood loss to diagnose the active source of bleeding and also provides the benefit of therapeutic intervention at the same time.

Intraoperative enteroscopy is useful when both endoscopic and radiological investigation fails to detect the source of bleeding. It is done by inserting an endoscopy by oral, rectal, or enterotomy route during surgery. The diagnostic yield is estimated to be 60 to 88 percent. Intraoperative enteroscopy is rarely used and only done when there is no source identified in an active bleeding patient. Complication includes perforation, serosal, mesentery or vessel tears, azotemia, and prolonged ileus.