**Hepatitis A**

Administer Hepatitis A immunoglobulin to pregnant women who had contact with persons with acute hepatitis A viral infection and newborns infected during the third trimester. Newborns are to receive Hepatitis A immunoglobulin within 48 hours of birth, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control(CDC) and the American College of Pediatric Association.

There is a minimal risk of transmission of Hepatitis A virus via breastmilk. The benefit of breastfeeding greatly outweighs stopping breastfeeding. There is no contraindication to breastfeeding for mothers infected with hepatitis A.

**Hepatitis B**

Hepatitis B immunoglobulin and Hepatitis B vaccine should be administered within 12 to 24 hours of birth to all babies of Hepatitis surface antigen positive (HBsAg) mothers or those with unknown/undocumented HBsAg status. This is regardless of whether maternal antiviral therapy was administered during the pregnancy.

The implementation of this approach has reduced the risk of exposure from 90% to 5% to 10% in exposed neonates. Decreasing vertical hepatitis B virus transmission through cesarean section is not recommended as the sole indication.

Using antiviral therapy such as tenofovir, telbivudine, or lamivudine after 28 to 32 weeks of gestation in Hepatitis B virus-infected pregnant women with high viral load (>6-8 log 10 copies/mL) has been associated with less than 3% risk of transmission.

The administration of both hepatitis B immunoglobulin and Hepatitis B vaccine HBV vaccine within 12 to 24 hours of birth to reduce in utero infection has been recommended by both the European Association for the Study of Liver Disease and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM).

Fetal exposure risk has not been increased with the use of these antiviral medications during pregnancy.

**Hepatitis C**

ACOG and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM) recommend against doing cesarean section solely to reduce HCV transmission during pregnancy.

Chronic hepatitis C is treated with direct antiviral agents before pregnancy. The safety profile in pregnancy for women taking direct antiviral agents has not yet been established. Direct antiviral agents treatment is mostly deferred until postpartum.

There is no contraindication for breastfeeding in hepatitis C virus-infected mothers and infants.

**Hepatitis D**

Hepatitis D virus infection is treated with long-term alpha interferon and PEGylated interferon. These are both contraindicated during pregnancy.

Transmission of the Hepatitis D virus has largely decreased due to perinatal prevention and treatment of Hepatitis B virus infection.

**Hepatitis E**

Hepatitis E viral infection is associated with a severe disease course. Hepatitis E virus recombinant protein vaccine was noted to be effective in decreasing HEV transmission in developing countries. This is currently unavailable in developed countries. Safety and efficacy in pregnant women have not been studied.

There is no contraindication to breastfeeding in mothers infected with the hepatitis E virus.