A delay in diagnosis or prolonged usage of orthotics despite worsening deformity can eventually lead to a fixed and rigid deformity that may only be salvaged by arthrodesis.

There is a risk of tendon transfer or stabilization failure without correction of the underlying osseous deformity or with incomplete correction.

An arthrodesis is a surgical option as well, but the results have been less promising in the long term, and adjacent joint disease is a known complication in foot and ankle surgery. A study by Ward et al. evaluated long term results of surgical intervention in patients with CMT and a flexible cavovarus foot. Their intervention included plantar fasciotomy, transfer of the peroneus longus to brevis, and a first metatarsal osteotomy. The average age of the study group at the time of surgery was 15.5 years, with an average follow-up time of 41.5 years. The reconstruction cohort developed less degenerative changes in the foot and ankle and had a lower incidence of re-operation compared to historic CMT cohorts treated primarily with a triple arthrodesis.

Complications may also result from the subtle cavus foot and may include ankle instability, varus ankle arthrosis, peroneal tendon disorders, lateral foot overload including 5th metatarsal stress fractures, anteromedial ankle impingement syndromes, plantar fasciitis, claw toe deformities, and pathology may extend proximally with knee derangement as a result.

Cavovarus alignment and chronic ankle instability are also risk factors for the development of ankle joint arthritis.