The incidence of unilateral abducens nerve palsy in head trauma ranges from 1% to 3%.  Compromise of the abducens nerve results in the inability to abduct the ipsilateral eye and a partial decrease in the ability to adduct the contralateral eye. This manifests in the patient as diplopia or double vision due to the unopposed action of the medial rectus. This vision is worse at a distance, and the patient will have an esotropia on the primary gaze. Patients may also present with a head turn and/or strabismus to maintain binocularity and binocular fusion to minimize diplopia. Since some fibers cross as described above, the lack of a contralateral adduction defect makes it easy to differentiate a lesion in the abducens nucleus and before the medial longitudinal fasciculus from a lesion beyond the medial longitudinal fasciculus. On physical exam, the patient will not be able to abduct the affected eye past midline. They will also complain of worsening diplopia on attempted lateral gaze.

Damage to the abducens nerve can be caused by anything that compresses or stretches the nerve, such as tumors, aneurysms, fractures, or increased intracranial pressure (ICP). Other general causes include damage to the blood supply of the nerve (strokes), demyelinating syndromes, or infectious processes such as meningitis, or various neuropathies.

In children, damage to the abducens nerve is frequently seen as a post-viral syndrome. However, these patients should get an extensive workup to rule out neoplasm as a cause of palsy. Adults will require a less extensive workup because the most common cause of abducens nerve palsy in that population is ischemic neuropathy. In adults, common risk factors of a compromised vascular supply include older age, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. Of those, the most common cause of abducens nerve palsy is diabetic neuropathy.

Damage to the abducens nerve can result from anything that compresses it. Some causes of palsy due to compression could be a malignancy, aneurysms, or head trauma leading to nerve impingement anywhere along with its intracranial courses, such as in the middle fossa, the cavernous sinus, or the orbit itself.

Similarly, processes that cause downward pressure of the brainstem can stretch the abducens nerve along the clivus. Some of these processes include a brain tumor, hydrocephalus, pseudotumor cerebri, intracranial hemorrhage, or edema. A condition associated with bilateral abducens nerve palsy is idiopathic intracranial hypertension.

Viral or bacterial infections of the central nervous system may also damage the nerve. In fact, a lumbar puncture (LP) for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is completed to exclude meningitis in patients who have no history of diabetes or hypertension and who have a head CT scan negative for other pathology.

Treatment of a sixth nerve palsy is dependent on the underlying cause. If the cause is due to a viral infection, the palsy resolves itself over time, along with other symptoms of the viral infection. If due to a compromised vascular supply, treatment should be targeted toward minimizing the concurrent risk factors that impair microvascular circulation. If it is due to compression, surgery, chemotherapy, or other procedures to correct the cause of mass effect on the nerve. Corticosteroids can also be used to reduce nerve tissue inflammation from those underlying causes.