It is mandatory to treat odontogenic tumors in an interprofessional team approach to ensure proper treatment and outcome. The team should include an oral surgeon and head and neck surgeon with proper expertise in neck dissection. Having a plastic surgeon in the team is also important in cases when possible reconstruction might be needed. Postoperative care is crucial for optimal outcomes. Nursing staff should look after the airway make sure it is clear and patent by frequent suctioning to prevent aspiration and maintain good oxygenation.

Prophylactic measures should also be taken to avoid potential risks of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or stress ulcers. Pain team involvement in the early postoperative period can significantly improve the overall patient treatment experience. Dietitian may be needed for early postoperative care for patients struggling with oral feeding or who have been instructed not to eat to heal the surgical site. In these cases, parenteral nutrition may be considered. Speech and language therapist plays a great role the rehabilitation of surgical patients to improve their long-term outcome.

When an operation involves major resection with significant cosmetic consequences, care should be taken to involve mental health nurses to counsel these patients and provide the needed support. Although the surgical option is the main treatment in most cases, few cases may benefit from radiotherapy or chemotherapy. In such cases, the involvement of the oncology team is mandatory. All team members should keep good communication to ensure that the best possible outcome could be achieved.