History of dryness of mouth, dry skin, joint pains, family history of connective tissue disorders, is often present in cases of sicca associated with systemic diseases. History of skin lesions is present in cases of plaque secondary to herpes zoster keratitis. History of atopy, contact lens wear, or past corneal surgery may be present.

The symptoms are often present before the onset of plaque formation due to the underlying condition. For example, in sicca associated plaque, complaints of dryness and foreign body sensation are present long before the plaque formation.

The symptoms include:

- Foreign body sensation

- Blurred vision

- Dryness

- Pain

- Mucoid discharge

- Photophobia and blepharospasm

A slit-lamp examination may reveal:

- Eyelids – Blepharitis, meibomitis

- Conjunctiva – Conjunctivitis, fornix filaments, hyperemia, mucoid discharge, decreased tear film height

- Cornea – The mucous plaque may take the form of thin thread-like material (filament) attached to the corneal epithelium (filamentary keratitis), keratinization, epithelial derangement, corneal scars, decreased corneal sensations, epithelial or stromal edema, epithelial defect, mucus plaque, keratic precipitates

- Others – Mild iritis can be seen in cases associated with herpes zoster keratitis.

- Mucus plaques may vary in size and shape according to the etiology. In dry eye states, the plaques are round and small. In herpes zoster keratitis, they are large and bizarrely shaped known as dendriform plaques. The plaques may be associated with filaments in case of dry eye states.

- The plaques are semi-translucent to opaque, whitish-grey, with a dry surface and present in the horizontal median. The plaques are firmly adhered to the underlying epithelium and leave a raw surface when removed.