Following are some of the significant complications of alcoholic liver disease:

- Variceal Hemorrhage: The presentation is usually with hematemesis or melena. Management options include endoscopic band ligation, sclerotherapy, and placement of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt placement (TIPS). TIPS increases the risk of hepatic encephalopathy.

- Ascites: This is the most common complication of alcoholic liver disease in which there is an accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The patient usually presents with abdominal distension and pedal edema. It can be managed with sodium restriction, diuretics, paracentesis, and TIPS.

- Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP): It is an infection of ascitic fluid with no evidence of any other intraabdominal source (e.g., a perforated viscus) of infection. The diagnosis can be confirmed by positive ascitic fluid bacterial culture and ascitic fluid absolute neutrophil count of over 250/mm^3. The preferred antibiotic is cefotaxime, but ciprofloxacin can be an option if the patient is not able to take cefotaxime.

- Hepatorenal syndrome: This is the development of renal failure owing to advanced alcoholic liver disease after having excluded other causes of renal failure. Characteristically, it demonstrates a progressive rise in creatinine, low sodium excretion rate, oliguria, benign urinary sediment, and absence of proteinuria. Type 1 hepatorenal syndrome is a more severe type with at least a two-fold increase in creatinine in less than two weeks. It correlates with a high mortality rate. Type 2 is slower in onset and has a relatively better prognosis. Treatment for a critically ill patient includes norepinephrine and albumin. For noncritically ill patients treatment includes midodrine ( oral alpha agonist), octreotide, and albumin. The ultimate treatment is liver transplantation

- Hepatic hydrothorax: This is the presence of pleural effusion, and excludes other causes of pleural effusion. Treatment is diuretics, thoracentesis, and TIPS.

- Hepatopulmonary syndrome: It characteristically presents with elevated alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient on room air and evidence of intrapulmonary vascular abnormalities. The patient typically presents with shortness of breath and hypoxia. There is no treatment option except liver transplantation.

- Hepatic encephalopathy: It is characterized by reversible neuropsychiatric abnormalities. Treatment includes lactulose, rifaximin, and correction of precipitating factors like infection, GI bleeding, etc.

- Other rare complications are cirrhotic cardiomyopathy, hepatocellular carcinoma, portal gastropathy, portopulmonary hypertension, and portal vein thrombosis.