The clinical presentation of patients with adenocarcinoma will vary according to the primary site of involvement by the tumor and the extent of other organs involved. Obtaining a family history from the patient plays a significant role as some of the cancers are inherited. Patients can be asymptomatic or have nonspecific symptoms like unintended weight loss and other symptoms depending on the organ involvement with metastasis. The most commonly involved sites include the bones, lungs, liver, and lymph nodes which represent nearly 60 percent of the cases. The most common type of adenocarcinomas comprises breast, lung, prostate, colorectal, and pancreatic.

Adenocarcinoma of the breast may present with common symptoms like sudden onset of pain or after trauma, nipple discharge/inversion, new persistent skin changes, palpable breast mass which could be found as an incidental finding or at a routine wellness exam.

Adenocarcinoma of the lung can present with a chronic dry cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, weight loss, or as an incidental finding on routine imaging. Lung adenocarcinoma is associated with extrapulmonary features like hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, which manifests as clubbing, periostitis of long bones, and arthritis.

Adenocarcinoma of prostate patients may present with difficulty urination, weak stream, incomplete emptying of the bladder, occasionally hematuria, chronic back pain. On exam enlarged prostate, abnormal DRE exam, although this has low sensitivity and specificity.

Adenocarcinoma of the colon and rectum can present as unintentional weight loss, fatigue, generalized weakness, hematochezia, abdominal pain, bowel obstruction. Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas can present as chronic epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, jaundice, weight loss, anorexia, asthenia, steatorrhea, hepatosplenomegaly, thrombophlebitis.