The consequences of prolonged or repetitive compression may result in inflammation, fibrosis, and demyelination of the affected nerve. Compressive forces are thought to result in varying degrees of microvascular damage, which range from mild compression that obstructs venous flow resulting in congestion and edema, to severe compression, which can result in arterial ischemia. Inflammatory responses result in the production of inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6) substance P, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, bradykinin, and prostaglandins. Fibrosis can worsen the effects of mechanical compression, as it prevents the natural sliding and gliding of the nerve. Lastly, demyelination can lead to abnormalities in axonal signaling. A combination of these factors listed may produce axonal degeneration, which results in a poorer prognosis and more prolonged recovery.

According to Seddon, nerve injury can subdivide into three classifications: neuropraxia, axonotmesis, and neurotmesis. Neuropraxia is the earliest and mildest form of nerve injury in which there is only myelin sheath injury or ischemia. The axon and surrounding connective tissue are undamaged. In electrodiagnostic studies, this could demonstrate conduction slowing or block. In axonotmesis, there is an injury to both axons and the myelin sheaths with sparing of the surrounding connective tissue. This damage results in Wallerian degeneration with subsequent axonal regrowth. Prognosis with axonotmesis is variable and depends largely on the distance of the nerve to the target muscles. In the most severe form of nerve injury, neurotmesis is the complete disruption of the axon and supporting structures, without the possibility of axonal regrowth. In comparing the degrees of severity of these injuries, remyelination may take a matter of weeks, while axons regenerate at a rate of approximately 1 mm per day.