Wilderness medicine is an amalgamation of many different medical disciplines. The base medical knowledge needed for competent practice is most closely aligned with the specialties of emergency medicine and primary care. However, familiarity with many other subspecialties such as emergency medical services (EMS), expedition medicine, tactical medicine, travel medicine, and several others may be necessary depending on individual practice circumstances. With such a broad knowledge base, an agreed-upon definition of wilderness medicine has proven difficult. Most reasonable definitions center on delayed time to definitive care and limitations of available resources.

Modern wilderness medicine is a relatively new and evolving area of clinical practice. The Wilderness Medical Society (WMS) is a leading organization for promoting research and education in the field of wilderness medicine, but it has only been in existence since 1983. Several other national organizations providing wilderness medical care and education, such as the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS) and the National Ski Patrol (NSP), can trace their roots back several decades earlier. Since the early 2000s, there has been more interest from the mainstream medical community in wilderness medicine education and practice. This appears to coincide with increased participation in outdoor recreation by the general public during the same timeframe. With this increased focus, the practice of wilderness medicine has been changing. Many providers will be familiar with wilderness medicine teachings emphasizing impromptu care. Serious practitioners of wilderness medicine, however, understand that this method is inadequate when providing an organized medical response to patients in a wilderness setting. In recent years, the idea of incorporating wilderness medicine into the existing EMS structure has gained traction.

Several studies have attempted to establish the incidence of medical issues in remote settings. The majority of these studies have focused on the medical response in the national parks.