**Venous Access**

Since its introduction in the early 1990s, the CRT device implantation technique has evolved rapidly. Originally a limited thoracotomy approach was used for epicardial lead placement, but advances in left ventricular (LV) transvenous lead delivery systems have led to the entirely transvenous implanted system.

Some operators prefer combined cephalic and subclavian vein access to facilitate easy catheter manipulation and coronary sinus cannulation. This technique minimizes lead interaction and the risk of lead dislodgement during sequential lead placement. However, subclavian vein puncture carries a significant risk of pneumothorax, and it may lead to densely fibrotic tracts as the leads pass through the ligamentous tissues between the medial end of the clavicle and the first rib. And this fibrosis can potentially make percutaneous lead extraction impossible.

**CRT Leads Implantation**

In the case of CRT-D (CRT devices combined with defibrillator), three long hydrophilic guidewires are placed in the accessed vein (cephalic or subclavian). An 11Fr sheath is advanced over one of the wires to introduce a 9Fr right ventricular (RV) defibrillator lead followed by slitting of the sheath. The RV lead is then positioned at an appropriate site. After RV led positioning, two separate sheaths are advanced over each of the two retained guidewires. To avoid lead interaction, these sheaths (for the left ventricle and right atrium) are not slit until all three leads are positioned at their appropriate places.

A guide catheter is then placed via the sheath into the coronary sinus over a hydrophilic wire or deflectable catheter for the left ventricular lead placement. Coronary sinus (CS) venography can be performed via a balloon-tip catheter inserted into the guide catheter. Left ventricular lead is placed in an appropriate tributary of the CS guided by fluoroscopy. In the end, the right atrial (RA) lead is placed. Once the three leads are positioned. The sheath is slit, and the RA and RV leads are sutured onto the pectoral muscle. Finally, the guide sheath is slit, followed by slitting the short 9F sheath and suturing the CS lead onto the pectoral muscle.

In the case of CRT-P (CRT device without defibrillator), two long hydrophilic guidewires are placed in the accessed vein. A 9F sheath was advanced over one of the guidewires to position an RV pacing lead, followed by slitting of the sheath. After positioning the RV lead, two separate sheaths are advanced over each of the two guidewires. Then a guide catheter is placed for the placement of the LV lead guided by fluoroscopy. The RA lead is then placed via the remaining sheath.  Sheaths are slit, and leads are secured by suturing into the pectoral muscle.

Successful resynchronization is achieved by placement of the LV lead in an appropriate tributary of CS, preferably at the site in the proximal third to the middle third of the LV, and LV lead positioned in the apical region is associated with an unfavorable outcome.

**Difficulties in LV Lead Placement**

The inability to cannulate the coronary sinus or a preselected tributary is usually due to the tortuosity of the branch. This can be overcome by using multiple angulations to explore the anatomy and advancing the lead coaxial to the wire and the CS tributary. Different lead sizes and shapes can also be utilized to overcome this technical difficulty.  If these maneuvers are not helpful, it may be worthwhile to try double-wiring the branch with a stiff wire to help straighten it.

Lead instability is uncommon but may occur. To prevent this, a lead with a more aggressive curve or active fixation may be used. Stenting may also be used to improve lead stability. With this technique, two guidewires are placed in the venous branch, with one used to advance the pacing lead and the other used for placement of a stent, which is deployed at low pressure to secure the pacing lead.

**CRT Programming**

An individually adapted AV interval is essential to achieve maximum benefit from resynchronization. Optimized AV interval programming synchronizes atrial and ventricular contraction, maximizes the atrial contribution to left ventricular diastolic filling, and prevents presystolic mitral regurgitation. Interventricular synchrony and LV contraction can be further optimized by VV interval adjustment, although the impact of VV optimization on CRT outcome is still under debate. Non-invasive AV and VV interval optimization methods by electro- and echocardiography can be considered, although clinical outcome data does not support these methods.