Management of mechanical back strains depends on the chronicity of symptoms, the patient's comorbidities, and the specific etiology. The American College of Physicians published an updated guideline in 2017 with recommendations regarding non-invasive options for treating low back pain. First-line nonpharmacologic therapy for acute low back pain includes spinal manipulation, acupuncture, massage, and superficial heat application, while first-line pharmacologic therapy for acute low back pain is nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and muscle relaxants. According to low-quality evidence, the use of acetaminophen and systemic corticosteroids showed no improvement of acute back pain compared to placebo. There was insufficient evidence to determine the benefits of other pharmacologic agents, such as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antiepileptic medications, and opioids. According to the clinical policy by the American College of Emergency Physicians, opioids should not be routine pharmaceutical therapy but saved for those whose pain is severe or uncontrolled with other medications.

Physical therapy is an integral component in the treatment of mechanical back pain. When initial conservative measures fail, a referral is appropriate. Studies have shown that early physical therapy intervention when compared to the implementation of physical therapy after lower back pain was chronic resulted in a reduction in healthcare costs, a decrease in opioid use, and a reduction in spinal surgery rates.

For chronic low back pain, non-pharmacologic approaches were recommended as the first-line agents, including exercise, tai-chi, yoga, multidisciplinary rehabilitation, spinal manipulation, acupuncture, psychotherapy, low-level laser therapy, and electromyogram biofeedback. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were again the first-line pharmacologic agents recommended, followed by tramadol and duloxetine as the second-line treatments. Recommendations for opioid therapy are only if the previously mentioned therapies failed and based on an individualized decision to determine if the benefit outweighs the risk.

The American Pain Society also has published recommendations by a multidisciplinary panel in 2009 regarding the use of more invasive procedures for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes to treat non-radicular low back pain, radicular low back pain, and spinal stenosis. The panel emphasized the use of intensive interdisciplinary rehabilitation for chronic non-radicular low back pain, as it has similar efficacy to fusion surgery. Epidural steroid injection showed variable evidence of short-term benefit for radicular low back pain; thus, the panel recommended a shared decision-making process for the appropriate patient.

For surgical management options, standard open discectomy and microdiscectomy have a moderate short-term benefit in treating persistent, debilitating radiculopathy secondary to herniated disc disease. Similarly, decompressive laminectomy has a moderate short-term benefit in treating severe, debilitating spinal stenosis. The panel noted that these benefits tend to decrease over time, and a shared decision-making process is also appropriate in these patients before surgical intervention. Lastly, spinal cord stimulation may be an option for patients who underwent surgery for herniated disc disease but continue to have debilitating radiculopathy.