Lower extremity ulcers can pose a diagnostic dilemma. The cause of a lower extremity wound may be due to a myriad of diagnoses, including arterial or venous disease, infection, trauma, and diabetes mellitus, among other etiologies.

As a patient may present to various medical professionals, i.e., nurses, clinicians (wound care, podiatry, family medicine, etc.), home health aides, prompt communication with an interprofessional group must optimize the timeliness of diagnosis and appropriate care.

The diagnosis is often complicated and requires exhaustive studies. Even after making the diagnosis, the treatment is not straightforward. Not everyone responds to the same treatment, and one may need to try several different approaches to heal the ulcers. Patients should be provided with realistic expectations of the outcome. Irrespective of the treatment, the importance of a wound care nurse cannot be overstated. These patients need long-term wound care with daily dressing changes and regular debridement. Pain management is an issue, and a pharmacist and a pain specialist must be involved. Empirical prescription of opioid pain medications should be avoided to prevent addiction and tolerance.

Since many patients develop stress and anxiety, mental health professionals may be consulted. Patient ambulation should be encouraged to prevent dependent edema, worsening of pain, and pressure sores.

Open and effective communication is key for good patient outcomes. [Level 5]. An interprofessional approach to atrophie blanche is essential. Clinicians will likely be the ones diagnosing the condition. Nursing will be involved with history taking and preparing the patient for examination. They can also provide counseling and monitor the patient's response to pharmaceutical therapy. As always, the pharmacist should verify the clinician's agent selection and dosing, and also offer feedback regarding potential drug interactions, and report these back to the team. If there is a psychological element to the case, counseling professionals can assist and keep the team appraised of progress on that front. All these various individuals need to communicate across interprofessional lines, to ensure all members of the team have all the latest information, and together drive positive outcomes. [Level 5]