The spine consists of 33 bony vertebrae. This includes 7 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 4 coccygeal. The spinal cord runs through the vertebral canal, extending from the foramen magnum to roughly the L1 level in most adults. It is surrounded by three meningeal layers: the pia, arachnoid, and dura. Nerve roots emerge bilaterally at each vertebral level to innervate their respective dermatomes.

Epidural catheters are placed within the epidural space. The epidural space exists circumferentially between the dura mater and the ligamentum flavum, extending from the foramen magnum to the sacral hiatus. Within the epidural space lies epidural veins, fat, lymphatics, and nerve roots.

Epidural catheter placement can be performed in a sitting or lying position at the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, or sacral levels. When approaching the epidural space from a posterior midline approach, three ligaments are traversed from superficial to deep; the supraspinous ligament, the interspinous ligament, and the ligamentum flavum. The supraspinous ligament anchors the tips of each spinous process, while the interspinous ligament anchors the body of each spinous process. The ligamentum flavum anchors the laminae of each vertebra and serves as the posterior aspect of the epidural space. The ligamentum flavum is identified by its tough, gritty feeling as compared to the other layers. When approaching from a paramedian approach, only the ligamentum flavum is traversed.

Local anesthetic (LA) and adjuvants are injected into the epidural space to anesthetize the spinal nerve roots. This is believed to be the principal site of action of epidural anesthesia. Blockade of the posterior nerve root interrupts somatic and visceral sensation, while blockade of the anterior nerve root interrupts motor and autonomic function. Sympathetic outflow derives from nerve roots of the thoracolumbar region (T1-L2) levels. Interruption of this transmission from epidural anesthesia thus produces a sympathetic blockade or “sympathectomy,” possibly resulting in variable decreases of blood pressure and heart rate. Alteration to respiratory function is generally spared, given the cervical innervation of the diaphragm.

Surface landmarks can be used to approximate spinal levels. The nipple line approximates T4, the inferior border of the scapula approximates T7, and the superior aspect of the iliac crests approximates L4.