A migraine is a common headache that can last for up to 72 hours if left untreated or inappropriately treated. Nausea and/or vomiting may occur along with a migraine attack, thus affecting the patient's ability to function as usual.

Patient education is essential for successful migraine management plans.

Some pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic therapies are available for migraine prophylaxis.

If the response to triptan therapy does not achieve the desired relief of symptoms, the healthcare team should verify that the patient is taking the triptan as soon as the headache pain begins.

Even though the risk of serotonin syndrome is low in patients taking triptans alone or combined with an SSRI or SNRI, health care providers should monitor for signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome and are encouraged to report such cases to MedWatch.

The interprofessional healthcare team should provide formal counseling to patients being prescribed triptans. Patients should take the triptan as soon as the migraine starts for the best results.

Finally, a patient-centered approach is essential in migraine management for prophylactic and abortive treatment. Treatment requires individualization, and the response to treatment is reassessed for the need for change in therapy.

Appropriate use of triptans to treat migraines requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, all contributing from their specialized areas to enhance patient outcomes while limiting adverse events. [Level 5]