Placental abruption is one of the causes of vaginal bleeding in the second half of pregnancy. A focused history and physical is critical to differentiate placental abruption and other causes of vaginal bleeding. Because a definitive diagnosis of placental abruption can only be made after birth when the placenta is examined the history and physical examination are critical to the appropriate management of the maternal/fetal dyad. Placental abruption is a potentially life-threatening situation. Therefore, accurate assessment of the patient is critical to developing an appropriate management plan and to prevent a potentially poor outcome.

The history begins with a review of the prenatal course, especially placental location on prior sonograms and if there is a history of placental abruption in previous pregnancies. Exploring the woman’s behaviors, specifically whether she smokes or uses cocaine is a critical component of history. Asking about potential trauma, especially in the abdominal area needs to be done in a tactful and supportive manner. Especially in situations of partner abuse, the woman may be reluctant to reveal that she sustained trauma to her abdomen.

The most useful mechanism for recognizing the onset of placental abruption is an assessment of the patient. The physical examination includes palpation of the uterus. The uterus is palpated for tenderness, consistency, and frequency and duration of uterine contractions, if present. The vaginal area is inspected for the presence of bleeding. However, a digital examination of the cervix should be delayed until a sonogram is obtained for placental location and to rule out a placenta previa. If bleeding is present, the quantity and characteristic of the blood, as well as the presence of clots, is evaluated. Remember, the absence of vaginal bleeding does not eliminate the diagnosis of placental abruption.

Evaluation of vital signs to detect tachycardia or hypotension, which may be indicators of a concealed hemorrhage are taken. Blood specimens such as a complete blood count (CBC), fibrinogen, clotting profile, and type and RH may be collected. These laboratory values will not aid in the diagnosis of placental abruption but will provide baseline data against which to evaluate the patient’s condition over time.

Evaluation of fetal well-being is also included in the examination. Begin with auscultation of fetal heart sounds and ask about fetal movement, specifically recent changes in activity patterns. Continuous electronic fetal monitoring is initiated to identify prolonged bradycardia, decreased variability, and the presence of late decelerations.