**Eczematous cheilitis**could be a result of exogenous factors (irritant contact cheilitis, allergic cheilitis) or endogenous factors (atopic cheilitis).

**Dry, chapped lips:**Frequent exposure to hot or dry winds can cause loss of plasticity of keratin in vermillion, leading to sores and dry, scaly lips. The patient might get into the habit of chronic licking of lips to pick up scales, which further aggravates the problem.

**Allergic Contact Cheilitis:**A delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to allergens that come in contact with the lips can cause inflammation of the lips. It is also known as lipstick cheilitis since several ingredients found in lipsticks may act as irritants. The most common cosmetic sensitizers identified by patch testing include fragrances, Myroxylon pereirae, and nickel. However, some ingredients unique to lipsticks may also cause lip dermatitis. For example, castor oil, colophony, shellac, azo dyes, sesame oil, preservatives, ozonated olive oil, propolis, and copolymers. Apart from lipsticks, allergic contact cheilitis can be caused by a variety of other substances that come into contact with lips. They could be found in mouthwashes, toothpastes, and even food.

**Atopic Cheilitis:**Patients with a history of atopy or atopic dermatitis commonly have associated atopic cheilitis. It presents with dryness, erythema, scaling, and fissuring of lips.

**Angular Cheilitis:**Angular cheilitis, also known as angular stomatitis or perlèche, is an acute or chronic inflammation of the skin and adjacent labial mucosa at the angles of the mouth. It manifests as a roughly triangulararea of erythema and edema at one, or more frequently both,angles of the mouth.Candida albicans, and less commonly, Staphylococcus aureus. Poor oral hygiene, ill-fitting dentures, or absence of teeth as in the elderly can lead to excessive moisture and maceration from saliva leading to these infections. Less commonly, the nutritional deficiencies, particularly those of riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pyridoxine (B6), folate (B9), iron, and general protein malnutrition, may produce smooth, shiny, red lips associated with angular stomatitis, collectively known as cheilosis.

**Infective cheilitis:**

Viral cheilitis: It is mainly due to the herpes simplex virus, especially type 1. The primary herpes infection (herpetic gingivostomatitis) combines post-vesicular erosive and crusted cheilitis with diffuse stomatitis leading to dysphagia, perioral vesicles, fever, and cervical lymphadenopathy. Recurrence of oral herpes affects the lips in most cases. It manifests as a cluster of blisters accompanied by a burning sensation. Next, the vesicles erode to leave behind crusted erosions that resolve in a week.

Bacterial Cheilitis: The most common cause of bacterial cheilitis is infection with group A Streptococcus or Staphylococcus.

Mycotic cheilitis: Cheilitis caused by candida manifests with erythema and painful edema of the lips, sometimes with fissures, and it is usually accompanied by acute (pseudomembranous candidiasis) or chronic stomatitis, and/or angular cheilitis. The diagnosis is confirmed by taking a specimen for mycological examination.

Parasitic cheilitis: Leishmaniasis is a possible cause of cheilitis in endemic regions. It gives the appearance of an erythematous papule or plaque that gradually enlarges and then ulcerates or a permanent lip enlargement (macrocheilia).

**Actinic Cheilitis:**Actinic Cheilitis (also known as solar keratosis of the lip or actinic keratosis) originates from the proliferation of atypical epidermal keratinocytes due to chronic sun exposure. It is a premalignant condition and occasionally progresses to squamous cell carcinoma.

**Drug-induced cheilitis:**Systemic retinoids such as etretinate and isotretinoin cause dryness, erythema, scaling, and cracking of the lips (may include angles of mouth) in almost all the patients. Less frequently, it may also be caused by any other drugs that cause dryness of mouth and lip.

**Glandular cheilitis:**It is a rare, chronic inflammation with tumefaction and sometimes suppuration of salivary glands at the lower lip. The most common clinical form is the simple cheilitis glandularis, which manifests as a moderate thickening of the lower lip with inflammatory dilated gland duct orifices, from which mucous saliva can be squeezed easily.

**Cheilitis granulomatosis:**Cheilitis granulomatosis is a persistent, idiopathic, nontender granulomatous inflammation of one or both lips. The initial manifestation is sudden diffuse or nodular swellings involving the upper lip, the lower lip, and one or both cheeks in decreasing incidence. Early attacks cause edema of lips that usually subsides in days to hours; however, recurrent attacks may lead to a persistent increase in swelling, leading to firm, rubber-like consistency of lips. The complete form of Melkersson Rosenthal syndrome combines cheilitis granulomatosis, peripheral facial paralysis, and a fissured tongue with loss of taste sensation.