Diagnosis of adult T cell leukemia requires a comprehensive history review in conjunction with laboratory and pathologic survey. ATL is diagnosed mainly in patients from HTLV-1-endemic areas, e.g., Southwestern Japan, the Caribbean area, and South America, sub-Saharan Africa, and some regions of the Middle East and Australo-Melanesia.

In the acute and chronic leukemic phase, the white blood cell count may increase with circulating atypical cells. The peripheral blood smear may show condensed chromatin with a convoluted or polylobated nucleus, often called a “flower cell” or “cloverleaf” that is pathognomonic for ATL.

Many other cytologic variants can be observed, such as large cells, anaplastic cells, and Sézary-like cells. Overall, the recommended panel should include CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8, CD25, and CD30 for the diagnosis.

An excisional lymph node biopsy, skin biopsy, and GI tract biopsy in conjunction with flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry (IHC) are helpful for the diagnosis. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy may also be needed for diagnosis and staging. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), paired box 5 (PAX5), and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) are negative in the lymphoma subtype of ATL. A high level of Ki-67 proliferation index is associated with aggressive ATL.

In a clinical setting, evaluation should always include a complete cell blood count with differential, peripheral blood smear, LDH, a TLS panel, including uric acid, phosphate, calcium, potassium, and creatinine levels, and a serum concentration of soluble interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor. The screening for Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency should also be considered before proceeding to TLS treatment with rasburicase. HIV and hepatitis panel should also be sent. All patients with newly diagnosed aggressive ATL should have a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing as a part of the initial workup.

All patients with aggressive ATL should receive imaging tests to evaluate the extent of lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, organ infiltration, and skeletal involvement. Either computed tomography (CT) with contrast or positron-emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) should be included as part of the workup; however, treatment should not be delayed solely to obtain PET-CT. CT scan or MRI of the brain and lumbar puncture should also be considered to evaluate the central nervous system involvement by ATL cells or opportunistic infection, especially for aggressive ATL.