Physostigmine is a tertiary amine and a reversible cholinergic medication that was most commonly used to manage and treat antimuscarinic toxicity and glaucoma. It is no longer available. **This article is for historical purposes.**Physostigmine originates from the Calabar bean, widely found in the African tropics, and is a highly toxic parasympathomimetic alkaloid.

Physostigmine salicylate has FDA approval for use in treating glaucoma and the treatment of anticholinergic toxicity. It is useful to treat the effects of anticholinergic toxicity on the central nervous system due to its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier.

Concerning the treatment of glaucoma, physostigmine increases the levels of acetylcholine available for the ciliary muscle of the eye to contract. This increase results in increased aqueous humor flow and a decrease in intraocular pressure. Due to its increased side effects, medications with fewer side effects are preferable for the treatment of glaucoma.

Recent studies have examined the use of physostigmine in systemic inflammation, sepsis, and nerve gas exposure. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled monocentric pilot trial performed between 2015 and 2017 with 20 enrolled patients looked at the effects of physostigmine in patients following intra-abdominal infections leading to septic shock. There was no statistical significance in the outcome between the two groups of placebo (0.9% sodium chloride) and physostigmine salicylate. The research found treatment with physostigmine salicylate to be feasible and safe. Future research looking at a large sample size is necessary to assess the effects of physostigmine on recovery from septic shock.

A study published in 2018 proposed using physostigmine-loaded liposomes to protect against nerve gas exposure. Nerve gas commonly affects acetylcholinesterase by amplifying its action. Physostigmine can reversibly bind to acetylcholinesterase and block the effects of nerve gas. Liposomes were used in this study to prolong the half-life of physostigmine, which usually has a half-life of 23 minutes.