Sebaceous glands are located in the mid-dermis and almost always develop alongside a hair follicle, with an outlet emptying into the follicular canal. This association is known as the pilosebaceous unit. A small number of sebaceous glands known as Meibomian glands open directly onto the skin in the epithelium of the eyelid and help to enhance the lubricating properties of tears.

The embryological development of the sebaceous gland lies in the process of ingrowth of ectodermal cells into the mesoderm. By weeks 13 to 15 of fetal life, the sebaceous gland can distinctly be visualized differentiating in a cephalocaudal sequence, in association with the hair follicle. At 17 weeks, lipid drops become visible at the center of the gland. The developing common excretory duct, which will serve as a focal point of attachment for the sebaceous gland acini, begins as a solid cord-like structure. The sebum-filled cells comprising the cord eventually rupture and form a channel that becomes the first pilosebaceous canal. The ductal opening of the sebaceous gland into the hair follicle is an important anatomical boundary; between this opening and the arrector pili muscle lies the bulge region of the hair follicle, a vital source of local stem cells. Interestingly, sebum is demonstrably the first glandular product made by the body. Sebaceous gland activity increases a few hours after birth and peaks during the first week of life, declining until the next peak during adrenarche (around nine years of age) until about 18 years of age. The approximate number of sebaceous glands generally remains constant throughout life, but their size tends to increase with age, especially during adolescence.