Ancillary testing such as x-rays and laboratory work is indicated only as dictated by the clinical picture rather than by routine. They are dependent on the need to search for further injury, especially in patients with major burns, associated trauma, or inhalation injury. Patients presenting from a structure fire, industrial site, and those with electrical injury will need special attention. After the primary survey is complete, any further imaging necessary to the secondary survey should be conducted in a search for occult trauma and inhalation injury. Significant burns or associated multi-trauma, baseline laboratory work, and aggressive imaging, including CT scanning, are appropriate.

Deleterious systemic effects of inhaled gases are primarily from carbon monoxide and cyanide. Evaluation for carbon monoxide is easily accomplished with CO-pulse oximetry when available and venous blood gas when not. The diagnosis of cyanide toxicity is a little more difficult. Clinically, the patient will demonstrate some mental status changes and a poor response to fluid resuscitation. A persistent lactic acidosis and carboxyhemoglobin concentrations greater than 10% in these patients should prompt treatment. Administration of hydroxocobalamin is a safe treatment with fewer side effects than sodium thiosulfate or sodium nitrite.

Evaluation of electrical burns deserves special note as an external appearance can be quite benign, yet due to the path of the current, the patient can have significant occult injuries, including fractures, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac arrhythmia, and compartment syndrome.

Patients should be X-rayed aggressively for occult fracture after a good exam. Facial burns due to electricity can cause significant contractures and underlying tissue damage. Of note are oral commissure burns and children from biting through electrical cords. The path of the current through the body is not necessarily a straight line, and it depends on the various tissue resistances making the evaluation less certain. Lightning strikes are rare, have a highly variable presentation, and can have delayed onset of symptoms. Injuries can occur both from the electrical current and from the trauma associated with the strike itself. A good head and neck exam are essential in these patients, particularly of the tympanic membranes and corneas.