An organized stroke protocol is highly recommended to expedite evaluation. The door-to-needle time of 60 minutes is recommended for acute ischemic strokes for patients who qualify for thrombolytics.

The initial evaluation of any patient is airway, breathing, circulation, and vital signs. Patients may present with respiratory abnormalities from elevated intracranial pressure and are at risk of aspiration and asphyxiation. Endotracheal intubation may be necessary to ensure adequate oxygenation and ventilation.

A fingerstick glucose check should be performed, as it is an easy way of ruling out hypoglycemia as a cause of neurological abnormalities.

A plain CT head or brain MRI is recommended for patients within 20 minutes of presentation to rule out hemorrhage. In hospitals that are stroke centers or can provide emergency care, vascular imaging should be considered for possible endovascular intervention; however, this should not delay the administration of thrombolytics.

Acute ischemic stroke can be seen on diffusion-weighted MR sequence. The FLAIR sequence helps in predicting the time since the onset of the stroke which is of paramount importance in planning thrombolytic therapy in the patient. The DWI features with no changes in the FLAIR sequence suggest the ischemic stroke is less than 6 hours old and therefore a candidate for early intravenous thrombolysis to revert the neurological deficit.

Other diagnostic tests include an electrocardiogram (ECG), troponin, complete blood count, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (Cr), and coagulation factors. An ECG and troponin are suggested because stroke is often associated with coronary artery disease. A complete blood count can look for anemia or suggest infection. Electrolyte abnormalities should be corrected. BUN and Cr should be monitored as contrast studies may worsen kidney function. Coagulation factors, including PTT, PT, and INR, should also be done as the elevated levels can suggest a cause of hemorrhagic stroke.

For institutions without expert imaging interpretation, the US Food and Drug Administration highly recommends the teleradiology system for image interpretation for suspected stroke patients. This helps with the decision to administer IV alteplase. A discussion and agreement between telestroke neurologists and radiologists are highly recommended.

In areas that do not have an in-house stroke team or telestroke protocol, a telephone consultation may be considered for the administration of thrombolytics. The level of evidence is limited for this recommendation.