This article will focus on the manifestations of neurosyphilis; however, patients will likely have a history of syphilis and its associated symptoms, which is discussed in StatPearls - Syphilis.

Neurosyphilis exists in five forms, which may be further classified as early and late neurosyphilis.

**Early Neurosyphilis**

**Asymptomatic Neurosyphilis (ANS)**

- It is the most common form and occurs before symptomatic syphilis develops.

- Patients are unaware that they are affected and have no signs of neurological disease.

- It is defined by the presence of CSF abnormalities in a patient with serological evidence of syphilis but no neurological symptoms.

- Prior to penicillin, the diagnosis of ANS was significant in predicting the prognosis and outcomes of patients regarding the neurological sequelae of syphilis.

**Meningeal**

- This results from diffuse inflammation of the meninges.

- Typical meningeal symptoms include headache, nausea, vomiting, neck stiffness, photophobia, cranial nerve deficits, and possibly seizures.

**Meningovascular**

- This is defined as the inflammation of the meninges, as well as endarteritis causing thrombosis and infarction of cerebral tissue.

- Early symptoms are nonspecific and include headache, nausea, vomiting, and vertigo.

- It causes cerebral vascular syndrome, and the symptoms depend on the site of thrombosis and the corresponding cerebral functions.

- Spinal cord vessels may also be affected, resulting in meningomyelitis and spastic weakness (particularly in the lower extremities), sensory loss, and muscular atrophy.

**Late Neurosyphilis (Parenchymal)**

**General Paresis (general paralysis of the insane, paralytic dementia)**

- It is due to chronic meningoencephalitis resulting in cerebral atrophy.

- Symptoms of paretic neurosyphilis can be further divided into early and late symptoms and can occur insidiously or suddenly.

- Early symptoms include mood disturbances such as irritability, personality changes, changes in sleep habits, and forgetfulness.

- Late symptoms include labile mood, memory and judgment impairment, confusion, delusions, and seizures.

- Psychiatric disease including depression, delirium, mania, and psychosis can also result.

- Neurologically the clinician may see pupillary abnormalities, dysarthria, and tremors.

**Tabes Dorsalis**

- It results from the degeneration of the posterior (dorsal) column and roots of the spinal cord.

- Classically patients have ataxia, lightning (lancinating) pains, bladder dysfunction, paresthesias, and vision changes

- Additional neurologic deficits include pupillary abnormalities (Argyll Robertson pupils), ocular palsies, diminished reflexes, vibratory and proprioceptive impairments, ocular palsies, and Charcot joints.