Blood investigations: Complete blood count, serum glucose, total protein, triglycerides, albumin, and LDH are done routinely.

Imaging: A chest radiograph may show pleural effusion. Usually, it is unilateral in up to 78% of patients, and it involves the right hemithorax more commonly.

The varied course of the thoracic duct and its site of leak dictates the side of pleural effusion. Hence, injury to the duct below the 5th thoracic vertebrae results in pleural effusion on the right side, and damage above this level occurs in a left-sided pleural effusion.

Suspicion should arise when a pleural effusion is recurrent or persistent, more so when it is milky, turbid, or serosanguinous on aspiration. However, the classically described appearance of milky or opalescent aspirate is not universal and is seen in only up to 50% of patients with a thoracic duct leak.

Pleural fluid analysis: Fluid appearance should be noted. The white cell count typically has a lymphocyte predominance with a nucleated cell count greater than 70%. Also, lymphocytes found would be a polyclonal population of T cells.

Electrolyte and protein content is similar to the plasma. LDH content is usually low, and a high level signifies a malignant etiology. Glucose levels are similar to plasma, and a level less than 60 mg/dL, indicates either an infection or a malignant pleural effusion. Triglyceride levels >110mg/dL and cholesterol <200 mg/dL is typically found in patients suspected to have chylothorax. A triglyceride level >240 mg/dL has a sensitivity and specificity of >95%.

The definitive diagnostic test is the detection of chylomicrons in the fluid by lipoprotein electrophoresis, though not performed routinely due to its high expense and availability. Chylomicrons can also be detected by cytological analysis of the obtained fluid with Sudan III, although this is a sensitive test but not specific. Hence it is usually combined with fluid analysis to increase its accuracy.

After confirming the presence of chylothorax, patients require additional evaluation to find the etiology for the leak, and that includes computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen. Though at times, CT may not provide the site of the leak and also in the presence of thoracic duct anomalies, CT may not yield much information. Lymphangiography is a dye study where a dye (methylene blue) is injected in the subcutis of digits and is carried by the pedal lymphatics into the central system. Also, lipiodol contrast can be injected into the lymphatic vessel, and the probable site of the leak and anatomical variation can be visualized using fluoroscopy.

Lymphoscintigraphy is the injection of a technetium 99-labeled agent into the dorsum of the foot bilaterally. Later, imaging is done with single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT)/CT, which gives a good visualization of the thoracic duct.

Recent studies suggest that near-infra-red fluorescence is nonionizing imaging and an easy-to-use method to detect thoracic duct leaks in open surgery or thoracoscopic interventions. Yet, no application to percutaneous sclerotherapy has been described, and hence it can also be a useful tool for percutaneous sclerotherapy.