Studies show a median postoperative hospitalization stay of 8 days, a success rate of 95%, and a complication rate of 18.2%.

To prevent complications in the postoperative period, the anastomosis must be allowed to heal in a tension-free setting with continuous neck flexion. Methods to maintain neck flexion include the guardian stitch, mechanical ventilation with paralytics, neck brace, and posterior neck plaster splint. However, these were all found to increase hospital stay and morbidity.

Restenosis can present in up to 10% of patients and is the most common complication of tracheal resection, possibly due to granulation tissue development at the suture line or inadequate resection of initial stenosis. Symptoms may take several months to manifest, so frequent monitoring with flexible bronchoscopy is recommended. Early restenosis can be treated with balloon dilation, budesonide inhalers, a corticosteroid injection into the granulation tissue, or mitomycin C or corticosteroid-coated drug-eluting stents.

Wound dehiscence is a rare (<1%), but deadly complication that often occurs in the anterior tracheal wall where the tension is highest and can present with an air leak and subcutaneous emphysema of the neck. An immediate investigation is required, and flexible bronchoscopy is used to locate the area of dehiscence. Small dehiscences can be treated with voice rest, neck flexion, antibiotics, nasogastric tube feeding, and possible reintubation with cuff distal to the anastomosis.

Laryngeal edema is more common in patients undergoing cricotracheal resection (5%) and can persist for 1-2 weeks postoperatively.

Wound infection can present with erythema, drainage, and increased pain. Treatment involves a culture of the wound, antibiotics, CT to assess for extraluminal air and fluid collection, and bronchoscopy for anastomotic dehiscence evaluation.

Tracheoinnominate fistula occurs when the anterior anastomosis is dehisced, causing inflammation and erosion into the innominate artery. The cardinal sign is a small episode of hemoptysis, which usually precedes a major life-threatening bleed. Small episodes of hemoptysis should be evaluated with a CT angiogram, and major hemoptysis requires a return to the operation room with ligation of the innominate artery.

Tracheoesophageal fistula occurs when the posterior anastomosis is dehisced, causing inflammation and erosion into the esophagus. Signs include post-prandial cough and pneumonia. Barium swallow and bronchoscopy are used to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment involves tracheostomy, nasogastric tube feeding, revision of anastomosis, and two-layer closure of the esophageal defect.

Other complications include recurrent laryngeal nerve injury (2%), myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis, and prolonged hospitalization.

Johnson et al. performed an analysis of 126 adult patients who underwent cervical tracheoplasty, intrathoracic tracheoplasty, or excision of tracheal stenosis and anastomosis as the principle procedures using the American College of Surgeon National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQUIP) from 2014 to 2016.