Within the oral cavity, about 1 to 5% of oral cavity malignancies are located on the hard palate.

**Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)**is the most common malignancy in the oral cavity. Although the incidence of SCC of the palate is lower compared to other subsites, SCC remains the most common malignant lesion in the hard palate accounting for 2% of all head and neck SCC, with a predilection for male patients in their 6th decade.

**Minor salivary gland tumors (MSGT)**are the most common neoplasms found in the hard palate with malignancy rates ranging from 40 to 82%.

**Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC)**is the most common salivary gland malignancy seen in the palate, accounting for 17.7% of all malignant salivary gland tumors.

**Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC)**is the most common salivary gland malignancy. The minor salivary glands of the hard palate are the 2nd most common location for MEC following the parotid gland.

**Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA)**accounts for 19% to 26% of minor salivary gland malignancies.

**Low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma (LGPA)**is a rare oral minor salivary gland tumor that has a predilection for the hard palate in patients in the 4th to 5th decade.

**Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC)**is a rare tumor found in 2.91% of minor salivary glands tumors in the palate.

**Mucosal melanomas (MM)**can present in the mucus membranes in the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tract and comprises of only 0.8% to 3.7% of all melanoma cases.

**Kaposi sarcoma (KS)**most often involve cutaneous lesions and can involve the mucus membrane in the oral and gastrointestinal tract in up to 50% of all cases.

**Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)**is the 7th most common cancer in the USA and can present in extra-nodal tissue in 25% to 40% of cases.