rThe catabolic process begins when proteolytic enzymes are released in zymogen form from the gastrointestinal mucosa. Once secreted, zymogens are cleaved into active proteases. Pepsin from the gastric mucosa hydrolyzes the larger polypeptide into smaller polypeptides that can later be broken down further by the pancreatic proteases released in the duodenum. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidases synthesized by the exocrine pancreas can cleave the polypeptide at specific cleavage points into amino acids and oligopeptides. Aminopeptidases located on the brush border of intestinal epithelial cells hydrolyze the remaining oligopeptides into amino acids that then absorb into circulation through transmembrane transport systems. Both facilitated and active transport mechanisms exist to transport amino acids into the cells.

Protein catabolism is a vital part of cellular turnover. When cytosolic proteins such as signaling or structural peptides are no longer needed, they must be broken down in lysosomes to create new proteins that can carry out necessary metabolic functions. If the resulting amino acids are not used to synthesize new proteins for vital intracellular functions, they can enter the citric acid cycle for energy generation. When programmed death is the cell's fate, cathepsins and other catabolic enzymes work together in the apoptotic process.

Gastric Peptidases: Chief cells in the gastric mucosa secrete pepsinogen.

Pancreatic and Intestinal Peptidases: The exocrine pancreas secretes a variety of digestive enzymes, including amylase, lipase, colipase, bicarbonate, and inactive proteases. The bicarbonate released into the intestinal lumen raises the pH and allows the pancreatic proteases to become activated from their zymogen form. One particular protease, trypsin, is the most important to the digestive process because it cleaves proteins on its own and also activates other proteases from their inactive forms. Trypsin is cleaved from its proenzyme form trypsinogen by enteropeptidase. Trypsin then continues on to activate chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, and procarboxypeptidases into chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidases, respectively.

Elastase, also a serine protease, breaks down elastin and also proteins with small hydrophobic side chains such as glycine or alanine. Pancreatic acinar cells release two forms of elastase, with elastase II having a broader specificity than elastase I.

Intracellular protein turnover: proteins within the cell also undergo catabolism to replenish the intracellular amino acid pool. While all proteins have a half-life, some degrade within minutes and some within hours or days. Some examples of heavily synthesized and degraded proteins are muscle cell proteins, hemoglobin, gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and proteolytic enzymes themselves. Many of these proteins are broken down by lysosomal proteases so that their amino acid constituents are usable for rebuilding proteins whose needs depend on the current physiological status of the cell. For example, in starvation periods, the amino acids released from muscle protein catabolism can funnel into gluconeogenesis and act as an energy source. In a fed state or during metabolic acidosis, Glutamine can be a fuel for the renal system. Skeletal muscle can absorb alanine, aspartate, and glutamate, and through transamination, form useful Krebs cycle intermediates.