The WHO has classified the clinical signs in Xerophthalmia as the following:

**Night Blindness**

Night blindness or defective vision in dim light is the earliest clinical manifestation of Vitamin A deficiency. It is considered to be both a sensitive and specific indicator for serum retinol levels.

**Conjunctival Xerosis (X1A)**

Conjunctival xerosis is characterized by a dull and dry appearance of the conjunctiva and even abnormal conjunctival impression cytology. Changes in the tissue proteins of the epithelium are thought to be the primary cause, with the loss of goblet cells and insufficient mucin secretion contributing to the changes described above.

**Bitot Spots (X1B)**

Bitot's spots are whitish, opaque deposits on the palpebral conjunctiva, usually the interpalpebral area. It is seen more commonly in the temporal conjunctiva. A  Bitot's spot is a collection of desquamated, keratinized epithelial cells characteristically seen as a raised area over the conjunctiva.

**Corneal Xerosis (X2)**

Corneal xerosis is characterized by a dry, hazy appearance of the cornea. It may start as superficial, punctate epithelial lesions. This stage quickly progresses to the stage of corneal melting or keratomalacia. Up to this stage, high-dose Vitamin A supplementation can result in the full preservation of vision.

**Corneal Ulceration and Keratomalacia (X3A and X3B)**

Keratomalacia is characterized by liquefaction of part or whole of the cornea. Corneal softening is characterized pathologically by colliquative necrosis.

**Corneal Scar (XS)**

Corneal scarring due to Vitamin A deficiency is often bilateral and may be accompanied by severe protein-energy malnutrition, diarrhea, or respiratory infection. Other causes of corneal scarring have to be ruled out.

**Xerophthalmic Fundus (XF)**

This fundus change is seen in prolonged Vitamin A deficiency, where functional retinal changes are followed by structural changes in the retina.