The goals of managing dermatomyositis are focused on treating muscle weakness, skin disease, and addressing any other underlying complications.

The first-line treatment of muscle disease in dermatomyositis is systemic glucocorticoids with or without immunosuppressants. Although there is no standard systemic steroid regimen specified for dermatomyositis, the general principles of therapy are the same. Initially, prednisolone is given at high doses for the first few months until the muscle enzyme levels decline, and muscle strength improves. During this time, patients should be regularly evaluated for an adequate response, keeping in mind that it takes approximately six weeks for muscle enzymes to normalize. Also, it may require as long as three months for muscle weakness to improve. Once an adequate response occurs, the administration of systemic steroids is gradually tapered off over time. The total duration of therapy with systemic steroids usually spans between nine and twelve months. It is important to note that administering high dose glucocorticoids for more than six weeks may lead to glucocorticoid myopathy.

A failure to respond to initial treatment with systemic steroids should prompt the physician to exclude other causes of myopathy. These may include hypothyroidism, inclusion body myositis, glucocorticoid myopathy, or underlying malignancy. Once alternate diagnoses are ruled out, steroid-sparing immunosuppressants can be added.

Immuno-suppressants help to alleviate the adverse effects of long-term systemic steroids. Such adverse effects could include osteoporosis, increased susceptibility to infections, cushingoid features, and secondary diabetes. Immunosuppressant administration can be initiated along with steroids in cases of severe myopathy, chronic medical conditions (e.g., diabetes), and profound extra-muscular complications (e.g., interstitial lung disease, esophageal dysfunction). First-line agents include azathioprine and methotrexate. The choice of immunosuppressant depends on many factors, including dosing frequency, systemic involvement, adverse effects, and alcohol use. Administration of an immuno-suppressant such as azathioprine is preferred in patients with liver involvement, interstitial lung disease, and those who are unable to abstain from alcohol. On the other hand, methotrexate has the advantage of once-a-week dosing.

Patients who do not respond satisfactorily to therapy with steroids and azathioprine or methotrexate are considered resistant. Treatment options for resistant cases include rituximab, mycophenolate mofetil, calcineurin inhibitors, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), and cyclophosphamide. Rituximab is an anti-CD 20 agent and is the recommended first-line agent in resistant cases. If this fails, intravenous immunoglobulin or a combination of azathioprine and methotrexate can be used as second-line therapy. Mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus are useful in refractory cases, especially if there is a concomitant interstitial lung disease. Cyclophosphamide is preferred in cases of rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease.

It is essential to monitor patients for any adverse effects of immunosuppressants. For example, patients on methotrexate should be monitored for stomatitis, hepatotoxicity, and leucopenia. Cotreatment with folic acid or leucovorin can help to minimize these adverse effects. Azathioprine can cause a flu-like reaction, which may require discontinuation of therapy. It also causes myelosuppression and pancreatitis. Cyclophosphamide increases the risk of malignancy and should be avoided unless multiple drug therapies have failed.

Skin disease in dermatomyositis is managed with general measures, physiotherapy, and medical therapy. These measures should include sun-protective measures, such as sunlight avoidance, the use of sun-protective clothing and sunscreen with sun protective factor (SPF) of 30 or higher. Pruritis due to skin disease can be disabling and can be managed by employing local agents (pramoxine, menthol, camphor) or oral drugs (e.g., sedating antihistamines, amitriptyline, gabapentin). Medical therapy for skin disease includes topical agents and systemic medications. Topical agents include corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors. Most patients end up requiring systemic drugs to control skin disease. The most commonly used systemic agents to treat skin disease are hydroxychloroquine and methotrexate. Although systemic glucocorticoids can control muscle disease, they are not effective in controlling skin disease.

Calcinosis, which occurs more frequently in juvenile dermatomyositis, can be managed with calcium channel blockers such as diltiazem. In some cases, surgical removal of calcinotic nodules may be indicated.

Physical therapy and rehabilitation play an essential role in management. Patients with mild disease should be encouraged to participate in active exercise programs. Range of motion exercises can help in preventing contractures. Patients with esophageal dysfunction may require consultation with speech therapy and may also require measures to prevent aspiration. Anti-aspiration measures include elevation of the head off the bed, thickening of feeds, and even feeding via gastric tubes when indicated.

Anti-resorptive therapy may be indicated in patients on long term systemic corticosteroids in order to prevent osteoporosis. Patients on high dose systemic glucocorticoids or immunosuppressants should be considered for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis Jirovecii with trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole. Lastly, all patients should receive the appropriate immunizations prior to receiving immunosuppressants.