Abciximab is the Fab antibody fragment of chimeric human-murine monoclonal antibody 7E3. This medication inhibits platelet aggregation by reversibly binding to platelet IIb/IIIa receptors, which in turn results in steric hindrance. It prevents the binding of fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, and other aggregation-promoting molecules during clot formation. A second action that has not been a focus of research is the impact of abciximab binding onto the Mac-1 integrin receptor on activated monocytes. Inhibition is the result in a dose-dependent fashion, which produces an environment similar to the autosomal recessive disease Glanzmann thrombasthenia, which is marked by an inherent decrease in GPIIB-IIa receptors on the surface of the platelet. Laboratory findings in this condition include an increased bleeding time with no change in platelet count, PT, or PTT.  Do not confuse this with the pathogenesis of Von Willebrand disease or Bernard-Soulier syndrome. These are diseases of platelet adhesion, in contrast to Glanzmann thrombasthenia, which is a disorder of platelet aggregation. Clopidogrel and ticagrelor are drugs that decrease platelet aggregation and are useful in preventing ischemic stroke. Platelet adhesion is a commonly mistaken mechanism for abciximab. Abciximab produces its effect over a short half-life of approximately 30 minutes, allowing its use as a short-term platelet aggregation inhibitor on the way to the cath lab for PCI. The free plasma concentrations of abciximab decrease rapidly. There is an initial half-life of fewer than 10 minutes. The second phase half-life is about 30 minutes. Its effects on platelets last for 48 hours after administration and can still have effects for up to 15 days after administration.