For the two different types of implantation procedures the general procedural technique is as follows:

**Orthotopic Heart Transplantation**

This is a much more commonly utilized procedure. The recipient's heart is excised except for the cuffs of the right and left atria. The donor's heart is transplanted by anastomosing the donor, and recipient right atrium to right atrial cuff left atrium to left atrial cuff, aorta, and pulmonary artery (PA). This is followed by a bicaval technique whereby the recipient's right atrium is fully excised, and the recipient's vena cava is anastomosed to the donor's right atrium.

**Heterotopic Heart Transplantation**

This is rare, and only a handful of procedures have been performed worldwide. The recipient's heart is not excised, and the donor's heart is transplanted into the patient's thoracic cavity. Anastomosis is made between the donor and recipient atria. The donor aorta is anastomosed to the recipient aorta, and the donor PA is anastomosed to the recipient PA.

A detailed description of the orthotopic heart transplant is described below.

**Recipient Heart Excision**

Excision begins with opening the chest with sternotomy and pericardiotomy. Aorta and pulmonary veins are separated, and superior and inferior vena cavae are mobilized and secured with tapes. Heparinization is initiated, and the aortic cannula is inserted into the aorta after appropriate activated coagulation time (ACT) is achieved. Superior vena cava (SVC) is cannulated with right-angled cannula located proximal to tape snare well above the cavo-atrial junction. Inferior vena cava (IVC) is cannulated with a straight cannula via purse-string above the diaphragm reflection.

With the donor heart 10 to 15 minutes from arrival, cardiopulmonary bypass is started at a temperature of 32 degrees celsius (hypothermia). The left atrium is excised at the junction of the right superior pulmonary vein, which decompresses the left heart. This incision is extended in both directions. The SVC is divided into the cavo-atrial junction. The right atrium is excised above the IVC tape snare leaving behind the right atrial cuff. Both aorta and then pulmonary artery are excised just above the valves. This leaves a good length of the distal vessel. In the end, the incision of the left atrium is extended medially and downwards into the appendage hence excising it. Both atrial incisions are joined, which forms a large cuff made of four pulmonary veins, and the heart is excised.

**The Donor's Heart**

Donor heart excision begins with joining pulmonary veins and then trimming the left atrial cuff, so it corresponds to that of the recipient. The mitral valve is inspected and the foramen ovale to determine if it is patent or closed. The great vessels, including the aorta and pulmonary artery, are excised.

**Reperfusion and Completion**

The great vessels are unclamped, hence reperfusing the heart. The heart is reperfused for at least 30 minutes as the rewarming process continues. De-airing is also performed to decompress the ventricles. The patient is slowly weaned off the bypass. Once off bypass, mediastinal drains (two) are placed, and protamine administered to reverse heparin. The chest is closed in a standard fashion.

Careful monitoring and post-operative care and instructions to minimize post-operative wound infections are required. In general, a re-visit to a cardiothoracic surgeon for suture and drain removal in four to six weeks is required.