A history and physical must be completed in a systematic form. One must always remember all components of a complete history and physical examination.

History involves the following:

1. History of Presenting Illness: location, pain - if so intensity, quality, onset, precipitating factors, alleviating factors

2. Review of Systems: This should include a system-based review of all organ systems, including constitutional systems (fever, chills, night sweats, changes in weight, fatigue).

3. Past Medical History: It is imperative to know the patient's previous medical history, as this could clue into the reason for lymphadenopathy (i.e., HIV/AIDs, remote history of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma)

4. Medications: Some medications can cause reversible lymphadenopathy (i.e., cephalosporins, phenytoin

5. Social History: It is vital to know living conditions, chemical exposures, use of alcohol, tobacco, recreational drugs, pets, animal exposures, recent travel

6. Sexual History: It is pertinent to know the number of sexual partners, sexually active with males, females, or both; use of protection, history of sexually transmitted infections, and partners with known sexually transmitted infections

7. Surgical History: Inquire about which surgeries and when they occurred, how soon the lymphadenopathy occurred (i.e., post-operative lymphadenopathy)

8. Family History: It is imperative to know if a family history exists of cancer

Physical examination involves the following:

1. Vital signs: Temperature, Blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation are all of significance to help determine if the patient is hemodynamically stable. This can help differentiate sepsis from benign conditions.

2. A head-to-toe exam must to conducted including inspection of the head, ears, nose, throat, and thyroid gland. Auscultation of lungs, heart, and palpation for splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. A thorough inspection should be done of the skin, palpating when necessary, looking for rashes, lesions, nodules.

3. When palpating lymphadenopathy, one must keep in mind location, size, firmness, and pain.

- Location:

- Anterior cervical lymph nodes are superior and inferior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Posterior cervical lymph nodes are posterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
- One should also inspect for supraclavicular, axillary, and inguinal lymphadenopathy bilaterally.
- Local lymphadenopathy suggests a more localized disease as compared to widespread lymphadenopathy.

- Size:

- Cervical lymph nodes and axillary nodes are atypical if > 1 cm, as compared to supraclavicular > 0.5 cm, and inguinal nodes >1.5 cm.

- Firmness:

- Generally, if a lymph node is readily mobile, it is less concerning for a malignant condition.

- Pain:

- Pain can be a sign of inflammation, an acute reaction to an infection, and is less concerning for a malignant process.