Essential tremor most often affects the hands and arms bilaterally and is symmetric, but cases of asymmetric essential tremor have also been reported. In cases of asymmetric essential tremor, the tremor was more severe in the non-dominant arm. It can also affect the head and voice and, uncommonly, the face, legs, and trunk. It varies from a low amplitude, high-frequency postural tremor of the hands to a much larger amplitude, a tremor that is activated by particular postures and actions. In most cases, the tremor frequency of essential tremor is 6 to 12 Hz. essential tremor becomes apparent in the arms when they are held outstretched; it typically increases at the end of goal-directed movements such as drinking from a glass or finger-to-nose testing. Amplitude tends to increase with age, while frequency tends to decrease with age. Although there are large variations in tremor amplitude and disability among patients with essential tremor, it is a disabling condition for a substantial proportion of affected individuals. A number of reports suggest that functional disability in essential tremor is associated with the amplitude of kinetic tremor in the upper limbs. Some patients with essential tremor develop enhanced physiologic tremor due to anxiety or other adrenergic mechanisms, thereby aggravating the underlying tremor. On a physical exam, essential tremor can be elicited during examination under 2 circumstances: with the arms suspended against gravity in a fixed posture and during goal-directed activity. Essential tremor is usually relieved by small amounts of alcohol (60% to 70%) but, in contrast with physiologic tremor, is not usually aggravated by caffeine. In some cases, additional cerebellar signs can be found, like abnormal tandem walking and mild ataxia.

A tremor in the legs is unusual with essential tremor. Parkinsonian tremor is more likely if the resting tremor is present in the legs. A tremor of the neck may be vertical ("yes-yes") near 25%  or horizontal ("no-no") near 75% and is usually associated with a tremor of the hand or voice. A tremor of the head rarely occurs in isolation in essential tremor. When it does, the possibility of cervical dystonia with dystonic head tremor should be considered.

Also, preliminary studies suggest that very mild cognitive deficits with reduced performance on tests of memory and frontal executive function may be more common in patients with essential tremor than age-matched controls and that essential tremor may be associated with an increased risk of dementia and Parkinson disease.