To better understand how teeth function, one must understand the mechanics of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ). The TMJ is located where the mandible articulates with the skull, directly in front of the auditory canal. Numerous muscles and ligaments guide and control the TMJ, but at the most basic level, the mandible has two possible movements; rotation and translation. When the mouth initially opens, the mandible will rotate and then slide forward at a certain point to allow further opening, which is called translating. This translational movement occurs by two joint spaces within the joint and a cartilaginous disc between them, making it a ginglymoarthrodial joint; it both hinges and slides.

These mechanics translate to the relationship of the arches to one another. The lower jaw can protrude and move side-to-side (i.e., laterally). Together, the range of these movements is called the envelope of occlusion.

Occlusion is the term for how teeth fit together and interlock. In proper occlusion, the maxillary arch and teeth sit slightly anterior to the mandibular arch and teeth. In a transverse dimension, the maxillary teeth sit more lateral than the mandibular teeth. Correct occlusion is essential for the primary function of teeth, as a tight meshwork allows for efficient mastication. When this fitment is not ideal, it is called malocclusion, discussed in a later section.

The concept of the envelope of occlusion helps us understand how the teeth should function physiologically. When a patient bites together so that the teeth touch in a normal position (an excellent cue to help patients do this is to ask them to bite on their back teeth) and then slides the lower jaw forward slowly, one will note that the front teeth slide against each other, but the back teeth open and no longer touch. This is called anterior guidance and is an important secondary function of the anterior teeth (the incisors and canines). This function minimizes shear forces on the posterior teeth.

From the same starting position with normal occlusion, if one, again keeping the teeth together, slides the lower jaw to one side, one will note that the teeth on the ipsilateral side touch, but the teeth on the contralateral side do not. In some people, only the canines touch here. Again, this is a function to help prevent shear forces in excursive or sideways movements.

Beyond mastication, teeth have an essential role in phonation. For example, when a fricative sound is made, like saying the letter F, one will note that the maxillary incisors rest against or close to the vermillion border of the lower lip.

Finally, teeth, like bones, also participate in mineral exchange. The tooth's inner layers, closest to the circulatory supply and pulp, are most active in this regard, although the enamel may exchange minerals with saliva.