The concept of universal screening for thyroid disease in pregnancy has been a point of controversy. While professional obstetric societies recommend targeted screening for thyroid disease in those who are at high risk for thyroid dysfunction, there are some arguments for universal screening. Thyroid function tests are relatively low cost. If all pregnant women are screened for thyroid disease at the initial prenatal visit, many cases of both overt hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism can be diagnosed earlier. This allows for earlier intervention to optimize thyroid hormone levels to decrease maternal and fetal risks.

Without universal screening, all members of the health care team should be aware of the symptoms of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy to know when to screen for thyroid disease. Providers, provider's assistants, nurse practitioners, nurses, and medical assistants should all know how to take a history that includes previously diagnosed thyroid disease, including any thyroid procedures.

Primary care providers and endocrinologists should inquire whether a patient with Grave disease is planning future pregnancies. This allows the patient to optimize their thyroid hormone levels with appropriate medication and to get adequate counseling during the preconception period, as it is recommended to postpone conceptions until the patient is euthyroid and stable.

Neonatology should be made aware of following neonates born to women with Grave disease for signs and symptoms of transient hyperthyroidism or neonatal Grave disease due to TRAbs that crossed the placenta before birth.