# Continuing Education Activity

Latex comes from a sap found in rubber trees, Hevea brasiliensis, which is used to make many products used today. It is allergenic and causes symptoms ranging from a rash to anaphylaxis. All members of the healthcare team have a role to play in preventing the exacerbation or triggering of a latex allergy in patients. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and prevention of latex allergies and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of latex allergy.
- Review the evaluation of latex allergy.
- Outline the treatment and prevention options available for latex allergy.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to enhance the care of latex allergy.

# Introduction

Latex comes from a sap found in rubber trees, Hevea brasiliensis, which is used to make many products we use today.

# Etiology

Individuals in health care, including clinicians, nurses, and dentists and those who work with chemicals or in labs, wear gloves more frequently than the general public. Many medical items contain latex besides gloves and include:

- Stethoscopes

- Catheters

- IV tubing

- Tourniquets

- Electrode pads

- Syringes

- Respirators

- Dental dams

- Drainage tubes

- Condoms

This increased exposure to latex puts them at risk for sensitization initially and ultimately, a latex allergy if sensitization continues. Direct exposure to the allergen through the use of gloves, condoms, or catheters is the most common cause of latex allergy with a direct correlation of sensitization to the amount of exposure.

Airborne particles are another source of allergen exposure as latex can be inhaled into the lungs. Cornstarch particles in latex gloves and tire dust are the most common sources of inhaled particles resulting in latex reactions.

# Epidemiology

There have been varying reports of the prevalence of latex allergy among the general population. Latex allergy affects 1 to 2 percent of the population, and one study showed that latex sensitization is more likely in healthcare workers exposed to latex compared to the general population. Clinical manifestation, however, was approximately the same in both healthcare workers and the general population.

Epidemiologic studies have shown that a specific patient population such as those with spina bifida are at increased risk of developing a latex allergy with the prevalence of spina bifida hypersensitivity ranging from 20% to 65%.

# Pathophysiology

Latex has several modes of entry, including direct contact with the skin, entrance through mucous membranes or intravenously, or inhalation of latex powder through the lungs. A true latex allergy will result in a type I hypersensitivity reaction mediated by IgE antibodies that bind to the allergenic proteins. The binding causes the release of histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and kinins from mast cells and basophils, resulting in an immune response. Within minutes of exposure to latex, the patient may experience hives, wheezing, runny nose, and conjunctivitis.

# History and Physical

A thorough history and physical is necessary for the identification of patients with a latex allergy. Patients likely to have symptoms are those with repeated exposure in health care or those in labs, specific food allergies, spina bifida, and frequent surgeries or procedures as a child. Latex allergy, however, can often be mistaken with an irritant or allergic contact dermatitis. Irritant contact dermatitis will result in erythema of the skin, whereas allergic contact dermatitis is due to a delayed-type IV hypersensitivity reaction. Patients with allergic dermatitis will also develop erythema, but will also have pruritus and urticaria after exposure; this is not a true latex allergy, and using non-latex products could still result in the same reaction.

A true latex allergy will result in a type I immediate hypersensitivity reaction. This reaction will also result in itchy skin and urticaria, but could also present with angioedema, asthma, and systemic reactions, including anaphylaxis.

# Evaluation

Latex allergy diagnosis begins with a thorough history with a correlation of physical signs and symptoms. There are, however, several diagnostic tests, including serum testing and the skin prick test. The most common serum testing worldwide detects bound IgE using an enzymatic reagent in an in-vitro assay. However, results had significant false positives.

# Treatment / Management

The most crucial step in managing patients who are susceptible to latex allergy is to determine individuals at high risk through history and physical. After the determination of patients at risk for latex allergy, prevention of exposure is essential. However, if the individual is exposed and symptomatic, treatment is necessary depending on the type of reaction. If it is due to irritant dermatitis, removal of the latex and cleansing of the area is the first step. The application of topical steroids is used to reduce inflammation, and evaluation from a dermatologist is recommended. Delayed type IV hypersensitivity reactions have the same treatment, although the recommendation is to obtain testing for serum IgE as well. Patients with an immediate type I systemic reaction should have the exposure removed and undergo monitoring and treatment for life-threatening conditions. Management should begin with screening for high-risk individuals and the prevention of exposure. There are alternatives to latex such as neoprene, polyvinyl chloride, silicone, and vinyl and the introduction of powder and latex-free gloves have significantly reduced the prevalence of latex allergies.

# Differential Diagnosis

Irritant contact dermatitis can present similarly to a latex allergy and can be mistaken for an allergic reaction when it is, in fact, a nonimmunologic reaction. This type of reaction is due to friction or contact with chemicals resulting in irritated skin. Individuals with these reactions do not have a true latex allergy and may not develop a response to latex. These patients will need a protective barrier for their skin and do not necessarily need to avoid latex exposure.

# Prognosis

There is currently no cure for latex sensitization or allergic reactions. Symptoms such as skin irritation are readily treatable with steroid creams, but prevention is the mainstay in decreasing the incidence of latex allergies.

# Complications

Patients who have more frequent exposure or have had heavy sensitization to latex have a higher risk of anaphylaxis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Education is crucial for the prevention of allergic reactions. Patients require information regarding foods likely to cause cross-reactions with latex sensitivity and any products that contain latex. It is also important to notify any members of the healthcare team involved with caring for the patient that there is an allergy. Patients must receive alternatives to latex products, and proper compliance will result in decreased risk of reactions.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Prevention is crucial in good outcomes for patients with latex allergy. Because of the widespread allergy to latex in the healthcare environment, there is now an interprofessional team that sets policies on purchasing latex-free products and assists with the management of latex-sensitive patients.

Ancillary staff, technicians, nurses, and clinicians involved in caring for the patient are the first line in the prevention of incidental exposure to latex for the patient on admission to the hospital. If they have symptoms, an allergist and immunologist will help determine if there are sensitization and a true latex allergy.

Elimination of latex products has been shown to reduce the problem with a marked reduction in healthcare costs. Nurses are often the first to see patients and should be taught to determine the presence of latex allergy in the patient's history, which enables healthcare workers to provide a latex-free environment. Lastly, if there are persistent symptoms, a dermatologist could be consulted to aid in the treatment.