The obvious finding in a patient with a cryptorchid testis is the lack of a palpable scrotal testicle. This is usually accompanied by an inguinal hernia and a decreased degree of scrotal rugae or ridges. A careful examination should be made of the entire inguinal and pelvic area as well as the contralateral testicle. Normal rugae and a testicle sometimes noted in the scrotum is a retractile testicle that does not require further treatment.

Signs and symptoms of undescended testicles include the following:

**Infertility**

There are multiple reasons for reduced fertility in men with cryptorchidism. One would be hyperthermia as the intrascrotal temperature is several degrees cooler than ectopic positions which would result in impaired spermatogenesis. Various anatomical abnormalities are associated with undescended testis such as testis-epididymal disjunction. There may be an inadvertent injury to the vas, epididymis, or testis during orchiopexy. There is a higher incidence of anti-sperm antibodies in infertile patients with a history of cryptorchidism.

Men with undescended testes tend to have reduced fertility, even after orchiopexy.

- About 10% to 30% of unilateral cryptorchid testicle patients will develop infertility.

- Azoospermia is found in 13% of unilateral undescended testicle patients.

- Azoospermia increases to about 90% in bilateral cryptorchid patients who are left untreated.

- The reduction in fertility after orchiopexy for bilateral cryptorchidism is at least about 38%.

- This is the basis for the universal recommendation for early surgery due to degeneration of spermatogenic tissue and reduced spermatogonia counts after the second year of life in patients with untreated, undescended testes.

**Psychological Consequences**

Boys with undescended testicles are not more likely to be gender-disordered, effeminate, or pre-homosexual. When the family dynamics are destructive to male self-esteem, disturbed self-image may occur. When cryptorchism is surgically corrected, healthy masculinity generally occurs.

**Cancer**

Overall, the risk of testicular cancer if orchiopexy is done before puberty is about three times that of the general population. It is 5 to 6 times higher when orchiopexy is done after puberty. The risk of cancer does not seem to be different when orchiopexy is done early in infancy compared to later in childhood.

- The most common type of testicular cancer in untreated undescended testes is seminoma.

- The peak age range for this tumor is 15 to 45 years.

- In contrast, after orchiopexy, seminomas represent only 30% of testicular tumors in previously undescended testes.

- Testicular cancer is quite treatable if caught early, so boys who had an orchiopexy as infants should be taught testicular self-examination to assist with early cancer detection.

- Self-examination is particularly important for all males with a history of undescended testes starting right after puberty.