There are many supplies necessary in preparation for rapid sequence intubation

-  Endotracheal tube with an inflatable cuff with sterile lubricant

-  Laryngoscope handle and blades

-  Suction x2

-  Bag valve mask

-  End-tidal carbon dioxide monitor

-  Induction agents

-  Tracheal tube inducer (bougie)

-  Supraglottic airway such as laryngeal mask airway

-  Video-assisted laryngoscopy

-  Pulse oximetry

-  IV access

-  Push dose pressors

Before initiating the procedure, the clinician should make sure that the lighting in the room is adequate. The clinician should test the lighting source on the laryngoscope and test the inflation of the endotracheal tube. An easily viewed pulse oximeter should be available.

**Endotracheal Tube Size:**

Generally, a 7.0 to 7.5 mm internal diameter size tube should be placed in a female patient, and a 7.5 to 8.0 mm tube should be placed in a male. Smaller tube sizes are not adequately large enough to perform a bronchoscopy if it becomes necessary.

**Blade Selection:**

The most commonly used laryngoscope blades are the Macintosh and Miller blades. The Macintosh blade has a curved spatula used to approximate the curvature of the tongue and move the epiglottis, mandible, hyoid bone, and other soft tissues out of the view of the glottis. A Macintosh 3 has a 13-cm blade and fits most average-sized adults. A Macintosh 4 blade is 15.5-cm and allows the practitioner a longer blade to utilize if necessary. The Macintosh blade should be placed inside the vallecula at the base of the tongue. A Miller blade is flat and designed to go over the epiglottis to reveal the vocal cords.

SEE MEDIA ITEM 1

**Induction Agents:**

An in-depth discussion on the agents used to induce and paralyze patients undergoing RSI is outside the scope of this article.  However, below are two charts of the frequently used induction and paralytic agents and their differing characteristics.

SEE MEDIA ITEM 5