The expression of enkephalins and their target opioid receptors have a wide distribution throughout the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems, multiple organ systems, as well as endocrine tissues and their target organs. The various effects of enkephalins are best understood by considering a small sample of these experimentally studied systems. The extensive literature on enkephalins physiological effects includes but is not limited to its role in analgesia, angiogenesis, blood pressure regulation, embryonic development, feeding, hypoxia, limbic system modulation (emotional conditions), memory processes, neuroprotection, peristalsis, pancreatic secretion, wound repair, respiratory control, and hepatoprotective mechanisms.

**Analgesia**

High concentrations of opioid receptors are present in the PAG, locus coeruleus, the rostral ventral medulla, and the substantia gelatinosa of the dorsal horn. Activation of mu-opioid receptors in the midbrain causes descending inhibition of the PAG and nucleus reticular paragigantocellularis. This inhibitory signal becomes further propagated to 5-hydroxytryptamine and enkephalin-containing neurons that connect with the dorsal horn and can ultimately inhibit or reduce the transmission of nociceptive stimuli to the CNS.

**Stress Response Regulation**

In response to stress, organisms release Corticotropin-Releasing Factor (CRF), which, in turn, stimulates the production of catecholamines while simultaneously producing endogenous opioids, including enkephalins and endorphins. The postulate is that the endogenous opioid system serves to regulate the intensity and duration of the stress response via multiple mechanisms. Enkephalin, for instance, has been found to modulate the release of CRF from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.

**Peristalsis**

Enkephalins and endogenous opioids slow gastrointestinal motility by altering neuronal excitability. The main effect occurs by inhibiting K+ and Ca2+ channels, which hyperpolarizes the cell and ultimately prevents conductance of an action potential and the resulting release of neurotransmitter required for gut motility.