Management of BPES is complex and requires a multidisciplinary/interprofessional approach, including—a pediatric ophthalmologist, oculoplastic surgeon, pediatrician, endocrinologist, gynecologist, nurses, and genetic counselor. Ophthalmologists play a unique role in educating fellow clinicians and healthcare professionals about the possibility of amblyopia and its visual implications if gone unrecognized.

Genetic information is complex, and genetic counselors are essential in educating families and patients on test results. The decision to pursue genetic testing is very personal, particularly for female patients. FOXL2 gene mutation analysis is primarily for identifying future fertility status. Genetic counselors can lead one-on-one counseling to families regarding unexpected test results and discussions regarding reproductive choices. The Clinical Genetics Society recommends postponing genetic testing for disorders with purely reproductive implications until the individual is of age or maturity to understand the implications of the test and make their own informed decision about testing.

Endocrinologists and gynecologists are essential in the interprofessional approach to treating these patients. Individuals with BPES type I should be referred to an endocrinologist to address hormone replacement therapy. Low estrogen levels at a young age increase the risk of osteoporosis, heart disease, and depression. Women with POF cannot get pregnant naturally but can carry a pregnancy with in vitro fertilization with donor oocytes. Patients should be referred to a gynecologist or infertility specialist to discuss reproductive treatments. Ensuring patients understand reproductive biology and therapeutic options can help them cope with this emotionally distressing condition.