The patients with an aortic arch aneurysm can remain asymptomatic or present with non-specific complaints of vague chest pain, dysphagia, or raspy voice; there is a high possibility of this condition to go undiagnosed, which can prove fatal due to its life-threatening complications. This entails that clinicians must be sensitized about the diagnostic possibility of this condition and the risk factors associated with it. The radiologist plays a vital role not only in diagnosing but also in the monitoring of this condition.

Chest X-ray finding of the widened mediastinum and enlarged aortic contour can have a myriad of differentials and calls for ruling out this condition, whereas the rate of expansion, being the most important predictor of rupture, is monitored on the regular imaging by a radiologist. Recognizing risk factors and counseling about lifestyle modification along with the need for compliance of medical therapy further enforces the requirement for interprofessional responsibilities. The nurses, also being vital members of the interprofessional group, will assist with the education of the patient and family and will also monitor the patient's signs to look for impending complications like rupture or leak. Cardiothoracic and vascular surgeons need to coordinate with the treating physicians as making a timely decision about the operative requirement can prolong patient survival. In the postoperative period, for pain and wound infection, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics and appropriate antibiotics.

Outcomes of the condition depend on its timely diagnosis and intervention to prevent complications.