The goal of treatment is no seizure and no side effects or acceptable side effects. Antiepileptic medications are the mainstay of treatment, but other approaches are available for refractory seizures.

**Medications**

Except for ethosuximide, all other currently available AEDs can be used in the treatment of complex partial seizures. The choice of medication depends on the patient's preference, comorbid conditions, drug interactions, and side effect profile of the drug. Monotherapy is preferred initially. An increased dose of a single agent may be required to achieve seizure control before adding another agent. Classical AEDs used for complex partial seizures include carbamazepine, valproate, phenytoin, and phenobarbital. Newer agents available are levetiracetam, topiramate, lamotrigine, gabapentin, oxcarbazepine, zonisamide, felbamate, tiagabine, pregabalin, and lacosamide. The most common first-line drugs are carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproic acid, and oxcarbazepine.

More than half of the patients with complex partial seizures will require more than one AED. The use of more than one antiepileptic drug creates a potential for drug interactions, often necessitating constant monitoring and adjustment in doses. Seizures are considered refractory when two or more AEDs have failed to control the seizures. Only about half of the patients with complex partial seizures have epilepsy fully controlled with medications.

**Ketogenic Diet**

The ketogenic diet is a specialized high fat, low carb, and controlled protein diet that should be considered in children with intractable seizures when at least two AEDs have been ineffective.

**Surgery**

Surgical intervention is considered for refractory complex partial seizures. Resection surgery is considered when the seizure focus is localized and solo. An ideal candidate for respective surgery is a patient with refractory complex partial seizures who have failed a trial of at least two or three AEDs, have features suggesting mesial temporal onset and MRI shows mesial temporal sclerosis. Surgical procedures for refractory complex partial seizures include amygdalohippocampectomy, temporal lobectomy, and gamma knife radiation.

**Vagus Nerve Stimulation**

Patients with refractory seizures who are not candidates for surgery should be considered for implantation of vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) device. Response rates of 35% to 45% have been reported with VNS therapy. Antiepileptic drugs should always be used along with them. If VNS therapy is effective, it may be possible to reduce the medications slowly.