The use of thioridazine has declined significantly because of the availability of safer and more effective atypical antipsychotics. When it is used, the entire interprofessional healthcare team needs to be actively involved in therapy. In the current medical environment, its use is almost exclusively limited to refractory schizophrenia that has failed to respond to other therapeutic agents. However, all clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) who prescribe thioridazine should first consult with a psychiatrist for a better option. If the drug is prescribed, its adverse effects must be closely monitored. This is where nursing staff and pharmacists can be of particular benefit. The pharmacist can also check for drug-drug interactions and report these to the prescriber if present. Nurses can serve as a contact point to the prescriber for other interprofessional healthcare team members and patients, offer patient counseling regarding medication administration and side effects, and document any concerns in the patient's medical record.

Further, the patient requires education about the side effects and potential drug interactions. Although a rare but serious side effect of thioridazine is agranulocytosis, each patient should be evaluated for abnormal white blood cell counts before use because this medication may exacerbate this problem. If all members of the interprofessional healthcare team collaborate and share information about the patient during thioridazine therapy, the patient is more apt to derive therapeutic benefit leading to improved outcomes with fewer adverse effects. [Level 5]