**Calcium's Role**

Calcium is a divalent cation essential to heart, kidney, bone, and nervous system functioning, making PTH's functioning crucial. Calcium plays an integral part in cardiac contractions. The contractility of the heart is predicated on the availability and role of calcium inside myocardial cells. When there is an excess amount of calcium within cardiac cells, contractility will increase, and similarly, when there is a lesser concentration of calcium within the cardiac cells, contraction will decrease. This can potentially lead to prolonged QT intervals seen on ECG. Extreme hypercalcemia's effect on the myocardium can be manifested in ECG changes, causing very short QT intervals. This could potentially precipitate the onset of fatal arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia or even ventricular fibrillation if gone unattended. Abnormal oversecretion of PTH is also the source of bone degradation, systemically releasing dangerous amounts of calcium into the blood. This can facilitate the premature transition into osteoporosis and increase the susceptibility to fractures.

**Calcium Related Pathologies**

Electrolyte homeostasis is crucial for appropriate nerve health and function, which is especially true for calcium. Low levels of calcium, which can be caused by an underproductive parathyroid gland, cause nerve hyperexcitability at every level of neurons throughout the nervous system. The mechanism behind this is associated with a decrease in the threshold potential in the presence of low levels of calcium. The sodium channels are opened at a much lower membrane potential requiring smaller amounts of stimulus. In addition to the overfiring of neurons, patients may also feel numbness, tingling, and muscle cramps. High levels of calcium can cause debilitating effects on the kidneys, potentially precipitating renal stones, which can be destructive and excruciating.

**PTH and Malignancy**

In a clinical scenario where hypercalcemia is found with appropriately suppressed levels of PTH, malignancy needs to be ruled out. In metastasis, bones can be invaded by cancer, stimulating local osteolytic activity and increasing serum calcium levels. In certain cancers like breast and prostate, tumors may release 1-alpha-hydroxylase, increasing the synthesis of calcitriol and allowing for excessive reabsorption of calcium. A physiological phenomenon is seen in the bladder, kidney, ovarian, uterine, head and neck, lung, and breast carcinomas where the primary tumor secretes a parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP). Some neuroendocrine tumors occasionally secrete PTHrP, while some sarcomas and hematological cancers are found to produce the protein sporadically.

**PTHrP, Malignancy, and Hypercalcemia**

PTHrP is a monomeric polypeptide ranging in size from 60 to 173 amino acids that can exist in several different isoforms mimicking the functions of PTH associated with the pathological condition known as humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM). In normal conditions, this protein is secreted throughout the body in all types of tissues but in small quantities. Some of the functions that PTHrP serves are associated with calcium transport in the mammary gland and kidney. It is also known to serve a role in the relaxation of smooth muscle in the arterial walls, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, uterus, and bladder. Its presence is also associated with fetal development and the progression of successful gestation. Sometimes PTHrP will be greatly elevated in pregnancies. Screening patients for elevated levels of PTHrP in the context of hypercalcemia of unknown etiology is important. If found, it may be indicative of a malignant process producing ectopic PTHrP, which will cause hypercalcemia. It is also important to note that all scenarios with elevated PTHrP are not conclusive for identifying the presence of cancer. Some physiological conditions can produce PTHrP in large quantities, such as pregnancy.

**Osteoporosis**

Synthetic PTH is used to treat osteoporosis in men and women but has caused osteosarcoma in animals.