All imaging is performed in the parasagittal plane. Hold the transducer so that the orientation marker points towards the head (cephalad). If necessary, adjust the screen so that the orientation marker and cephalad structures are displayed on the left. The liver is easy to recognize cephalad structure, which should be on the left of the screen.

With the patient in the supine position, expose the epigastrium. Position the cephalad tip of the probe immediately below the xiphoid process. Confirm correct probe orientation after identifying the liver on the screen. Locate the great vessels (inferior vena cava or abdominal aorta) and adjust the image depth so that the posterior vessel border or vertebral bodies are visible at the bottom of the screen. Required depth varies significantly depending on the patient body habitus.

Scan the abdomen by sweeping the probe laterally, from left to right, keeping the probe perpendicular to the skin. Identify the stomach, liver, pancreas, superior mesenteric artery, aorta, and inferior vena cava. Examine and stomach and observe the characteristics of any stomach contents, noting the presence of solids, thick liquids, or clear fluids.

- Note that the supine gastric exam is qualitative only and must be accompanied by examining the RLD position. A full stomach (presence of solids or thick liquids) can be confirmed in the supine position, but it cannot be ruled out. Moreover, gastric volume assessments cannot be accurately performed while supine.

After completing the exam in the supine position, place the patient in the right RLD position. This position facilitates the gravitational flow of stomach contents to the antrum, which increases the sensitivity of gastric ultrasound and facilitates gastric volume measurement.

With the patient in the RLD position, scan the abdomen, identifying the anatomic structures previously discussed. Occasionally, image depth must be increased to obtain adequate views of the great vessels of the abdomen.

Examine the contents of the stomach, again noting thick liquids or solids.

- Solids: Solids have a heterogeneous, “frosted glass” appearance on ultrasound. Structures located beyond solid food (e.g., aorta) may not be visible due to poor penetration of ultrasound waves beyond solid food.

- Thick liquids: Thick liquids (example: yogurt) appear hyperechoic and homogenous on gastric ultrasound.

- Clear liquids: Clear fluids appear hypoechoic (black) and homogenous. If the fluid was recently ingested, air bubbles (hyperechoic) might be present in the fluid, presenting a “starry night” appearance. The presence of clear liquids in the stomach should be followed by measuring antral CSA in the right lateral decubitus position, followed by calculating the estimated gastric volume (step 9).

- Empty: The empty stomach has a “bulls-eye” appearance, with a small or collapsed antrum surrounded by the sonographically distinct layers of the stomach wall. There is often a small volume of clear liquid (baseline gastric secretions) within a physiologically empty stomach.

If the stomach contains only clear liquids, the volume can be estimated by measuring the CSA of the antrum at the level of the aorta. Care is necessary to ensure that measurements are taken at the aorta level rather than the IVC. Due to the funnel shape of the antrum, measurements at the level of the IVC will underestimate gastric volume, leading to false negatives.

Calculate the estimated gastric volume: The volume of stomach contents (in milliliters) can be estimated by the following equation: 27 + (14.6 * CSA) – (1.28 * age).

Gastric volumes <1.5 ml/kg are considered normal (consistent with baseline secretions), associated with a low risk of aspiration under anesthesia.