**Principles of Quality Management**

Regarding the study of quality management, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) identified seven basic principles that, when applied properly, can aid in the evaluation and optimization of a service or product based on data collection, process improvement, and coordination amongst involved parties.

Customer service/ customer satisfaction is essential to quality management. Without customers, there is no one to offer a service or product. The goal is to keep customers returning by meeting their expectations and building confidence in the offered product or service. While an institution’s employees are each other’s customers, the ultimate customer is the patient. Both patient experience and patient outcomes define healthcare quality. While we do not want the patients cycling through a hospital more than needed, the hospital would like to be their provider of choice if hospitalization is warranted.  By taking into account the patient’s perception of care—did they feel respected, were they included in the plan of care—and by fulfilling patient expectations, the financial aspect of the healthcare system also will thrive. As an example, patients coming into the emergency department expect to be seen and cared for in a timely fashion. One example of a way to ensure a timely evaluation is to record when each member of the team arrives to evaluate a patient.  As mentioned, while the patient remains the ultimate customer of healthcare institutions, it also should be emphasized that the people at every level of the organization are one another’s customers, and each other’s performance is intertwined. The goal is for each group/department to meet or exceed the needs and expectations of the departments or groups they are serving. This approach allows the entire institution to deliver the utmost care and safety to its patients. For example, the paramedics rely on the emergency department to be ready for a patient, and, in turn, the emergency physician relies on quick test results from the laboratory and radiology departments.

Leadership is necessary at all levels to reinforce the goals and purpose of an organization, product, or service. Leadership at the top is needed to set the mission and vision of the organization and to promote support, efficiency, and open communication by encouraging a unified and attainable approach to reach objectives via pre-set process/policies. Returning to our trauma scenario, the trauma surgeon ensures that the ATLS protocol is followed, and appropriate interventions are taken, whether it be a chest tube insertion or exploratory surgery. Their job is to encourage the team and communicate the needs of the patient to those within the trauma bay and other involved parties such as the operating room or interventional radiology.

Engagement of people at all ranks is essential to reach the objective of an organization, product, or service. Healthcare institutions are built on the strength and commitment of its people. It is ideal to have enthusiastic workers who are competent in their particular role within the process. By respecting those at all levels, there is an improvement in job satisfaction, motivation, and collaboration; thus, better feedback for improvement within all stages of the process.  As an example, in the operating room (OR), all providers have a known, pre-identified role, whether it is the scrub technician monitoring the sterile field, the anesthesiologist evaluating patient vitals, or the OR nurse who is leading the pre-operative timeout. Feedback from all providers is essential to ensure they can perform their job at the highest level possible.

Process approach is the key to achieving a consistent, desired outcome. While it is often multiple interrelated processes that are required to achieve the ideal outcome, these all must function consistently and as a unit to thrive. Once standardized, individual processes require continuous assessment and appropriate optimization if areas needing improvement are identified. For a cardiac arrest patient, the process begins the moment 9-1-1 is called and continues through assessment by EMS, handoff to the emergency department team, performance of advance cardiac life support protocol, and throughout the patient’s hospital stay. While each aspect of care provides different services, each must be standardized and eventually optimized to achieve the ultimate objective of getting the patient home safely with minimal morbidity.

Improvement is the key to success. By continually collecting data and assessing outcomes, opportunities for improvement come to light and are addressable. The end result is better quality through improved performance, outcomes, and customer satisfaction. Root cause analysis and failure mode and effects analysis are two methods used to examine sentinel events and promote improvement within a health care system. In the medical world, there are frequent morbidity and mortality conferences and peer review sessions pertaining to a patient not having an ideal outcome. What could have been done better throughout all stages of care? Was the patient seen and evaluated in a timely fashion? Was there a missed diagnosis? Were the appropriate interventions taken for the clinical picture? Was there a breach in the standard of care? What can possibly remedy this?

Evidence-based decision making (i.e., evidence-based medicine) is the evaluation of facts, evidence, cause-and-effect relationships, and other data that will allow for the delivery of the best product or service. By basing decisions on facts, processes can be standardized, which is more likely to produce consistent and desired results. After changing processes, it is important to continue to monitor outcomes to determine whether corrective action is reaching the desired endpoint. By repeating this cycle and sharing results with other health care intuitions, quality care, and ideal outcomes can be widely replicated.  For example, Level 1 trauma centers have in-house trauma and neurosurgeons around the clock to ensure expedited care because studies and clinical experience have shown that immediate access to these physicians reduced cost, time to intervention, and hospital length of stay.

Relationship management is essential for an organization to thrive. Supportive relationships with suppliers, retailers, monetary providers, and partners must be maintained as well as a common understanding of goals across all parties. Shared goals and understanding also ensures a reliable supply chain to allow the institution to deliver high-quality care to its patients consistently. For example, donations to a hospital allow a new interventional radiology suite to be built with the highest level of technology so that patients can be accessed quicker, and providers have more space and resources for treatment.