The diagnosis of Menkes disease is made by the characteristic clinical, biochemical, and radiological features. The characteristic clinical features often suggest the diagnosis.

Biochemical evaluation plays a significant role in the diagnosis of Menkes disease. Serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels are typically low in Menkes disease in the range of 0-55 microgram/dl and 10-160 mg/dl, respectively, with the normal levels being 70 to 150 micrograms/dl and 200-450 mg/dl. These levels are typically low in babies less than six months. So, biochemical labs should never be interpreted alone without another testing. In this scenario, plasma catecholamine analysis indicative of dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency can be used as a rapid diagnostic test.

Features of hair on light microscopy are often very characteristic in the case of Menkes disease. It is important to examine as many strands as possible because every hair may not demonstrate typical morphological features.

Neuroimaging has a major role in establishing the diagnosis of Menkes disease. Cerebral atrophy and delayed myelination are the most commonly observed features on the MRI brain. (Fig.1A) Other features include subdural effusion, hematoma and hygroma, leukoencephalopathy, basal ganglia signal changes, and intracranial vessel tortuosity.

EEG in Menkes follows three characteristic stages with the progression of the disease. Ictal findings in the early stage include slow spike waves and slowing in the posterior region, whereas interictal EEG shows multifocal polymorphic waves. The intermediate stage shows multifocal hypsarrhythmia with diffuse irregular slow and spike waves. The late-stage is characterized by multifocal high amplitude activity and mixed irregular slow waves.

X-ray findings include generalized osteoporosis, metaphyseal flaring, and spurs in long bones. Periosteal diaphyseal reactions and thickenings are present. Rib fractures are often misdiagnosed as child abuse. Menkes disease should be considered as a differential diagnosis in infants with unexplained subdural hematoma in the absence of retinal hemorrhage.

Molecular genetic testing includes single gene testing and multigene panels. The sequential analysis includes analyzing ATP7A followed by gene-targeted deletion/duplication analysis if no pathogenic variant is found. Multigene panels can be customized by the clinician, including ATP7A and other genes of interest such as FBLN5 related cutis laxa and ELN related cutis laxa while limiting identification of variants of uncertain significance and variants that do not explain the underlying phenotype.

Prenatal diagnosis is available for women with carrier states, including chorionic villi sampling and analyzing copper intake in the cultured fibroblast, especially if the genetic mutation is unknown. If there is an affected patient in the family with a known mutation, then specific genes can be tested.