The trachea originates at the inferior edge of the larynx and connects to the left and main stem bronchus. The primary function of the trachea is to allow passage of inspired and expired air into and out of the lung. The trachea is a midline structure and lies just anterior the esophagus.

After it originates from the larynx, the trachea divides into the left and right mainstem bronchi. This junction point is called the carina. The tracheal diameter is about 24 to 26 mm in adult males and 22 to 24 mm in females. It is much broader in the proximal area than the distal segment. The trachea is 16 to 20 C-shaped cartilage rings stacked one on top of another. A narrow thin membrane connects each of the tracheal rings. The posterior aspect of the trachea is adjacent to the anterior esophagus.

The trachea has four layers. The inner mucosal layer has a lining of ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium with goblet cells. These cells are responsible for secreting mucus which coats the inner lining of the trachea. The mucus traps dust particles and other debris before they reach the lung. The cilia function to propel the dust away from the lung.

The submucosa is located just below the mucosa and contains nervous tissue and blood vessels. This layer also contains elastin and collagen fibers, which provide the trachea with support and elasticity. The presence of smooth muscle in the submucosa allows for the trachea to alter its diameter. A layer of hyaline cartilage supporting the tracheal rings surrounds the submucosa. The hyaline cartilage layer is sturdy but flexible and prevents the collapse of the trachea during expiration. The outermost layer is the adventitia, consisting of loose connective tissue that anchors the trachea to the adjacent soft tissues.

The trachealis muscle found in the posterior wall allows the trachea to contract and decrease its diameter. This muscle is vital for coughing, getting rid of secretions, foreign particles, saliva, or food. The main reason why the C-shaped cartilage rings are incomplete is that they allow the trachea to narrow. This action is helpful, especially when eating food, which requires the expansion of the esophagus.