**Diagnosis of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension**

Signs and symptoms of PH (including group 1 PAH) are nonspecific.

Common signs and symptoms of PH include the following:

- Dyspnea and fatigue—The most common initial symptoms of PH are exertional dyspnea, lethargy, and fatigue due to an inadequate increase in cardiac output during exercise.

- Symptoms of right ventricular failure, which develop as PH progresses, include the following:

- Exertional chest pain—Exertional chest pain (i.e., angina) is usually due to subendocardial hypoperfusion caused by increased right ventricular wall stress and myocardial oxygen demand. However, it is occasionally caused by compression of the left main coronary artery by an enlarged pulmonary artery, particularly in patients with a pulmonary artery trunk at least 40 mm in diameter.
- Exertional syncope—Exertional syncope occurs due to an insufficient increase in cardiac output during activity or reflex bradycardia from mechanoreceptor activation in the right ventricle.
- Weight gain from edema—Peripheral edema is due to right ventricular failure, increased right-sided filling pressures, and extracellular volume expansion.
- Anorexia and/or abdominal pain and swelling—Anorexia and/or abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant is due to passive hepatic congestion.

Uncommon symptoms of PH include cough, hemoptysis, and hoarseness. The hoarseness is caused by compression of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve by a dilated main pulmonary artery (Ortner syndrome), resulting in unilateral vocal cord paralysis.

As PH progresses, the following signs of right ventricular failure may be evident:

- Jugular venous pressure (JVP) abnormalities—The JVP is typically elevated in patients with PH. Initially, a prominent a wave is seen, while a prominent v wave indicates significant tricuspid regurgitation and often severe right ventricular failure.

- Right-sided auscultatory findings that are augmented with inspiration may be heard, including:

- A right-sided third or fourth heart sound (i.e., a gallop) in association with a left parasternal heave or a downward subxiphoid thrust
- Wide splitting of the second heart sound
- A holosystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation and, in more severe cases, a diastolic pulmonic regurgitation murmur

- Hepatomegaly, a pulsatile or tender liver, peripheral edema, ascites, and pleural effusion (i.e., signs of severe decompensated right ventricular failure)

The electrocardiogram (ECG) may provide supportive evidence of PH, but a normal ECG does not exclude the diagnosis of PH.

While right ventricular hypertrophy has insufficient sensitivity and specificity to serve as a screening tool, prolongation of the QRS complex and QTc suggest severe disease.

In 90% of individuals with IPAH, the chest radiograph is abnormal at the time of diagnosis.

Once PH is suspected, the initial test of choice is transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which then determines the sequence of subsequent testing.

- Estimated pulmonary artery pressure using the tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity (TRV)

- The assessment of right ventricular size, wall thickness, and function

- The potential contribution of left-sided heart disease to PH

Guidelines issued by the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/European Respiratory Society (ERS) propose using the peak TRV together with echocardiographic signs of PH.

**Table 1: Echocardiographic Probability of PH**

**Peak TRV (m/s)**

**Presence of Other Echocardiographic PH Signs***

**Echocardiographic Probability of PH**

≤2.8 or not measurable

No

Low

≤2.8 or not measurable

Yes

Intermediate

2.9 to 3.4

No

Intermediate

2.9 to 3.4

Yes

High

>3.4

Not required

High

**Table 2: Echocardiographic Signs Suggesting PH**

**A: The Ventricles***

**B: Pulmonary Artery***

**C: Inferior Vena Cava and Right Atrium***

Right ventricle/left ventricle basal diameter ratio >1.0

Right ventricular outflow Doppler acceleration time <105 msec and/or mid-systolic notching

Inferior cava diameter >21 mm with decreased inspiratory collapse (<50% with a sniff or <20% with quiet inspiration)

Flattening of the interventricular septum (left ventricular eccentricity index >1.1 in systole and/or diastole)

Early diastolic pulmonary regurgitation velocity >2.2 m/sec

Right atrial area (end-systole) >18 cm



Pulmonary artery diameter >25 mm



* Echocardiographic signs from at least two different categories (A/B/C) from the list should be present to alter the level of echocardiographic probability of PH.

The recommended plan per the ESC/ERS guidelines for further patient investigation based on the echocardiographic probability of PH is shown in **Table 3**for symptomatic patients.

**Table 3: Diagnostic Management Suggested According to Echocardiographic Probability of PH in Patients With Symptoms Compatible With PH, With or Without Risk Factors for PAH or Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension (CTEPH)**

**Echocardiographic Probability of PH**

**Without Risk Factors or Associated Conditions for PAH or CTEPH**

**With Risk Factors or Associated Conditions for PAH or CTEPH**

Low

An alternative diagnosis should be considered.

Echocardiography follow-up should be considered.

Alternative diagnosis and echocardiography follow-up should be considered. Further investigation of PH may be considered.

High

Further investigation of PH (including RHC) is recommended.

Further investigation of PH (including RHC) is recommended.

RHC—right heart catheterization

**Table 4: Hemodynamic Definitions of Pre- and Post-Capillary PH**

**Definitions**

**Characteristics**

**Clinical Groups of PH**

Pre-capillary PH

mPAP >20 mmHg

PAWP ≤15 mmHg

PVR ≥3 Wood units

1, 3, 4, and 5

Isolated post-capillary PH (IpcPH)

mPAP >20 mmHg

PAWP >15 mmHg

PVR <3 Wood units

2 and 5

Combined pre- and post-capillary PH (CpcPH)

mPAP >20 mmHg

PAWP >15 mmHg

PVR ≥3 Wood units

2 and 5

PAWP—pulmonary arterial wedge pressure

The diagnosis of group 1 PAH requires RHC to demonstrate an mPAP ≥20 mmHg at rest and a PVR ≥3 Wood units.

- Mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) ≤15 mmHg (to exclude PH due to left heart disease [i.e., group 2 PH])

- CLDs and other causes of hypoxemia are mild or absent (to exclude PH owing to CLD or hypoxemia [i.e., group 3 PH])

- Venous thromboembolic disease and pulmonary artery obstructions are absent (to exclude group 4 PH)

- Certain miscellaneous disorders are absent, including systemic disorders (e.g., sarcoidosis, chronic renal insufficiency), hematologic disorders (e.g., myeloproliferative diseases, chronic hemolytic anemias), and metabolic disorders (e.g., glycogen storage disease). The purpose is to exclude PH with unclear multifactorial mechanisms (group 5 PH)

Below are all the conditions associated with group 1 PAH that should be considered:

- IPAH and HPAH (1.1 and 1.2)

- Drugs and toxins (1.3)

- PAH associated with (1.4):

- Connective tissue disease

- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection

- Portal hypertension

- Congenital heart disease

- Schistosomiasis

- Long-term responders to calcium channel blocker (CCB) therapy (1.5)

- PAH with overt features of venous/capillary involvement (1.6)

- Persistent PH of the newborn (1.7)

**Risk Assessment**

Patients with PAH should be referred to a specialized center for evaluation and management. A comprehensive assessment is required since no single variable provides sufficient diagnostic and prognostic information. Risk stratification determines the initial PAH regimen chosen and is also used to determine disease progression and response to therapy. To determine PAH risk assessment, a multidimensional approach is needed. **Table 5**, which is derived from the ESC/ERS guidelines, lists the variables that are most frequently used in PH centers.

**Table 5: Risk Assessment in PAH**

**Determinants of Prognosis (Estimated 1-Year Mortality)**

**Low risk <5%**

**Intermediate Risk (5% to 10%)**

**High Risk >10%**

Clinical signs of right heart failure

Absent

Absent

Present

Progression of symptoms

No

Slow

Rapid

Syncope

No

Occasional syncope

Repeated syncope

WHO FC

I, II

III

IV

6MWD

>440 m

165 to 440 m

<165 m

Cardiopulmonary exercise testing

Peak VO>15 ml/min/kg

Peak VO 11 to 15 ml/min/kg

Peak VO<11 ml/min/kg

NT-proBNP plasma levels

BNP <50 ng/l

NT-proBNP <300 ng/l

BNP 50 to 300 ng/l

NT-proBNP 300-1400 ng/l

BNP >300 ng/l

NT-proBNP >1400 ng/l

Imaging (echocardiography, CMR imaging)

RA area <18 cm

No pericardial effusion

RA area 18 to 26 cm

No or minimal pericardial effusion

RA area >26 cm

Pericardial effusion

Hemodynamics

RAP <8 mmHg

CI ≥2.5 l/min/m

SvO>65%

RAP 8 to 14 mmHg

CI 2.0-2.4 l/min/m

SvO60-65%

RAP >14 mmHg

CI <2.0 l/min/m

SvO<60%

6MWD—6-minute walking distance

BNP—brain natriuretic peptide

CI—cardiac index

CMR—cardiac magnetic resonance

FC—functional class

NT-proBNP—N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide

RA—right atrium

RAP—right atrial pressure

SvO—mixed venous oxygen saturation

VO—oxygen consumption

The goal of treatment is to bring all the patients’ variables to the low-risk column in **Table 5**, often through treatment escalation or switching of therapy.

**Table 6: WHO FC for PH**

**Class**

**WHO FC**

I

Patients with PH but without resulting limitations of physical activity. Ordinary physical activity does not cause undue fatigue or dyspnea, chest pain, or heart syncope.

II

Patients with PH resulting in slight limitation of physical activity; they are comfortable at rest. Ordinary physical activity results in undue fatigue or dyspnea, chest pain, or heart syncope.

III

Patients with PH resulting in marked limitation of physical activity; they are comfortable at rest. Less than ordinary physical activity causes undue fatigue or dyspnea, chest pain, or heart syncope.

IV

Patients with a PH resulting in an inability to carry on any physical activity without symptoms; these patients manifest signs of right heart failure. Dyspnea and/or fatigue may be present even at rest. Discomfort is increased by physical activity.

Several groups have proposed other models for risk stratification. These include the US Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-term PAH disease management (REVEAL), the Swedish PAH Registry (SPAHR), and the Comparative, Prospective Registry of Newly Initiated Therapies for Pulmonary Hypertension (COMPERA), and the French pulmonary hypertension network (FPHN). Like the ESC/ERS approach, most of these models predict survival and involve a multidimensional approach that includes elements of clinical, biochemical (e.g., BNP), functional (e.g., exercise capacity, WHO FC), and hemodynamic parameters (echocardiography and pulmonary arterial catheter) that have prognostic significance.

The 1-year survival of patients with newly diagnosed group 1 PAH may be predicted using a risk score derived from the REVEAL registry data. The risk score is the sum of points derived from clinical data, including group 1 subgroup, demographics, and comorbidities; FC, vital signs, 6MWD, and BNP level; plus echocardiogram, pulmonary function tests, and RHC findings. Data were prospectively collected from 504 patients with a mean 6MWD of 308 meters, 62% of whom were classified as WHO FC III. Overall, 1-year survival correlated with risk score: 1 to 7 (95%), 8 (92%), 9 (89%), 10 to 11 (72%), and ≥12 (66%). Although not agreed upon, a score of 1 or less is considered low-risk, a score between 2 and 9 is considered moderate-risk, and a score of 10 or greater is high-risk.

The prognosis was reported using data from the COMPERA database. Patients were risk-stratified utilizing a model that incorporated WHO FC, 6MWD, BNP levels, RAP, CI, and SvO. Mortality rates in patients one year after diagnosis were 3% for low-risk patients, 10% for intermediate-risk patients, and 21% for high-risk patients.

These proposed models have limitations and must be used in conjunction with clinical assessment.

Given the importance of risk stratification in managing patients with PAH, researchers have been investigating novel models to enhance the risk stratification approach. Recently, a 4-strata risk model categorizing PAH patients as low, intermediate-low, intermediate-high, or high risk has been proposed. This approach differs from the traditional 3-strata risk model (low risk, intermediate risk, high risk) proposed by the ESC/ERS. Studies have demonstrated that this 4-strata risk assessment method improves risk prediction, especially within the intermediate-risk category of patients with PAH. Additionally, this model has been shown to perform better at predicting survival and is more sensitive to change than the conventional 3-strata approach.

**Current Treatment**

PAH represents an imbalance between vasoconstrictors and proliferative mediators (e.g., endothelin-1) and vasodilators (e.g., nitric oxide, prostacyclin).**(Table 7)**. The emergence of targeted therapies for PAH has raised the 1-year survival rates to 91% and the 5-year survival rates to 61% for newly diagnosed patients.

The 4 US FDA-approved treatment classes for PAH include phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is), oral endothelin-receptor antagonists (ERAs), prostacyclin pathway agents (PPAs), and soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) stimulants.

**Table 7: PAH-Specific FDA-Approved Therapies**

**Class**

**Agent**

**Administrative Route**

PPAs

Epoprostenol

Continuous IV infusion via a central venous catheter

Treprostinil

Continuous IV infusion via a central venous catheter or continuous SC infusion; inhaled; oral

ERAs

Bosentan

Oral

Ambrisentan

Oral

Macitentan

Oral

sGC stimulants

Riociguat

Oral

PDE5Is

Sildenafil

Oral; IV

Tadalafil

Oral

IV—intravenous

SC—subcutaneous

According to the treatment algorithm proposed by the 6th World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension, select patients with PAH should undergo acute vasoreactivity testing (AVT) to identify the small subset of PAH patients (10% to 20%) who may respond to CCB therapy.

Patients with associated forms of PAH are rarely vasoreactive, and, as such, vasoreactive testing is not indicated.

Improved survival was reported in an observational study of 64 patients with IPAH, which reported that the 5-year survival was greater among patients who received CCB therapy (primarily nifedipine) compared with a control group of patients (comprised non-vasoreactive IPAH patients and historical controls).

Another observational study of 557 patients with IPAH found that only 13% had a positive vasoreactivity test, and 54% of the vasoreactive patients with IPAH who received CCB therapy maintained functional improvement after one year.

The daily doses of these drugs that have shown efficacy in IPAH are relatively high: 120–240 mg for nifedipine, 240 to 720 mg for diltiazem, and up to 20 mg for amlodipine.

Many of the adverse events (AEs) associated with CCBs are because of the potent systemic vasodilatory properties of CCBs (e.g., hypotension, peripheral edema).

Individuals who respond to CCB therapy should be reassessed after 3 to 6 months of treatment.

For patients with PAH who are typically non-vasoreactive (e.g., connective tissue disease-PAH) and have not undergone vasoreactive testing, and for patients who are non-vasoreactive or are vasoreactive and have failed CCB therapy, PAH-specific therapy is indicated.

PAH-specific therapy consistently improves hemodynamic measures, WHO FC, and the 6MWD.

For treatment-naïve PAH patients with WHO FC I symptoms, the ACCP guidelines suggest monitoring closely for disease progression to a functional level that warrants therapy (e.g., WHO FC II).

For patients with WHO FC II or III or who have low or intermediate risk PAH, both the ACCP guidelines and 6th World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension recommend dual combination therapy with an ERA (e.g., ambrisentan) and PDE5I (e.g., tadalafil) for most patients.

**Tadalafil plus ambrisentan**—A randomized trial (AMBITION) of 500 drug-naïve patients with group 1 PAH (mostly idiopathic and connective tissue disease-related) with class II or III symptoms compared the combination of 10 mg of ambrisentan and 40 mg of tadalafil with either agent alone.

Other combination oral regimens of dual therapy consisting of an ERA and a PDE5I are feasible options in patients not suited to the ambrisentan/tadalafil combination (e.g., contraindications to the drug or AEs).

**Macitentan plus sildenafil—**The SERAPHIN trial compared the oral ERA, macitentan, with placebo in 250 patients with moderate-to-severe PAH; 85% of patients had IPAH or connective tissue disease-associated PAH, and the majority were FC II or III. Approximately 60% of patients were already on a PDE5I (i.e., combined therapy), mostly sildenafil, and 40% were treatment-naïve (i.e., single-agent therapy with macitentan). Over a 2-year period, fewer patients treated with macitentan (3 mg or 10 mg daily) progressed or died on therapy (38% and 31%, respectively, vs. 46%). Exercise capacity and WHO FC also improved with macitentan treatment. This benefit was observed independent of whether patients were on combination or single-agent oral therapy for PAH.

**Bosentan plus tadalafil**—The PHIRST trial randomly assigned 405 patients with mostly FC II and III PAH, half of whom were on bosentan, to receive tadalafil (2.5, 10, 20, or 40 mg) or placebo once daily for 16 weeks. Tadalafil (40 mg) significantly increased the 6MWD and the time to clinical worsening while also decreasing the incidence of clinical worsening and improving health-related quality of life (QoL).

**Bosentan plus sildenafil**—In a prospective study, the addition of sildenafil to bosentan in PAH patients who had developed clinical deterioration improved symptoms, exercise capacity, and WHO FC.

According to the 6th World Symposium on Pulmonary Hypertension, single-agent oral therapy may be appropriate for patients with low- or intermediate-risk diseases who have a low-risk profile and for patients who have been stable on monotherapy for a prolonged period (e.g., 5 to 10 years).

Other possible indications include patients >75 years old with multiple risk factors for heart failure, individuals suspected to have pulmonary veno-occlusive disease or pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis, patients with contraindications to combination therapy (e.g., severe liver disease), individuals with portopulmonary hypertension and HIV (i.e., patients who were not included in the combination trials), or patients who decline combination therapy.

Per the ACCP guidelines, options for these patients include ERAs (i.e., ambrisentan, bosentan, macitentan), PDE5Is (i.e., sildenafil, tadalafil), and sGC stimulators (i.e., riociguat).

The choice of therapy may depend on several factors, including patient preferences, cost, route of administration, toxicity profile, comorbidities (e.g., liver failure, kidney failure), and potential drug interactions with other agents.

**ERAs as a group—**In a meta-analysis of 16 randomized trials that compared ERAs with placebo in individuals with FC II/III, patients receiving ERAs had improved exercise capacity (mean increase of 25 m), FC (odds ratio [OR], 1.41; 95% CI, 1.16-1.70), and symptoms, and reduced odds of FC deterioration (OR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.26-0.72). There was low certainty of the evidence of a possible reduction in mortality from ERA use (OR 0.78, 95% CI, 0.58-1.07).

**Ambrisentan—**Randomized placebo-controlled trials (e.g., ARIES-1, ARIES-2) of patients with moderate-to-severe IPAH and connective tissue disease-related PAH (mostly WHO FC II and III) consistently reported that ambrisentan, administered for up to 2 years, delayed disease progression and clinical worsening. Moreover, ambrisentan was associated with improved exercise tolerance, WHO FC, pulmonary vascular hemodynamics, and QoL.

**Bosentan**—Bosentan has been shown in individuals with group 1 PAH to delay clinical worsening and improve pulmonary vascular hemodynamics and exercise capacity.

**Macitentan—**In the aforementioned SERAPHIN trial that compared macitentan with placebo in 250 patients with moderate-to-severe PAH (mostly WHO FC II and III), the benefits that were observed in the patients taking combined therapy (e.g., slower disease progression and lower mortality, improved exercise tolerance) were also seen in a subgroup of patients who were on single-agent therapy with macitentan.

The main AEs of ERAs are hepatotoxicity and peripheral edema.

Ambrisentan is contraindicated in patients with concurrent idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF); one randomized study reported that this agent was associated with an increased risk of IPF disease progression and hospitalizations.

**PDE5Is as a group**—A meta-analysis of 36 studies (2999 patients) reported that patients with group 1 PAH treated with PDE5Is were more likely to improve their WHO FC (OR, 8.59; 95% CI, 3.95-18.72) and less likely to die (OR, 0.088; 95% CI, 0.07-0.68).

**Sildenafil—**Sildenafil improves pulmonary hemodynamics and exercise capacity in individuals with group 1 PAH.

A follow-up, open-label 3-year extension trial (SUPER-2) reported persistent improvement in the 6MWD and WHO FC in 46% and 29% of patients, respectively.

**Tadalafil—**In the PHIRST-1 and -2 trials that included 405 PAH patients, half of whom were treatment naïve, tadalafil increased the 6MWD and the time to clinical worsening when compared with placebo.

Common AEs of PDE5Is include headache, gastrointestinal (GI) upset, flushing, and muscle pain.

**Riociguat**—Data have shown that riociguat improves outcomes for individuals with group 1 PAH. In trials of WHO FC II and III PAH patients (PATENT-1 and -2), half of whom were treatment-naïve, riociguat improved exercise tolerance, PVR, symptoms, WHO FC, and time to clinical worsening for up to 2 years of treatment. Riociguat had a favorable safety profile and was well tolerated, with syncope as the most frequently reported AE (4% vs. 1%).

**Parenteral prostanoids as a group—**Several parenteral prostanoids are available with the strongest evidence of efficacy in favor of IV epoprostenol. In a meta-analysis of 17 trials (765 patients with PAH), patients on prostacyclin agonists were more than twice as likely to have improved WHO FC, 6MWD, and pulmonary hemodynamics compared with a control group of PAH patients (placebo, any other treatment, or usual care). Mortality improved in individuals receiving IV agents (OR, 0.29; 95% CI, 0.12-0.69).

**Epoprostenol**—In patients with PAH, IV epoprostenol consistently improves hemodynamic parameters and functional capacity.

AEs that may be associated with epoprostenol include jaw pain, diarrhea, and flushing. Central venous catheter infection may also occur and contribute to the morbidity and mortality of continuous epoprostenol therapy.

**Treprostinil**—IV and SC treprostinil improve hemodynamic parameters, symptoms, exercise capacity, and possibly survival in patients with group 1 PAH.

**Sildenafil plus epoprostenol**—A trial randomly assigned 267 patients with group 1 PAH receiving epoprostenol to have sildenafil or placebo added for 16 weeks. Most patients were WHO FC III at the beginning of the study. Compared with the placebo, the combination regimen was associated with improved hemodynamic parameters, exercise capacity, QoL, and time to clinical worsening.

**Bosentan plus epoprostenol**—A study (BREATHE-2 trial) randomly assigned 22 individuals with group 1 PAH receiving epoprostenol to have either bosentan or placebo added for 16 weeks. The dual therapy was associated with improved hemodynamic parameters, exercise capacity, and WHO FC compared with baseline.

**Inhaled treprostinil plus either bosentan or sildenafil**—In one trial (TRIUMPH), 235 patients with group 1 PAH who were deteriorating despite bosentan or sildenafil therapy were randomly assigned to receive the addition of either inhaled treprostinil or placebo for 12 weeks. The treprostinil group had a significant improvement in their 6MWD and QoL.

**Sildenafil plus inhaled iloprost**—Studies have demonstrated that in patients with group 1 PAH have reported that the addition of sildenafil to inhaled iloprost resulted in an improvement in exercise capacity, WHO FC, and hemodynamics.

**Bosentan plus inhaled iloprost**—A study showed that the combination of bosentan with inhaled iloprost resulted in a marked increase in exercise capacity.

**Emerging Treatments**

Several therapies are currently undergoing investigation in clinical trials for the treatment of PAH.

Mutations in bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor type 2 (BMPR2) play a known role in the pathogenesis of PAH.

A total of 2 doses of sotatercept (0.3 or 0.7 mg/kg subcutaneously every three weeks) were compared with placebo in a 24-week multicenter trial of 106 patients with PAH receiving standard therapy.

Selonsertib is a first-in-class small-molecule (apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 [ASK1]) inhibitor developed to treat diseases with a high burden of oxidative stress, including PAH.P = .21), 28 dynes/cm in the selonsertib 6-mg group (P = .27) and –21 dynes/cm in the selonsertib 18-mg group (P = .60).

Ralinepag is a selective non-prostanoid prostacyclin receptor agonist formulated as an oral, extended-release tablet taken once daily.P = .03) in 61 patients receiving mono- (41%) or dual- (59%) background therapy.