**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise Only From Odontogenic Epithelium Without Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme**

They include ameloblastoma, calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor, squamous odontogenic tumor, and adenomatoid odontogenic tumor. Ameloblastoma is the second most common odontogenic tumor after odontoma. It can originate from any of the following: remnants of the dental lamina, enamel organ, odontogenic cyst lining, or oral mucosa basal cells. It can be either central (intra-osseous), which includes multicystic or solid and unicystic or peripheral (extra-osseous). The majority of cases are solid or multicystic 92%, while unicystic and peripheral represent 6% and 2%, respectively.

Other types in this category include calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumors (Pindborg tumor), which usually arises from the remnants of the dental lamina or reduced enamel epithelium, and squamous odontogenic tumors that usually originate from the remnants of the dental lamina.

**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise From Both Odontogenic Epithelium and Odontogenic Ectomesenchyme, With or Without Dental Hard Tissue Formation**

This includes odontoma, odontogenic ghost cell tumor, ameloblastic fibroma Primordial odontogenic tumor. Odontoma is the most common odontogenic tumor. Its prevalence exceeds all other tumors combined. It is considered to be hamartoma rather than an actual tumor. It can present in one of two forms: compound type, which is composed of multiple teethlike structures, and complex type, in which irregular masses are present that do not resemble dental structures.

Another true neoplasm is ameloblastic fibroma, in which both epithelial and ectomesenchymal components are neoplastic. This differentiates it from ameloblastic fibro odontoma and odontoma, which are considered to be hamartomatous lesions.

**Odontogenic Tumors That Arise From Ectomesenchyme With or Without Included Odontogenic Epithelium**

This includes****odontogenic fibroma, odontogenic myxoma (myxofibroma), cementoblastoma, and cemento-ossifying fibroma. Odontogenic fibroma can be either central (intra-osseous type) or peripheral (extra-osseous type).

**Malignant Odontogenic Tumors**

This includes ameloblastic carcinoma, clear cell odontogenic carcinoma, primary intraosseous carcinoma, Non otherwise specified (NOS) sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma, Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma, Odontogenic carcinosarcoma, and Odontogenic sarcomas. All these tumors have the typical microscopic features of malignancy and can metastasize to regional lymph nodes or distant metastases.

The majority of ameloblastic carcinoma cases arise de novo and less commonly arise from pre-existing ameloblastoma. It is a rare tumor that represents less than 1% of all odontogenic tumors.

Non otherwise specified (NOS) sclerosing odontogenic carcinoma has been recently added in the 4th edition of WHO classification for odontogenic tumors. It is a very rare tumor, as only 15 cases have been reported in the literature. It is considered a locally aggressive tumor with low potential for metastatic spread due to marked sclerosis in the surrounding stroma.