**Children**

In children, the daily caloric requirement is calculated based on the age, sex, and activity status of the child. For a child between 2 and 3 years of age, the recommended daily caloric intake is 1000 to 1400 kcal/day; this requirement increases with the age of the child. Children during a growth spurt, require higher amounts of calories to maintain the body as well as to grow. The daily recommended caloric intake for children 11 to 12 years range between 1800 and 2200 kcal/day. Another way to generalize caloric need is that an infant needs 100cal/kg/day, ages 1 to 3 years need 80 kcal/kg/day, 4 to 5 years needs 70kcal/kg/day, 6 to 8 years needs 60 to 65 kcal/kg/day and 9+ needs 35 to 45 kcal/kg/day. Growth charts are vital in directing nutritional counseling in children.

The daily recommended intake (DRI) of water depends on age, sex, weight, activity status, air temperature, and humidity. Plain water serves as the best way to fulfill this requirement. In a recent study, adequate plain water intake in children was more in high-income households, while 75% of children fail to meet the DRI.

Another way to calculate daily fluid requirements is the 4-2-1 rule with 4ml/kg/hr for the first 10kg of weight and then 40ml/hr +2ml/kg/hr for kg 10 to 20 and then 60ml/hr +1ml/kg for every kg >20. With this formula, a 5kg child would need 20ml/hr or 480ml/day, and a 25kg child would need 65ml/hr or 1,5860 ml/day. Under-nutrition accounts for more than 3 million deaths in children < 5 years per year globally. Factors resulting in a diet that is low in quality include lack of knowledge, poverty, palatability, time scarcity, and lack of availability.

**Adults**

The daily-recommended caloric intake for adult males and females is 2600-2800 kcal/day and 2000-2200 kcal/day, respectively. This requirement is not static and depends significantly on the activity status and the physical condition of the body. Imbalance in the diet leads to under-nutrition and over-nutrition, both of which are harmful to the body. The daily water requirement of the body depends on age, weight, sex, and air temperature. The DRI of water for men and women aged 19 to 30 years is 3.7 L/day and 2.7 L/day, respectively. In an analysis done in the USA, the estimated median total water intake of males and females aged between 19 to 50 years was 3.5 L/day and 3.0 L/day, respectively.

**Pregnant Women**

Nutrition plays a vital role in pregnancy. The recommended weight gain during pregnancy depends on the prepregnancy body mass index (BMI). Underweight women (BMI<18.5) before pregnancy are advised to gain 28 to 40 lbs throughout their pregnancy, normal (BMI 18.5 to 24.9) 25 to 35 lbs, overweight (BMI 25 to 29.9) 15 to 25 lbs, and obese (BMI>30) 11 to 20 lbs. Pregnant women do not need to increase their daily calories during the first trimester. During the second trimester, added 340 calories per day are recommended, and then 450 extra calories per day in the third trimester.

Excess weight gain during pregnancy can lead to maternal and fetal complications. Maternal complications include cesarean delivery, retention of weight after delivery, and postpartum depression. An increased incidence of obesity, allergy, asthma, and cancer is seen in children of mothers who had excess weight gain during pregnancy. The National Research Council guidelines also recommend a range of weight gain for women carrying twin fetuses. Women with normal pre-pregnancy weight should gain 17kg-25 kg, while overweight and obese women should gain, 14kg-23kg and 11kg-19kg, respectively. It is important to ensure that women conceive while they are in the normal weight category; preconception counseling and adequate contraception should be discussed. The healthcare provider should track the weight gain during pregnancy and should guide the pregnant females regarding adequate dietary changes.

A prenatal vitamin should be taken before conception and then throughout pregnancy and breastfeeding. Adequate intake of folate (400 mcg/day) in the first trimester decreases neural tube defects. The recommended intake of iron doubles to 30 mg/day to assist with increased blood production. Vitamin D requirements increase to 600 IU per day, and calcium intake remains 1000 mg/day. Protein requirement increases from 0.8g/kg/day to 1.1g/kg/day. Fluid requirements also increase to 3 liters per day. Women should not avoid highly allergenic foods as a prophylactic measure during pregnancy. Women who follow certain diets may continue to do so with the assistance of their physician to ensure the meeting of all dietary needs.

**Athletes**

The nutritional requirements for athletes vary based on intensity and type of training. Physicians need to consider body composition and not just body weight when determining the needs of athletes. Special circumstances to consider would be a desire to gain weight, lose weight, build muscle, training in excess heat, training at high altitudes, and how much time in a day is spent in training. Hydration is important for maximal performance, so athletes should be sure to hydrate the 24 hours before an event, in the hour before their event, during their event, and then recovery after their event.