# Continuing Education Activity

Copper metabolism plays an important role in physiologic homeostasis. Copper toxicity, however, induces several pathologic processes that are detrimental to human health. This discussion highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the importance of early recognition of copper toxicity in regards to improving patient outcomes.
- Outline the potential risk factors for copper toxicity.
- Review the first and second-line treatments available to patients with copper toxicity.
- Explain the importance of improving patient education by an interprofessional team to enhance the prevention of copper toxicity.

# Introduction

Copper is a trace element (minerals required in amounts 1 to 100 mg/day by adults) found in high concentrations in the brain, liver, and kidney. However, because of their size, bone and muscle contain more than half of the copper in the body.

While copper is required as an important catalytic cofactor in redox chemistry for many proteins, when present in excess, free copper ions can cause damage to cellular components. A delicate balance between the uptake and efflux of copper ions determines the amount of cellular copper.

# Etiology

Many instances of copper toxicity are often the result of accidental consumption or installation of contaminated water sources, copper salt-containing topical creams for burn treatments, acidic foods cooked in uncoated copper cookware, or in suicide attempts (the lethal dose of ingested copper is (10 to 20 g). Copper sulfate is an easily accessible chemical in many countries and is even sold over the counter. It is commonly used in farming as a pesticide in the leather industry and making home-made glue. The burning of copper sulfate in houses and shops (as a good luck charm and for some religious activities) is a common practice among Buddhists and Hindus. The bright blue color of the hydrated form of copper sulfate crystals is alluring to children and is a frequent reason for inadvertent poisoning.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of copper poisoning varies largely by region, but it is uncommon in Western countries; it is more common in South Asian countries where it is more prevalent in rural populations. Copper toxicity risks are higher for neonates and infants as they have an immature biliary excretion system and enhanced intestinal absorption.

# History and Physical

Signs of overt acute copper toxicity depend somewhat on the mode of copper overload with ingestions presenting most commonly with gastrointestinal side effects such as abdominal pain, hematemesis, melena, jaundice, anorexia, severe thirst, diarrhea, and vomiting associated with erosive gastropathy.

# Evaluation

Measurement of urine and blood copper levels in addition to serum ceruloplasmin levels remain the mainstay of copper toxicity initial evaluations if history and physical exam raise clinical suspicion.

# Treatment / Management

The therapeutic management of copper toxicity focuses on 4 major principles: Reduction of absorption, close observation, supportive measures with the management of complications, and chelation therapy.

D-Penicillamine is the primary chelator used in copper toxicity, although EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) and DMPS (dimercaptopropanesulfonic acid) may also be used for heavy metal toxicity with copper.

# Differential Diagnosis

Other heavy metal toxicities may present similarly and also must be ruled out. In children, chronic copper toxicity may be phenotypically very similar to Pink disease (infantile acrodynia).

# Prognosis

Prognosis is poor if not treated promptly with chelation and supportive measures as 14% to 36% of the patients pass away within a few hours of a toxic ingestion.

# Complications

Ingestion may lead to stricture formation throughout the gastrointestinal tract. Acute liver failure can occur due to direct copper toxicity-induced tissue necrosis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Stopping the over-the-counter sale of copper sulfate and the restriction of purchase, distribution, and sale to authorized agents is important in decreasing the incidence of copper toxicity. Alternatively, over-the-counter availability of copper sulfate can be limited to large crystals as cases of poisoning are usually due to inadvertent/intentional dissolving of the fine powder-like pulverized form of the compound.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Treatment is most effective when it is applied early in the course of the encounter. This necessitates that all interprofessional healthcare team members, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, be familiar with identifying the signs and symptoms of copper toxicity and take action to initiate prompt treatment and management of the patient's condition, resulting in better outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients at higher risk (i.e., those with Wilson disease) should receive education on modes of excessive copper exposure, avoidance of excessive copper intake, and signs and symptoms that may be concerning for worsening copper overload. Screening of siblings and children of patients with Wilson disease may elucidate those at higher risk.