Patients with suspected neonatal conjunctivitis should be managed based on initial clinical assessment and evaluation of possible complications. If the clinician has high suspicious of neonatal conjunctivitis and the confirmatory tests of the infection are not available, treatment against both (Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae) should start to avoid complications.

If the clinician has established the diagnosis of gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum, immediate initiation of treatment, including hospitalization, is crucial. The first-line treatment of choice is a single dose of ceftriaxone 25 to 50 mg/kg/24 hr, with a maximum of 125 mg. Frequent eye irrigation with sterile isotonic saline is also recommended as an adjunct therapy. An alternative regimen is cefotaxime 100 mg/kg in a single dose. If chlamydial conjunctivitis is confirmed, oral erythromycin 50 mg/kg/24 hr for two weeks remains the regimen of choice; topical erythromycin can be used as adjunct therapy as well. Conjunctivitis secondary to staphylococcal species and pseudomonas requires treatment with systemic antibiotics. On the other hand, patients with herpes simplex conjunctivitis should have treatment with systemic antiviral therapy, along with topical ophthalmic drugs, including 0.15% ganciclovir or 1% trifluridine for 14 days. An ophthalmology consult is necessary in these cases.

Recommendations about management in asymptomatic babies born to mothers infected with Chlamydia trachomatis infection exist; these babies require close monitoring for the appearance of clinical symptoms suggestive of chlamydia ocular or respiratory infections. Oral erythromycin is not recommended in asymptomatic babies due to an increased risk of developing pyloric stenosis.