Molecules of progesterone form from the process of steroidogenesis. While the biosynthetic pathway of producing progesterone completes in a manner that is independent of the steroid-producing organ, the specific subset and quantity of any given steroid hormone are dependent on the enzymatic expression of each respective organ. For example, while both the gonads and the ovaries perform steroidogenesis, these organs differ in their expression of specific enzymes, resulting in the production of unique and varied levels of hormones, such as progesterone. Progesterone, as with all steroids hormones, is derived from cholesterol and is uniquely composed of 21- carbon atoms. All such steroid hormones consist of a cyclopentane-perhydro-phenanthrene backbone, which has 17 carbon molecules that form four-rings.

As a steroid hormone, progesterone functions by binding to a nuclear receptor located within the cytoplasm of a cell. Upon binding within the cytoplasm, progesterone will undergo dimerization followed by translocation to the nucleus, where it can bind to a strand of DNA. The binding of progesterone to DNA within the nucleus allows for the subsequent regulation of gene expression. This steroid hormone mainly binds to progesterone receptors (PGR) located throughout the body, commonly found as three isoforms of the progesterone receptors: PR-A, PR-B, and PR-C. There is an antagonistic relationship between the PR-A and PR-B receptors. PR-A can inhibit DNA transcription that is induced by PR-B as well as the estrogen receptor.