Botulinum antitoxin, also known as botulism antitoxin, is comprised of antibodies or antibody antigen-binding fragments that block the neurotoxin produced by the bacterial species Clostridium botulinum. Botulinum toxin causes botulism, a paralytic syndrome classically characterized by symptoms of descending symmetric muscle weakness. Symptoms can include blurry vision, inability to speak or swallow, and weakness in the bilateral upper extremities with progression to the chest and lower extremities.

Botulinum toxin is often cited as the most poisonous substance known; the lethal dose is 1 nanogram/kilogram.

The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes yearly surveillance data on laboratory-confirmed reports of botulism in the United States; from 2001 to 2016, there have been 100 to 200 confirmed botulism cases reported by the CDC. In one systematic review specifically looking at foodborne botulism from 1920 through 2014, there were 197 reported outbreaks, with 2 to 97 cases per outbreak.

**Indications**

As of March 13, 2010, the heptavalent botulinum antitoxin (HBAT) replaced all other non-infant botulinum antitoxins. This formulation contains fragments of immunoglobulin, Fab, and F(ab')2, that are active against 7 botulinum toxin subtypes. Only A, B, and E are naturally occurring types that cause disease in humans, but the other types potentially could be used as a weaponized biologic agent, so all 7 forms are used in HBAT. HBAT is FDA approved for adult and pediatric patients who have symptomatic foodborne or wound botulism or suspected exposure to botulinum toxin A-G.

The first botulinum antitoxin was developed in the 1970s by the US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID). This antitoxin serum was developed from First Flight, a thoroughbred horse that was the only source of the United States botulinum antitoxin until the 1990s.

Prior to HBAT, formulations included investigational monovalent and licensed bivalent antitoxin serotypes targeting toxin types E and AB, respectively. Serotype AB was used for wound botulism cases, whereas foodborne botulism was treated with serotype AB and E. Both of these preparations of antitoxin are whole immunoglobulins.

There is also an investigational pentavalent toxoid vaccine, which differs from the other antitoxins as it is comprised of the inactivated toxin. Previously, it was reserved for pathologists and other personnel who work closely with C. botulinum or those who are first responders in a biological warfare threat. However, in 2011, the CDC discontinued offering this vaccine completely as new data suggested a declining efficacy of the toxoid.

There are no non-FDA-approved indications.