As with most beta-lactam antibiotics, third-generation cephalosporins are generally well tolerated and characteristically have a low toxicity profile. However, some toxicity profiles may be particularly severe. For instance, reports exist of coagulopathies leading to bleeding with the use of third-generation cephalosporins. For example, because cefoperazone contains the N-methyl-thio-tetrazole (NMTT) side chain, which inhibits vitamin K-dependent carboxylation, administration of cefoperazone and other NMTT-containing cephalosporins can induce alterations in the hepatic glutathione redox state, an increase in oxidized glutathione, and, in turn, inhibition of microsomal reduction of vitamin K epoxide with hypoprothrombinemia and bleeding.

Not unlike other classes and subclasses of antibiotics, the use of third-generation cephalosporins may expose the patient to the risk of superinfection. There are also reports of pseudomembranous colitis induced by Clostridium difficile with the use of third-generation cephalosporins.

Hypersensitivity reactions have been noted, though severe allergic reactions are uncommon. The incidence of cephalosporin allergy is approximately 1–3% of the general population.

Other rare reactions to some third-generation cephalosporins include seizures and disulfiram-like reactions. Concerning neurotoxicity, apart from the well-known epileptogenic activity, cephalosporin-induced neurotoxicity may occur in various clinical presentations, including myoclonus, asterixis, and encephalopathy. The pathogenetic mechanism is not well understood, but it is probably related to the competitive antagonism of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Although extremely rare, the possibility of ceftriaxone-induced encephalopathy featuring limb weakness or numbness, memory impairment, and behavioral problems has been reported.

Cephalosporins are in the high-risk category of medications that may cause Steven-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis as this syndrome may occur with cefdinir and ceftriaxone.