Besides understanding the pathophysiology related to LGCCs in several neurologic diseases, the main clinical significance of these channels stems from pharmacological studies. GABA-A receptors, specifically, are documented as the main drug target for several classes of drugs to achieve sedative, hypnotic, anesthetic, and anticonvulsive effects.

- **Benzodiazepines**– when bound increase the frequency of channel opening events so to potentiate GABA’s inhibitory effect; exhibits a dose-dependent level of sedation, rapid onset of sleep and prolonged stage 2 sleep, achieve stage III of general anesthesia, and effective anticonvulsant effect via generalized CNS depression

- **Barbiturates**– when bound increase the duration of a channel being open so as to potentiate GABA’s inhibitory effect; exhibits a dose-dependent level of sedation, rapid onset of sleep and prolonged stage 2 of sleep, shorter-acting anesthetic used for induction of anesthesia in shorter procedures, effective anticonvulsant effects in generalized tonic-clonic seizures

- **Zolpidem, zaleplon**– work as GABA agonists; the main effects involve the sleep cycle decreasing the time to falling asleep, zolpidem specifically also decreasing REM sleep with minimal effect on slow-wave sleep stages whereas zaleplon has minimal effect on all stages of sleep.

- **Flumazenil**– serves as a GABA antagonist; reverses the effects of inhibitory signaling and all agents described above.

Though there are no specific pharmacologic agents that target glycine receptors yet, it is pertinent to mention the effects of strychnine poisoning. Used as a pesticide, if one experienced high exposure this could result in effects related to glycine receptor antagonism. Symptoms include “awake seizures” described as painful muscle contractions while the patient is conscious - the clinical course lacking a post-ictal period normally seen in seizure activity. Treatment for this is benzodiazepine administration and supportive care with no residual neurologic deficits.