It may be difficult to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions based on clinical evaluation alone. More rapid onset may hint towards a more aggressive or malignant process. If there was slow progression initially that then became rapid, it could indicate the malignant transformation of a pleomorphic adenoma into a carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma. The presence or absence of pain can also help predict the nature of the offending lesion, as the most common malignant lesion, adenoid cystic carcinoma, can exhibit perineural invasion. Usually, orbital imaging is helpful and often necessary to confirm and characterize a possible orbital lesion. Characteristics to discern are whether the tumor is solid vs. cystic, well-defined vs. infiltrative, the presence or absence and amount of calcification, the presence of fat or fluid, bony remodeling or destruction, and contrast enhancement.

Computed tomography (CT) is expedient, widely available, cost-effective, and especially helpful for lacrimal fossa anatomy. It is widely considered the initial imaging modality of choice for lacrimal gland lesions, especially if a benign tumor is suspected. It can identify the presence and size of a mass and its effects on surrounding structures such as the bone (most importantly), extraocular muscles, and the globe. Contrast administration is also helpful to look for enhancing lesions. Computed tomography scans also readily show calcification within a lesion, which can help differentiate the offending mass.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is more expensive, harder to obtain, and has a longer duration but gives superior soft tissue detail. The various image processing sequences allow for detailed characterization of the mass in question, and DWI may delineate benign versus malignant.

Unlike CT, MRI has limited bone visualization but can better evaluate tumor involvement of orbital nerves, important for adenoid cystic carcinoma.

Many cases may require both CT and MRI imaging before further management decisions.