Uterine myocytes are smooth muscle cells, packed heavily with myofilaments, dense bodies, and dense bands. These cells have more actin than myosin by a factor of 6. The dense bodies attach actin filaments to each other, making sure the contraction results in a force along the longitudinal direction of the myocyte. The actin filaments of the contractile machinery are attached to the cytoskeleton with the help of dense bands. This results in transmitting the forces from the contractile units toward the plasma membrane leading to a shortening of the myocyte.

The myosin present in these cells is classified as MII. It is a hexamer molecule made of two myosin heavy chains (MHC) and two pairs of myosin light chains (MLC). It forms three basic domains. The ‘head’ region is made of the globular N-terminal end of the MHCs that protrudes laterally from the filament. It has the actin-binding region as well as the ATP hydrolysis site that gives the energy needed for contraction. This is converted into a larger movement due to the stiff 'neck' domain at the C-terminal end of the motor region

Intermediate filaments present in myocytes not only give shape to the cell but also help in and signal transduction and spatio-temporal organization of the cell augmenting the tension created by the contractile action.

The cells communicate with one another through connections called gap junctions which increase towards the end of pregnancy to help in synchronous contractions. The amount of actin and myosin present in myocytes increases in pregnancy as the uterus hypertrophies. Phosphocreatine, glycogen, and fatty acid deposits are increased in order to provide energy for contractions. The blood flow to the uterus during the pregnancy rises in sync with the growing need for perfusion but later lags behind towards the end of pregnancy.