A urinalysis should be obtained on every patient with a suspected kidney stone.  Hematuria is usually present, but up to 15% of kidney stone patients will not demonstrate even microscopic hematuria. The presence of urinary crystals may suggest urolithiasis. Positive nitrites, leukocytes, and bacteria suggest infection, which should be cultured and treated aggressively.

A KUB can be obtained to screen for the presence of significant nephrolithiasis but may often miss small stones, calculi hidden by overlying bowel, or uncalcified. Ultrasound may be very useful for assessing obstruction and resultant hydronephrosis, especially in pregnancy, where x-ray studies are discouraged. It can also be used to measure the resistive index, which can suggest ureteral obstruction.

Resistive Index = (peak systolic velocity - end-diastolic velocity)/peak systolic velocity

Values of 0.70 or less are considered normal, while higher values suggest obstructive uropathy. Bilateral high resistive indices suggest medical renal disease, while a unilateral high resistive index (0.75 or higher) suggests an obstruction, such as from a stone.  Once a ureteral stone has been identified, the lower the resistive index, the more likely the stone will pass spontaneously.

Ultrasound can also identify uric acid and other non-calcific stones if they are large enough (usually greater than 4 mm), but it can also miss the presence of stones less than 5 mm.

The most sensitive and reliable test to diagnose urolithiasis is a non-contrast abdominal and pelvic CT scan, which will also provide information regarding obstruction with resultant hydronephrosis or concerns for infection.

Even without IV contrast, in most cases, the correct diagnosis can be easily made. If contrast is absolutely necessary, doing the non-contrast study first eliminates urinary stones from consideration. Certainly, if the urinalysis is abnormal for blood or possible infection, a non-contrast abdominal and pelvic CT should be performed before using contrast, which will make identifying any urinary stones far more difficult. If this recommendation is not followed, sooner or later, contrast will be given to a patient who will ultimately be diagnosed with urinary stones. Obscuring urinary stones with IV contrast can make it much more difficult to determine their size, number, or shape, complicating decisions on optimum treatment and possible surgery.

A simultaneous KUB should be done if the CT is positive for stones. This will provide information useful in tracking or following the progress of the stone, its degree of calcification, and its shape, which cannot always be identified from the CT scan alone.