Symptoms of ulnar nerve compression have an insidious onset that typically begins with numbness and paresthesias over the small finger, ulnar half of the ring finger, and hypothenar eminence. Weakness and atrophy of the hand intrinsics may follow if compression occurs proximal to zone 3 of Guyon's canal. Wasting and atrophy of the hand often follows, and leads to clumsiness and decreased pinch strength exhibited by Froment's test positivity. **Froment's test**is a component of the physical examination where a patient is asked to hold a piece of paper between the thumb and radial side of the index finger to isolate adductor pollicis, which as noted above is the only muscle of the thenar eminence that is solely innervated by the ulnar nerve. Flexion of the thumb at the IP joint to utilize flexor pollicis longus (FPL) rather than the adductor pollicis indicates dysfunction of the ulnar nerve and constitutes a positive Froment's sign.

Similarly, **Tinel's sign**at the cubital and ulnar tunnels may reproduce symptoms of paresthesias and numbness, indicating a likely compressive neuropathy at that location.

**Wartenberg's sign**is a test for ulnar nerve motor weakness where a patient is asked to hold his or her fingers fully adducted with the metacarpophalangeal joint, proximal interphalangeal, and distal interphalangeal joints (i.e., MCP, PIP, and DIPs) in full extension. If in so doing, it is found that the small finger drifts away from the others into abduction, this is known as a positive Wartenberg sign. This finding represents a deficiency of the palmar interossei, which are innervated by the ulnar nerve and function to adduct the fingers. An abducted drift of the little finger is caused by unopposed action from the extensor digit minimi (EDM) and the extensor digitorum communis (EDC) muscles to the small finger, which are innervated by the posterior interosseus nerve (PIN).

As noted above, it is critical to understand the different areas and presentations of ulnar nerve dysfunction, and a good physical exam must differentiate between the various sites of compression. For example, a patient who has an isolated motor deficit with no sensory deficit raises suspicion of compression within zone 2 of Guyon's canal, while an isolated sensory deficit may be indicative of a zone 3 compression, or alternatively an early compressive neuropathy more proximally. Reproduction of symptoms with flexion of the elbow raises a strong suspicion of compression at the level of the elbow in the cubital tunnel. It is important to inquire if the patient notices a "snapping" or "popping" in the elbow, which indicates nerve mobility within the cubital tunnel and indicates ulnar nerve transposition may be appropriate management.

Lastly, the examiner must consider alternative diagnoses, including C8 radiculopathy. The sensory deficits associated with C8 radiculopathy and peripheral nerve compressive neuropathy are similar and must be distinguished. By understanding the anatomy, differentiation of these two mimicking clinical pictures becomes much simpler. The medial forearm receives its sensory innervation from the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve and rises from the medial cord of the brachial plexus. Therefore, neurological changes in the medial forearm rather than isolation to the hand are consistent with C8 radiculopathy rather than an ulnar nerve compression more distally at the elbow. Muscles of the thenar eminence, including abductor pollicis brevis (APB), flexor pollicis brevis (FPB), and opponens pollicis (OP), as well as the radial two lumbricals, are innervated by the C8 nerve root through the median nerve, and would be weak in C8 radiculopathy but not in a peripheral ulnar nerve compressive neuropathy.