General treatment principles with most Rhodococcus infections are as follows:

- Use of multiple agents (especially in immunocompromised patients) are often needed.

- Beta-lactams (except carbapenems) should be avoided even if the pathogen is susceptible in-vivo because of the development of resistance to therapy.

- Typically, prolonged therapy is necessary.

- Improvement of host immunity is an integral part of a successful treatment outcome.

For immunocompetent hosts, a single agent may be sufficient such as extended-spectrum macrolide or a fluoroquinolone. For immunocompromised hosts, however, two or more agents, at least one with good macrophage penetration, is preferred. Antibiotic options which should be based on susceptibility results include vancomycin, linezolid, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, macrolides, and rifampin. Central nervous system (CNS) involvement should favor selection of multiple agents with good CNS penetration.

For immunocompromised hosts with a serious infection, treatment is often started with intravenous therapy using two or more agents for 2 to 3 weeks or until clinically improved, followed by oral therapy for a minimum of 2 to 6 months. Oral treatment should be given until symptoms and signs have resolved, and cultures become negative. Definitive therapy is often followed by suppressive therapy until immune reconstitution occurs, especially in AIDS patients. Suppressive therapy could be a combination of rifampin plus either a macrolide, doxycycline, or quinolone. Initiation of antiretroviral therapy should be encouraged in HIV patients with R. equi infection as soon as feasible because restoration of cellular immunity is associated with improved survival.

Adjunctive surgical intervention may be necessary for pulmonary infections. This may include abscess or empyema drainage or even lobectomy if there is a poor response to antibiotics.