**Gastroparesis**

A condition defined by delayed gastric emptying, gastroparesis presents in patients with nausea, vomiting, bloating, flatulence, early satiety, and loss of appetite. The mechanism of the delayed gastric emptying seen here is thought to be mediated by a disturbance in the strength and timing of baseline gastric contractility. While other causes of delayed gastric emptying may be related to a mechanical obstruction, gastroparesis is usually either idiopathic, a feared complication of diabetes mellitus due to autonomic neuropathy or even a result of iatrogenic damage during abdominal surgery. The first-line pharmacological agent used for gastroparesis is metoclopramide, a dopamine receptor antagonist that has prokinetic properties. Second-line agents include erythromycin and cisapride.

A well-established cause of gastroparesis in the diabetic patient population is an autonomic neuropathy of the vagus nerve. When the parasympathetic function to the proximal foregut is compromised, in particular, gastric fundic and antral motor activity

A study published in 2005 by Moldovan et al. investigated diabetic gastroparesis in 36 patients via ultrasonographic techniques. Thirteen patients with diabetes mellitus type 1 were in the study sample (HbA1c = 8.1 +/- 1.4), and 23 with diabetes mellitus type 2 comprised the rest of the subjects (HbA1c = 9.7 +/- 1.2). Focusing specifically on autonomic causes, the investigators further divided patients up into groups based on their type of diabetes, and whether they were found to have normal gastric emptying or delayed gastric emptying. In the group of type 1 diabetics, they observed that 50% with normal gastric emptying tested abnormally for parasympathetic neuropathy; in those with delayed gastric emptying, 71.5% tested positive for parasympathetic abnormalities. In the group comprised of type 2 diabetics, the following results were achieved: 46.5% with normal gastric emptying displayed aberrant parasympathetic function, and 75% with delayed gastric emptying revealed parasympathetic abnormalities.