**General Management**

ABC must be addressed initially as the patient arrives.

- **Airway assessment**( Make sure the airway is clear for adequate oxygenation and ventilation)

- **Breathing**( Note the pattern of breathing and oxygen saturation.)

- **Circulation**( Vital sign and cardiac assessment and management )

- **Oxygen delivery and ventilatory support**(Through nasal cannula, face mask, non-rebreather mask, noninvasive pressure support ventilation, and mechanical ventilation as required)

- 
**Prop up**

- 
**Intra-venous access**

- 
**Urine output monitoring**

After initial airway clearance, oxygenation assessment, and maintenance, management mainly depends upon presentation and should be tailored from patient to patient. Supplemental oxygen is a requirement if the patient is at risk of hypoxemia (SPO2 less than 90% ). Unnecessary oxygen should not be administered as it causes vasoconstriction and reduction in cardiac output. Supplemental oxygen if necessary should be given in the following order:

**Nasal cannula and face mask ---> Non-rebreather mask ---> Trial of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) ---> Intubation and mechanical ventilation**

If the respiratory distress and hypoxemia continue on oxygen supplementation, a trial of non-invasive ventilation should follow if there are no contraindications of NIV, as evidence suggests that it lowers the need for intubation and improves respiratory parameters. If the patient does not improve or have contraindications to NIV, then intubation and mechanical ventilation (with high positive end-expiratory pressure) should be considered.

**Specific Management**

- 
**Treatment of the underlying cause.**

- 
**Non Invasive Management**

- 
**Invasive Management**

**Non-Invasive Management**can be achieved by:

- 
**Pre-Load Reduction which can be achieved by:**

- Nitroglycerin

- Sodium nitroprusside

- Isosorbide dinitrate

- Loop diuretics (furosemide, torsemide, bumetanide)

- Morphine and nesiritide require extreme care.

- BIPAP can help move the fluid out of the lungs by increasing the intrapulmonary pressure

After initial resuscitation and management, the mainstay of treatment in acute settings is diuresis with or without vasodilatory therapy. The aggressiveness of treatment depends upon the initial presentation, hemodynamic, and volume status of the patient. VTE prophylaxis is generally indicated in patients admitted with acute heart failure. Sodium restriction is also necessary for patients with HF.

Patients presenting with acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) with features of pulmonary edema should be treated with intravenous diuretics initially, regardless of the etiology. Patients with HF and features of pulmonary edema receiving treatment with early administration of diuretics had better outcomes according to guidelines of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart Association Task Force.

If renal function is adequate:

- Furosemide: 20 to 40 mg IV

- Torsemide: 10 to 20 mg IV

- Bumetanide: 1 mg IV

If renal function is deranged/severe HF:

- Furosemide: up to 160 to 200 mg IV bolus, or can be given as 5 to 10mg/hr drip.

- Torsemide: up to 100 to 200 mg IV bolus

- Bumetanide: 4 to 8 mg IV bolus

If the patient shows normal renal function, and there is very little/no response to initial treatment, the dose of diuretics should be doubled at 2-hour intervals until achieving the maximum recommended.

The patients who are on chronic diuretic therapy should receive higher doses of diuretics in acute settings. The initial dose for such patients should be greater than two times of daily maintenance dose. A continuous infusion can also be used as an alternative to bolus therapy if the patient responds to the bolus dose.

While being managed in hospital for pulmonary edema IV diuresis can be used using loop diuretics. Furosemide is the usual drug of choice. While diuresis, one should monitor the following:

- Daily weight

- Strict intake and output measures

- Telemetry

- A basic metabolic panel including kidney functions and electrolytes

- Keep serum potassium above 4.0 mEq/L and Mg over 2.0 mEq/L.

- Continuous pulse ox if indicated

- Renal functions

In addition to diuretic therapy, vasodilator therapy may be necessary  Indications include:

- Urgent afterload reduction ( severe hypertension )

- Adjunct to diuretics when the patient doesn't respond to diuretic therapy alone

- For patients with refractory heart failure and decreased cardiac output

Vasodilator therapy has to be used with great caution since it can cause symptomatic hypotension, and the evidence of its efficacy and safety is very limited. When they are needed, they should be used with great caution while monitoring hemodynamic response under expert opinion.

Nitrates (nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate) cause greater venodilation than arterio-dilation and can be used intravenously in recommended doses. Nitroglycerin can be used at 5 to 10 mcg/min initially and can be increased gradually to the maximum recommended dose (200 mcg/min) while closely monitoring the hemodynamic responses. Isosorbide dinitrate has a much longer half-life than nitroglycerin, which puts it at a disadvantage if the drug requires discontinuation because of the symptomatic hypotension.

Sodium nitroprusside causes both venous and arterio-dilation and can significantly lower the blood pressure. It requires close hemodynamic monitoring through an intra-arterial catheter. It is used initially in a dose of 5 to 10 mcg/min, which can be titrated up to 400mcg/min, which is the maximum recommended dose. At higher doses, it increases the risk of cyanide toxicity. Hence it has to be used with extreme caution and with close monitoring under expert supervision.

Nesiritide should not routinely be a therapeutic option for the treatment of HF. A large randomized trial fusing nesiritide in patients of acutely decompensated heart failure (ADHF)  shows that it was not associated with any change in the rate of death or rehospitalization, increased risk of hypotension and a small non-significant change in dyspnea.

Salt and water restriction is generally indicated for patients with HF.

Vasopressor receptor antagonist (tolvaptan) can also be used with caution and under supervision.

- 
**After-Load Reduction which can be achieved by:**

- ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI):  captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, perindopril, etc.

- ARBs (angiotensin receptor blockers): valsartan, telmisartan, olmesartan, candesartan, etc.

- Sodium nitroprusside

ACE inhibitors or ARNI is the mainstay of chronic treatment for patients with HFrEF. If the patient doesn't tolerate ACE-inhibitors or ARNI, then ARB should be considered the first-line choice for prolonged treatment. Beta-blockers and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists require extra care if used.

If blood pressure is low, start ionotropic agents, and vasopressors (catecholamines and phosphodiesterase inhibitors) should commence. The treatment for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) differs from heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. (HFpEF).

For patients of HFrEF presenting with hypotension, intense hemodynamic monitoring is necessary. The patient should undergo evaluation for signs of shock (confusion, cold extremities, decreased urine output, etc.). If the patient of HFrEF has signs of hypotension and/or blood pressure less than 80mmg, Ionotropes should be added immediately and titrated accordingly. For patients of persistent shock, vasopressors also have to be added.

For the patients of HFpEF, only vasopressors are necessary. Inotropes are NOT indicated in patients with HFpEF and dynamic left ventricular obstruction (most commonly hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy).

**Invasive Management**

- **IABP**(intra-aortic balloon pump)

- 
**Ultrafiltration**

- 
**Ventricular assist devices**

- 
**ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation)**

- 
**Cardiac transplant**

- **Valve replacement******(in case of valvular issues)

- 
**PCI (percutaneous coronary intervention)**

- 
**CABG (coronary artery bypass graft)**

- **Intubation**(if required to maintain the airway and also helps in moving the fluid out)

In a patient of severe HFrEF with acute hemodynamic compromise and cardiogenic shock, mechanical cardiac support is available while waiting on a decision or waiting on recovery hence called " bridge to the decision and "bridge to recovery." The patients usually have blood pressure less than 90mmHg, PCWP greater than 18mmHg, and a cardiac index of less than 2L/min per meter square.

**IABP**(intra-aortic balloon pump) is the device that is used most commonly among the mechanical circulatory devices as it is least expensive, easily insertable, and readily available. It consists of a balloon in the aorta that inflates and deflates synchronously with the heartbeat causing increased cardiac output and coronary flow. IABPs are used commonly for temporary circulatory support with patients of advanced heart failure while waiting for a heart transplant or VADs. It is not a definitive therapy but is widely used as a bridge therapy for patients with cardiogenic shock and also as an adjunct to thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction for stabilization.

**Ventricular assist devices**as compared to IABP have greater efficacy in increasing the hemodynamic parameters. These have more complications and require more expertise, take longer to insert and cost more in comparison. They are an option in acute decompensated heart failure. They can also be useful in complications of acute heart failure like cardiogenic shock, mitral regurgitation, and VSDs. They can be different kinds like left ventricle to the aorta, left atrium to the aorta, right ventricular assist device, etc.

**Ultrafiltration**(UF) is the most effective approach for sodium, and water removal effectively improves hemodynamics in patients of heart failure. UF is the process of abstracting plasma water from the whole blood across a hemofilter because of the transmembrane pressure gradient. It is preferred over diuretics because it removes sodium and water more effectively and does not stimulate the neurohormonal activation through macula densa. UF is used in patients with HF as it decreases PCWP, restores diuresis, reduces diuretic requirements, corrects hyponatremia, improves cardiac output, and thus improves congestion.

UF can be crucial in patients with heart failure and resistance to diuretic therapy and can serve to optimize the volume status. Many questions regarding UF require examination in further studies, and the evidence does not support its widespread use as a substitute for diuretics.