All post-cardiac transplant patients should undergo routine screening for cardiac allograft vasculopathy, as early detection may improve prognosis.

During the first 5 years post-transplant, coronary angiography should be performed every 1 or 2 years if renal function is preserved (estimated glomerular filtration rate ≥30 to 40 mL/min/1.73 m). In cases of significant renal impairment (<30 to 40 mL/min/1.73 m), annual dobutamine stress echocardiography should be performed to assess for inducible coronary ischemia.

Five years post-transplant, low-risk patients can continue surveillance with annual dobutamine stress echocardiography. If patients have evidence of evolving CAV, they should undergo annual coronary angiograms so long as renal function permits. For those patients with poor quality echocardiography images, a dobutamine or dipyridamole stress radionuclide myocardial perfusion study can be performed.

Coronary angiography should be performed on post-transplant patients who present with a change in clinical status and graft dysfunction with a drop in left ventricular ejection fraction, which cannot be explained by acute rejection.

It should be noted that CAV narrows the coronary arteries in a diffuse, concentric pattern, unlike atherosclerosis, which is eccentric and focal and easier to detect on coronary angiography. Thus, angiography has its limitations, especially in early CAV, and may underestimate the severity and burden of the disease. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), in conjunction with coronary flow reserve measurements, overcome this limitation.

Once the diagnosis of CAV has been established, echocardiograms should be performed to follow left ventricular ejection fraction and allograft dysfunction serially. In addition, annual coronary angiograms aid in the diagnosis of lesions amenable to percutaneous coronary interventions or, in advanced cases, if re-transplantation should be considered.