Patellar tendinopathy is mainly a clinical diagnosis made through a detailed history and meticulous physical examination. Appropriate questions which will cue in the diagnosis: Sport practiced, schedule of practice and competition, which position the athlete plays, and level of performance. The patient will usually complain of well-localized pain and tenderness on the inferior tip of the patella.

Patellar tendinopathy shares other common signs and symptoms of other knee pathologies, such as pain with prolonged sitting, squatting, and stair climbing. Also, patients may complain of pain from activities that involve prolonged flexion of the knee, otherwise known as the " Movie Theatre sign."

Examination of the knee might reveal a localized swelling overlying the patellar tendon, which is tender to palpate. In addition, the following signs have been described; Basset's sign, "passive extension – flexion sign," where the examiner palpates the anterior aspect of the fully extended knee and identifies the highest tender point, which is usually at the inferior pole of the patella and the proximal part of the patellar tendon. The examination is repeated at 90 degrees of knee flexion, and the sign is positive when there is a marked reduction in tenderness to palpation in the flexed knee position. The other sign is the "standing active quadriceps sign," where the whole patellar tendon is palpated while the patient is standing, and the examination is repeated while the patient is standing on the involved extremity with the knee in 30 degrees of flexion. Similarly, the sign is positive if there is a marked reduction in tenderness to palpation while the quadriceps muscle is contracted. The concept behind these signs was explained in a cadaveric study that showed when the quadriceps muscle is tensioned, as, in 90 degrees of knee flexion, the deep fibers of the tendon do not deform to anterior palpation.

A thorough examination of the entire lower extremity is needed to identify relevant deficits at the hip, knee, and ankle/foot region. Often malalignment of the foot, heel, or tibia can place excess stress on the knee extensor tendons increasing the risk of tendinopathy.

There are multiple scales for evaluating tendon overuse. A relatively more accurate scale is the Victorian Institute Sports tendon Assessment (VISA) score. The scale was tailored specifically to evaluate symptoms and functionality in patellar tendinopathy. The scale has good inter and intra-observer reliability and stability. It is a brief questionnaire that assesses symptoms, simple function tests, and the ability to play sports.