**Violence**

Violence or witnessing violence can have both immediate physical and long-lasting psychiatric implications. While people who experience sexual abuse and intimate partner violence are at increased risk of contracting sexually transmitted infections like HIV, people who experience other types of violence like physical and emotional abuse and neglect are also more likely to develop risky sexual behaviors like engaging with multiple partners and not practicing safe sex.

**Alcohol Use Disorder**

Alcohol use disorder decreases an individual's life expectancy by approximately ten years.

**Tobacco Use**

Tobacco use is a major risk factor for the development of lung diseases like bronchitis, emphysema, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Smoking mediates atherosclerosis, which leads to a variety of cardiac and vascular pathologies like myocardial infarction, stroke, peripheral vascular disease, and erectile dysfunction. Furthermore, cigarette smoke contains many carcinogens responsible for causing various cancers, particularly of the lung, mouth, larynx, esophagus, and pancreas.

**Risky Sexual Behaviors**

Unsafe sexual practices increase the risk of developing sexually transmitted infections like HIV, chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, trichomoniasis, etc.

**Eating Disorders**

Eating disorders can cause serious health problems if left untreated. Anorexia nervosa can cause cardiovascular problems like arrhythmias and hypotension, hypothermia, pancytopenia, amenorrhea, osteoporosis, hypoglycemia, hypercortisolemia, gastroparesis, constipation, xerosis, and lanugo hair. Bulimia nervosa can lead to dental erosions and gastroesophageal reflux, while binge eating disorder can cause diabetes due to obesity. Furthermore, refeeding after a period of under-nutrition can generate significant metabolic changes that can give rise to fatal consequences.