A wide range in the percentages of symptomatic versus asymptomatic cysts has been reported, and this reported rate will depend greatly on the population in which it is being calculated. The location of the arachnoid cyst is quite variable, with a clear dominance of lesions consistently found in the middle cranial fossa and the retrocerebellar locations. A smaller number of cysts are present at the convexity and in the suprasellar region. The lowest frequency of lesions is found in the cerebellopontine angle, intraventricular space, supracerebellar cistern, quadrigeminal cistern, ambient cistern, anterior fossa, and brainstem. A significant variation is reported in the incidence of the less frequent arachnoid cysts locations. For instance, Al-Holou et al. report very few intraventricular cysts in children (0.3%), no intraventricular cysts in adults, and Hall et al. reported 12% of cysts to be intraventricular in children.

Most commonly, the arachnoid cyst will be detected incidentally unless a patient is sent to a referral center due to being symptomatic. Fortunately, the most common locations for cysts in the middle cranial fossa and retrocerebellar region are not associated with symptoms. Cysts in less common locations are found to be more likely symptomatic. In unusual cases, when arachnoid cysts cause symptoms, they present mainly by two mechanisms. One is secondary to mass effect, and the other is due to rupture. Arachnoid cysts are discovered related to many different presentations since they are usually incidental and not associated with the reason the patient is being imaged. Arachnoid cysts have been found during imaging work-up for headache, seizure, increased intracranial pressure, hydrocephalus, suspected stroke, hemiparesis, nausea/vomiting, dizziness, cranial nerve dysfunctions, tinnitus, vertigo, developmental delay/regression, behavior concerns, visual symptoms, and trauma.

Even in patients who present with a headache, if an arachnoid cyst is detected, it most likely is not related to the headache and is an incidental finding. However, careful evaluation of each case is required. The arachnoid cyst can be very large and can be a definitive cause of headaches and seizures.

It is rare for the arachnoid cyst to be a cause of a significant neurological symptom such as hydrocephalus, ataxia, or cranial nerve impingement. However, given the relatively common incidence and the many locations that arachnoid cysts occur in, an extensive array of symptoms are caused by arachnoid cysts. These include vision loss, nausea/vomiting, macrocephaly, third nerve palsy, trochlear dysfunction, trigeminal neuropathy, hemifacial spasm, sensory neuronal hearing loss, facial palsy, vagus nerve palsy, vertigo, and eighth cranial neuropathy.

Very unusual symptomatology has resulted from arachnoid cysts. Bobble-head doll syndrome, a rhythmic movement of the head, has been reported related to third ventricular dilation and potentially cerebellar involvement.

The rupture of an arachnoid cyst to cause a subdural hygroma is rare.

The spinal arachnoid cyst is rare.