The Ghon complex is named after Anton Ghon (1866-1936), an Austrian pathologist who described primary tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis as having a pulmonary lesion with regional lymph involvement.

The Ghon complex is a non-pathognomonic finding on chest radiography that is significant for pulmonary tuberculosis.

The most frequently encountered route of infection with M. tuberculosis is through the respiratory tract. The predilection of M. tuberculosis for the upper lobes is possibly due to the ventilatory physiology of this region.

The Ghon complex should not be confused with the Ranke complex. The Ghon complex precedes the development of the Ranke complex. The Ghon complex is seen in untreated primary pulmonary tuberculosis infection with Ghon lesion fibrosis. The Ranke complex results from a primary tuberculosis Ghon complex undergoing calcification during the inflammatory process and is characterized by a calcified Ghon lesion and calcified mediastinal lymph nodes.

After primary infection, M. tuberculosis can progress in one of three ways. The primary infection can be eradicated from the body by the immune system. The infection may persist in a dormant, controlled state, sometimes called latent tuberculosis; latency may last indefinitely. The primary infection may bypass latency and progress to cause symptomatic disease, sometimes referred to as active tuberculosis.

Patients with latent tuberculosis are at risk of reactivation to active tuberculosis; this risk is highly dependent on the immune status of the host.

On pathological examination, the Ghon complex usually measures approximately 1.0 to 1.5 centimeters in area.

Cavitation of Ghon complexes occurs with greater frequency in children when compared with adults, and the presence of these lesions correlates with positive gastric aspirates and sputum cultures in children.

The Ghon complex is not unique to pulmonary tuberculosis and can also be seen in other infections, such as pulmonary histoplasmosis and paracoccidioidomycosis.