Before the time of coronary artery stenting, probing for ways to overcome the deficiencies of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) was solely based on small experiments, which demonstrated the healing response of the treated coronary vessels was equivalent to the degree of foisted damage.

Coronary artery calcification increases the complexity of PCI, with less favorable results than in noncalcified lesions. Severely calcified coronary lesions increase the risk of dissection, inhibit stent delivery and adequate stent expansion, and are prone to stent mal-apposition. Various atherectomy techniques came into play at different times in history. Directional coronary atherectomy (DCA) was used in a randomized trial in 1987 for the first time. Excimer laser coronary angioplasty (ELCA) and percutaneous transluminal rotational atherectomy (PTRA) emerged later in 1988. Holmium laser angioplasty (HLA) was launched commercially in 1990, cutting balloon angioplasty (CBA) entered in 1991, and the latest ablative device, orbital atherectomy (OA), started in 2008.

For the past two decades, several mechanical approaches to ablate or section atheromatous plaque during PCI have undergone small mechanistic studies that reported promising findings. However, dozens of large clinical trials have failed to demonstrate that the strategy of plaque ablation can achieve better clinical outcomes than PTCA alone. Hence, randomized trials challenged the ablation hypothesis. Guidelines now specify that athero-ablative devices should not be used routinely during PCI.