Following intravitreal implantation, complications can occur, including conjunctival hyperemia, conjunctival hemorrhage, vitreous hemorrhage, vitreous loss, hypotony, choroidal detachment, retinal detachment, accidental lens touch, intraocular inflammation, and wound dehiscence.

NBI requires multiple surgeries for implantation, replacement, or removal as necessary. This can lead to an increased risk of post-surgical complications such as endophthalmitis, pseudoendophthalmitis, vitreous haze and hemorrhage, cataracts, and retinal detachment.

Vitrasert can also lead to epiretinal membrane formation.

BI can have an uncontrolled release of drug load during the final burst stage of the implant, which can cause complications related to drug toxicity. BI can also cloud vision, and their movement in front of the retina or anterior chamber is a possible complication.

Steroid intravitreal implants are additionally associated with risks of increased intraocular pressure leading to increased IOP and glaucoma and the development or progression of cataracts. They can also migrate into the anterior chamber, which can secondarily cause damage to the corneal endothelium.

Ranibizumab PDS is associated with endophthalmitis, retinal detachment, implant dislocation, septum dislodgement, vitreous hemorrhage, conjunctival erosion, retraction, and bleb formation.

**Follow-up**

Follow-up of patients with intravitreal implants is important for treatment response, monitoring of side effects, and early identification of complications.

Follow-up visits depend on the disease being treated but are usually scheduled at 4 to 6 weeks to look for treatment response.

Best-corrected visual acuity should be checked at every visit.

IOP measurement by applanation tonometry is important, especially for intravitreal implants containing steroids.

Slit lamp examination is also important to look for any anterior chamber reaction and development or progression of cataracts.

In NIPU and CMV retinitis, a fundus examination should be done to look for a decrease in vitreous haze and resolution of retinitis lesions.

Ancillary investigations such as optical coherence tomography (OCT), OCT angiography (OCTA), and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) play a role in the follow-up.

In conditions such as DME and RVO- ME, OCT can aid in determining the response to treatment. Central subfield thickness (CST) is assessed at every visit to look for the resolution of ME. It helps in the decision-making process of re-treatment.

OCT, OCTA, and FFA can be useful in nAMD undergoing intravitreal implants to look for any signs of activity or recurrence of choroidal neovascular membranes, which will require re-treatment.