The development of the heart occurs in various stages. During embryogenesis, the formation of the primitive streak follows the invagination of epiblast cells, indicating the start of gastrulation. Gastrulation divides the embryonic plate, which originally contained two layers between the yolk sac and amniotic cavity, into three germ layers; ecto-, meso-, and endoderm. The mesoderm is situated between the ectoderm and endoderm layers and, during development, spreads laterally and cranially, forming different structures, particularly the heart.

The myocardium begins developing during the second week of gestation in the dorsal mesocardium. After three weeks of fertilization, the primitive heart begins to develop as a straight tube changing its configuration as time proceeds. This entails folding of the tube, giving rise to bulges that become analogous to the adult heart; truncus arteriosus develops into the aorta and pulmonary artery, bulbus cordis develops into smooth left and right ventricles, primitive ventricle into trabeculated LV/RV, primitive atrium into trabeculated atria and the sinus venosus which develops into the right atrium (sinus venarum) and coronary sinus.

Around the fourth week of development, the heart undergoes a cardiac looping process that establishes the heart's left-sided orientation. This is performed with the help of cilia, a motile structure, and dynein, a protein.

As the heart is shaped into its proper configuration, further developmental changes occur. The heart initially begins as a single chamber, but through the growth of various septa, four separate chambers are created. The muscular ventricular septum originates from the bottom of the ventricle, with a membranous septum forming shortly after, joining with the aortic-pulmonary septum as its twists down and fuses together. The endocardial cushions also appear at this time and separate the left and right atria and ventricles. Any structural changes or defects in these processes can lead to congenital heart disorders.