As unstable 18-F decays, it releases positrons. Within about 2 mm of travel from their origination site in tissue, positrons collide with electrons and release gamma energy (photons). The photons strike scintillator crystals housed in a device that encircles the patient. Crystals used in modern imaging machines vary by manufacturer, each with its own photon detection yield and resolution; a common crystal type used for PET is lutetium oxyorthosilicate. The crystals transmit the photoelectric energy into circuits that convert the electric energy into computer data. The scintillation (photon) detector is designed to detect only photons that simultaneously register when traveling in opposing 180-degree directions (meaning they have originated from the same location). Thus, a computer algorithm can be used to directly pinpoint the source of the two photons within several millimeters of error in three dimensions. The resolution of scanning using 18-FDG PET is typically considered to be 8 mm, meaning that a hypermetabolic tissue that is smaller than 8 mm may not be visible.

Similarly, a CT machine envelops a patient with an external source of radiation, detects the photons that pass through the patient to a photon receptor, and produces images that demonstrate the size, shape, and composition of organs and abnormalities within the body based on the distribution of absorbed photons.

At the outpatient or inpatient facility where it is performed, PET-CT requires an extensive list of additional equipment, including laboratory equipment for containing, measuring, and administering the pharmaceuticals involved.  The sample of liquid containing the 18-FDG injected intravenously into the patient is normally shipped to the imaging facility based on a pre-calculated dose per patient because 18-FDG is synthesized using a particle accelerator, which very few medical institutions own. 18-FDG pharmacology and PET equipment are reviewed in further detail elsewhere.

PET-CT image interpretation also depends on the type of computer software used. For example, many programs superimpose the PET images onto the CT images and show the PET images in a 3D-like fashion.

In 2016 the American College of Radiology (ACR) published guidelines for imaging patients with PET-CT (ACR–SPR Practice Parameter or Performing FDG-PET/CT in Oncology (Res 25)). The guidelines specify criteria that imaging equipment should meet or exceed, including PET scanner and CT scanner pixel resolution, photon detection sensitivity, CT slice thickness, and scan time.

The ACR left open several technical parameters to the discretion of the imaging facility, such as:

- PET scintillation detector type and photon detection method. The ACR reported the absence of any head-to-head trials showing one type of scanning equipment superior in quality and cost.

- Whether to inject the same amount of 18-FDG for every patient or use a formula to vary the dose between patients, dose amounts can be based on parameters that can change from among patients, such as body mass, crystal photon detector settings, and percentage of scan slice overlap.

- Whether to use intravenous contrast media. Contrast may or may not add diagnostic information. It can artifactually lower tissue SUVs, but the impact of this on diagnostic interpretation is usually limited.

- Injection to scan time. Most facilities obtain transmission images 60 minutes following 18-FDG administration. However, this time may be shorter (no less than 45 minutes) or longer for clinical trials or unique clinical situations. SUVs obtained at injection-to-scan times of 60 minutes were found to vary little compared to injection-to-scan times of 55 to 75 minutes (Radiological Society of North America. FDG-PET/CT UPICT V1.0. 2014).