Depending on both the level and complexity of the injury, the treatment can range from simple drainage procedures to reconstruction of the biliary system.

The Strasberg classification can help guide treatment. In Strasberg type A injuries, the biliary system is in continuity with a leak from the cystic duct or minor hepatic duct through the liver bed. If there is a drain already in place, the output can be monitored to evaluate for spontaneous closure of the leak. Endoscopic stenting across the lesion can help occlude the leak and facilitate drainage through the biliary system by decreasing the pressure in the proximal biliary system. Sphincterotomy may be necessary in cases of retained choledocholithiasis. If the patient has peritonitis or worsening intraabdominal sepsis, exploration may be necessary for washout. For Type A injuries involving leakage from the cystic duct stump, coil embolization the cystic duct by interventional radiology has been described in a few cases.

Strasberg type B injuries with only minimal pain and mild elevation in liver function tests can be treated conservatively and monitored. The occlusion may go unnoticed and cause segmental cholestasis, intrahepatic stones, and atrophy of the right lobe of the liver. If there is evidence of cholangitis due to the occlusion, the patient will require drainage of the affected segment via percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram with biliary drainage tube placement or hepaticojejunostomy. Segmental resection of the involved segments may be necessary if the atrophy is significant. Endoscopic management of occlusive injuries is typically unsuccessful as the occlusion puts the proximal biliary segment in discontinuity with the distal biliary tree.

Strasberg type C injuries are similar to type B, but the injured accessory duct is leaking instead of occluded. Both types B and C injuries are not amenable to endoscopic intervention as the segment proximal to the injury is not in continuity with the biliary system. Percutaneous drainage of the subhepatic biliary leak can result in spontaneous closure and prevention of biliary peritonitis. In rare instances, the patient may require hepaticojejunostomy or hepatectomy.

Strasberg type D injuries involve a medial partial injury to the common bile duct. If the injury is small with no evidence of devascularization, the defect can be closed using interrupted 5-0 absorbable monofilament suture with a drain left in place, endoscopic sphincterotomy, and stent placement. If there is devascularization, the surgeon should still repair the injury with a drain left in place in anticipation of an expected bile leak. Endoscopic stent placement with interventional radiologic drain placement is an alternative, especially for injuries noted in the postoperative period. A multidisciplinary approach is necessary to ensure proper treatment and avoid further injury or complications. A HIDA scan is obtained two to four weeks after the insertion of the endoscopic stent to evaluate for a continued leak. In the absence of a leak on HIDA, the stent is removed endoscopically, and cholangiogram is performed. A leak noted on cholangiogram is treated with sphincterotomy or stent replacement for an additional four weeks. The clinician should follow these patients with repeat ERCP or MRCP to evaluate for the development of stricture, leak, or progression to a Strasberg type E injury.

Strasberg type E injuries that are noted at the time of injury can be repaired primarily in an end to end fashion if there is no tension on the anastomosis. This repair should be done over a T-tube that provides external drainage or a Y tube that drains into the duodenum. If the anastomosis is not performable in a tension-free fashion, a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy is the preferred reconstruction option. In cases of friable tissue or very dense adhesions where hepaticojejunostomy is not feasible, a pedicled omental patch can be used as a temporary repair to control bile leak until definitive reconstruction.

Vascular injuries associated with bile duct injuries can present with hemobilia, abscess, or ischemia, for which the management is angioembolization, percutaneous drainage, or liver resection, respectively.