Regionally, the pharynx divides into three parts which are from superior to inferior:-the nasal pharynx, located behind the posterior nasal apertures (choanae), the oral pharynx, located behind the opening of the oral cavity, and the laryngeal pharynx, located behind the inlet (opening) of the larynx. First, the nasal pharynx is only related to the respiratory tract as air passes through it from the nasal cavities. Also, within the lateral surface of the back of the nasopharynx, there are two openings, one on either side, which is called the auditory tubes (Eustachian tubes or pharyngotympanic tubes) surrounded by elevations of mucous membrane called tubal elevations. These tubes are connected to the middle ears (tympanic cavities) posteriorly and mainly serve to equalize pressure and facilitate the drainage of the secretions of the middle ears. Second, the oral pharynx is a continuation of the oral cavity and functions to pass the bolus toward the laryngeal pharynx below.

As the bolus passes from the oral cavity, the muscles of the soft palate contract to close the choanae so that food does not enter the nasal cavity. Simultaneously, the epiglottis (single cartilage at the upper part of the larynx) is pushed anteriorly to close the laryngeal inlet preventing food from entering the airways. Lastly, the laryngeal pharynx receives bolus from the oral pharynx and passes it into the esophagus for digestion. Air passes from the upper two parts of the pharynx (nasal and oral) and enters the laryngeal pharynx toward the inlet of the larynx and from there to trachea down the respiratory tract.