Glaucoma management is tailored to the specific type and severity. However, there is no treatment at this time that can reverse any of the vision loss that has occurred, it can only help to prevent further damage and vision loss. Visual field testing and mapping of vision loss are helpful in monitoring disease progression.

Open-angle glaucoma is generally managed initially with medications to lower eye pressure. Medication classes include prostaglandin analogs, beta blockers, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, an alpha-2 agonist, miotic agents, and more recently rho-kinase inhibitors and nitric-oxide donating medications. Laser trabeculoplasty is also used as a primary treatment option in some cases. If medical management cannot be achieved successfully, procedures like laser trabeculoplasty, trabeculectomy, inserting a drainage valve/tube shunt, or laser treatment to the ciliary body to reduce aqueous production can be used to establish better control of IOP. Minimally invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS) is another evolving option for those who have mild-moderate glaucoma. MIGS has a more favorable overall safety profile compared with conventional trabeculectomy and tube shunts, more rapid recovery time, and have proven effective for IOP reduction to the mid-high teens level. Studies also support that MIGS placement can reduce the number of pressure lowering medications required to maintain target IOP levels.

Normal-tension glaucoma can be treated with medications to lower intraocular pressure and should also have any other possible underlying medical conditions treated. Medications such as prostaglandin analogs, alpha-2 agonists, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and miotics. Beta-blockers are controversial due to questions of decreased optic nerve head perfusion, especially with the potential exacerbation of the early AM nadir in blood pressure observed. If medical management fails, laser trabeculoplasty or filtration surgery can be utilized if continued progression of vision loss. In the Collaborative normal tension glaucoma study, patients with normal-tension glaucoma have been shown to slow or stabilize their field loss after a 30% reduction in IOP.

Angle-closure is an emergency and must be treated as such. This is because pressures can be high enough to cause glaucomatous optic nerve damage, ischemic nerve damage, or retinal vascular occlusion.

Secondary glaucoma should be treated for the underlying cause of glaucoma with the possible addition of medications to lower intraocular pressure depending on the underlying cause.