**History:**

Patients with cavernous sinus thrombosis most commonly complain of fever, headache (50% to 90%), periorbital swelling and pain, vision changes, such as photophobia, diplopia, loss of vision. Symptoms may be present at onset or progress subacutely over days. Usually, it starts with one eye and then progresses to another eye. Less common symptoms may include rigors, stiff neck, facial numbness, confusion, seizures, stroke symptoms, or coma.

**Physical Exam:**

Vital signs may reveal fever (sometimes in a “picket fence” pattern characteristic for septic thrombophlebitis), tachycardia, or hypotension.

Neurologic findings such as altered mentation, lethargy, or obtundation, are not unusual. Seizures or stroke syndromes (such as hemiparesis) are rare.

Eye findings are nearly universal (90%). These include periorbital edema (initially unilateral but typically bilateral), lid erythema, chemosis, ptosis, proptosis (due to impaired venous drainage of the orbit), restricted or painful eye movement, and less commonly papilledema, retinal hemorrhages, decreased visual acuity (7% to 22%), photophobia, diminished pupillary reflex, and pulsating conjunctiva. Blindness can result in 8% to 15% of cases.

Individually, a sixth cranial neuropathy is the most common neuropathy, resulting in partial ophthalmoplegia with limited eye abduction. Most cases, however, progress rapidly to complete external ophthalmoplegia from third, fourth and sixth cranial neuropathy.

Internal ophthalmoplegia results in a nonreactive pupil, from paralysis of the iris and ciliary body, either constricted (miosis) from loss of sympathetic fibers from the short ciliary nerves or dilated (mydriasis) from loss of parasympathetic fibers from cranial nerve III.

Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis) may be present.

The sensory exam might reveal diminished sensation to face (due to compression of the ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the fifth cranial nerve) and an impaired corneal reflex.