The involvement of a multidisciplinary and interprofessional team involving clinicians (MDs and DOs, as well as mid-level practitioners such as NPs, and PAs), interventional radiologists, nephrologists, cardiologists, hematologists, and a vascular surgeon is required for the management of renal infarction. Nursing staff and pharmacists round out the interprofessional team.

While a clinician diagnoses the case of renal infarction, endovascular procedures are referred to an interventional radiologist or vascular surgeon. Complications such as acute kidney injury may need evaluation from a nephrologist. The etiology of renal infarction may require consultation with a cardiologist and hematologist. A combined approach by all these clinicians helps identify and tackle the rare challenging diagnosis of renal infarction.

Nursing will provide crucial support in patient examination and counseling, surgical preparation and assistance during surgery, and post-operative care. Pharmacists will be critical in all these cases, particularly with anticoagulation regimens, medication reconciliation, and counseling patients regarding their medication.

Any multidisciplinary/interprofessional healthcare team member who notes a change in patient status performs an intervention themselves or notes therapeutic failure or an adverse event should immediately record their findings in the patient's chart or medical record and notify other team members so that corrective action can be implemented. This kind of interprofessional information sharing and collaborative action will optimize patient outcomes in renal infarction cases and prevent any adverse results. [Level 5]