A complete medical history should be taken at every patient encounter, including medications and allergies, as antibiotics aid in treating some apical diseases by decreasing the associated complex bacterial load.

Apical periodontitis can be classified according to its presentation into 1) initial apical periodontitis (also known as acute apical periodontitis) and 2) chronic apical periodontitis.

**Initial Apical Periodontitis**

Initial apical periodontitis can result from both infectious or aseptic inflammation.

Symptoms at this stage include pain, tenderness on pressure, difficulty eating in the area, and sensation of tooth elevation.

The early stage of apical periodontitis is an inflammatory process where neutrophils are extravasated to the area through chemotaxis. The neutrophils attack and kill the offending microorganisms and release leukotrienes and prostaglandins, which attract more neutrophils and macrophages to the site.

Activated macrophages release other cytokines that intensify the vascular response and osteoclastic bone resorption. At this point, the acute phase may take different courses: healing or worsening the infection. When root canal therapy is initiated, and the offending microbes are removed from the root canal system, the lesion may resolve, and the periapical tissues will remain unchanged radiographically.

**Chronic Apical Periodontitis**

If the oral microbes and their by-products remain after the initial host response, the lesion may turn from a neutrophil-dominated lesion to a macrophage-dominated lesion encapsulated in connective tissue.

In the chronic phase, activated T- cells produce a variety of cytokines that down-regulate and suppress the osteoclastic activity (reducing bone resorption) and increase the production of connective tissue growth factor (TGF-beta).