Like with all infections, prompt initiation of antibiotics and source control is fundamental. Treatment of empyema usually involves medical and surgical treatment. In community-acquired empyema, the use of a third or fourth-generation cephalosporin plus metronidazole or ampicillin with a beta-lactamase inhibitor will provided good coverage. In hospital-acquired or trauma-related, and surgery-related empyema, coverage of Pseudomonas and MRSA by adding vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole or piperacillin-tazobactam is essential . Due to the difficulty isolating anaerobes, the coverage for this organism should continue regardless of negative cultures. There is not a proven benefit of intrapleural antibiotics. Antibiotic should be given for 2 to 6 weeks, depending on patient response, source control, and organism.

Tube thoracostomy is the most common type of drainage, bore tube versus smaller tubes have not shown any difference regarding mortality and prognosis, but bigger tubes are associated with more pain. For this reason, small tubes are frequently placed, generally smaller than 14F. The position of the tube should be confirming with an x-ray or CT scan. Lack of clinical improvement in the first 24 hours is usually related to tube malposition or blockage. Blockage of the chest tube can be prevented with frequent flushing, but the necessary amount and frequency of this process is unclear. Any indication of a persistent fluid or other locations should be addressed with more aggressive therapy including a larger tube, more tubes, or surgery. The chest tube can usually be removed when the daily production of pleural fluid is proximal 350 ml/day or less.

The use of intrapleural medication has been around for at least 60 years. Fibrinolytics such as urokinase, streptokinase, and tissue plasminogen activator have been tried, as well as, mucolytics such as DNase. The isolated use of fibrinolytics, so far, has not shown differences in mortality or surgical intervention. On the other hand, some studies have shown that the combination of fibrinolytic and mucolytic, specifically TPA and DNase increases the amount of fluid drainage and the need for surgery, unfortunately, no changes in mortality have been shown. Currently, the use of  intrapleural agents is not a standard of care.

Usually, surgical intervention is the last resource. The main goal of surgical therapy in empyema is the evacuation of the pus from the pleural cavity and lung expansion. In patients requiring surgical intervention in acute empyema, video-assisted thoracotomy (VATS) is the first step. It is a less invasive procedure, there is less blood loss, less pain for the patient, better respiratory outcome, decrease length of stay, and a decreased 30 days mortality.

There is always a dilemma of when to convert to open-thoracotomy, and some of the clear indications for this are uncontrolled bleeding, damage to a structure that cannot be repaired with laparoscopy, and a patient who is not able to tolerate one-lung ventilation. Also, when the evacuation of the cavity or lung expansion are not achieved with VATS, an open-thoracotomy is indicated.

After the acute phase, some patients develop fibrosis and lung restriction that can cause dyspnea and exercise-intolerance as symptoms. Decortication may help to alleviate these symptoms and is considered when pulmonary restriction is present 6 months after the resolution of the infection but there are still issues in a patient's quality of life.