**Histopathology at Different States of Alcoholic Hepatitis:**

The first stage is hepatic steatosis. It involves the accumulation of small fat droplets around liver cells, specifically around the venules, and approaches the portal tracts. The altered intracellular redox potential leads to the accumulation of intracellular lipids. Fatty liver is generally considered a reversible condition.

On further progression, there is marked steatosis, hepatocellular necrosis, and acute inflammation. Eosinophilic fibrillar material (Mallory hyaline or Mallory-Denk bodies) forms in swollen (ballooned) hepatocytes. This stage is known as alcoholic hepatitis. Severe lobular infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils) is abundantly present in this condition in contrast to most other types of hepatitis where mononuclear cells localize around portal triads.

The end-stage of liver disease is alcoholic cirrhosis. At this stage, fibrotic septae surround regenerative nodules in the liver.

The deposition of collagen typically occurs around the terminal hepatic vein (perivenular fibrosis) and along the sinusoids, leading to a peculiar "chicken wire" pattern of fibrosis in alcoholic cirrhosis.

For the optimal assessment of liver fibrosis, it must be appreciated by specific stains, as Masson Trichrome or Sirius Red.

To note that the above stages are not absolute or necessarily progressive. An overlap of the above stages and features of all three histologic stages can be present in one individual with long-standing alcohol abuse. Discontinuation of alcohol intake may cause regression of all the above stages.