**Laboratory Studies**

Diagnosis of VIPoma is made in patients with secretory diarrhea usually greater than 3.0 liters per day with a serum VIP level around 250 to 500 pg/ml (reference range is less than 190 pg/ml). Secretory diarrhea has a low fecal osmotic gap of less than 50 mOsm/kg. It is important to repeat levels of VIP to confirm diagnosis since levels may not be elevated between episodes of watery diarrhea. It is also imperative to determine VIP levels when the patient is symptomatic, as the VIPoma may only secrete VIP intermittently. Hence, a normal level may be a false negative. Among children suspected of having VIPoma, catecholamine levels should also need to be measured. Levels of pancreatic polypeptide are elevated in tumors originating from the pancreas.

Electrolyte abnormalities include hypokalemia, hypochlorhydria, hypomagnesemia, hyperglycemia, and hypercalcemia. Hypokalemia and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis occur due to a large amount of GI loss and bicarbonate wasting. Hypochlorhydria occurs secondary to the direct gastric acid inhibitory effect of VIP. Hypercalcemia may be due to dehydration, coincidental MEN1 syndrome, or secretion by the tumor of a calcitrophic peptide. Hypomagnesemia may occur from profound diarrhea. Hyperglycemia is due to the increased glycogenolytic activity of VIP.

**Imaging Studies**

Tumor localization is typically started with a helical multiphasic contrast-enhanced CT scan. The sensitivity of multiphasic CT scans is significantly high at greater than 80% for detecting intrapancreatic neuroendocrine tumors

MRI is performed in case of indeterminate lesions and may have a better sensitivity to detect liver metastases.

Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy using radiolabeled somatostatin analog octreotide or lanreotide has the advantage of detecting small, occult metastases within and outside of the abdomen.

Other techniques include endoscopic ultrasound, which helps determine the accurate extent of the disease. A biopsy of the pancreatic lesions can also be performed with this technique.

The FDA approves functional PET imaging technique with 68-Ga DOTATATE injection as the radioactive diagnostic agent for the detection of somatostatin receptor-positive neuroendocrine tumors in both adult and pediatric patients.