# Continuing Education Activity

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (CCSST) is an exceedingly rare tumor that originates from neural crest cells and is histologically characterized by clear cells that contain accumulated glycogen. These tumors share histological and immunohistochemical characteristics with malignant melanoma. They commonly arise from tendinous sheaths and aponeuroses, with the majority described in the lower limbs, particularly around the ankles. Tumors arising in the upper extremities are rare. A few primary clear cell sarcoma cases of soft tissue have been described arising from the chest wall and scapular soft tissues. This activity reviews the presentation, evaluation, and management of clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue and stresses the role of an interprofessional team approach to care for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the classic histopathological findings in clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue.
- Outline risk factors for the development of clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue.
- Explain the physical exam findings associated with clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue.
- Describe the importance of improving communication amongst interprofessional team members to enhance care for patients affected by clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue.

# Introduction

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (CCSST) is an exceedingly rare tumor that originates from neural crest cells and is histologically characterized by clear cells representing intracellular glycogen accumulation.

# Etiology

While the major cause of these tumors remains unknown, several risks have been described for soft tissue sarcomas, such as genetic predisposition, radiation therapy, lymphedema, gene mutations, and chemotherapy.

Clear cell sarcoma was initially described as “malignant melanoma of soft parts” due to their histological similarities. Both share immunohistochemical markers, and their gene expression profiling suggests that CCSST are a genomic subtype of MM.

# Epidemiology

The true incidence of this tumor remains unknown. It is more common in Caucasians and estimated that men and women are equally affected with a median age of 39 years, with rare cases reported in children.

# Pathophysiology

Clear-cell sarcoma of soft tissue appears as a macroscopically tan-gray firm mass.EWSR1/ATF1 gene fusion, a finding that helps differentiate these lesions from MM.

# Histopathology

On microscopy, the neoplastic cells show abundant cytoplasm containing numerous mitochondria. Cells are commonly polygonal and fusiform with clear cytoplasm and a centrally located round nucleus. The "clear-cell" appearance represents intracellular glycogen accumulation, as demonstrated by the periodic acid-Schiff stain. Pigmented and unpigmented melanosomes, scattered multinucleated giant cells, and areas of focal necrosis are also commonly present.

CCSST commonly show highly infiltrative cells, haphazardly organized into compact nests and fascicles that dissect along with dense fibrous connective tissue.

Immunohistochemistry shows antigens commonly associated with melanin synthesis, including HMB-45 and S100 within the cytoplasm and nucleus. It may also show positivity for CD99, Melan-A, neuron-specific enolase, and vimentin.

Cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, desmin, and smooth muscle actin are usually negative.

# History and Physical

Most patients present in their thirties and forties. While CCSST commonly appears in the legs or thighs as a small tender spot or swelling, some patients may present involvement of the subcutaneous tissue and adjacent dermis and may present with ulceration of the overlying skin.

Rare presentations of CCSST have also been documented in other sites, including the lumbar region, parapharyngeal tissue, penis, and neck.

# Evaluation

The initial evaluation should include a complete history and physical examination. As previously discussed, most patients will present with a small swelling or tender spot in the lower extremities, particularly in an ankle.

Soft tissue sarcomas, in general, can be divided into subtypes, and no single imaging modality is ideal for every tumor.

In addition to plain radiographs, which are useful to evaluate for possible masses arising from bone, or to detect intralesional calcifications, cross-sectional imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is commonly preferred for masses that arise in the extremities. MRI, unlike CT, delineates different muscle groups and may provide more information regarding the extent of these tumors.

Histology is essential for planning further workup and treatment. Tissue may be obtained through incisional biopsy, fine needle aspiration, or core needle biopsy. The latter has a lower incidence of complications, is highly accurate, and is usually preferred.

Further pathological workup for CCSST should include immunohistochemistry. Confirmation of CCSST and differentiating this tumor from MM will also require fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).

After treatment, discussed below, postoperative imaging is commonly performed 3 months after treatment. For high-grade lesions on presentation, 3- to 6-month interval imaging is preferred, while low-grade lesions may be followed with annual imaging.

# Treatment / Management

For localized lesions, the treatment of choice is wide surgical resection with negative margins.

Radiotherapy may improve outcomes in patients who undergo close resection margins.

After surgical excision, patients should be followed closely due to the high rates of recurrence. Patients with higher risk may benefit from close interval imaging, while lower-risk patients may be followed with yearly imaging.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of a tumor located in the proximity of tendons and aponeurosis should include paraganglioma-like dermal melanocytic tumor, MM, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, synovial sarcoma, and clear cell myomelanocytic tumor.

Compared to MM, CCSST usually occurs in the younger patient population, is located in deeper tissues, is associated with aponeuroses or tendons, and commonly lacks epidermal involvement.

Synovial sarcoma commonly shows a t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) translocation producing SYT/SSX1 or SYT/sSSX2 gene fusions, not seen in CCSST.

Paraganglioma-like dermal melanocytic tumor primarily presents in the extremities of female patients as a dermal nodule. On microscopy, it shows oval-cells arranged in packet-like groups.

Clear cell myomelanocytic tumor belongs to a family of tumors known as perivascular epithelioid cell family of tumors, which present commonly in the abdomen, usually in the ligamentum teres of the liver of young patients. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor usually arises within large peripheral nerves and is negative for HMB-45.

# Prognosis

CCSST is associated with an overall poor prognosis. A study with 75 patients showed a 69% and 21% metastatic disease and local recurrence rate, respectively. The overall 5-year survival rate was 47% and 36% for 10-years. Furthermore, for patients who presented localized disease, the overall survival was 55% and 41% at 5 and 10 years, respectively.

Significant prognostic factors include tumor size, depth, and TNM classification. However, after multivariate analysis, only tumor size has remained a significant prognostic factor.

Another study showed 10% to 14% of patients developing regional lymph node metastasis. A majority of all patients with CCSST eventually developed distant metastasis, most commonly to lung and bone tissue, in addition to regional lymph nodes.

Overall, the course of CCSST is regarded as relentless and progressive, usually terminating in widespread metastatic disease.

# Complications

While a large percentage of patients present with indolently growing mass in the lower extremity, around 30% to 60% of patients may present pain or tenderness. A minority of patients may present with ulceration of the overlying skin.

Untreated CCSST will most likely progress to a widespread deadly metastatic disease.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although most patients present in their 30s or 40s, the overall prognosis for CCSST is generally regarded as poor. Some patients may appear disease-free after treatment for some time and posteriorly develop local recurrence or late metastatic disease with a rapidly fatal progression. Patients should be educated about the overall poor prognosis of CCSST, individual risk factors for local or metastatic recurrence, and be provided with tumor staging before and after treatment. They should also be encouraged to follow up closely with their healthcare providers.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patient-centered management should include counseling on diagnostic work-up and treatment choices, individualizing patients with different risk factors for local or distant recurrence. Tumor staging should be done early, and repeated with more information, commonly after excision biopsy, and using the tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) system for patients with soft tissue sarcomas that arise in extremity/trunk.