There are a number of expected outcomes following cryosurgery that patient should be advised about before the surgery. Cryosurgery produces tissue damage that heals by secondary intention, which can take longer to heal than an excision, especially if it is performed on the leg. Healing time directly correlates with the depth of freezing, so lesions that have had a deeper freeze will take longer to heal. Pain is an expected outcome of this procedure. Pain will last less than a minute. Treated sites will progress from erythema, edema, and vesiculation over the course of several days. Depending on the depth of the treatment an exudate may be noted up to 2 weeks after treatment. Mummification or eschar formation may follow the exudative phase and can be gently debrided if necessary.

Complications of cryosurgery include dyspigmentation, alopecia, pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, depressed scars, and tissue distortion (nail dystrophy or notching of cartilage). Dyspigmentation is the most common complication of cryosurgery. Hypopigmentation is the most likely type of dyspigmentation seen because cryosurgery can destroy melanocytes. However, darker skinned individuals can develop hyperpigmentation. In the scalp or other hair-bearing areas, alopecia can result from cold-induced destruction of hair bulge cells and lead to permanent alopecia. Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia can result from cryotherapy. No treatment is needed as this will spontaneously resolve. Depressed scars can form after deep cryosurgery. The depressions may resolve over time. Cryosurgery can also damage underlying structures such as the nail matrix of the digits or cartilage on the ears and nose, which can produce notching or retraction.