Unstable angina is a very common disorder that is seen in the emergency room. There are many recommendations for the management of this serious cardiac disorder. Current recommendations are that this disorder should be managed by an interprofessional team that includes primary health care providers, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, pharmacists, cardiologists, and emergency room physicians, functioning together as an interprofessional team. In addition, a consult from a cardiac surgeon is highly recommended. Both the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Foundation has issued guidelines on the management of unstable angina.

Once the patient has stabilized, prevention is key. The nurse practitioner, pharmacist, and primary care provider should urge the patient to quit smoking, eat a healthy diet, resume regular exercise, maintain a healthy body weight, and remain compliant with medications. Close follow-up is necessary to ensure that patients are meeting the goals of cardiac rehab. Further, lipid-lowering is vital to reduce the risk of recurrent unstable angina; the pharmacist should provide input and check dosing and potential drug-drug interactions. Finally, the nurse and pharmacist should emphasize the importance of blood pressure control and management of diabetes. Nursing will do most ongoing monitoring, evaluate treatment effectiveness, and alert the clinician to any potential issues. This type of interprofessional teamwork yields the best outcomes. [Level 5]

Today most hospitals have healthcare teams that specialize in the management of unstable angina. The members of this team need to be familiar with the latest guidelines and support patients with education on the reduction of risk factors and the benefits of compliance with medications.

**Outcomes**

Ample evidence exists that quality improvement programs have the lowest morbidity and best outcomes.