**Management of Acute Right Ventricular Failure**

**Medical Management**

Management of acute RVF starts with an assessment the severity of the patient’s condition and the decision to admit the patient to the intensive care unit (ICU) or intermediate care unit when appropriate. Rapid identification and management of triggering factors (i.e., sepsis, arrhythmias, drug withdrawal) are necessary. In the case of an RV infarct, rapid revascularization is essential, as is reperfusion therapy in a patient with a high-risk PE. As infection portends a very poor prognosis in acute RVF, preventative measures and prompt detection and treatment of infection are important.

The mainstay of treatment focuses on three tenants: optimizing volume status, increasing RV contractility, and reducing RV afterload.

Volume loading may be appropriate if the patient is hypotensive and has low or normal filling pressures. Placement of a PAC or central venous pressure monitoring is often helpful as while the RV is preload dependent. Volume loading may over distend the RV and result in a further decline in cardiac output. If volume overload is present, IV diuresis is indicated, or renal replacement therapy if volume removal cannot be accomplished with medication. In addition to improving symptoms, diuresis has the additional benefits of reducing TR, restoring synchronous RV contraction, and reducing ventricular interdependence. Sodium restriction, daily weights, and strict monitoring of fluid intake and urine output is advised to aid in maintaining euvolemia.

Efforts should also be made to restore sinus rhythm in patients with atrial arrhythmias given the contribution of atrial contraction to cardiac output in RVF. In addition, hemodynamically significant tachy- and bradyarrhythmias should be treated. Digoxin has been shown to be of some benefit in patients with severe PAH. However, care must be taken in the critically ill patient given its narrow therapeutic window and possible side effects.

When hemodynamic instability is present, vasopressors are indicated. Norepinephrine is the pressor of choice to improve systemic hypotension and restore cerebral, cardiac and end-organ perfusion.   Inotropes, including dobutamine, levosimendan, and the phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitor milrinone are also helpful in that they improve contractility and cardiac output. Dobutamine is the inotrope of choice in RVF, as it leads to increased myocardial contractility via the beta receptor and vasodilatation/decreased afterload via the beta receptor. Caution should be taken however with dobutamine and milrinone as both may reduce systemic pressure. If this occurs, the addition of a vasopressor may be required.

If pressure overload is the etiology of the RVF, as is the case in PAH, afterload reduction with pulmonary vasodilators is the primary therapy. These drugs target three therapeutic pathways, nitric oxide (NO), endothelin and prostacyclin. It has been demonstrated that regardless of the class of drug used; acute responsiveness has prognostic significance in acute RVF. In addition to lowering afterload, some of these agents, such as the endothelin receptor antagonist (ERA) bosentan and the phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitor sildenafil, have also been shown to directly increase RV contractility. The pulmonary vasodilators used to treat acute RVF include:

- Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) acts via the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) pathway to cause pulmonary vasodilatation. It is rapidly inactivated by hemoglobin in the capillaries of the lung, thereby preventing systemic hypotension. The iNO acts only in ventilated areas of the lung, lowering PAP and PVR and improving oxygenation, without worsening hypoxia due to the ventilation-perfusion mismatch or shunting that can be seen with the systemic vasodilators. The iNO has been well studied in patients with acute RVF and has been shown in combination with dobutamine to improve CO, oxygenation, and PVR. Caution must be taken to avoid methemoglobinemia, and iNO must be withdrawn slowly to avoid hemodynamic decompensation from rebound PH.

- The intravenous (IV) prostacyclins epoprostenol and treprostinil act via the cyclic adenosine monophosphate pathway to result in potent pulmonary vasodilatation, systemic vasodilatation, and inhibition of platelet aggregation. Epoprostenol is the prostacyclin of choice for critically ill patients with acute RVF given its 6-minute half-life. Epoprostenol is started at 1 ng/kg/min to -2 ng/kg/min and up-titrated as tolerated, with caution in patients with comorbidities, hypoxemia or hemodynamic instability. Like iNO, the prostacyclins decrease PAP and PVR and increase cardiac output, however dose-dependent side effects (hypotension, nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, and headache) often limit titration. Prospective data demonstrating treatment benefit of IV prostacyclins in acute RVF is limited.

- Iloprost and treprostinil: inhaled prostacyclins. Both reduce PVR and improve cardiac output, with less systemic side effects. While treprostinil may also be given subcutaneously, it is inferior in critically ill, hemodynamically unstable patients due to its unpredictable absorption and longer half-life.

- ERAs and PDE5-inhibitors: oral, pulmonary vasodilators that reduce PAP, reduce PVR, and improve cardiac output in patients with RVF. ERAs block the endothelin-A and endothelin-B receptors in endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells, reducing the vasoconstrictive, proliferative and proinflammatory effects of endothelin. The use of ERAs in the ICU is limited by their longer half-life and hepatotoxicity (bosentan). PDE5-inhibitors block degradation of cGMP. In addition to the previously mentioned hemodynamic effects, PDE5i have been shown to reduce hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) and the up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by HPV.   The limited data for the use of PDE5-inhibitors in the ICU suggest a potential benefit in patients with RVF after mitral valve repair, coronary artery bypass grafting, or LVAD placement, and to reduce rebound PH in PAH patients weaning from iNO.

Caution must be taken with patients requiring mechanical ventilation, as excessive tidal volumes (V) and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) increase PAP, RAP and RV afterload. Also, PEEP may worsen the picture by reducing venous return in the preload-dependent RV. While permissive hypercapnia leads to vasoconstriction, thereby increasing PAP and worsening RVF, hyperventilation acutely reduces PAP and acidosis-induced vasoconstriction. Care must be taken to avoid high V in this setting. The optimal ventilator setting for the patient with RVF is that which delivers adequate oxygenation and ventilation with the lowest V, plateau pressure, and PEEP.

**Surgical Management and Interventional Therapies**

For patients with reversible RVF refractory to medical therapy, surgical options are indicated either as a bridge to recovery or transplantation. Surgery may also be indicated for patients with RVF in the setting of valvular heart disease, congenital heart disease, and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH). Adequate preoperative diuresis is imperative, and the use of pulmonary vasodilators and inotropes peri-operatively may be needed. In addition, the irreversible end-organ damage is a contraindication for surgical management.

Veno-arterial (VA) extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be indicated as salvage therapy in patients with massive PE and refractory cardiogenic shock following systemic thrombolysis.   ECMO may also be used as a bridge to lung or heart-lung transplantation in patients with severe RVF due to end-staged PAH.

Mechanical support with a right ventricular-assist device (RVAD) may be an option for the patient with isolated RVF awaiting transplant. However, ECMO may be a better treatment option for unloading the RV in the setting of severely increased PVR as pumping blood into the PA may worsen PH and cause lung injury.

Patients with RVF due to LVF may benefit from LVAD implantation, with improved PAP before heart transplantation and possibly improved post-transplant survival. However, LVADs may worsen or lead to new RVF due to alterations in RV geometry and flow/pressure dynamics and biventricular support may be required.

Pulmonary thromboendarterectomy (PTE) is the treatment of choice for patients with CTEPH and is often curative. PTE has been shown to improve functional status, exercise tolerance, quality of life, gas exchange, hemodynamics, RV function, and survival, particularly in patients with proximal lesions and minimal small vessel disease. ,  PTE is not recommended for patients with massively elevated PVR (greater than 1000 dyn/cm to 1200 dyn/cm). Outcomes with PTE have been shown to directly correlate with the surgeon and center experience, concordance between the anatomic disease and PVR, preoperative PVR, the absence of comorbidities (particularly splenectomy and ventricular-atrial shunt) and post-operative PVR. Operative mortality in an experienced center is between 4% to 7%, and PTE should not be delayed in operative candidates in favor of treatment with pulmonary vasodilator therapy.

Surgical embolectomy or percutaneous embolectomy may be used for acute RVF in the setting of massive PE, but data comparing embolectomy with thrombolysis are limited.

Balloon atrial septostomy (BAS) is indicated for PAH patients with syncope or refractory RVF to decompress the RA and RV and improve CO via the creation of a right-to-left shunt. BAS may be used as a bridge to transplantation or as palliative therapy in advanced RVF/PAH and has a role in third world countries in which pulmonary vasodilators are not available. Mortality associated with BAS is low (approximately 5%), particularly in experienced centers, however spontaneous closure of the defect often necessitates repeating the procedure.   Contraindications of BAS include high RAP (greater than 20 mmHg), oxygen saturation less than 90% on room air, severe RVF requiring cardiorespiratory support, PVRI greater than 55 U/m and LV end-diastolic pressure greater than 18 mmHg.

Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) restores mechanical synchrony in the failing LV, leading to improved hemodynamics and reverse remodeling and improved morbidity and mortality in LVF.  Animal studies and small case series suggest that RV pacing results in acute hemodynamic improvement in patients with RVF in the setting of PAH, however, no data show long-term clinical benefit in this population.

Ultimately, heart, lung, or combined heart-lung transplantation (HLT) is the treatment of last-resort for end-staged RVF. In patients with RVF due to PAH, RAP greater than 15 and CI less than 2.0 are poor prognostic indicators and referral for transplantation is indicated. It remains unclear at which point the RV is beyond recovery, however, in general, the RV is resilient, and most often lung transplant alone is sufficient with estimated 1-year-survival of 65% to 75% and 10-year survival of 45% to 66%.

Congenital patients with RVF in the setting of Eisenmenger syndrome may undergo lung transplantation with repair of simple shunts (ASDs) at the time of surgery or combined HLT, which has demonstrated a survival benefit in this population.