The skin of the face is stretched by one hand while the other hand is used to roll or glide the instrument over in a direction perpendicular to that of stretching force. If using a needle roller, then the device is rolled 15 to 20 times in horizontal, vertical, and both oblique directions. The treatment endpoint is uniform, pinpoint bleeding. Saline pads should be kept over treated areas of the face once the treatment endpoint has been reached. Full facial treatment generally takes 15-20 minutes.

Combining the microneedling treatment with immediate post-operative application of serums that include vitamins A and C enhances the regenerative-process of microneedling-induced wound healing and leads to greater clinical and histologic outcomes

**P****ostoperative Care**

The procedure is typically well-tolerated with no post-treatment sequlae, besides some erythema, mild edema, and exfoliative scaling that can last for 2-3 days. There is no downtime and patients can resume usual daily activities starting the next day, with the caution to wear sunscreen with regular reapplication and to avoid sun exposure and harsh chemicals for at least for 1 week.

Patients should be advised that they may observe some serous drainage the hours following the procedure, in the earliest stages of wound healing. Damp gauze can effectively be used to collect the excess fluid.

Advise patients that final results cannot be viewed immediately as the process of neocollagenesis continues for approximately 3-6 months following the treatment.

Treatment can be repeated after a minimum of 3 weeks