# Continuing Education Activity

The anterior spinal artery syndrome refers to ischemic infarction of the spinal cord resulting from direct occlusion of the anterior spinal artery, artery of Adamkiewicz, or generalized hypoperfusion. It is associated with many other disease conditions or treatment complications. Prompt diagnosis and treatment are necessary to avoid high morbidity-mortality, long-term disability related to anterior spinal artery syndrome. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of anterior spinal artery syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with anterior spinal artery syndrome.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of the anterior spinal artery syndrome. 
- Summarize the pathophysiology of the anterior spinal artery syndrome. 
- Outline and explain different treatment modalities for anterior spinal artery syndrome. 
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with the anterior spinal artery syndrome.

# Introduction

The anterior spinal artery supplies the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord and runs along the entire length of the anterior surface of the spinal cord.

The ASAS is a rare cause of spinal cord acute ischemic myelopathy but is the most common cause of spinal cord infarcts.

# Etiology

ASAS occurs when occlusion/hypoperfusion occurs at the anterior spinal artery or any major radiculomedullary branches.

Many etiologies have correlations with occlusion/hypoperfusion of the anterior spinal artery.

- **Aortic surgery**(iatrogenic): most common cause of ASAS.

- **Atherosclerotic disease**: a common cause of ASAS. Development of a thrombus/emboli that occludes the anterior spinal artery leading to ASAS.

- **Thoraco-abdominal aortic disease**(aortic dissection): dissection of the aorta causes occlusion of radiculomedullary arteries.

- **Cardiac arrest**: absent blood flow to the anterior spinal artery

- **Cardiac emboli**: This is an infrequent cause of ASAS. This category includes infectious endocarditis, which may lead to septic emboli, and this may lead to an anterior spinal artery or major radiculomedullary arteries occlusion and thus the development of ASAS.

- **Vasculitis**: a rare cause of ASAS. (ie. polyarteritis nodosa).

- **Degenerative spine disease**: although a rare cause of ASAS, the literature describes patients with cervical spondylosis or thoracic disc herniation that present with ASAS. A large disc herniation can compress the anterior spinal artery and cause spinal cord infarction resulting in ASAS.

- **Vertebral fracture**: anterior cord impingement by a fracture fragment.

- **Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy**: This condition is sometimes known as idiopathic transverse myelitis. Naiman et al. first described it in 1961.

- **Shock**: hypotension leads to ASAS.

- **Luetic aortitis**: it was common during the syphilitic era, but rarely seen at present.

- **Minimally invasive spine surgery**: rare iatrogenic cause. Percutaneous balloon kyphoplasty.

- **Arteriovenous malformations (AVM)**: spinal cord AVM.

- **Digital subtraction angiography**: a rare cause of ASAS during diagnostic****and embolization procedures. The overall incidence is 1.4 to 6.5%.

- **Sickle cell disease**: thrombosis.

- **Other hypercoagulable diseases**: thrombosis.

- **Cocaine use**: vasospasm, vasculitis, and thrombosis.

# Epidemiology

ASAS is a rare condition; therefore, statistical studies evaluating the incidence and prevalence of this condition are scarce.

Spinal cord infarction accounts for 1.2% of all strokes. Spinal cord infarct has an incidence in the USA of 3.1 per 100,000 persons.

Some risk factors associated with ASAS development include smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and family or patient history of ischemic cerebrovascular accidents.

# Pathophysiology

The anterior spinal artery (ASA), supplies the anterior two-thirds of the medulla/spinal cord. Two arteries branch from their respective vertebral arteries and form a single ASA at the foramen magnum level. The ASA runs as an uninterrupted artery located within the anterior median sulcus up to the conus medullaris.

The anterior spinal artery gives off small sulcal and penetrating arteries that enter the spinal cord's body at each level to supply blood to the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord.

At cervical regions, the ASA connections from radiculomedullary arteries can be variable. Usually, the cut off is above the aortic arch, from either the vertebral or subclavian arteries. At thoracic and lumbar regions, the intercostal arteries give rise to the radiculomedullary arteries, supplying the ASA. They supply the spinal cord at and below their level of entry. The spinal cord has, on average, from 7 to 8 radiculomedullary arteries. The largest of all radiculomedullary arteries is called the great anterior radiculomedullary artery or artery of Adamkiwiecz.

The artery of Adamkiwiecz is the largest and most common radiculomedullary artery occluded and results in the ischemia of ASA and ASAS development. It supplies the lower two-thirds of the spinal cord. It originates from the intercostal artery most commonly from the left side (70% to 80%).

To understand the clinical presentation of ASAS, it is essential to know the spinal cord's anatomy to explain the pathophysiology behind this condition. The spinal cord subdivides into three portions. The posterior part of the cord contains the fasciculus gracilis and cuneatus responsible for proprioception, vibration sense, and fine touch. This area is supplied by the two posterior spinal arteries that run in the spinal cord's posterior lateral sulcus, and it is why these modalities are preserved in ASAS.

The anterolateral portion of the cord contains the spinothalamic and spinocerebellar tracts responsible for transmitting pain and temperature sensation from extremities to the brain.

The lateral horns exist from the T1 level to the L2 level. They contain the cell bodies of the sympathetic nervous system. The anterior spinal artery is responsible for the vascular supply to these areas. If an infarction occurs at these levels, the sympathetic network is affected, for which patients may present with neurogenic bladder/bowel and sexual impairments.

After the ASA flow becomes reduced or absent, several events at the cellular level occur. This disruption of blood flow starts a signaling cascade that results in neuronal destruction. It begins with the ischemic insult in which there is a decrease in blood flow and oxygen to the spinal cord. There is immediate activation of astrocytes and microglia, tissue edema/inflammation, disruption of the brain-blood-barrier, and neutrophil influx.

# History and Physical

The development of ASAS is associated with an acute presentation after the time of insult. Usually, the first presenting symptom is acute back pain, whose location most of the time corresponds with the level of the injury in the spinal cord.

Acute clinical findings:

- Acute back pain at the level of injury

- Bilateral flaccid para/quadriparesis or plegia

- Loss of pain and temperature

- Preservation of proprioception, vibratory sense, fine touch, and two-point discrimination

- Autonomic dysfunction with hypotension, bradycardia, and impaired temperature regulation

- Respiratory failure

- Spinal shock

Late clinical findings (within days to weeks):

- Continued/permanent motor/sensory dysfunction

- Bilateral spastic para/quadriparesis or plegia

- Hyperreflexia

- Bilateral Babinski signs

- Neurogenic bladder/bowel

- Sexual dysfunction

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of ASAS is usually suspected with a detailed history and the physical exam findings. Neuroimaging studies can help establish and confirm the diagnosis of ASAS.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine is the gold-standard study for the diagnosis of ASAS. Although results can be negative in the first 24 hours, it is usually done to confirm an ASAS diagnosis.

Magnetic resonance angiography may help for further delineation and visualization of spinal vascular pathology.

Other studies and tests are useful to find the underlying etiology of ASAS.

# Treatment / Management

There is no effective treatment to stop or revert ASAS. The use of high dose corticosteroids for patients with ASAS is ineffective, and few reports have shown mild improvement, while most of them show no improvement.

Treatment is usually supportive and focused on treating acute and late symptoms or complications.

- Fluid/vasopressors: for neurogenic hypotension.

- Mechanical ventilation: for the involvement of phrenic nerve and dysfunction of the diaphragm in high cervical lesions

- Bladder catheterization: for neurogenic urinary retention.

- Deep venous thrombosis prevention prophylaxis.

- Pressure sores prevention.

- Gastrointestinal stress ulcer prevention.

- Physical, occupational, and psychological therapy

The goal of the treatment of ASAS focuses on treating the underlying etiology behind the development of ASAS. Current treatment follows the same guidelines for cerebral ischemia, atherosclerotic vascular disease, and acute traumatic spinal cord injury.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Transverse myelitis: slower onset

- Multiple sclerosis: similar MRI findings but the patient may present cranial and ocular manifestations

- Venous congestive myelopathy: prominent enlarged pial veins with central and peripheral white matter changes

- Spinal cord neoplasms: slower onset

- Spinal cord arteriovenous malformations

- Disk herniation

- Epidural hematoma

- Epidural abscess

- Spinal cord compressive pathologies

- Central cord syndrome

- Dorsal cord syndrome

- Brown-Séquard syndrome

- Guillain-Barré syndrome

- Conus medullaris syndrome

- Cauda equina syndrome

# Prognosis

The long-term prognosis of ASAS is only briefly described in the literature. It is poor in general, but one study mentioned that spinal strokes have a better prognosis than cerebral strokes, which also involve cognitive damage.

Most survivors will have varying degrees of functional motor and sensory dysfunction.

Multiple factors have correlations with better or worse prognoses.

- Etiology: aortic dissection/rupture and high cervical lesions have a greater risk of death.

- Symptom severity at initial presentation: Those with more severe initial presenting symptoms have the worst outcomes.

- Improvement in the first 24 hours: Those with no improvement during the initial 24 hours have the worst outcomes.

- Female sex correlates with poorer outcomes.

- Old age is associated with poorer outcomes.

# Complications

Patients with ASAS develop multiple complications associated with the condition. Complications arise due to the highly incapacitating injury to the spinal cord. The complications and presenting symptoms are dependant on the level in the spinal cord that the insults occur. The majority of life-threatening complications in ASAS show shortly after the ischemic insult or during the hospitalization period:

- Hypotension: involvement of lateral horns (T1-L2) may lead to shock with fatal consequences if not treated/corrected.

- Respiratory failure: high cervical-level injury will involve the phrenic nerve (C3-C5), which may lead to prolonged mechanical ventilation.

- Bradycardia: this may lead to cardiac arrest for which patients may require atropine or even permanent electrical pacing.

- Infections (urinary tract infections, pneumonia, bacteremia)

- Electrolyte imbalances

- Renal failure

- Depression

ASAS prognosis for recovery is dismal with poor outcomes. Many complications develop as most patients do not recover their motor and sensory dysfunction and have prolonged immobilization.

- Permanent para or quadra paresis or plegia

- Deep venous thrombosis

- Pulmonary embolism

- Pressure ulcers with a 50% lifetime risk

- Neurogenic bowel/bladder

- Sexual dysfunction

- Neuropathic pain

- Gastrointestinal stress ulcers

- Gastrointestinal dysmotility

- Chronic pain in 79% of the patients

- Increased risk of osteoporosis due to prolonged immobilization

- Spasticity

- Psychological depression and other conditions

- Economic issues

- Dependency on others in activities of daily living

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

The successful long-term management of ASAS is dependant on adequate and comprehensive rehabilitation before and after discharge.

# Consultations

- Neurology

- Neuro-radiologist

- Neuro-intensivist

- Pneumologist

- Urologist

- Psychologist

- Psychiatrist

- Social work

- Physical medicine and rehabilitation

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although ASAS is unpreventable and usually non-reversible, the most common underlying causes that lead to the development of ASAS are preventable such as aortic aneurysm/dissection and atherosclerotic disease. The patient's education should focus on primary disease prevention, especially at preventing major risk factors such as hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and smoking to promote a healthier lifestyle, including healthy nutrition, exercise, and smoking cessation. If a patient develops morbidities that are risk factors, it is crucial to start medical management to control those risk factors. The strict management of risk factors helps to prevent recurrence or worsening functionality.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- ASAS is caused by ischemia at the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord due to anterior spinal artery reduced blood flow.

- The most common etiology is aortic surgery.

- For preventable conditions such as aortic aneurysm or dissection, patient education about preventable risk factors is essential.

- Presents as acute back pain at the level of injury

- The patient shows bilateral motor dysfunction, loss of pain and temperature, with preservation of proprioception and vibratory sense.

- May have autonomic dysfunction.

- MRI is the gold standard for diagnosis.

- No acute treatment is available; management focuses on treating presenting symptoms and complications.

- A more severe presentation without acute improvement results in the worst prognosis

- Most patients remain functionally incapacitated.

- Physical and emotional support is essential.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although rare, ASAS is a severe, incapacitating syndrome that usually affects multiple organs and produces poor outcomes. A team approach to managing this condition after the arrival in the emergency room results in the best possible outcome. The emergency room physician must do a rapid recognition of the problem and obtain imaging that confirms the diagnosis, which leads to early treatment.

The interprofessional team is necessary for the management of ASAS. Nurses are vital members whose role is crucial in identifying and preventing complications (pressure ulcers, urinary retention). Pharmacists, whose role is no less important since patients with ASAS, especially during the acute period, generally need multiple medications, resulting in polypharmacy. Physical and occupational therapists whose role is an essential factor in determining a patient's prognosis, especially for the long-term. Additionally, social workers and the different physicians treat the patient for mental, social, economic, and physical disabilities. In patients with spinal cord infarction, functional independence and overall lifespan have improved due to improvements in all healthcare fields.