Over 500,000 bronchoscopies are performed annually in the United States.

Anesthesia for flexible bronchoscopy depends on the procedure type and patient factors. Patients presenting for bronchoscopy might have limited cardiac and pulmonary function. Patients might become apneic even with minimal sedation. An anesthesia provider should be prepared to intervene if rapid oxygen desaturations and airway obstructions occur. Airway interventions include nasopharyngeal trumpet, bag-mask ventilation, and oral intubation with an endotracheal tube (ETT).

There are many considerations that an anesthesia provider needs to be aware of during a bronchoscopy. A thorough preoperative assessment must be done. The anesthetic plan is based on the technique of anesthesia used in conjunction with patient comorbidities. Both the bronchoscopy operator and anesthesia team must agree on the anesthetic plan. A variety of types of anesthesia can be used, and some in combination. Discussed below are some anesthesia types that can facilitate a bronchoscopy.

**Topical Anesthesia**

One technique is topical anesthesia, in which a local anesthetic, typically lidocaine, is used to produce topical anesthesia to the posterior oral cavity and base of the tongue.

**Regional Anesthesia**

Another anesthesia technique is regional anesthesia via a superior laryngeal nerve block. This nerve block will blunt the cough reflex, which is very sensitive to airway irritation. Precise positioning of the superior laryngeal nerve block is important due to the potential of injuring surrounding structures relative to the nerve. As the superior laryngeal nerve (internal branch) runs with the superior laryngeal artery just below the greater cornu of the hyoid, the block needle should be positioned perpendicular to the skin aiming just below the greater cornu of the hyoid bone for in-plane ultrasound-guided technique. Potential complications include tracheal injection, arterial/nerve injection, thyroid injection, and hematoma.

**Monitored Anesthesia Care (MAC)**

Nearly all anesthesia for bronchoscopy involves the anesthesia team providing light or moderate sedation.

**Total Intravenous Anesthesia (TIVA)**

This type of anesthesia is a form of general anesthesia in which medications are administered solely intravenously. No inhalation agents are used. TIVA is useful in rigid bronchoscopy as ventilation is often interrupted. This is the only technique used in Jet Ventilation (JV). Commonly using JV, a neuromuscular blocking agent is used for complete muscle paralysis in conjunction with a sedative-hypnotic.

**General Anesthesia**

Patients requiring deeper sedation with general anesthesia must have their airway secured via an ETT or laryngeal mask airway (LMA).  A bronchoscope can be inserted through these airway devices using specialized adaptors. Sharing an airway has potential complications, including airway obstruction, mechanical trauma, inadequate ventilation, barotrauma, inadequate anesthetic level with possible awareness, laryngospasm, and bronchospasm.

Jet ventilation during bronchoscopy requires oxygen delivery at high pressure, which has unique and potentially catastrophic sequelae.