As discussed earlier, there are issues of concern in the biochemical synthesis of collagen. Errors of collagen synthesis can present with clinical manifestations. A few notable diseases are scurvy, osteogenesis imperfecta, and Ehlers–Danlos syndrome.

**Scurvy**

A nutritional deficiency of water-soluble vitamin C or ascorbic acid most commonly causes scurvy. Scurvy is rare in the developing world and is mostly seen in infants, the elderly, and alcoholics, all who may have inadequate nutritional intake and malnutrition.

Patients may present with general fatigue, weakness, poor wound healing, anemia, and gum disease. Clinically, one of the first signs of scurvy occurs on the skin and manifests as perifollicular hemorrhage where follicles of the skin are plugged with keratin. These areas appear as bruise-like spots around the hair follicles. There can also be fragile hairs arranged in a corkscrew confirmation. Scurvy is diagnosed clinically with a dietary history, and x-rays may show subperiosteal hemorrhage or cortical thinning. Ascorbic acid levels less than 11 micromols/L can help confirm the diagnosis. Treatment is vitamin C supplementation and a diet that includes tomatoes, citrus fruits, and other vegetables high in vitamin C.

**Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI**)

This is a family of genetic disorders that affect the bones making them weak and easily breakable. Inheritance is autosomal dominant, and most cases are due to mutations in the COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes. There are 8 types, each with differing degrees of severity with type 1 the mildest and type II the most severe.

Gene mutations affect procollagen formation in which the small glycine amino acid is substituted for bulkier amino acids which alter the collagen triple helix structure.

OI affects 1 in 15,000 people, and diagnosis is made clinically and can be confirmed by DNA or collagen testing. Prognosis depends on the type of OI. There is no cure and treatment is supportive and based on the prevention of fractures. Bisphosphonates, surgery, and physiotherapy have been shown to help.

**Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS**)

This is a group of inherited connective tissue disorders that affect about 1 in 5000 individuals globally. There are 13 EDSs, and signs and symptoms vary based on the type of EDS. Most forms of EDS are autosomal dominantly inherited, and mutations are in the COL1A1, COL1A2, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, to name a few. Mutations in genes affect extracellular peptide cleavage and alter collagen fibril cross-linking and aggregation, which causes altered stability and functionality of the fibers.

Depending on the genetic mutation and type of collagen affected patients may show an array of clinical findings; however, there are some common manifestations in EDS patients that range from mild to life-threatening.

Diagnosis is made clinically, DNA studies and collagen mutation studies can be used as adjuncts. The prognosis largely depends on the type of EDS a patient has. However, there is no cure for EDS, and treatment is supportive.