Drug and alcohol impairment in the workplace are a common problem, especially in healthcare settings. Given the high prevalence of drug and alcohol impairment in interprofessional team members , the risk of career-ending consequences, and the potential for unintended harm to patients, there is increasing awareness of this issue. Florida has developed The Intervention Project for Nurses, a project that provides an alternative to legal discipline for nurses who have been identified to have alcohol or drug problems in the workplace. Individuals with alcohol and drug problems need evaluation and treatment instead of punitive sanctions. Interprofessional team members need to be able to recognize the signs and symptoms of substance use and utilize appropriate tools to assist peers who need help. This will help improve both patient and provider safety and prevent the permanent loss of a practitioner who has devoted years to their training. This activity reviews alcohol and drug impairment in the workplace and how the state of Florida is addressing this issue. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for coworkers struggling with alcohol or drug abuse.

**Objectives:**
- State the etiology of alcohol and drug-related impairment in the workplace.
- Describe the presentation of alcohol or drug intoxication in the workplace.
- List the management options available 
for alcohol and drug-related impairment in the workplace in Florida.
- Explain the importance of improving coordination amongst the interprofessional team members to help recognize and treat individuals affected by alcohol and drug-related impairment in the workplace.