The neonates suffering from NH are usually asymptomatic, and the hypertension is detected via the routine continuous BP monitoring in the NICU. Those who are symptomatic may present with feeding intolerance, poor nipple efforts, irritability, hypotonia, hypertonia, vomiting, apnea, respiratory distress, oxygen desaturations, and in severe cases, tachycardia, congestive heart failure, cardiogenic shock, and seizures.  The symptoms are non-specific and varied. In older and term newborns, it is either detected by routine monitoring in NICU or by checking vital signs during the well-child visits. The newborns who are discharged from the nursery may return with symptoms of irritability and failure to thrive.

A detailed system-wise physical examination is important. The general appearance may reveal dysmorphism, consistent with Turner, William’s, or Noonan syndromes, the diseases associated with coarctation of the aorta. The presence of a cardiac murmur with a discrepancy in the four limb blood pressures and femoral pulses suggests COA. Physical features of congestive heart failure like tachycardia, murmur, mottling, and cyanosis may be present. Palpation of the abdomen may reveal a mass in conditions of polycystic kidney disease, renal tumors, hydronephrosis, and renal vein thrombosis. The genitourinary examination may reveal congenital anomalies or ambiguous genitalia in congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The history of oligohydramnios may suggest congenital renal anomalies, and the infant may be born with typical features in severe cases.