Staging of soft tissue sarcomas utilizes the TNM system as well as tumor grading. The T-staging is based on size and location (i.e., trunk/extremity, retroperitoneal, head and neck, etc.). The size cutoffs for T-staging vary based on tumor location. Nodal staging (N0 or N1) is straightforward and merely indicates the involvement of regional lymph nodes. Certain sarcoma subtypes have a propensity for lymph node metastasis, such as epithelial sarcomas, clear cell sarcomas, angiosarcomas, and rhabdomyosarcomas. Metastasis (M0 or M1) could be fulfilled either through non-regional adenopathy or with spread to visceral organs.

Tumor grading is also essential for staging. Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) grading utilizes a point system based on necrosis (no necrosis – 0 pts, <50% necrosis – 1pt, or ≥50% necrosis – 2 pts), differentiation (resembling normal adult mesenchymal tissue – 1pt, Sarcomas with definite histologic typing – 2pts, and undifferentiated – 3pts), and mitotic count (0-9 mitosis/hpf – 1 pt, 10-19-mitosis/hpf – 2pts, ≥20 mitosis/hpf – 3 pts). The sum of these factors determines the tumor grade ranging from 1-3 (1- 2-3pts, 2- 4-5 pts, 3- 6-8 pts). Grading and nodal/metastatic status are what primarily drive staging, while tumor size plays a smaller role.

Although sarcomas can be divided between stages I to IV as per the eight editions of the AJCC (America joint committee for cancer) guidelines, they are either localized (stages 1 to 3) or metastatic (Stage 4). This oversimplified staging is essential in determining if the tumor is resectable or not.