- Basal cell carcinoma (BCC): BCC is the most common malignancy of skin and approximately constitutes up to 80% of all skin cancers. BCC occurs more commonly in the sun-exposed skin. The most common presentation of BCC is in the form of a papule or a nodule. Morphologically BCC appears as basaloid cells with scant cytoplasm and elongated hyperchromatic nuclei. Positive stains that aid in confirming the diagnosis include: BerEP4, 34betaE12, MNF 116, p53, BCL2, and p63. Negative stains include EMA, CEA, involucrin, and CK20.

- Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC): SCC is the second most malignancy of skin. SCC is graded based on the degree of differentiation and keratinization into well, moderately, and poorly differentiated. Common presentations of SCC include a thin plaque or erythematous scaly papule. Positive stains that aid in confirming the diagnosis include: 34betaE12, AE1/AE3, CK5/6, EMA, and p63. Negative stains include CAM5.2, BerEP4, S100, and SMA.

- Amelanotic melanoma: Amelanotic melanoma is a variant of melanoma that presents as white or reddish lesions. Similar to other common skin malignancies amelanotic melanoma is more common in sun-exposed skin. Similar to malignant melanoma, Amelanotic melanoma prognosis is determined by two important factors that include lesion thickness and lesion degree of invasion.

- Seborrheic keratosis: These are benign skin lesions affecting primarily adult patients. The lesion presents as a sharply demarcated pigmented greasy lesion that elevates above the surface of the skin. On microscopic examination, the lesion appears as an acanthotic proliferations of small cuboidal keratinocytes without any evidence of cytological atypia.

- Cutaneous lymphoma.

- Verruca vulgaris.

- Metastatic carcinoma: Skin metastases from breast, lung, or kidney carcinoma should be kept in the differential of eccrine carcinoma.