At its most basic definition, the term “shock” means that there is a lack of adequate tissue oxygenation throughout the body. Typically, this lack of oxygenation is caused by either a lack of circulating blood volume, a decrease in cardiac function, a decrease in systemic vascular resistance, or some other means by which the body cannot circulate blood flow to vital organs. Typically associated with this is a sudden drop in blood pressure by which the body cannot adequately perfuse vital organs. When trying to resuscitate a patient in shock, it is important to keep in mind the etiology of the patient’s shock, as this will sometimes drastically alter the process of proper resuscitation.

The most important type of shock that is encountered in resuscitation is a hemorrhagic shock. Closely related to this would be a more broad category of hypovolemic shock. Aside from acute hemorrhage, cardiogenic shock describes a cause of shock in which the cardiac output is strictly the component by which the body cannot perfuse the rest of the body.  Neurogenic and septic shock deal with a decrease in systemic vascular resistance which prevents the body from directing blood to vital organs due to the decreased pressure. The shock from adrenal insufficiency is another cause that incorporates factors of cardiac output (CO), systemic vascular resistance (SVR), and volume.

Roughly 21 million blood products are transfused every year in the United States. Daily, almost 36000 packed RBCs, 7000 platelets, and 10000 FFP units are transfused in the United States. However, the vast majority of these transfusions are not due to hemorrhagic shock, but to prepare a patient for elective surgery (55%), or for patients with some form of chronic anemia (30%). Only 15% of all transfusions in the United States are initiated due to an emergent need for blood products or trauma. Despite the relative infrequency of hemorrhagic shock, it is important to understand the current guidelines regarding appropriate fluid resuscitation in this situation.