**1. Zellweger syndrome:**A peroxisomal biogenesis defect also characterizes caused by PEX gene mutations. Zellweger syndrome can be precisely differentiated from Refsum disease by its clinical presentation.

**2. Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy:**It is an autosomal recessive peroxisomal biogenesis disorder resulting from mutations in the PEX gene. Patients usually have a severe psychomotor delay and die several months after birth, usually before the 7th month. Patients who survive further are severely mentally disabled with sensorineural deafness and are blind due to retinopathy. Fibroblasts isolated from patients are impaired in their ability to oxidize phytanic acid and VLCFA and to synthesize plasmalogens.

**3. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia:**Due to abnormal variants of PEX7. Refsum disease can be differentiated from rhizomelic chondrodysplasia type 1 clinically, although, in few patients with a moderate variant, a Refsum disease-like phenotype has been described.

**4. Alpha-methyl acyl-CoA racemase deficiency****:**Can be distinguished by screening for peroxisome metabolites in the plasma, followed by fibroblast studies and genetic testing.

**5. Retinitis pigmentosa:**Progressive loss of vision and anosmia are typically one of the initial presenting symptoms in Refsum disease. Hence, it is advisable to measure plasma phytanic acid in anyone presenting with retinitis pigmentosa, particularly when coupled with other manifestations such as early-onset visual and sensorineural hearing loss, ataxia and ichthyosis which are suggestive of Refsum disease.

**6. Alstrom syndrome:**Has clinical features very similar to Refsum disease, such as dystrophy of rods and cons cells, progressive loss of hearing (sensorineural), obesity, dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cirrhotic liver and even multiple organ collapse. All due to bi-allelic pathogenic variants in ALMS1 with autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. It can be differentiated from Refsum disease by biochemical and genetic profile.

**7. Bardet-Bidel syndrome:**Also marked by retinal cell dystrophy and retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, limbic deformities such as postaxial polydactyly, sensorineural type hearing loss, diabetes mellitus, mental issues, and hypogonadism. The retinitis pigmentosa in these patients is more severe than what we see in patients of Refsum disease. Pathogenic mutations are described in at least eighteen genes.

**8. Kearns-Sayre syndrome:**Chararectrised by pigmentary retinopathy along with progressive ophthalmoplegia, which usually occurs before the second decade of life. Patients present at least one of the following anomalies: cardiac conduction block, CSF protein concentration >100 mg/dL, or cerebellar ataxia. Sensorineural hearing loss is also commonly seen. This syndrome is mainly sporadic and propagates due to mitochondrial DNA deletion caused by genetic aberrations exclusively from the maternal end.

**9. Friedrich ataxia:**Defined by gradually progressive ataxia with onset as early from 10 years of age, usually before 25 years. It shows symptoms like dysarthria, muscle weakness with spasticity in lower limbs with absent deep tendon reflexes, proprioception, and vibration sense. Patients also might have scoliosis, bladder dysfunction, and hearing loss. Caused by bi-allelic pathogenic variants in FXN.