# Introduction

Sleep is a reversible state of disconnection from the environment, including reduced consciousness, skeletal muscle mobility, and metabolism.

Sleep is measured primarily by polysomnography (PSG) which is considered the gold standard for diagnosing sleep disorders.

# Cellular Level

The sleep cycle is regulated by the circadian rhythm, a process controlled by the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus.

The SCN receives input from nerve cells in the retina that detect light to regulate the circadian rhythm and sleep via multiple pathways that cause the nocturnal release of ACTH, prolactin, melatonin, and norepinephrine. One of the most commonly recognized pathways by which this occurs is via the stimulation of norepinephrine release by the SCN, which in turn stimulates the pineal gland to release melatonin.

Wakefulness is maintained by subcortical structures and pathways activating the cortical system.

- Norepinephrine (locus ceruleus)

- Serotonin (midline raphe nuclei)

- Histamine (tuberomammillary nucleus)

- Dopamine (ventral periaqueductal gray matter)

- Acetylcholine (pedunculopontine tegmentum and laterodorsal tegmentum of the pons)

- Orexin (perifornical area)

Sleep initiation and maintenance require the successful suppression of the arousal systems via the inhibitory activity of the ventrolateral preoptic (VLPO) area.

The extraocular movements after which REM sleep is named is largely due to the cholinergic activity of the pedunculopontine tegmentum (PPT) center and glutamatergic activity of the medial pontine reticular formation (mPRF).

# Function

The purpose of sleep is not well understood, particularly REM sleep.

# Mechanism

Sleep exists as two distinct types: rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep.

Sleep architecture is influenced by two separate processes: process S and process C.

# Related Testing

Two modes of measurement exist in sleep physiology: behavioral assessment and physiological monitoring.

The gold standard of physiological monitoring is the polysomnogram (PSG).

- Alert wakefulness: low-amplitude mixed frequency EEG

- Drowsy wakefulness: alpha waves with 8 to 13 Hz peaks

- N1 stage: 4 to 7 Hz Theta waves (sawtooth)

- N2 stage: 11 to 16 Hz spindles (bursts of waves) and 0.5 to 2 Hz K-complexes (biphasic waves)

- N3 stage: 0.5 to 3 Hz Delta waves (large and slow)

- REM sleep (stage R): theta waves or wave-like patterns

The onset of sleep begins with wakefulness and progresses rapidly to REM sleep by approximately 60 to 90 minutes.

A variety of parameters are used to measure REM sleep, including the time to onset, length of the REM stage, and amount of eye movement that occurs during REM.

# Pathophysiology

There are a wide variety of pathologies that interrupt normal sleep physiology. A few of the most common are included below:

**Physiological Disruptions of Sleep**

Narcolepsy results from the inherited loss of orexin-releasing neurons in the lateral hippocampus, which causes somnolence, sleep cycle disruptions, and cataplexy.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is the cessation of airflow despite normal respiratory effort due to partial or complete obstruction of the upper airway.

**Psychiatric Disruptions of Sleep**

Major depressive disorder (MDD) has been associated with decreases in REM latency, increased REM density, and a prolonged first REM cycle.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is characterized by the broad range of sleep disturbances that are observed as a patient fluctuates between episodes of mania, bipolar depression, and euthymia.

Schizophrenia is associated with several changes in REM sleep, including reduced REM latency, higher REM density, and the failure to rebound from REM sleep deprivation.

Parasomnias are a class of pathologies defined as behavioral manifestations of partial arousals from sleep, particularly REM sleep.

REM behavior disorder (REMBD) is a particularly interesting parasomnia. REMBD is an idiopathic disturbance of sleep architecture characterized by significantly decreased REM muscle atonia that results in the active enactment of dreams during REM sleep.

Insomnia is characterized by the dysfunction of sleep onset or maintenance not caused by substances or secondary medical conditions.

Several common substances and medications are associated with REM sleep disruption. Alcohol is a commonly used substance for self-medication and significantly delays the first onset of REM sleep.

# Clinical Significance

Over 50 million Americans suffer from sleep loss, which is defined as a sleep duration less than the average of 7 to 8 hours per night.