Screening for any disease is fruitful when there is benefit from its early diagnosis and intervention. This activity discusses the screening for diabetes mellitus, which is one of those diseases that affect millions worldwide.

Diabetes Mellitus includes three groups of diseases-

- Type 1 diabetes mellitus

- Type 2 diabetes mellitus

- Gestational diabetes

**Type 1 Diabetes**

Type I diabetes is diagnosed after hyperglycemia symptoms like polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, and lethargy. It can also present as diabetic ketoacidosis in resource-constrained areas. Screening for type I diabetes is still in its infancy, although trials with tests for insulin, zinc transporter 8, antibodies to islet cells, IA-2 and GAD65 are underway.

**Type 2 Diabetes**

Type 2 diabetes may initially have few symptoms; however, long-term effects lead to a myriad of different problems late in the course of the disease leading to debilitating sequelae. More than 30 million people in the US have diabetes.

Screening for type 2 diabetes can be by either fasting blood sugar, hemoglobin (A1C), glucose tolerance testing, and random plasma sugar. Urine glucose may be useful, but it is an inferior test to screen for diabetes, although research is reconsidering this claim.

The screening is said to be positive if there are two abnormal tests from the same sample or two separate samples for the first three tests below:

1) HbA1C over 6.5 percent

2) Fasting plasma glucose greater than or equal to 126 mg/dL

3) 2-hour glucose greater than or equal to 200 mg/dL in an oral glucose tolerance test with 75 mg glucose load.

4) Random blood glucose greater than or equal to 200 mg/dL in symptomatic patients(thirst, polyuria, weight loss, blurry vision)

For the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, symptomatic patients require no further tests.

HbA1C values can be affected by factors that increase or decrease the RBC lifespan. Anemic states falsely increase HbA1C values, whereas their treatment falsely decreases it.

The US Preventive Services Task Force's recommendation is to screen for diabetes between 40 to 70 years who are overweight or obese and repeat testing every three years if results are normal.

Risk factors for diabetes include: • Hypertension • HDL < 35 mg/dL or TG > 250 mg/dL • First-degree relative with diabetes • High-risk race/ethnicity (African American, Latino, Native American, Asian American, Pacific Islander) • Asian Americans with a BMI of greater than or equal to 23 kg/m • Women who have delivered child greater than 9 lbs (4 kg) or with gestational diabetes • HbA1c = 5.7%, impaired fasting glucose (IFG) or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)

Other: acanthosis nigricans, PCOS, history of coronary vascular disease (CVD), physical inactivity

The recommendations for those with a high risk of developing diabetes are candidates for more early/frequent screening, early behavior intervention, and intensive treatment.

The recommended interval for the screening of asymptomatic patients is three years. The interval can be short in patients who have obesity and other major risk factors for developing diabetes.

The American Diabetes Association recommends screening for diabetes in adults aged 45 years or older and screening in persons with multiple risk factors regardless of age.

The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, American Academy of Family Physicians, Diabetes Australia, Diabetes UK, and the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care have recommendations that differ in their approach to screening but acknowledge and stress risk factors compared to an older age.

**Gestational Diabetes**

Gestational diabetes adversely impacts the lives of both fetus and mother, making screening for it an essential part of obstetric care. Screening is necessary with the presence of one of the risk factors for diabetes. In addition to the risk factors discussed above, others include:

- History of prediabetes(impaired glucose tolerance/fasting glucose, HbA1C>5.7)

- Prior history of gestational diabetes

- BMI>30 kg/m^2

- Family history of diabetes

- Multiple gestations

- Old maternal age

- Glycosuria at the first prenatal visit

- History of unexplained miscarriage or malformation

In the US, all women are screened for gestational diabetes, as most of them have at least a few of these risk factors.

HbA1C and fasting blood glucose have not been found useful for the screening of gestational diabetes. A glucose tolerance test is helpful in effective screening for this condition.

-  One-step method: Glucose tolerance test with 75 mg glucose load. (overnight fast required)

-  Two-step method: First, by 50 g glucose challenge test which, if positive, is followed by a confirmatory second 3-hour glucose tolerance test with 100 g glucose load.

The one-step 75 g glucose tolerance test is simpler and the most widely used method. The test is positive if it satisfies any one of the following:

- Fasting glucose ≥92 mg/dL (5.1 mmol/L)

- 1hr glucose ≥180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)

- 2hr glucose ≥153 mg/dL (8.5 mmol/mol)