Management of midshaft humerus fractures is historically conservative, meaning reduction and splint. There is an approximately 90% rate of appropriate alignment and union with conservative management.

A reduction should be performed more urgently if there is a loss of pulse distal to the injury or skin tenting. The reduction should not be performed without adequate pain control and/or sedation. Any overlying breaks in the skin (lacerations, abrasions, or skin tears) should be addressed before splinting of any kind. Splinting of a humerus fracture presents challenges to immobilization due to its location. As with any splint, the joint above and below the fractured bone should be immobilized, so for humerus fractures, this includes the elbow and shoulder. Appropriate splinting options for a humerus fracture would include a coaptation splint with a sling, a hanging arm cast, a long arm splint, or a shoulder immobilizer. If one is going to be performing procedural/conscious sedation, reduction, and splinting, all splinting material should be prepared and readily available in the patient’s treatment room before sedation.

Upon follow-up with an orthopedic specialist after the initial injury, a more long-term cast may be applied to immobilize the fractured extremity if conservative management is the approach of choice. This is done ten to 12 days following the date of injury.

Some indications for operative management include neurovascular injury, open fractures, comminuted fractures, inability to tolerate a splint/cast for a prolonged period, trauma with multiple fractures, other fractures to the same arm, or failed conservative treatment with nonunion of the fracture site. Conservative treatment is associated with a healing time of up to ten to 12 weeks with transverse or comminuted fractures taking longer to heal than spiral or oblique fractures. Operative management, however, is becoming increasingly popular outside of these indications due to more prompt healing times and the better promise of appropriate alignment and union.

Humeral shaft fractures take at least 4 months to heal and have a nonunion rate of 1-12%. Higher rates of nonunion are associated with transverse fractures, inadequate shoulder mobilization, and soft tissue interposition.