Careful selection of the appropriate equipment for each extraction and patient scenario is key to successfully removing a tooth as efficiently, safely, and non-traumatically as possible. Therefore, it is crucial that any clinician undertaking dental extractions is aware of the various equipment options available to them and be able to choose from them appropriately. While the equipment detailed below is by no means an exhaustive list, it aims to describe some commonly known examples of each piece of equipment that may be required during a dental extraction and how they are best utilized.

**Dental Anesthesia Equipment**

Extractions are usually facilitated by the administration of appropriate anesthesia. The equipment required for local anesthesia delivery consists of a syringe, a needle, and a plunger. The syringe casing and plunger may be single-use or reusable. The needle is double-ended, with one end piercing the dental anesthesia cartridge and the other end being used to pierce the mucosa. Dental needles are commonly available in three lengths: extra-short, short and long. A short needle is usually approximately 21 mm, while a long needle is approximately 32 mm, this extra length facilitating block injections. The diameter of a dental needle is known as the gauge - the higher the gauge, the smaller the diameter. Dental needles are available in 25, 27, and 30 gauge. Studies show that patients cannot perceive a difference in pain with the different gauges, and a 30-gauge needle is no longer recommended for use.

Dental local anesthesia is available in many drug formulations and concentrations, including lidocaine 2% with 1:80,000 parts adrenaline, articaine 4% with 1:100,000 parts adrenaline, and prilocaine 3% with felypressin. There are varying levels of evidence to support which formulations are more potent than the others.

**Elevators**

Elevators are instruments used partly to sever the periodontal ligament from the tooth to be extracted. They are also used to lift the tooth coronally out of the socket, sometimes resulting in the avulsion of the tooth or facilitating the application of forceps on the tooth.

**Coupland Elevators**

Coupland elevators come in three sequential widths: Couplands 1, 2, and 3. They all have a straight tip. They can be used sequentially, allowing for gradual dental socket expansion and increased tooth elevation. Alternatively, they can be used individually in relation to the space available between the tooth and the dental socket wall.

**Warwick James Elevators**

Warwick James elevators have three iterations: straight, left-curved, and right-curved. The straight Warwick James elevator can be used similarly to Coupland elevators, but due to the smaller width of the tip, it is suitable for smaller spaces. The right and left-curved elevators are applied in a similar fashion to the straight elevators but are used in a "scooping" motion. For example, when used for a maxillary third molar, the appropriate-sided elevator is chosen, and the inner aspect of the elevator is applied along the curve of the tooth's roots, with the curved tip placed as apically as possible. The elevator is then rotated to displace the tooth distally, usually facilitating its removal.

**Cryers**

Cryers are available in left- and right-curved, similar to Warwick James elevators. However, the tip of these elevators is much sharper with a wider base, making them triangular in shape. This makes Cryers especially useful for elevating root apices at the base of a socket when the adjacent root has been removed. For example, if a mesial root has been removed entirely, but a small portion of the distal root apex remains, a Cryer can be placed in the mesial space with the tip against the distal root apex. A rotating movement is then applied to elevate the apex.

**Luxators**

Luxators look similar to elevators; however, they are used with different aims. They are sharp-tipped instruments that should be used along the long axis of a tooth. These instruments aim to sever the periodontal ligament attachment to the tooth and to gradually widen the alveolar socket.

**Forceps**

Dental extraction forceps consist of three main parts: the handle, the hinge, and the beaks. The beaks are parallel to the handle in maxillary forceps. The beaks are perpendicular to the handle in mandibular forceps. The shapes of the beaks are adapted depending on which tooth the forceps are intended to remove. The beaks are designed to grip onto the crown or root surface of teeth, but ideally, forceps should always be placed as apically as possible to avoid crown fracture.

The beaks of forceps for use on multi-rooted teeth are pointed in order to engage the furcation areas of teeth. Cowhorn forceps have longer, pointed beaks, which allow them to engage deeper into the furcation of molars, making them especially useful for teeth that have lost large amounts of coronal tissue. The handle of forceps used on upper posterior teeth may have a curve at the end of the handle (known as 'Read pattern forceps'), which allows more axial force to be transmitted to the beaks.

Forceps are used to apply apical pressure onto a tooth with either a rotational or buccolingual movement or a combination of both. Correct selection of forceps for the tooth being removed is key to success in using them, and a practitioner should be aware of the variations between forceps for anterior teeth, premolars, molars, maxillary third molars, roots, and cowhorns.

**Scalpel**

The most commonly used scalpel in dentistry is the 15-blade. The 15-blades are commonly used for fine skin incisions and are therefore frequently used in dermatology. A 15-blade or a 15c-blade is useful for intra-oral and peri-oral use due to the fine and thin tip required to work in this relatively small area.

**Surgical Handpiece and Burs**

Surgical handpieces are used with burs to remove bone during surgical extractions. While the scope of this article is routine extractions, it is important to know the equipment required should a routine extraction become more complex. Surgical handpieces should be used for bone removal over traditional high-speed air turbine dental handpieces as surgical handpieces do not expel air, which reduces the risk of the patient developing surgical emphysema.

The two main types of surgical burs are fissure burs and round burs. Round burs are often used for buccal bone removal as they do not create sharp edges. Fissure burs can also be used for bone removal and for sectioning of crowns and roots.

**Additional Equipment Considerations**

Additional equipment, such as personal protective equipment, suction, and appropriate lighting, must also be utilized for effective treatment.