Candida auris is an emerging fungal pathogen associated with nosocomial infections and a serious global health threat. An interprofessional healthcare team that includes epidemiologists, both globally and in healthcare settings, is crucial for monitoring the spread of this pathogen. C. auris has numerous virulence qualities, shows multi-drug resistance patterns to common antifungal therapy used for other invasive Candida infections, and has been challenging for microbiology laboratories to diagnose. All interprofessional team members, including clinicians, nurses, medical technicians, pharmacists, and laboratory technicians, should be aware of the seriousness of this pathogen.

All care team members must engage in open communication and accurate record-keeping at every step of the case; this includes nurses, pharmacists, lab techs, clinicians, and specialists. Open communication channels are vital to success; this involves not only the patient but population-wide protocols to prevent outbreaks or containment of outbreaks in the community. This is where interprofessional care coordination, information sharing, and communication will help drive the best possible outcomes. [Level 5]

Staff should be educated on the recommendations for disinfecting patient rooms and contaminated environments. Infectious disease specialists should collaborate with microbiology technicians in diagnosing patients and obtaining appropriate antibiogram information to manage infected patients effectively; this may involve a consult with an infectious disease specialized pharmacist. C. auris tends to occur in cluster breakouts in the healthcare setting and carries a high mortality. The infection prevention and control officer of the healthcare facility should be immediately notified and guide staff for appropriate infection control techniques and prevention of spread. C. auris is a reportable pathogen and should be reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.