Several physiologic factors can shift the oxygen dissociation curve either to the left or the right. A rightward shift favors unloading oxygen compared to the original curve at the same oxygen tension. Conversely, oxygen loading is favored with a leftward shift with the oxygen dissociation curve. Increases in carbon dioxide tension, decreased pH (acidity), increased 2,3-DPG, and increases in temperature shift the curve rightward. This is helpful in delivering oxygen to metabolically active tissues, which metabolize oxygen and glucose to CO2 and organic acids. The relationship between acidity, CO2, and hemoglobin O2 affinity is called the Bohr effect. An increase in CO2 will decrease the pH and induce oxygen unloading. in a high acid state, the rate of glycolysis is decreased thus the activity of 2,3-BPG phosphatase is induced and 2,3 BPG concentration is decreased. 2,3 BPG binds specifically to deoxy Hb in the central cavity thus stabilizing t deoxygenated state of Hb and decreasing O2 affinity. Temperature is the easiest relationship to understand. At higher temperatures, unloading is favored because increased thermal energy favors previously unfavorable reactions. Interestingly, increased CO2 and decreased pH are also potent stimuli for vasodilation, enhancing O2 delivery to metabolically active tissues.

Fetal HgB (alpha2gamma2) introduces a leftward shift of the curve, favoring O2 binding to hemoglobin at lower oxygen tension. This is favorable in the womb, to allow the growing fetus to pull O2 from the maternal circulation. In the treatment of sickle cell disease, treatment with hydroxyurea has been shown to increase levels of circulating fetal hemoglobin. These patients will have higher oxygen tension, which favors the O2 bound form, which helps prevent the hemoglobin from sickling and causing an acute crisis.

The dissociation curve also undergoes a leftward shift in carbon monoxide poisoning. CO has a 240-fold greater affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen and will displace oxygen. This favors retention of O2 (keeping hemoglobin in the tense state) on hemoglobin at peripheral tissues. Despite a greater proportion of saturated hemoglobin molecules, total O2 content is decreased because of the high affinity of CO for hemoglobin.

At high elevations, oxygen binding and delivery are more complicated. Initially, with decreased atmospheric O2 tension, the unloading of oxygen at peripheral tissues is favored. This is because, given a sufficiently low atmospheric pO2, loading, carriage of oxygen, and unloading all take place on the sloped section. This also induces hyperventilation and transient respiratory alkalosis. This mild hypoxia leads to acidosis, increased 2,3 DPG, and a rightward shift (see above), usually on day 2 or 3. Chronic hypoxia (weeks) leads to increased erythropoietin released by the kidney, an increase in hematocrit, and a rise in O2 content back to normal (but potentially at a lower saturation).

As discussed, drops in pH promote oxygen unloading, but the venous blood is not appreciably more acidic than arterial blood due to the Haldane effect. Deoxygenation in the periphery promotes carbaminohemoglobin (CO2-Hgb) formation, binding up of H+, and release of bicarbonate. This allows for effective buffering between the arterial and venous ends of the circulation, and for efficient carriage of a significant portion of the CO2 pool. The fewer oxygen atoms bound, the more H+ can be accommodated, and bicarbonate can be produced.