While the most common causes of conjunctivitis are viral or bacterial and due to allergic reactions, there are other causes of conjunctivitis that should be considered when treatment does not improve symptoms. Uveitis is a local autoimmune reaction that causes the eye to become inflamed and is commonly mistaken for conjunctivitis. Uveitis can be a local reaction that is idiopathic or a manifestation of a systemic autoimmune disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, or ankylosis spondylitis. Systemic autoimmune disease such Sjogren syndrome or Stevens-Johnson syndrome can also mimic conjunctivitis by presenting with conjunctival erythema and discharge.

A systemic workup should be initiated if any of these diseases are suspected. The most life or sight-threatening masqueraders of conjunctivitis include cavernous carotid fistula, orbital cellulitis, and orbital hemorrhage. In cavernous carotid fistulas, an abnormal communication between the arterial and venous circulation form causing vasodilation of the venous system. Subsequently, the fistula can cause rupture and hemorrhage, leading to irreversible damage to the eye and/or death. Due to venostasis, the ophthalmic vein dilates and causes congestion of the episcleral vessels mimicking conjunctivitis. Proptosis and a pulsatile globe can help differentiate between a fistula and conjunctivitis. Orbital cellulitis is an infection posterior to the septum and involves the orbital contents. Patients present with similar symptoms of conjunctivitis, but will also have pain with eye movements or even restricted eye movements. Lastly, an orbital hemorrhage is an ophthalmic emergency. The cause is mostly traumatic, but it is possible to have a spontaneous hemorrhage, especially in patients on anticoagulants, that present with proptosis, tight eyelids, and erythema of the conjunctiva.