**Special Situations**

**Long Distance Notifications**

Proceed with the aforementioned GRIEV_ING mnemonic. If the family of the deceased feel inclined to come to the hospital, request that they are accompanied and make certain someone is accessible to answer any of their questions.

**Autopsy and Medical Examiner Cases**

Depending on state laws, deaths meeting established criteria must be promptly reported to the medical examiner and coroner. Some examples are unexplained or unusual deaths, homicides or suicides, medical procedure deaths, pediatric deaths, accidents, or unnatural deaths. If a medical examiner and coroner case, resuscitative lines, and tubes must not be removed from the deceased. If the death is not a medical examiner and coroner case, the physician is still obligated to present the family with the opportunity for an autopsy.

**Organ Donations**

It is not the responsibility of the emergency physician to discuss organ procurement with the family of the deceased. The Joint Commission standards on organ procurement require specific hospital procedures and protocols. This entails the collaboration with organ and tissue procurement organizations. Allow a member of the organization to discuss all information relating to organ and tissue donations with the family of the deceased.

**Witnessed Resuscitation**

Clinicians should develop procedures that facilitate safe family-witnessed resuscitation efforts. Allowing family members comprehensive, real-time observation on the patient’s situation may provide families with closure, leading to less complicated grief responses. Family members should be escorted out if concerns emerge of them posing a risk to the safety of the healthcare team.

**Pediatric Deaths**

Pediatric deaths are one of the most taxing situations faced by the team. Protocol for pediatric deaths is different from other deaths, in which clinicians and nurses are to provide a family-centered and team-oriented approach. The family should be allowed to be with the child during resuscitation efforts. The family should also be provided with appropriate resources and family planning. Clinicians should get in contact with the child’s pediatrician and disclose the circumstances of their death so the pediatrician can further support the deceased child’s family. Pediatric deaths meet the criteria to be reported to the Medical Examiner and Coroner.