The greatest morbidity and mortality associated with non-fatal drowning is due to tissue hypoxia, specifically cerebral hypoxia, and thus, the greatest priority in the resuscitation process is to address and correct hypoxia quickly. Current recommendations state that rescue breaths should begin as soon as possible, and the breaths should be given with the patient's their chin and airway extended when safe to do so. One recommendation is to start resuscitation with five rescue breaths instead of the usual two and to perform the rescue breaths before performing chest compressions. The Heimlich maneuver is no longer recommended and should be avoided. Hypothermic patients should have their pulse assessed for 30 seconds, as their pulse may be weak, and starting CPR on a heart that has an organized rhythm may trigger life-threatening dysrhythmia. When examining, manipulating, and moving hypothermic patients, it is important to be gentle to prevent inciting a dysrhythmia. Passive and active rewarming methods should be employed to warm the patient’s core temperature.

Initial management of the patient includes delivering oxygen via nasal cannula, non-rebreather, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, or endotracheal tube. Oxygen should be titrated to maintain oxygen saturation between 92% - 96% and to avoid over oxygenation.  Nebulized albuterol may be given for bronchospasm. Cardiac support should be employed. Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) protocol should be followed if needed. Infusion of crystalloids, and at times vasopressors, may be needed for refractory hypotension.