Scintimammography is a diagnostic imaging modality using radiopharmaceuticals to identify breast malignancies. With limited complications, allergic reaction to radiopharmaceuticals, and extravasation of radiopharmaceuticals, the most effective way of enhancing healthcare team outcomes is through identifying every step of the process and assigning a role to each team member. Prior to the patient arriving at the hospital or clinic for their examination, the following should be done:

- Appropriate scheduling should be provided to the patient to allow for optimal patient satisfaction.

- Screening for a history of recent surgeries, menstrual cycle, recent imaging with radiopharmaceuticals, history of contrast/radiopharmaceutical reactions, and personal medical history should be administered. Appropriate preparation for the patient should be overseen by the radiologist.

- The nuclear medicine technician should perform quality control according to the general guidelines by the Society of Nuclear Medicine on the scintillation camera.

- The radiologist should review the imaging to understand the case better and ensure that the study meets the appropriate criteria.

- Radiopharmaceuticals of choice should be prepared and shipped within the appropriate timeframe to prevent radioactive decay.

When these interprofessional roles have been assigned and are accomplished without interruption, the coordinated efforts of the entire interprofessional healthcare team, including the patient, demonstrate an overall better experience and more positive outcomes. [Level 5]