The disease usually involves the eye only with no systemic manifestations.

Refractive error (usually hypermetropia) may be present. The fundus appearance is drastic and shows a single egg-yolk like symmetrical subretinal deposit at the macula bilaterally, but the visual acuity is usually normal. However, there are reports of unilateral cases in patients with BEST1 mutation and bilateral reduced EOG Arden ratio with normal electroretinogram.

Typically, the optic nerve and retinal vessels are normal, and bony spicules are not seen.

The vitelliform macular lesion may progress through the typical stages, may regress with time, or may be associated with newer extramacular lesions.

Visual field - Usually, there is no peripheral visual field defect. Central scotoma may be present.

Autofluorescence - The vitelliform material is typically brilliantly autofluorescent and has a round or oval shape in the vitelliform stage. In pseudohypopyon stage, the autofluorescence is visible in the inferiorly deposited yellow material. Vitelliruptive disease shows speckled autofluorescence. The atrophic stage shows hypo-autofluorescence. Peripheral ring/small circumferential dots of hyper-autofluorescence may be noted in the vitelliruptive stage.

Fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA)- FFA is crucial to rule out choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM), which shows fluorescence that increases in size and intensity with time. The vitelliform deposit usually causes hypofluorescence secondary to blocked fluorescence. The atrophic stage reveals a window defect. There is no 'black choroid' appearance on FFA, as seen in Stargardt disease.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) - In the vitelliform stage, the OCT reveals the deposit of homogenous hyperreflective material.

In the subclinical stage, the middle highly reflective layer or middle HRL (interdigitation zone or IZ/cone outer segment tip line or COST) showed notable thickening throughout the macula, especially at the fovea.

In another study, the outer retinal layers were noted to be disrupted in stage 2 through 4 disease (vitelliform, pseudohypopyon, and vitelliruptive stage), and absent outer retinal layers were noted in the atrophic or cicatricial stage.

EOG - The normal light peak to dark trough ratio (Arden ratio) is at least 1.85. In BVMD (all stages, even with no apparent fundus lesion, all patients, and carriers with normal fundus), the light peak is universally reduced, resulting in an Arden ratio of 1.50 or less usually.

The diagnosis of BVMD needs the following criteria

- Presence of one of the typical lesions of BVMD

- Abnormal EOG

- Dominant mode of inheritance

- Typical natural course and onset of the disease as in BVMD

ERG - Typically, the ERG is normal.

Dark adaptometry is normal.

Color vision and contrast sensitivity may be affected.