When patients with atypical chest pain or new-onset heart failure present to the primary care provider, internist, and nurse practitioner, one of the investigations to assess the heart is a treadmill test. The test is usually performed by a cardiologist. It is helpful as a part of diagnosing patients with known or suspected coronary disease and provides significant prognostic information for patients with known disease.

Current guidelines suggest that exercise tests with imaging or echocardiography can be used as follow-up tests in intermediate or high-risk patients. If follow-up testing is positive, patients may benefit from guideline-directed medical therapy versus cardiac catheterization with revascularization. The healthcare providers should educate the patient on what the exercise stress test involves, how it is performed, and the type of results it can reproduce.

Treadmill stress testing requires the coordinated efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team that includes cardiologists, family clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), and nurses. All team members must know the parameters of stress testing, contraindications, interpretation, and signs that the test may need to be terminated earlier. Any concerns noted by any team member should be documented in the patient's health record and communicated to other interprofessional team members. Proper cardiac stress testing can prevent more serious cardiac events by helping initiate therapeutic interventions earlier and optimize patient outcomes. The interprofessional paradigm is the best means by which to accomplish this. [Level 5]