The current treatment approach for a patient with PAH is based on a risk stratification approach that considers clinical, functional, exercise, hemodynamic, and right ventricular function parameters. Multiple studies have shown this approach of treatment based on methodical risk assessment at baseline and follow-up to predict survival or event-free survival.

Every patient should be assessed at every visit using a multidimensional approach. To tackle this, there are various risk scores, but the three major ones that are used in the risk stratification are the US Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-term PAH Disease Management (REVEAL) equation and risk score, the 2022 European Society of Cardiology/European Respiratory Society (ESC/ERS) guidelines risk table which divides patients into low (<5%), intermediate (5 to 20%) or high (>20%) risk based on estimated one-year mortality and the French Pulmonary Hypertension Network (FPHN) Registry risk equation. The REVEAL 2.0 risk score calculator updates the original risk score calculator.

There is some concordance between the ESC/ERS risk stratification and the REVEAL 2.0 score as follows: low risk = REVEAL score ≤6, intermediate risk=REVEAL score 7 and 8, and high risk=REVEAL score ≥9.****The overall goal of treatment is to achieve low-risk status.

**General and Supportive Measures**

- For patients with PAH under medical therapy, a supervised exercise training program is recommended along with psychosocial support, while excessive physical activity causing distressing symptoms should be avoided.

- Patients with PAH should obtain vaccination against influenza, SARS-CoV-2, and Streptococcus pneumonia.

- In patients with PAH with the arterial partial pressure of oxygen <60mmHg, long-term oxygen therapy, including in-flight oxygen, is recommended.

- Optimization of anemia/iron status is recommended in patients with PAH.

- Anticoagulation is not generally recommended in PAH but can be considered on an individual basis.

- For procedures requiring anesthesia, a multidisciplinary consultation at a PH center should be considered to assess the risks and benefits.

- Women of childbearing potential with PAH should be counseled against pregnancy and provided with clear contraceptive advice and psychosocial support.

- If women of childbearing potential desire to become pregnant or who become pregnant, counseling at an expert PH center, including genetic counseling, should be done. Adoption and surrogacy with pre-conception genetic counseling may be considered.

- Termination of pregnancy in women with PAH should be done at expert centers. Endothelin receptor antagonists and riociguat are teratogenic and should not be used during pregnancy.

- Patients with PAH with signs of fluid retention and right ventricular failure should be treated with diuretic therapy.

- The use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, beta-blockers, angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors, or ivabradine is not recommended in PAH unless other indications exist, such as hypertension, left heart failure, coronary artery disease or arrhythmias.

**Medical Management for IPAH**

- **Drug classes**
- **Calcium channel blockers (CCBs):**In patients with IPAH, HPAH, and drug-induced PAH that test positive during vasoreactivity testing, high-dose CCBs can be used as the first-line therapy. Amlodipine or nifedipine is preferred in patients who are relatively bradycardic at baseline.
- **Endothelin receptor antagonists (ERAs):**Endothelin -1 causes vasoconstriction and mitogenic effects via the endothelin receptors type A. Endothelin B receptors promote vasodilation through clearance of endothelin-1 and accelerated production of prostacyclin and nitric oxide. However, non-selective blocking of endothelin receptors or selective blocking of endothelin A receptors has similar effectiveness in PAH.****Ambrisentan is an endothelin receptor type A antagonist, while bosentan and macitentan are dual type A and type B ERAs. Peripheral edema is seen with ambrisentan use; liver function test abnormalities can be seen with both ambrisentan and bosentan. Bosentan can reduce warfarin, sildenafil, and tadalafil levels and negate hormonal contraceptives' effects. Macitentan can cause a reduction in hemoglobin levels. These should not be used during pregnancy due to their teratogenic potential.
- **Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE-5i) and soluble Guanylate cyclase stimulators (sGCS):**These medications predominantly act on the nitric oxide (NO) pathway. PDE-5 inhibitors prevent the degradation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), thus causing increased NO levels leading to vasodilation; they also have antiproliferative effects.
- **Prostacyclin analogs (PCA) and prostacyclin receptor agonists (PRA):**Prostacyclins are potent vasodilators and endogenous inhibitors of platelet aggregation with cytoprotective and antiproliferative properties.****In patients with PAH, there is dysregulation of the prostacyclin pathway; hence, drugs targeting this pathway have been studied in PAH. Epoprostenol is a synthetic prostacyclin analog with a short half-life of 3 to 5 minutes and is administered via the intravenous route. Serious adverse events can occur due to pump malfunction, local site infection, catheter obstruction, and sepsis.

- **Treatment approach:**The drugs mentioned above target three separate pathways which lead to improvement in the disease - the endothelin system (antagonism), the prostacyclin pathway (agonism) as well as the nitric oxide pathway (agonism). The hemodynamic definitions of PH have changed recently, where the cutoff for abnormal mPAP was changed from ≥25 mmHg to >20 mmHg, and the cutoff for abnormal PVR from >3 WU to >2 WU. All the above-mentioned drugs have been studied in patients with mPAP >25mmHg and PVR>3 WU, and the efficacy of these drugs in patients with mPAP between 21 to 24mmHg and PVR 2-3 WU has not been established. Based on global experience and randomized controlled trials, the following treatment strategies have been recommended by the latest ESC/ERS guidelines.
- General and supportive measures should be provided to all patients.
- The new ESC/ERS guidelines recommend using the three strata risk stratification at initial evaluation (low risk, intermediate risk, and high risk) and four strata risk stratification at subsequent visits (low risk, intermediate-low risk, intermediate-high risk, and high risk). 
- In patients without cardiopulmonary comorbidities who are classified as high risk, initial triple therapy with ERA, PDE-5i, and intravenous/subcutaneous PCA should be started. If the patient remains at high risk on follow-up, lung transplant evaluation should be initiated.
- In patients without cardiopulmonary comorbidities who are low to intermediate risk, initial therapy should consist of ERA and PDE5i. If they remain in the intermediate-low risk status, PRA can be added, or the PDE5i can be switched to sGCS. If the patient goes into high-risk status, intravenous/subcutaneous PCA should be added. 
- In patients with cardiopulmonary comorbidities, initial therapy should consist of either PDE5i or ERA. Thereafter, these patients should receive regular follow-up and individualized therapy. 
- Cardiac comorbidities are defined as conditions associated with an increased risk of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, including obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and coronary heart disease. Pulmonary comorbidities include parenchymal lung diseases and are often associated with low DLCO****(<45% predicted value)

**Interventional Therapy for IPAH**

Balloon atrial septostomy and Potts shunt (shunt between left PA and descending aorta) can decompress the right heart, improving systemic blood flow and oxygen transportation despite causing desaturation. The procedures are rarely performed, are complex, and have substantial procedure-related mortality. They can only be considered in centers with expertise in the procedure.********Pulmonary artery denervation using intravascular ultrasound catheters and radiofrequency ablation is still in the experimental stages.****The technique aims to reduce sympathetic overdrive associated with vasoconstriction and vascular remodeling mediated through baroreceptors at the bifurcation of the PA.

**Lung and Heart-lung Transplantation**

Referral to a transplant center should be made in patients with PAH who have an inadequate response to combination therapy, remain at intermediate-high or high risk of death, or have diseases such as pulmonary veno-occlusive disease or pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis which respond poorly to medical treatment.

A majority of patients receive a bilateral lung transplant with heart-lung transplant only reserved for patients with non-correctable cardiac conditions.****Patients who survive the early post-transplant period have good long-term outcomes, with one study demonstrating median survival of 10 years in patients who survived the first year post-transplant.

**Treatment of Group 1 Other Than IPAH/HPAH**

- Drug-induced PAH should be diagnosed after eliciting relevant exposure and after other causes have been ruled out. The causative agent should be discontinued immediately if possible, and immediate PAH therapy should be considered in intermediate/high-risk patients. Patients who are low risk should be reassessed in 3 to 4 months, and PAH therapy can be considered if the hemodynamics are still abnormal.

- In patients with connective tissue disease-associated PAH, the underlying conditions should be treated, and the same approach as mentioned above for IPAH can be followed.

- In HIV-associated PAH, antiretroviral treatment should be started. Initial monotherapy for PAH can be considered with a sequential combination if necessary.

- In patients suspected to have Porto-pulmonary hypertension, a screening echocardiogram should be done, and they should be referred to expert centers. Initial monotherapy for PAH can be considered with a sequential combination if necessary. Liver transplantation can be considered on an individual basis as long as PVR is normal or near normal with PAH therapy.

- In patients with PAH due to congenital heart disease, closure of atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is recommended if PVR <3 WU. For those with PVR between 3 and 5 WU, and PVR >5 WU initially that declines to < 5 WU after therapy, shunt closure can be considered. In patients with PVR >5 WU despite treatment, shunt closure should not be done.

- In patients with congenital heart disease with defect closure/repair, risk assessment is recommended, and a treatment approach with initial combination therapy and subsequent sequential therapy based on risk assessment should be considered similar to patients with IPAH.

- In patients with Eisenmenger's syndrome, a risk assessment should be considered. In symptomatic patients, bosentan is recommended with consideration of adding other medications sequentially if treatment goals are not met.

**Management of PH-LHD**

- Patients with suspected PH-LHD should be phenotyped into the probability of likeliness of LHD causing their PH, which is based on age, risk factors for LHD (obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and diabetes), presence of known LHD, previous cardiac intervention, atrial fibrillation, structural LHD, ECG, echocardiogram, CPET, and cMRI. This will help in the decision to pursue further invasive assessment.

- An RHC should only be pursued if it will aid treatment decisions. If a severe pre-capillary component is suspected, a referral should be made to an expert center for further evaluation.

- The cornerstone of therapy is optimizing underlying cardiac disease.

- In patients with CpcPH, an individualized approach to treatment can be considered at an expert center, and current guidelines do not recommend for or against the use of PDE5i. However, these medications should definitely not be used in patients with IpcPH.

**Management of Group 3 PH**

PH in patients with lung disease is classified into severe PH (PVR >5 WU) or nonsevere (PVR < 5 WU).****However, it can sometimes be challenging to differentiate between group 1 and group 3 PH. An RHC should be done in patients suspected to have PAH or CTEPH as it may help with disease phenotyping; it should also be done in patients who are being considered for lung surgery, including lung transplant or lung volume reduction. Therapy should be focused on the treatment of the underlying disease. These patients should ideally be referred to expert centers for individualized treatment and consideration of transplant. Inhaled treprostinil has been approved in the United States for use in patients with PH associated with lung disease.

**Management of Group 4 PH**

Patients with suspected CTEPH should be referred to an expert center where confirmation of diagnosis should be done with computed tomography with contrast and/or digital subtraction angiography along with an RHC. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, the patients should be started on lifelong anticoagulation. Such patients should be discussed with a multidisciplinary team and, if deemed operable, should undergo pulmonary endarterectomy. Patients who are inoperable can be treated with balloon pulmonary angioplasty and/or riociguat. Sometimes patients with a pulmonary endarterectomy may have residual disease, and such patients can be treated with balloon pulmonary angioplasty and/or riociguat.

**Management of Group 5 PH**

The mainstay of treatment is the management of the underlying condition.