Pegfilgrastim has specific administration instructions for both the prevention of febrile neutropenia and the prevention of the hematopoietic sub-syndrome of acute radiation syndrome.

For the prevention of febrile neutropenia, a 6 mg dose of pegfilgrastim is given to the patient at least 24 hours after receiving chemotherapy.

The healthcare professional fills the on-body injector with the pegfilgrastim dose immediately before applying it to the patient's skin. Once filled with the medication, the unit activates automatically. Three minutes after activation, the on-body injector deploys a needle, which is then inserted into the patient subcutaneously by the healthcare provider. The device is then attached to the patient via its adhesive backing. The pegfilgrastim dose is not injected into the patient until 27 hours after activation. Following the administration of the drug dose, the patient may appropriately discard the on-body injector.

The patient should receive pegfilgrastim with the first dose of chemotherapy, and administrations should continue throughout their subsequent chemotherapy cycles. It is also important to note that pegfilgrastim should not be given to patients under 45 kg because they require weight-based dosing. Since the pre-filled syringe and on-body injector both administer precisely 6 mg of pegfilgrastim and have no marks for measuring, they should not be used for patients who require weight-based dosing.

For the prevention of the hematopoietic sub-syndrome of acute radiation syndrome, the recommended dose of pegfilgrastim is two doses of 6 mg each, and they should be administered one week apart after the patient has had exposure to radiation.

There is no dose adjustment necessary in cases of renal impairment.