The exact pathogenesis of necrolytic migratory erythema (NME) has yet to be elucidated; however, hyperglucagonemia undoubtedly plays an important role, having been implicated in most cases. This is evident as tumor resection or medical therapy with glucagon antagonists often results in complete resolution of the skin symptoms, often within one week of treatment.

To explain the interrelationship of the previously mentioned factors in the pathogenesis of NME, the multifactorial malnutrition model was created. This model is a prevailing theory of how excess glucagon induces changes in this disease state. The premise of this theory is that the catabolic state induced by excess serum glucagon results in the derangement of a common metabolic pathway involving zinc, protein, amino acids, and essential fatty acids. This pathway is likely affected by the depletion of one or more of the nutrients mentioned above; thus, one can classify NME as a deficiency dermatosis.

Zinc is likely of major importance in the pathogenesis of NME, as its supplementation has been shown to resolve the skin lesions in those with glucagonoma syndrome.

Hypoproteinemia and hypoaminoacidemia are seen in NME and glucagonoma syndrome and are likely a result of the catabolic state induced by excess glucagon. Hypoaminoacidemia is a result of the physiologic effect of glucagon on the liver to increase gluconeogenesis via amino acid catabolism. It is thought that the diminished availability of amino acids causes a decrease in peptide synthesis in tissues such as the epidermis, which predisposes it to rapid cycling and destruction. The reduced pool of amino acids is also shown to lead to increased arachidonic acid production and an increased tendency toward inflammation in the epidermis.

The deficiency of essential fatty acids that occurs in glucagonoma syndrome can be directly secondary to the hypoalbuminemia seen in the disease process; however, this may be only one aspect of the phenomenon. The deficiency of fatty acids may also be secondary to the enhanced peripheral lipolysis resulting from the physiologic actions of glucagon on hormone-sensitive lipase in adipose tissue.

This increase in inflammatory mediators is thought to be exacerbated by the hypoaminoacidemia and hypoproteinemia present in glucagonoma syndrome, as albumin normally sequesters fatty acids released by trauma and prevents their conversion to prostaglandins and leukotrienes.

The pathogenesis of NME in the context of pseudoglucagonoma syndrome has been less extensively studied due to the rarity of this condition. However, there are similarities to classical NME. One disease in which NME has been seen without the presence of a glucagonoma is hepatic cirrhosis. It is well known that in the presence of cirrhosis, the synthetic capacity of the liver is markedly reduced, resulting in hypoproteinemia and hypoaminoacidemia, which, as noted above, are likely related to the pathogenesis of NME seen in glucagonomas. In addition, the liver is involved with glucagon degradation, and in the presence of liver dysfunction, glucagon levels can become elevated, leading to NME.

Another spectrum of diseases that pseudoglucagonoma syndrome and NME occurs in are ones involving gastrointestinal dysfunction. Celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and pancreatic insufficiency have all been reported to cause NME in the absence of glucagon-secreting tumors.