The management of patients with Down syndrome is multidisciplinary. Newborn with suspicion of Down syndrome, should have a karyotyping done to confirm the diagnosis. The family needs to be referred to the clinical geneticist for the genetic testing and counseling of both the parents.

Parental education is one of the foremost aspects regarding the management of Down syndrome, as parents need to be aware of the different possible conditions associated with it so that they can be diagnosed and treated appropriately. Treatment is basically symtomatic and complete recovery is not possible.

These patients should have their hearing and vision assessed and as they are more prone to have a cataract, therefore timely surgery is required. Thyroid function tests should be done on a yearly basis and if deranged should be managed accordingly.

A balanced diet, regular exercise, and physical therapy are needed for the optimum growth and weight gain, although feeding problems do improve after the cardiac surgery.

Cardiac referral should be sent for all the patients regardless of the clinical signs of congenital heart disease which if present should be corrected within the first 6 months of life to ensure optimum growth and development of the child.

Other specialties involved include a developmental pediatrician, pediatric pulmonologist, gastroenterologist, neurologist, neurosurgeon, orthopedic specialist, child psychiatrist, physical and occupational therapist, speech and language therapist, and audiologist.