Treatment for this bacterial infection is based on intracellular activity, pharmacokinetics, and evidence from clinical trials that recommend tetracycline antibiotics, particularly doxycycline, as the preferred treatment. Case studies have shown that with treatment, most infected individuals will have an improvement in fever and clinical symptoms within 48 hours.

In pregnancy and in patients where doxycycline is contraindicated, the infection is best treated with macrolide antibiotics, such as azithromycin (a 5-day course if clinical response is seen) and erythromycin for a 7-day course. Third-line antibiotics active against C. psittaci include fluoroquinolones, which are less effective than tetracyclines and macrolides.

Macrolides remain the agents of choice in children with mild to moderate infection. However, as has been proposed for the treatment of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, in cases where the benefit of treatment with doxycycline outweighs the potential risk, especially if the alternative therapy is found to be ineffective against psittacosis, a tetracycline, such asdoxycycline can be considered in pediatric patients.

The role of corticosteroids in severe psittacosis is unclear. A case report published in 2021 outlined a case of severe psittacosis, which progressed to organizing pneumonia after 11 days of symptoms and reported poor response to doxycycline. Failing appropriate antibiotic therapy, corticosteroids were eventually added, which resulted in improvement in clinical symptoms; however, the patient did not survive.