Once the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) have been addressed, injury-specific interventions should be undertaken.

Immediate, life-threatening injuries require prompt intervention, such as emergency tube thoracostomy for large pneumothoraces and initial management of hemothorax. For cases of hemothorax, adequate drainage is imperative to prevent retained hemothorax. Retained hemothorax can lead to empyema requiring video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery.

The majority of thoracic trauma can be managed non-operatively. However, 15% of patients require operative management, and surgery should not be delayed when appropriate. Operative exploration of thoracic injuries should be considered if tube thoracostomy drainage exceeds 1000 to 1500 mL immediately, or there is an output of about 200 mL per hour for 2 to 4 hours or ongoing resuscitation (blood transfusion, persistent hypotension) with no other discernable cause.

In cases where cardiac arrest is imminent, emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) may be indicated for resuscitation. The best survival results are seen in patients who undergo EDT thoracotomy for thoracic stab injuries who arrive with signs of life. Per the Western Trauma Association Critical Decisions in Trauma resuscitative thoracotomy success of EDT for patients arriving in shock with penetrating cardiac injury approximates 35% and 15% for all penetrating wounds.

**Admission**

Asymptomatic patients with penetrating thoracic injuries and normal imaging on presentation should be observed for the development of a delayed pneumothorax or hemothorax.

Minor injuries may simply require close monitoring and pain control. Care should be taken in the young and the elderly. Patients with 3 or more rib fractures, a flail segment, and any number of rib fractures with pulmonary contusions, hemopneumothorax, hypoxia, or preexisting pulmonary disease should be monitored at an advanced level of care.

**Pain Control**

Pain control greatly affects mortality and morbidity in patients with chest trauma.

Other pain control options include interpleural nerve blocks, transdermal patches, intravenous patient control analgesia (PCA), and epidural analgesia.

Nonnarcotic transdermal patches are safe pain management options for many patients. They should be considered for patients with persistent chest wall pain despite lack of confirmed rib fractures, for patients being discharged, or as an adjunct treatment for those who are admitted.

**Antibiotics**

Prophylactic antibiotics administration for tube thoracostomy for blunt thoracic trauma does not reduce the incidence of empyema or pneumonia when placed with sterile technique.

They should be considered in cases of grossly contaminated wounds or in cases where the sterile technique was interrupted.

All patients with penetrating injury should have up-to-date tetanus vaccination.