Abacavir, as an NRTI, competes with deoxynucleotides in host cells to prevent the creation of double-stranded viral DNA. When preventing this viral double-stranded DNA from being encoded, the virus is unable to be reproduced in the host CD4 lymphocytes. Hypersensitivity can arise when individuals with antigen-presenting complexes linked to HLA B 5701 perform direct noncovalent bonding with abacavir. Once bonded, the surface complex is altered and is then recognized as foreign by cytotoxic lymphocytes. This interaction results in the release of inflammatory cytokines that facilitate the hypersensitive response.

Due to the severity of AHR, it is important to conduct screenings for the HLA B 5701 allele to avoid a hypersensitive response in patients predisposed to this outcome. In selecting a regimen, physicians must take into account the patient’s HLA B 5701 status. The recommendation is that patients receive an alternative NRTI to abacavir if they have the HLA B 5701 allele to avoid the possibility of a hypersensitive response.

Along with a patient’s genetic profile for the HLA B allele, it is also vital for the physician to review the patient’s medication history with abacavir. Since rechallenging the immune system after a hypersensitive response can produce extreme and life-threatening symptoms, there should be additional caution when considering abacavir in patients who may have had an allergic reaction previously. Skin patch testing can also be a consideration in these cases since it is used exclusively in patients that have already taken abacavir and serve as a localized challenge instead of a systematic reintroduction.

If clinicians observe these protocols and recommendations, physicians and patients will be capable of making an informed selection of the components of their antiretroviral therapy. For most, abacavir is very effective in concert with an additional NRTI and an InSTI, but for a small percentage of genetically predisposed individuals, abacavir can result in a harmful hypersensitive reaction.