As part of an interprofessional team, all healthcare personnel must be aware of the potential differential diagnoses in a patient complaining of chest pain. Clinicians will make the diagnosis, but other caregivers (e.g., nurses and pharmacists) will also be involved. Consult with a specialist, such as a nephrologist or a cardiologist, may be necessary. Nurses can assist with patient evaluation and counsel the patient once there is a definitive diagnosis. Pharmacists will play a crucial role in customizing the patient's medication regimen around dialysis, performing medication reconciliation, and counseling the patient on their drug regimen. All interprofessional team members must maintain accurate and updated patient records so everyone on the care team can access the same accurate and updated patient information. This, along with open communication, informs everyone involved in the case of any concerns or changes in patient status. This interprofessional approach will yield the best patient results. [Level 5]

Although uremic pericarditis is easily treatable, grave diagnoses such as, but not limited to, ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), cardiac arrhythmias, aortic dissection, coronary artery dissection, and stent thrombosis must be ruled out before making the clinical diagnosis of uremic pericarditis. In addition, since the presentation of uremic pericarditis can be consistent with STEMI (chest pain, elevated troponin, and electrocardiogram findings), it is imperative to perform an adequate and thorough evaluation for every patient.