Mycobacterium avium complex in HIV patients

Mycobacterium avium complex infections occur when the CD4 counts are less than 50. Mycobacterium avium complex infections frequently present as disseminated infections. Disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex infections are uncommon outside of HIV patients. Most infections are due to M. avium. For unknown reasons, M. intracellulare does not cause disseminated disease in HIV patients. The clinical presentation of the disseminated disease is non-specific. Common clinical findings are fever (more than 80%), night sweats (more than 35%), weight loss (more than 25%), abdomen pain, diarrhea, mesenteric lymphadenopathy, anemia, elevated alkaline phosphatase, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase.

Antiretroviral therapy can begin simultaneously. Rifabutin can be used instead of rifampin to avoid drug-drug interactions with antiretroviral agents. Preferred regimens must contain clarithromycin and ethambutol.

Mycobacterium avium complex in Cystic fibrosis patients

The principles of the therapy are the same as in an immunocompetent patient. There may be some patients who may tolerate medications but never become sputum negative, in which case prolonged treatment may be required. Azithromycin is preferred over clarithromycin due to a better tolerance profile.

Mycobacterium avium complex in transplant patients

Nontuberculosis Mycobacterial species infections are more common in hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients than in solid organ transplant patients. The most common site of infection has been the lungs, and there is an increasing trend. Most infections have been in the setting of chronic rejection.