Nowadays, total thyroidectomy is preferable to subtotal thyroidectomy, not only because of its lower recurrence rates but also because of its similar complication rates.

In a review by Knobel, following a transcervical excision of a retrosternal goiter, the chance for transient unilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve damage is 2% to 5.4%, for permanent unilateral nerve damage 1% to 2%, for transient hypocalcemia 33.9%, for permanent hypocalcemia 2.1% and tracheomalacia 3%.

Injury of the recurrent laryngeal nerve is considered a severe complication of thyroidectomy. Unilateral damage can result in unilateral vocal fold fixation and voice alterations, dysphagia, and aspiration pneumonia. Bilateral injury, however, leads to acute airway obstruction that requires tracheostomy.

Hypocalcemia constitutes another complication of thyroidectomy. Substernal thyroidectomy usually poses difficulties to localization of the parathyroid glands, the excision of which leads to hypoparathyroidism and thus low blood calcium. It is the inferior parathyroid glands that are more commonly accidentally excised due to their varying anatomy. Reoperation for intrathoracic goiter poses an even higher risk of hypocalcemia.

Tracheomalacia is a condition in which the trachea becomes flaccid due to the development of and pressure by extra-tracheal abnormal tissue, leading to tracheal obstruction after excision of the goiter and removal of the tracheal tube. Its prevalence in retrosternal goiters reaches 1.6%.

Mortality following substernal thyroidectomy ranges from 0 to 15,3% in operations requiring extracervical approaches and often results from a tracheobronchial fistula or sternotomy dehiscence. Thyroid cancer and compression symptoms are related to poor outcomes.

Cervical hemorrhage can occur in the first 8 hours following thyroidectomy. It is a potentially lethal complication, which results in laryngeal edema and acute airway obstruction and presents with coughing. The incidence of hemorrhage is about 4.2%. The use of a drain can help rapidly recognize this situation.

Other rare complications of substernal thyroidectomy include infections, pneumothorax, and the need for tracheostomy.