With the discovery of penicillin, antibiotics are a critical part of global health, including cancer chemotherapy and advanced surgical procedures. Antimicrobial agents are not like other drugs. They are unique in that both the individual patient and the broader society bear the consequences of their use with each prescription. The antimicrobial effect that saves lives also exerts selective pressure on replicating bacteria, leading to the emergence of drug resistance.

Between 1935 and 2003, fourteen new classes of antibiotics were introduced. Since 1998, only ten new antibiotics were approved, of which only linezolid and daptomycin have new targets of action.

Stewardship describes the careful and responsible management of something entrusted to one’s care. In 1996, John McGowan and Dale Gerding first applied the term antimicrobial stewardship, where they suggested a causal association between antimicrobial agent use and resistance. They also focused on the urgency of large-scale controlled trials of antimicrobial-use regulation employing sophisticated epidemiologic methods, molecular typing, and precise resistance mechanism analysis.

In simple terms, it refers to a coherent set of actions to promote the responsible use of antimicrobials. AMS is one of the three pillars of an integrated approach to strengthening the health care system. The other two include infection prevention and control(IPC) and patient and medicine safety. The critical components like Antimicrobial Resistance(AMR) surveillance and sufficient supply of quality medicines linked with three pillars help promote equitable and quality health care. The principles of AMS also apply to the use of antimicrobials in the animal and agriculture sectors, emphasizing the wise use of the agents.

All healthcare practitioners must embrace roles as frontline stewards to address this emerging health and economic concern of antimicrobial resistance. AMS can be fulfilled by prescribing appropriately and educating the patients and colleagues on the proper use of this increasingly scarce medical resource to protect our current and future patients. With AMS interventions, we aim for sustainable behavior change in an antibiotic prescription.