# Continuing Education Activity

Placenta previa is the complete or partial covering of the internal os of the cervix with the placenta. It is a major risk factor for postpartum hemorrhage and can lead to morbidity and mortality of the mother and neonate. This situation prevents a safe vaginal delivery and requires the delivery of the neonate to be via cesarean delivery. Most cases are diagnosed early on in pregnancy via sonography and others may present to the emergency room with painless vaginal bleeding in the second or third trimester of pregnancy. The presence of placenta previa can also increase a woman's risk for placenta accreta spectrum (PAS). This spectrum of conditions includes placenta accreta, increta, and percreta. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of patients with placenta previa. It also highlights the role of an interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition in order to improve outcomes for mother and fetus.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the risk factors for placenta previa.
- Describe the pathophysiology of placenta previa.
- Describe the management of patients with placenta previa and how this varies with gestational age, presentation, and stability of the patient.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination, collaboration, and communication amongst an interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care and improve outcomes for patients with placenta previa.

# Introduction

Placenta previa is the complete or partial covering of the internal os of the cervix with the placenta.

# Etiology

The underlying cause of placenta previa is unknown. There is, however, an association between endometrial damage and uterine scarring.

# Epidemiology

Placenta previa affects 0.3% to 2% of pregnancies in the third trimester and has become more evident secondary to the increasing rates of cesarean sections.

# Pathophysiology

Placenta previa is the complete or partial covering of the cervix. A low-lying placenta is where the edge is within 2 to 3.5 cm from the internal os.

# History and Physical

The risks factors for placenta previa include a history of advanced maternal age (age greater than 35 years old), multiparity, smoking, history of curettage, use of cocaine, and history of cesarean section(s).

Painless vaginal bleeding during the second or third trimester of pregnancy is the usual presentation. The bleeding may be provoked from intercourse, vaginal examinations, labor, and at times there may be no identifiable cause.

# Evaluation

Routine sonography in the first and second trimester of pregnancy provides early identification of placenta previa. It is important to realize that the earlier the diagnosis of placenta previa is, the more likely it is to resolve at delivery secondary to placental migration. Nearly 90% of placentas identified as "low lying" will ultimately resolve by the third trimester.

A patient presenting with vaginal bleeding in the second or third trimester should receive a transabdominal sonogram before a digital examination. If there is a concern for placenta previa, then a transvaginal sonogram should be performed to confirm the location of the placenta. Transvaginal sonogram has been shown to be superior to a transabdominal sonogram and is safe.

At the time of sonography, evaluation for PAS is also necessary. High suspicion for placenta accreta should be a consideration early on in diagnosis. Placenta accreta is the attachment of the placenta beyond the normal boundary of the myometrium that is established by the Nitabuch fibrinoid layer.

# Treatment / Management

With the diagnosis of placenta previa, the patient is scheduled for elective delivery at 36 to 37 weeks via cesarean section.

Patients who present with a known history of placenta previa and vaginal bleeding should have vitals performed, and should have electronic fetal monitoring initiated. The patient should receive two large-bore intravenous lines with a complete blood count, type and screen, and have coags drawn. If she presents with substantial bleeding, then 2-4 units of blood should be crossed and matched.

Patients with excessive or continuous vaginal bleeding should be delivered via cesarean section regardless of gestational age. If bleeding subsides then expectant management is permissible if the gestational age is less than 36 weeks. If at or greater than 36 weeks of gestation then cesarean delivery is recommended.

Delivery

A cesarean section should optimally occur under controlled conditions. A discussion with the patient should take place during prenatal care of the diagnosis, possible complications, and the plan for cesarean section and possible hysterectomy if there is uncontrolled postpartum hemorrhage or PAS. The surgeon, anesthesiologist, nursing staff, pediatricians, and blood bank should receive notification of these patients. If there is a concern for PAS then urology, general surgery, as well as interventional radiology should have involvement as well. Communication should take place among the teams regarding the expected date of surgery, planned procedures such as uterine artery embolization, and updated imaging studies, which allows the various units to be aware of the patient if the patient presents earlier in an emergency setting.

The patient should have two large bore IV lines in place and blood crossed and matched. Uterine artery catheters can be placed before the procedure by interventional radiology for precautions as well. Regional anesthesia, spinal-epidural combination, is recommended at the time of delivery for nonurgent cases.

A vertical skin incision is the recommended incision for optimal exposure. A high vertical uterine incision may be required if the placenta is covering the lower uterine segment, or if the lower uterine segment is underdeveloped. After delivery of the fetus, the placenta spontaneously detaches, and the uterine incision can be closed. There may be hemorrhage after detachment of the placenta secondary to the decreased contractability of the lower uterine segment, which can be managed with bimanual uterine massage, uterotonics, intrauterine tamponade using balloon or gauze, B-Lynch sutures, Hackethal suture, Cho sutures, uterine artery or internal iliac artery ligation, and uterine artery or internal iliac artery embolization.

There is an option for conservative management in patients with PAS if the patient desires fertility. The placenta can be left in situ until there is devascularisation of the placental bed so that the remaining placental tissue may either be more safely removed or resorbs itself. Several studies have reported excellent fertility rates following conservative treatment.

Patients with a low-lying placenta, placenta lies greater than 2cm from the cervical os, may qualify for a trial of labor but are at an increased risk for postpartum hemorrhage and emergent cesarean section compared to women with normal placentation.

# Differential Diagnosis

Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy can be due to numerous factors. Based on the trimester of pregnancy the differential diagnosis can vary greatly. In the first and second trimester, vaginal bleeding can be secondary to subchorionic hematoma, cervicitis, cervical cancer, threatened abortion, ectopic pregnancy, or molar pregnancy. In the third trimester, vaginal bleeding can be due to labor, placental abruption, vasa previa, or placenta previa.

The most life-threatening cause of vaginal bleeding in pregnancy that should be ruled out is placental abruption, which is placental separation before delivery, a complication in about 1% of births.

Vasa previa is the overlying of the internal cervical os with the fetal vessels that run through the membranes.

# Prognosis

Neonatal Prognosis

There is a threefold to fourfold increased neonatal mortality and morbidity rate with placenta previa primarily from preterm delivery.

Maternal Prognosis

About 90% of placenta previa cases resolve through delivery.

# Complications

Vaginal bleeding secondary to placenta previa can lead to postpartum hemorrhage requiring a blood transfusion, hysterectomy, maternal intensive care admission, septicemia, and maternal death.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- Placenta previa is the covering of the internal cervical os preventing a safe vaginal delivery.

- Delivery should be performed from 36 to 37 full weeks, via cesarean section, in uncomplicated cases.

- Bed rest, avoiding intercourse, and avoiding digital examinations are recommended. Any manipulation of the placenta can lead to hemorrhage.

- Patients with placenta previa should go to the emergency room if they have any episodes of vaginal bleeding.

- Prior history of placenta previa and a history of cesarean sections may increase a patient's risk for placenta accreta.

- If there is a concern for placenta accreta, increta, or percreta, then a cesarean hysterectomy may need to be performed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Placenta previa can lead to serious consequences and requires immediate attention to the presentation of vaginal bleeding. an interprofessional team approach must be taken to provide the utmost care for the patient. Patients diagnosed with placenta previa prior to vaginal bleeding should have multiple discussions with the OB/GYN regarding management and expectations. Patients should consent for possible blood transfusions, uterine artery embolization, and possible cesarean hysterectomy. Various disciplinaries, participating in an interprofessional team approach should be aware of the patient including, labor and delivery physicians, anesthesiologist, interventional radiologist, vascular surgeon, urology surgeon, and both surgical and neonatal nurses.