The nurse, the clinician, and the pharmacist must collaborate efficiently during the care of women with Bartholin gland pathology, in order to achieve the best possible outcome for these women and their families. Women with a Bartholin gland cyst are usually first seen by the primary care provider, nurse practitioner or internist. Because of the extensive differential, it is important to involve the gynecologist in the care of these patients.

The pharmacist has a very important role in educating patients about the available antimicrobial agents and in providing them with the required information about drug-drug interactions, in order to avoid any possibly preventable complications. The pharmacist should educate the patient on compliance and encourage them to immediately report any adverse events or any concerns.

While the actual drainage or marsupialization is done by the gynecologist, the patient follow up and teaching are done by the nurse practitioner. The nurse practitioner should educate the patient on how to perform sitz baths and maintaining perineal hygiene. If antibiotics are prescribed. All patients need a follow up to ensure healing has occurred.

The best standard of care to women with Bartholin gland cysts or abscesses could never be achieved without the interprofessional collaboration between the nurse, the clinician, and the pharmacist. Clear and effective communication among the members of the interprofessional team is key to the successful management of women with Bartholin gland pathology. [Level V]