The thoracic mediastinum is a significant region of the human body that includes vital cardiopulmonary structures. The mediastinum is involved in a variety of clinical abnormalities at all ages. Below is an abbreviated list of clinical correlations organized by subdivision.

The superior thoracic mediastinum is clinically relevant due to its large vessels and nerves. Penetrating wounds to this area have a high likelihood of affecting important vessels or nerves resulting in critical damage on impact, as well as during extraction.

The anterior mediastinum may appear clinically benign, but it is responsible for many clinical considerations. The thymus, located in the superior portion of the anterior mediastinum, is notorious for its role in diseases such as myasthenia gravis, pure red cell aplasia, and thymus cancer.

The middle mediastinum is arguably the most important subdivision of the region as it contains the pericardium, heart, and great vessel roots. Myocardial infarction, pericardial effusion, cardiac tamponade, Tetralogy of Fallot, and cardiomegaly are just a few examples of pathologies that manifest in the middle thoracic mediastinum.

The posterior mediastinum piggybacks a large amount of its clinical importance from the structures descending from the superior thoracic mediastinum. The descending aorta, autonomic nervous networks, extensive lymphatics, and esophagus are all capable of causing vast systemic dysfunction in the presence of pathology. Descending thoracic aortic aneurysm, thoracic duct obstruction, and distal esophageal-related dysphagia are problems that can quickly evolve into life-threatening situations.

These examples are just a few of the many pathologies involved in the thoracic mediastinum. These compartments and their structures are often involved in diseases from acute to chronic, infectious to traumatic, and congenital to neoplastic. Therefore, understanding the distinct regions of the thoracic mediastinum, the contained structures, landmarks, and physiologic variants, is essential to clinicians at all levels.