The diagnosis and treatment of NTM are complex and best done with an interprofessional team.  Patient-centered care is a practical approach and is the ultimate goal when treating patients. Research has demonstrated that an integrated interprofessional team is the best method for achieving excellent outcomes in inpatient care. Health professionals who look at the patient as a whole person may have more influence on the patient than if they look at him merely as a sick individual. The pharmacist should educate the patient on the importance of drug compliance, while also checking the medication record and verifying dosing and drug interactions. An infectious disease pharmacist can also go over the latest antibiogram data with the clinician to optimize antimicrobial effectiveness and prevent antibiotic resistance. Nursing can have involvement with medication administration as well as verifying compliance, looking for adverse events, offering patient counsel, and reporting any concerns to the clinician staff.

In some cases, daily observer therapy may be necessary. The patient should be urged to quit smoking, as this may exacerbate the symptoms. The pharmacist should work in tandem with the infectious disease expert and monitor the patient for adverse effects of the medications. A holistic approach helps determine the patient necessities and strengths that could serve as an essential component of the treatment plan. Hence, the healthcare invitation to participate in patient-centered care improves outcomes, patient safety, and enhances interprofessional team performance. [Level 5]