**Effect of Serum Potassium On Electrical Conduction**

Because potassium has the most significant influence on the transmembrane potential of the cell, potassium levels in the blood have a considerable influence on electrical activity in the heart/neurons and help explain why a low or high level of potassium can result in weakness and heart arrhythmias.  In the heart, a high or low level of potassium changes the transmembrane potential, which in and of itself promotes cardiac arrhythmia, but also indirectly promotes cardiac arrhythmia by altering the electrical gradient of other ions, namely Na, Cl, and calcium.

At the muscle level, primary periodic paralysis happens due to a defect in the ion channels. At the neuronal level, change in mental status with or without seizure can happen due to an altered transmembrane potential, which can occur due to increased or decreased levels of Na, K, and Ca.

Understanding the basic physiology of the cell membrane and how ion channels control it has led to a better understanding of so many disease processes and developing effective medical treatments for them. By altering the resting membrane, potential hypokalemia can lead to tachyarrythmias and hyperkalemia to bradyarrhythmias. For example, in cases of hyperkalemia where bradyarrhythmias are very common, calcium gluconate or calcium chloride can be given to stabilize the resting membrane potential.

Magnesium has been successfully used in severe exacerbations of asthma and in eclampsia, where it alters the neuromuscular transmissions by changing calcium entry into the cellular membrane.