**Medical Nutrition Therapy**

Medical nutritional therapy is the first line of treatment. A strategy of consuming small portions of low glycemic index carbohydrates (30 grams of carbohydrates per meal, 15 grams per snack), adequate protein consumption (30 grams per meal and total of 60 to 80 grams/day), adequate fat consumption (15 grams/meal, 5 grams/snack), spacing meals 3 to 4 hours apart, avoidance of alcohol, caffeine, and fluids with meals is recommended.

Avoiding high glycemic index foods is essential because a sudden rise in glucose can trigger more insulin release after meals and contribute to significant post-prandial hypoglycemia. High glycemic foods are digested quickly, whereas low glycemic foods are digested relatively slowly and cause a relatively slow rise in glucose levels.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Pharmacotherapy may be considered for individuals with moderate-severe symptoms refractory to nutritional therapy; however, large-scale studies comparing the efficacy of medications are yet to be performed. The choice in the use of medications depends on the clinician's preference/experience and patient choice. The use of nifedipine, acarbose, GLP-1 analogs, diazoxide, and somatostatin analogs for treatment has been reported in case reports and small case series.

Acarbose, an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor, delays the digestion of carbohydrates and may help decrease post-prandial glucose level spikes. Diazoxide acts via ATP-sensitive Potassium channels to inhibit the secretion of insulin. Somatostatin analogs slow gastric and small bowel transit of ingested material, affecting the release of hormones, insulin, and vasculature tone. Calcium channel blockers work via calcium channels on Beta cells to affect insulin secretion.

The International consensus on diagnosing and managing dumping syndrome endorses using acarbose as the first-line pharmacotherapeutic agent and using somatostatin analogs in patients not responding to acarbose. Usually, acarbose at a dose of 50–100 mg three times daily, with meals recommended. The adverse effects associated with acarbose are bloating and flatulence. Somatostatin analogs require frequent injections.

A recent randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study (PREVENT) reported promising results with Avexitide, a GLP -1 antagonist, in treating post-bariatric surgery hypoglycemia.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management may be considered for patients with moderate-to-severe symptoms refractory to nutritional therapy and pharmacotherapy. As with pharmacotherapy, large-scale trials comparing efficacy and safety are yet to be performed; surgical modality depends on the clinician's preference/expertise, comorbidities, anatomy, and patient choice. Gastrostomy tube placement in the remnant stomach, gastric outlet restriction surgery, RYGB reversal, and conversion of RYGB to SG have been reported in small case series. A partial pancreatectomy has been performed for this indication. However, it has not been found effective, and the ASMBS does not recommend it.