Hymenoptera stings are almost always diagnosed clinically. For this reason, it is very important to get a good history. Patients with uncomplicated, local reactions typically present complaining of pain and swelling after a presumed or witnessed sting. Apidae and Vespidae stings usually cause immediate pain. The venom then causes a local reaction within minutes that can last for hours. Symptoms include pain, swelling, pruritis, and bleeding. On exam, you may find erythema, edema, induration, and increased warmth. In some instances, one may also see a stinger still attached to the skin (Apidae). Stingers are usually still attached to the venom sac and so should be removed from the skin by scraping, for example, with a credit card, not by squeezing or with tweezers. Fire ant stings also cause pain immediately with an associated burning/itching sensation which lasts a few minutes, then a wheal with surrounding erythema forms. Patients can also develop a sterile pustule within 24 hours. Most Hymenoptera sting reactions are self-limited, result in a small area of local inflammation, and resolve within a few days. LLRs may be larger (greater than 10 cm), more painful, and persist for a longer duration. The exaggerated response to the venom is likely secondary to an IgE-mediated mechanism. These reactions typically worsen over 48 hours and then resolve within 7 to 10 days.

Systemic reactions often present as severe anaphylaxis, are rapid in onset and are life-threatening. Patients may have a history of anaphylaxis or a similar systemic reaction in the past secondary to insect stings. Patients present in extremis with rapidly worsening symptoms, including generalized urticaria, angioedema, flushing, difficulty breathing, wheezing, and hypotension/shock.