**Nonoperative treatment modalities**

In the vast majority of patients, exclusive treatment with nonoperative treatment modalities is sufficient for the management of acute or chronic symptoms.  Most patients report improvement with at least 3- to 6-months of nonoperative therapies. These modalities include, but are not limited to:

- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

- Activity modification

- Physical therapy

- therapeutic regimens and rehabilitation protocols emphasize glenohumeral joint mobilization, periscapular and rotator cuff strengthening programs, and posterior capsular stretching

- Diagnostic lidocaine block

- to confirm the diagnosis of QSS, an injection of 1% lidocaine (3cc or 5cc typically) to the QS will cause pain relief and symptomatic resolution

**Surgical management**

Open surgical decompression is reserved for patients with refractory QSS and failure of all nonoperative treatment modalities.  In cases of an apparent space-occupying lesion, or the setting of significant weakness and/or functional disability, earlier surgical decompression is a consideration.

Open decompression is beneficial in patients with evidence of fibrous adhesions or scarring that may be impingement and/or compressing the axillary nerve.  In the setting of paralabral cysts (often seen in association with labral pathologies in the shoulder) decompression of the cyst, in addition to concomitant shoulder labral repair can be performed.

In patients with vascular quadrangular space syndrome, their surgical management depends on the extent of damage to the posterior humeral circumflex artery. Patients who have an aneurysm of the PHCA undergo aneurysm resection. In patients with a thrombus, surgeons typically perform PHCA ligation, with or without thrombolysis. Patients who have a thrombus in their PHCA and digital emboli usually have a thromboembolectomy completed.

While performing surgery, the physician should identify, palpate, and track the axillary nerve and posterior humeral circumflex artery, and all care must be taken to mitigate any iatrogenic risk or injury to these neurovascular structures. Following decompression of the QS, palpation of the axillary nerve and PHCA should be performed as an assistant moves the patient’s glenohumeral joint throughout abduction and external rotation, to ensure the neurovascular structures can move without restriction and that the PHCA maintains a pulse throughout the motion.