Evaluation of lateral instability consists of the history, and physical described previously but also includes radiographs of the ankle to assess for syndesmosis widening, foot or ankle deformities which may predispose patients to instability. Stress radiographs such as with the anterior drawer test or talar tilt test are also essential to evaluate for structural abnormalities. Patients with mechanical instability will display radiological evidence, patients with functional instability may have a negative anterior drawer or talar tilt tests. MRI can be useful to evaluate the lateral ankle complex, and it can also identify concomitant pathologies such as talar dome osteochondral defects, peroneal tendon pathology and can be of assistance in surgical planning. Evaluation can consist of the staging of the injury to the lateral ankle, and there have been many classification descriptions over the years.

**Anatomic**

- Grade I - stretching of the lateral ligament complex

- Grade II - Partial tearing of one or several of the ligaments in the lateral ligament complex

- Grade III - Complete rupture of the lateral ligament complex.

**Functional**

- Grade I - the patient can fully bear weight and walk.

- Grade II - patient walks with a noticeable limp.

- Grade III - patient unable to walk

Stage I - ATFL involvement - microscopic tears

Stage II - ATFL involvement predominantly with CFL injury

Stage III - ATFL and CFL involvement with complete disruption of both ligaments and gross laxity noted upon examination.