Lipoprotein disorders are clinically important due to the of the role of lipoproteins in atherogenesis and the associated risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD). For patients with known ASCVD (secondary prevention), cholesterol-lowering leads to a consistent reduction in cardiovascular mortality and cardiovascular events in men and women and middle-aged and older patients. Among patients without cardiovascular disease (primary prevention), the data on reduction in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events with statin drugs is also well documented. Patients with triglyceride levels of more than 1000 mg/dl are at increased risk of acute pancreatitis.

Lipoproteins comprise lipids and protein and can be transported in plasma as such, for delivery of cholesterol, triglycerides, and fat-soluble vitamins to the respective organs as needed. In the past, lipoprotein disorders were the domain of specialized lipid physicians. However, the benefit of statin drugs, especially in reducing cardiovascular (CV) events has facilitated the treatment of hypercholesterolemia by family and internal medicine physicians. Despite this paradigm shift, the number of patients who could benefit from lipid-reducing drugs and who are not treated appropriately continues to be a major concern. Hence, the timely evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of lipoprotein disorders are of primary importance in the practice of medicine. This activity provides a practical approach to hypercholesterolemia and its management.