The urgency with which hyperkalemia should be managed depends on how rapidly the condition develops, the absolute serum potassium level, the degree of symptoms, and the cause.

Patients with neuromuscular weakness, paralysis, or ECG changes and elevated potassium of more than 5.5 mEq/L in patients at risk for ongoing hyperkalemia or confirmed hyperkalemia of 6.5 mEq/L should have aggressive treatment.

Treatment is usually prescribed in the following manner:

- Exogenous sources of potassium should be immediately discontinued.

- Treatment of the reversible cause should begin along with the management of hyperkalemia.

- Calcium therapy will stabilize the cardiac response to hyperkalemia and should be initiated first in the setting of cardiac toxicity. Calcium does not alter the serum concentration of potassium but is a first-line therapy in hyperkalemia-related arrhythmias and ECG changes. Calcium chloride contains three times more elemental calcium than calcium gluconate but is more irritating to peripheral vessels and more likely to cause tissue necrosis with extravasation, so it is usually only given through central venous lines or peripherally in cardiac arrest. Thus, calcium gluconate is the usual initial drug of choice in patients with evidence of cardiac toxicity.**never**be given in bicarbonate-containing fluids, as it can cause the precipitation of calcium carbonate.

- Insulin and glucose, or insulin alone in hyperglycemic patients, will drive the potassium back into the cells, effectively lowering serum potassium.

- Beta-2 adrenergic agents such as albuterol will also shift potassium intracellularly.**not**be used to manage hyperkalemia due to an increased risk of causing angina.

- Loop or thiazide diuretics may help enhance potassium excretion. They may be used in non-oliguric, volume-overloaded patients but should not be used as monotherapy in symptomatic patients. In hypervolemic patients with preserved kidney function (e.g., patients with congestive cardiac failure), 40 mg of intravenous furosemide is administered every 12 hours or may be given as a continuous infusion. In euvolemic or hypovolemic patients with preserved kidney function, an isotonic saline infusion is given before as needed to the patient before administering 40 mg of intravenous furosemide every 12 hours or a continuous furosemide infusion.

- Gastrointestinal cation exchangers such as patiromer may be helpful, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency who cannot receive immediate dialysis. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate, though commonly used, is falling out of favor due to lack of effectiveness and adverse effects, particularly bowel necrosis in elderly patients. If used due to a lack of alternatives, it should not be given with sorbitol, which increases toxicity.

- Hemodialysis should be performed in patients with end-stage renal disease or severe renal impairment.

Complications of treatment:

- Hypokalemia

- Inability to control hyperkalemia

- Hypocalcemia as a result of bicarbonate infusion

- Hypoglycemia due to insulin

- Metabolic alkalosis from bicarbonate therapy

- Volume depletion from diuresis