Sensory innervation to the lower extremity is handled through the sciatic nerve, femoral nerve, obturator nerve, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. These originate from the lumbar plexus, except for the sciatic nerve, which receives some contribution from the sacral plexus.

The femoral nerve is the largest of the four nerves and is commonly identified on ultrasound by emergency physicians when placing central venous access into the femoral vein. It is situated just lateral to the femoral artery on top of the iliac is muscle. The fascia iliaca separates the femoral nerve from the femoral artery.

- The obturator nerve runs through the psoas muscle and wraps behind the common iliac vessels. It affects only a minute portion of the medial aspect of the leg. The obturator nerve is variably blocked when performing the fascia iliaca compartment block.

- The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve innervates the lateral aspect of the thigh. This nerve runs behind the lateral aspect of the inguinal ligament.

- The sciatic nerve innervates the posterior compartment of the thigh. Because of its location, it is not blocked by anesthetic injection anteriorly.

The fascia iliaca is the second fascial plane encountered when viewing the proximal lower extremity under ultrasound. It runs below the fascia lata. In blind approaches, a characteristic "2 pops" are felt which indicates entrance into the compartment. The fascia iliaca runs anterior to the iliac this muscle, psoas muscle, and pectineus muscle. The sartorius muscle, as well as the femoral vessels, is located between the fascia lata and the fascia iliac. The fascia iliac compartment block has the potential to create a sensory block of the femoral, obturator, genitofemoral, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves.