# Introduction

In most primates, nails are unique features consisting of compact, translucent, keratinized cells. They protect the distal dorsal area of digits and participate in multiple functions, including grip, fine motor movements, and scratching.

Nail abnormalities can result from local nail pathology or manifest underlying systemic disease.

# Structure

The nail unit includes the nail plate and supporting structures. This section explains the anatomy of the nail unit and histologic findings of each region.

**Nail Plate**

The nail plate is the nail itself. It is a rigid, keratinized structure composed of around 196 rows of compact, well-differentiated keratinocytes called onychocytes.

**Nail Matrix**

The nail matrix is the origin of the nail plate. Its proximal end resides halfway between the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint and the PNF.**lunula**. The lunula is most prominent on the thumb and gets concealed by the PNF as one progresses to the digits on the ulnar side. The contour of the distal margin of the nail plate follows the shape of the lunula as observed in neonates and following nail avulsion.

At the edge of the lunula, an abrupt thinning of the epidermis is visible as the epithelium transitions to the nail bed.

Two elements constitute the mesenchymal layer under the nail matrix epithelium: a matrical dermis and a matrical hypoderm.

**Nail Bed**

The nail bed sits underneath the nail plate, spanning between the lunula and the hyponychium. The nail bed epithelium is composed of a monocellular basal layer, a spinous layer, and, like the nail matrix, is devoid of a stratum granulosum.

The nail bed dermis has one uniform compartment of collagen bundles and elastic fibers. There is a rich vascular network that is oriented longitudinally.

**Nail Folds**

The nail folds help secure the proximal and lateral margins of the nail plate.

- **Proximal**- The PNF is a skin wedge covering the proximal nail plate and matrix. Its dorsal surface is an extension of the normal finger epidermis, which reflects proximally to form a ventral surface. It overlies the proximal nail plate and divides into a distal and proximal zone.**eponychium**. At the angle between the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the PNF, the eponychium produces the**cuticle**, a thick stratum corneum layer that firmly adheres to the nail plate.

- **Lateral** – The LNFs line the sides of the nail. Histologically, apart from their lack of pilosebaceous units, they resemble normal skin.

**Hyponychium**

The hyponychium refers to the epidermis underlying the free margin of a nail. Melanocytes here have a basal distribution.

**Isthmus**

The isthmus is the transitional zone between the nail bed and the hyponychium.

# Function

The nails have multiple functions, including protective, mechanical, thermoregulatory, and cosmetic. Nails provide a rigid barrier for the distal digits and prevent hypertrophy that has been shown to ensue after great toe avulsions.

# Tissue Preparation

A nail biopsy should be conducted to diagnose inflammatory, infectious, or tumorous conditions. It is the most sensitive technique for diagnosing onychomycosis and is especially useful for pigmented nail lesions.

**Nail Plate**

A nail plate biopsy is the easiest to perform and has the lowest risk of scarring. If separation of the nail bed and nail plate is necessary or a proximal nail plate punch biopsy is needed, such as with proximal subungual onychomycosis, then anesthesia is required. Otherwise, a nail plate biopsy can be clipped from the free margin as is commonly utilized for distal-lateral subungual onychomycosis. An alternative method for diagnosing distal-lateral subungual and superficial onychomycosis does not require the removal of the nail plate. This modified nail plate biopsy involves a simple scraping of the subungual or superficial debris for direct microscopic examination with potassium hydroxide and sent for a fungal culture. Nail plate biopsies can also be useful for psoriasis, gout, and distinguishing melanin versus blood deposits.

**Nail Matrix**

Contrary to the nail plate biopsy, a nail matrix biopsy is the most difficult to perform and carries the highest risk of permanent nail dystrophy because of its role as the origin of the nail plate. The proximal matrix produces 81% of the cells in the nail plate; therefore, if possible, the biopsy should be confined to the distal matrix to decrease scarring potential.

Some clinicians prefer to replace the avulsed nail plate following the procedure.

**Nail Bed**

A nail bed biopsy is necessary for dyschromia, onycholysis, tumorous growths, atypical-appearing subungual warts, and to differentiate psoriasis from onychomycosis.

**Nail Fold**

Nail fold biopsies are useful for paronychia and nail fold tumors.

Another biopsy technique is the longitudinal biopsy, which incorporates all components of the nail apparatus. The incisions penetrate the periosteum with a straight medial incision and a curved lateral one.

Detailed information should be provided to the dermatopathologist, including pertinent patient history, differential diagnosis, and the exact location of the sample. Communicating the orientation of the sample is vital to optimizing histopathologic assessment because, as mentioned above, the histologic features greatly vary depending on the region of the nail unit. Ink, suture, or an accompanying diagram can facilitate communication of the orientation.

Processing a nail biopsy is more challenging than a standard skin biopsy. The specimen first undergoes fixation in a 10% formalin solution, and incubation time is proportionate to the tissue thickness. Because of the rigid nature of the nail plate, a softening step should be performed to reduce chattering, which may impair the quality of the slides and compromise the diagnostic potential. Many softening agents are available, including a combination of ethanol, methanol, acetone, glycerin, 4-hexylresorcinol, 10% to 30% potassium hydroxide, 10% potassium thioglycolate, polyoxyethylenesorbitan monopalmitate, 5% trichloroacetic acid, 4% phenol, 10% formalin, chitin-softening agent, 4 to 10% sodium hydroxide, and water.

Certain common household agents have even been shown to be effective softening agents.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

In addition to hematoxylin and eosin, other stains that are useful for interpreting nail biopsies include, but are not limited to, the following:

- **Periodic acid Schiff**(PAS) and**Grocott methenamine silver**(GMS) stains are used to highlight fungi. They adhere to the fungal cell wall elements and emit a magenta and brown color.

- **Diaminobenzidine**is used to identify blood.

- **HMB-45**,**Melan-A**,**S100**,**Fontana-Masson**,****and**PLN-2**are useful for lesions suspicious of melanoma.

# Pathophysiology

The nail matrix is responsible for nail plate growth.

Several factors influence the rate of growth. Lowered temperatures, female sex, non-dominant hand, first and fifth digits, certain disease states, and many medications are associated with a slower growth rate.

# Clinical Significance

Often underutilized, nails can offer an important clue in many clinical scenarios. Not only can they reveal a recent health history, but they can also act as a window to internal pathology. For instance, in the case of hypoxia, under-perfusion, iron-deficiency anemia, and endocarditis, the nails can display clubbing, delayed capillary refill, spooning, and splinter hemorrhages, respectively. Nail dystrophy can be the first sign of inflammatory diseases such as lichen planus and psoriasis.

The nails can be a site of aggressive conditions like melanoma. A histopathologic analysis is mandatory in the setting of suspicious melanoma. A helpful mnemonic that highlights clinical features associated with subungual melanoma is the ABCDEF rule, which stands for

- Age of 50 to 70 years old, Asian, African American, Native American

- Borders irregular, Brown or Black, Breadth over 3 mm

- Changing on own or not Changing with treatment

- Digit affected is most commonly the thumb, great toe, or index finger

- Extension to nail fold (Hutchinson sign)

- Family/personal history of melanoma or a dysplastic nevus

In addition to pigmented lesions, nail biopsies can help differentiate other similar-appearing entities, such as subungual verruca and subungual squamous cell carcinoma, as well as psoriasis and onychomycosis.

**Histopathologic Findings**

- **Spongiosis**: intercellular edema in the epidermis

- **Acantholysis**: loss of intercellular cohesion

- **Parakeratosis**: retention of nuclei in the stratum corneum

- **Hyperkeratosis**: thickened stratum corneum (orthokeratosis specifically defines a thickened stratum corneum without parakeratosis)

- **Hypergranulosis**: thickened stratum granulosum or presence of granular layer where it is normally absent

- **Hypogranulosis**: thinning or loss of stratum granulosum

- **Acanthosis**: thickened stratum spinosum

- **Exocytosis**: migration of cells (inflammatory or blood cells) into the epidermis

- **Papillomatosis**: the irregular fluctuation of epithelial surface overlying dermal papillae

- **Atrophy**: thinning of the dermis or epidermis

- **Pagetoid migration**: abnormal cells spreading upward in the epidermis

- **Koilocyte**: a suprabasal cell with a condensed nucleus and surrounding halo

**Diseases of the Nails and Associated Histopathologic Findings**

- **Subungual verruca**: Hyperkeratosis, acanthosis, papillomatosis, hypergranulosis, koilocytes

- **Subungual squamous cell carcinoma**: Mitotic figures, full-thickness keratinocyte atypia, parakeratosis, dermal invasion, koilocytes

- **Onychomycosis**: Hyphae, pseudohyphae, spores, neutrophil exocytosis, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, spongiosis

- **Psoriasis**: Hypergranulosis in nail matrix and bed, hypogranulosis in hyponychium, neutrophil exocytosis (Munro microabscesses), hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, spongiosis

- **Lichen planus**: Hypergranulosis, acanthosis, dermal fibrosis, lymphocytic infiltrate in the papillary dermis, hyperkeratosis, necrotic keratinocytes (Civatte bodies), spongiosis

- **Melanocytic activation**: No increase in melanocyte density, increase in pigment

- **Lentigo**: Melanocytic proliferation, solitary melanocytes located in the basal or suprabasal layer, absent or mild cytologic atypia

- **Nevus**: Melanocytic proliferation, nests predominate over individual melanocytes

- **Melanoma**: Melanocytic proliferation with atypical melanocytes, isolated melanocytes predominate over nests, pagetoid migration, dermal invasion