All patients receive general anesthesia through a double-lumen endotracheal tube. A triple lumen central venous `catheter is inserted into the neck. The majority of centers also place femoral vascular access to expedite percutaneous cannulation for initiation of ECMO support. It is important to insert the venous neckline on the left side as post-procedure extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be needed. A Swan Ganz catheter is also placed to monitor PA pressures. During lung transplantation (LTx), the close interrelation between heart and lung function makes TEE (trans-esophageal echocardiography) an invaluable tool for instantly monitoring the physiopathological situation in the subsequent steps of the intervention.

The patient is placed supine and prepped from neck to knee. For a single lung transplant, anterolateral thoracotomy is used. Bilateral transplants are traditionally done using a clamshell incision with sternal splitting. More recently, a sternal sparing approach has been used whenever possible. Split function testing preoperatively decides which side of the lung is transplanted first, with the severely diseased side transplanted first. The lungs are separated from the chest cavity, dense adhesions due to prior surgeries or pleurodesis can make this step difficult. A traction suture is taken on the dome of the diaphragm and brought out. The pericardium is opened at this point to aid with hilar dissection. Any adhesions are released with electrocautery. The hilar dissection is then carried out.

The diseased lung is removed, beginning with the division of the inferior pulmonary ligament. The pulmonary artery and pulmonary veins (PV) are subsequently divided using an endo stapler taking care to leave behind an adequate stump for anastomosis. Heparin is given systemically to keep the vessels patent. The hilum is prepared by the circumferential opening of the pericardium. The bronchus is prepared centrally. The other team prepares the donor lungs for implantation. The bronchus, pulmonary artery, and veins are prepared to keep the graft on ice. The lungs are then implanted, beginning with the bronchial anastomosis. This anastomosis is performed with a 3-0 prolene running suture in a telescoping fashion. The pulmonary artery is then aligned and anastomosed in an end-to-end fashion using a 4-0 prolene running suture. The pulmonary vein anastomosis is done last, and adequate care is taking to de-air the before tying down the sutures.

Ventilation after graft implantation is initiated with low FiO2 to avoid reperfusion injury, and gradually the mechanical ventilation is adjusted. The cardiopulmonary bypass for hemodynamic support is used during the operation whenever indicated. It supports the heart and lungs during surgery by providing circulatory support and oxygenation until the allograft functions. Thorough hemostasis is achieved at the end of the procedure. Similarly, the other lung is transplanted in a bilateral transplant procedure.

A the end of the procedure, three chest tubes are inserted: anteriorly in the chest, along the diaphragm, and posterolaterally towards the apex in the chest. The thoracotomy incision is closed in then closed in layers. The pectoral fascia, the subcutaneous layer, the subdermal layer, and the skin are re-approximated. After the transplant, the double-lumen endotracheal tube is exchanged for a single lumen. Bronchoscopy is performed at this time to assess the anastomotic suture line and remove any secretions or clots. Meanwhile, a nasoenteric feeding tube is also placed. Postoperative allograft dysfunction is managed with peripheral venovenous ECMO. The surgical duration is usually six to 10 hours.

Post-operatively, patients are transferred to the critical care unit. Here they remain on a ventilator until they regain consciousness and lung function is appropriate to start weaning. Adequate pain control is provided and anti-rejection drugs right away. It is critical to managing fluid intake, hemodynamics, and optimizing the outcome of end-organ perfusion in the intensive care unit. The majority of recipients receive immunosuppression consisting of steroids, a cell cycle inhibitor, and a calcineurin inhibitor. All patients undergo routine postoperative surveillance bronchoscopy and maintenance immunosuppression. Once stable,  they are shifted to the cardiothoracic nursing unit, based on the recovery. From here begins the post-transplant rehabilitation, which includes physical therapy and breathing and speech exercises. The expected length of stay is one to three weeks for an uncomplicated lung transplant.