Most people do not seek care until a disease process has already manifested, and this trend worsened with the COVID-19 pandemic.

Evidence shows that the sequelae of adverse health behavioral choices can be partially corrected. In a non-controlled study from a single physician practice, Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn reported on patients who were rejected as candidates for bypass surgery and put on a lipid-lowering drug and a vegetarian diet with little vegetable oils. These patients demonstrated a subsequent widening of their coronary arteries.

In 1998, a seminal study by Dr. Dean Ornish and collaborators was a landmark for initiating change. The article, entitled "Intensive Lifestyle Changes for Reversal of Coronary Heart Disease," compared 28 patients who had coronary artery disease and tried lifestyle intervention, compared to a cohort of patients who did not receive any intervention.

The American College of Lifestyle Medicine promulgates evidence that reinforces the importance of a diet containing fruits, vegetables, whole grains, unprocessed foods, and limited amounts of meat. These diet changes may have a substantial impact on obesity. A recent meta-analysis by Schlesinger et al. examined the risk of weight gain in relation to certain food groups.

They saw a decreased relative risk of fat in muscle the more a vegetarian diet was invoked. This and other studies suggest that increasing vegetables in one's diet are associated with a decreased relative risk of obesity, and increasing red meat intake is associated with a greater risk. There are multiple reasons for this, one of them being that the saturated fat content in red meat is often neglected. Saturated fats exist not only in red meats but also in other foods such as butter and cheese. Therefore, through education in lifestyle choices, one can choose to avoid saturated fats, achieving less future chronic disease and the associated pain and suffering.

Diabetes mellitus is another chronic disease process that is very common and significantly affects a patient's health and lifestyle. In 2002, Knowler et al. demonstrated that lifestyle interventions focusing on weight loss outperformed metformin in patients with type II diabetes mellitus.

They compared three interventional groups: lifestyle changes, metformin, and placebo. The lifestyle group was given a low-calorie & low-fat diet (almost vegetarian) and 150 minutes of physical activity per week. From this study, it is noteworthy that lifestyle changes outperformed metformin for preventing diabetes. Diabetes is also highly associated with obesity, and healthcare providers need improved strategies for weight loss. Obesity is increasing at alarming rates in the US. In 1985, no state had greater than a 14% prevalence of obesity. However, on the map 2010, greater than 30% of American adults are obese (figure 1, figure 2). In 2005, Dansinger et al. compared four diets regarding weight loss and heart disease risk reduction: Atkins, Ornish, Weight Watchers(R), and Zone diets.

All diets were noted to be successful at weight loss, directly related to regimen compliance. Ketogenic diets have become quite popular recently and often lead to successful weight loss. However, there is evidence that ketogenic diets (that encourage meat consumption) appear to be correlated with increased mortality.

In another study, the Portfolio diet (a diet of cholesterol-lowering foods) was administered to patients with high cholesterol levels.Adventist study was a large population-based longitudinal study of 96,000 patients, which compared vegetarians to meat-eaters.

Over a decade of observation, vegetarians had lower all-cause mortality and lower ischemic heart disease, cardiovascular disease, and cancer incidence. Diabetes was also less prevalent among vegetarians. The article concluded that vegetarians were healthier. A subgroup analysis compared three groups: vegans, lacto-ovo vegetarians, and pescatarians. It was reported that the "pescatarian" group was associated with the lowest all-cause mortality rate and decreased incidence of type II diabetes mellitus. Studies like this one suggest that diet is generally the most crucial lifestyle modification.

Another important, well-established aspect of preventive health is exercise. The effect of decreasing mortality through exercise is greatest with the first 150-200 minutes of moderate exercise per week, with additional exertional duration providing incrementally less benefit.talk test is a useful estimation of moderate exercise.

Sleep is another area emphasized in lifestyle preventive health. Analyzing all-cause mortality in a sleep duration study published by the American Heart Journal, it is noted that mortality decreases as one approaches a daily sleep duration of seven hours and increases with sleep duration beyond eight hours.

Sometimes societal constructs use lack of sleep as a feature of strength and "hard work," but it must be noted that this is not conducive to overall life performance. Lack of sleep is shown to decrease productivity and have consequences in the form of chronic diseases, including total cardiovascular disease and stroke.

Smoking, if habitual, is another significant risk factor for disease and mortality.

Stress and social isolation are other risk factors affecting chronic disease. Stress has been described as a risk factor for disease and overall mortality.

The goal of lifestyle modification as a preventative medicine is to make daily changes that are relatively easy to perform, adjust to, and uphold in terms of future daily habits. By educating our patients about these preventative lifestyle modifications, we can help them understand the consequences and implications of poor choices. In this regard, one can minimize future pain and suffering caused by a chronic disease process that has poor prospects for a cure but appears to be preventative and/or reversible – such as strokes, heart attacks, kidney failure, and the use of chronic dialysis.

In summary, even though prevention is not a revolutionary topic in medicine, it is neglected in most modern medical practices. Evidence-based lifestyle changes must be increasingly emphasized in the practitioner-patient encounter. Nutrition and exercise are the most important lifestyle modifications for nonsmoking patients. Patients should be encouraged to choose a diet predominantly of fiber-filled, nutrient-dense foods, thus promoting health. Additionally, regular and consistent physical activity is essential to an optimal health equation. Lack of quality sleep can detrimentally impact both of these modifications mentioned above. Substance abuse must be considered an essential modification as well.