Maintaining hand hygiene has been established as crucial for reducing the colonization and incidence of infectious diseases in all populations. Compliance with hand hygiene recommendations is believed to play a significant role in decreasing the risk of gastroenteric and respiratory infections.

Evidence suggests that hand sanitization significantly reduces the transmission of healthcare-associated pathogens and the incidence of HCAI.

However, it is important to keep in mind that the efficacy of alcohol hand sanitizers depends on the type of alcohol, the quantity applied, the technique used, and the consistency of use. There are also situations where these products are not ideal, for example, in preventing the spread of certain alcohol-resistant infections or when hands are significantly soiled, and the bacterial load is too high.

**Alcohol-based (hand) Rub**

The World Health Organization (WHO) defines an alcohol-based hand rub as: "An alcohol-containing preparation (liquid, gel or foam) designed for application to the hands to inactivate microorganisms and/or temporarily suppress their growth. Such preparations may contain one or more types of alcohol, other active ingredients with excipients, and humectants.”

Alcohol-based hand antiseptics mostly contain isopropanol, ethanol, n-propanol, or a mixture of these as their active ingredients. The antimicrobial activity of alcohols is attributed to their ability to denature and coagulate proteins. This causes microbes to lose their protective coatings and become non-functional. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention recommends formulations containing 80% (percent volume/volume) ethanol or 75% isopropyl alcohol; however, generally speaking, sanitizers containing 60 to 95% alcohol are acceptable. The recommended percentages of ethanol and isopropyl alcohol are kept as 80% and 75% because these values lie in the middle of the acceptable range.

Research suggests that alcohols are swiftly germicidal when applied to the skin but have no noticeable persistent residual activity. However, it has been documented that the regrowth of bacteria does occur slowly after its use. This may be because of the sublethal effect alcohol may have had on the residual bacteria.

Ethanol, the most common alcohol ingredient, appears to be the most effective alcohol against viruses, whereas propanol is considered a better bactericidal alcohol. The combination of alcohols may also have a synergistic effect. The alcohol concentration in hand sanitizers also changes its efficacy, with one study demonstrating that a hand rub with 85% ethanol content was significantly better at reducing bacterial populations than preparations of 60% to 62% ethanol. ABHS also often contain humectants, like glycerin, which helps prevent skin dryness, and emollients or moisturizers, like aloe vera, which help replace some of the water stripped off during use. None of the above-mentioned alcohols have shown a potential for acquired bacterial resistance and are therefore considered highly effective for repeated use in medical settings.