# Continuing Education Activity

Many providers lack thorough knowledge of the effects of inhaled anesthetics on the cardiovascular system. This can lead to significant intra-operative morbidity and mortality. To decrease associated morbidity and mortality, interprofessional team members must enhance their knowledge regarding the effects of inhaled anesthetics on the cardiovascular system. This activity reviews the physiologic response of the cardiovascular system to various inhaled anesthetics and concludes by discussing the development of anesthetic care teams and the increasing importance of clear and consistent open communication amongst interprofessional teams.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the anticipated effects of inhaled anesthetics on heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output in a healthy individual.
- Review how the different inhaled anesthetics may vary in terms of the magnitude of their effect on each cardiovascular parameter discussed.
- Explain how cardiovascular responses to inhaled anesthetics may change in patients at extremes of age, comorbidities, or taking additional medications.
- Summarize the importance of consistent open communication among the anesthesia care team when choosing the appropriate inhalation anesthetic agent for each case and when monitoring the patient during and after anesthesia administration.

# Introduction

Throughout the past several decades, both multiple studies and clinical practice have demonstrated the cardiovascular effects of inhalation anesthetic agents. These anesthetics include the early agents of diethyl ether and nitrous oxide to the latest halogenated agents such as isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane. The halogenated agents all have similar circulatory effects as seen in young, healthy volunteers during maintenance anesthesia.

# Function

Halogenated agents, including sevoflurane, desflurane, isoflurane, enflurane, and halothane, all decrease mean arterial pressure (MAP) with increasing concentrations of the anesthetic gas in a dose-dependent manner.

Cardiac output (CO) is reduced with increasing concentrations of inhaled anesthetics.

Tachycardia is commonly seen during maintenance administration of halogenated inhalation agents and is thought to be compensatory to the reduction in cardiac output as described above. The heart rate is dose-dependent as concentration increases and is slightly different for each agent. The concentration of inhalation anesthetics is standardized by the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), a known concentration of inhaled anesthetic at which fifty percent of patients do not elicit a physical response to a painful stimulus. Tachycardia is typically induced at the following concentrations for isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane respectively: 0.25, 1.0, and 1.5 MAC.

Rapid increases in the concentration of desflurane and isoflurane have significant effects on the heart rate, different from the maintenance dose as described above. Desflurane has the most profound response. An abrupt increase of desflurane concentration from 4% to 8% in less than a minute may result in a doubling of the heart rate and blood pressure above baseline in the absence of opiates, beta-blockers, or clonidine.

# Issues of Concern

Sevoflurane, desflurane, and isoflurane all prolong the QT interval on the electrocardiogram in healthy adults without concurrent medication.

There is debate regarding the use of inhaled anesthetic agents versus intravenous anesthetic agents during coronary artery bypass surgery in patients with coronary artery disease.

# Clinical Significance

Inhaled anesthetics enjoy extensive use for general anesthesia. As a result, the anesthesia provider must be aware of the cardiovascular effects and intricate differences among the various agents. Because hemodynamic instability correlates with increased risk of myocardial infarction, the risks, and benefits of undergoing general anesthesia merit consideration on a case-by-case basis.

# Other Issues

Hemodynamic instability is one of the major challenges associated with inhaled anesthetics and the elderly.

Pulmonary hypertension is associated with a high risk of mortality in patients who undergo invasive mechanical ventilation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

With the evolution of anesthetic care teams, it is vital to maintain open communication in the pre-operative, intra-operative, and post-operative periods between the interprofessional healthcare team members. Choosing the anesthetic modality as a team pre-operatively on a case-by-case basis is essential to the overall outcome of each case. Maintaining flexibility to allow for changes in the intraoperative period requires optimal communication within the anesthetic care team. Reanalyzing the case as a team in the post-operative period allows for improved outcomes in future cases. Overall, communication is essential to improving outcomes within anesthetic care teams that include the nurse anesthetist, surgeon, recovery room nurses, and the anesthesiologist, all working as a cohesive unit to drive optimal patient outcomes when using these anesthetics and preventing adverse cardiac outcomes. [Level 5]