A prospective study that evaluated 605 asymptomatic pregnant women and women in the postpartum period showed that none of the cases with thyrotoxicosis and 40% of cases with hypothyroid state needed treatment. If treatment is necessitated, it could usually be tapered over one year. Several studies have shown that long-term treatment would be required in up to 20% of cases with postpartum thyroiditis. There have not been any prospective studies to evaluate when and how to treat postpartum thyroiditis. Management of the thyrotoxic state is guided by its transitory nature. Anti-thyroid medications (methimazole and propylthiouracil) have been ineffective in the treatment of the thyrotoxic state of postpartum thyroiditis as it is destructive thyroiditis in which there is no increase in the synthesis of thyroid hormones. Symptoms are usually mild. In a few cases with clinically significant symptoms, a low dose of propranolol may be helpful. The thyrotoxic state of postpartum thyroiditis should be differentiated from Graves disease. When thyrotoxic state of postpartum thyroiditis resolved, the serum TSH level should be measured in about four to eight weeks (or in case of development of new symptoms) in order to screen for the hypothyroid state. In cases who develop significant symptoms, and currently lactating or cases who want to get pregnant, treatment should be initiated. Treatment with levothyroxine (LT4) 4 should be considered in the hypothyroid state of postpartum thyroiditis if the patient has mild symptoms, or advice if the patient wants to get pregnant again. If treatment is delayed, thyroid function must be evaluated every four to eight weeks until the patient gets euthyroid. In addition, women must be counseled to have contraception. The duration that the patient should continue to take LT4 has not been evaluated. Based on the guidelines, the euthyroid state should be maintained in cases who are pregnant or wants to get pregnant. To assess if the hypothyroid state of postpartum thyroiditis is permanent or transient, LT4 doses can be tapered starting 12 months after delivery. The dose should be tapered gradually, and serum TSH level must be monitored every six to eight weeks.