The pathophysiology of diseases that affect muscle myocytes is secondary to mutations in genes and dysfunction of myocyte proteins.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked inherited disorder that affects the dystrophin protein and is the most prevalent neuromuscular disorder. The dystrophin protein is responsible for anchoring intracellular cytoskeletal elements, to the myocyte membrane during contraction. Dystrophin can be completely absent or non-functioning, depending on the type of inherited mutation. Absence of the protein leads to myocyte death. The effects typically present as skeletal muscle with weakness in the pelvic girdle muscles that progressively involve other muscles. Muscle biopsy may show muscle replaced by fat. DMD affects cardiac myocytes to cause a dilated cardiomyopathy, which is typically the cause of death. DMD has an early onset of age, and children may be wheelchair users by ten years old. Genetic testing will confirm the diagnosis. Treatment of this disorder generally consists of systemic corticosteroids (prednisone or prednisolone).

Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) is an X-linked disorder that affects that is a milder form of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Mutations in BMD results in partially functioning dystrophin proteins. Onset is usually later that DMD and the symptoms are not as severe.

Myotonic muscular dystrophy is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease that results in CTG trinucleotide repeat expansions in the DMPK gene. This gene codes for an enzyme called myotonin protein kinase. Deficiency of this enzyme leads in myotonia (sustained muscle contraction), muscle weakness, and wasting. Myotonic muscular dystrophy also affects the cardiac conduction system (resulting in arrhythmias), eyes (cataracts), endocrine system (testicular atrophy), and central nervous system. If myotonic muscular dystrophy is suspected, genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis. Treatment consists of managing secondary complications.

Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are autoimmune disorders that involve the myocyte. Skeletal muscle is usually affected, and the disease affects proximal muscles in the shoulder and hips. Dermatomyositis has cutaneous manifestations (malar rash, Gottron papules or heliotrope rash). Dermatomyositis involves humoral mediated inflammation of the muscle perimysium (the sheath surrounding a bundle of muscle fibers). Polymyositis, which has no cutaneous manifestations involves cell-mediated inflammation of the endomysium (the sheath that surrounds a single myocyte). Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are commonly associated with malignancies and other autoimmune disorders. Treatment involves systemic steroid and immunosuppressant agents.

Mitochondrial myopathies are a group of rare disorders that usually present with myopathy and other manifestations. These disorders have mitochondrial inheritance patterns, which means that only mothers can pass mitochondrial DNA onto their offspring. In other words, an affected female will give mutated mitochondrial DNA to all of her offspring, but an affected male (who got the disease from his mother) will pass the mutated mitochondrial DNA to none of his offspring. These disorders demonstrate heteroplasmy, which is variable expression within a population. Imagine two siblings inherit mutated mitochondrial DNA from their mother. Heteroplasmy means that one of the siblings may be affected while the other is not, or the degree of their disease expression may not be equal. Symptoms of these disorders include skeletal muscle myopathy and myalgia (pain), smooth muscle myopathy (dysphagia), and cardiomyopathy. There are many other symptoms associated with the various syndromes. Diagnostic tests include muscle biopsies which may reveal “ragged red fibers” (accumulation of pathologic mitochondria) and genetic testing. No definitive treatment has demonstrated significant efficacy in treating these disorders.

Like any other type of cell in the body, myocytes can become neoplastic (benign or malignant). Skeletal myocytes undergo neoplastic change to become rhabdomyoma (benign) or rhabdomyosarcoma (malignant). Smooth muscle cells undergo neoplastic change to become leiomyoma (benign) or leiomyosarcoma (malignant).