Acute injection site reaction is the most common adverse effect of this product. This can manifest as erythema, swelling, or bruising that can take up to one week to heal. This risk increases if the patient takes a blood-thinning agent, such as aspirin, warfarin, clopidogrel, apixaban, rivaroxaban, and dabigatran. Clinicians should carefully review the patient’s medication list and counsel them regarding the increased risk.

Poly-L-lactic acid is a foreign substance. Therefore, it carries the risk of a hypersensitivity reaction upon injection into the skin. Patients should remove all makeup, and the skin should be adequately prepped before injection to minimize the introduction of additional foreign particles. Skin testing can be performed before treatment.

Post-treatment nodules with granuloma formation can occur with an injection of this product. The risk is thought to be due to lower dilution volumes, and studies have shown that a decreased risk exists when dilution of volumes of 7 mL or more is used. Post-injection massage recommended to be performed for 5 minutes at a time, five times a day for five days after injection, has been anecdotally recommended to help minimize the occurrence of the nodules. Injectors can also place smaller aliquots of the product deeper in the skin to help minimize this risk. Several treatments can be initiated if the patient experiences nodule formation. Early-onset lesions can be treated with subcision or injected with sterile water. Later onset nodules can be treated with intralesional triamcinolone up to 40 mg/mL or 5-fluorouracil 2% or 5% combined with a low-dose oral tetracycline antibiotic. There are some reports that oral prednisone may be used to help suppress the formation of nodules.

Inappropriate placement of this product in the skin can lead to lumpiness or visibility of the filler through the skin. Post-treatment massage to the area can help decrease this risk.

Post-procedural infection is rare but can occur. The skin should be prepped with an antiseptic, such as alcohol, followed by chlorhexidine or chloroxylenol. Some injectors inquire about a history of HSV and provide adequate prophylaxis of antivirals up to 2 days before and two days after treatment if augmentation is performed on or around the lip.

The most feared complication of an injectable product is skin necrosis due to cannulation of the product into a vessel with subsequent embolization or compression of a vessel from excessive volume. Injectors should have a thorough understanding of the anatomy of the treatment area and be aware of any potential danger zones. Injection of low volumes over multiple treatment sessions should be used whenever possible. Aspiration should be performed before injecting the product into the tissue. In the event of a vascular compromise, methods to promote vasodilation should be employed. The area should be treated with a warm compress and topical nitroglycerin to promote vasodilation.