The FDCA and its amendments have had significant public health implications. Before the FDCA, Americans were marketed and sold adulterated and misbranded food and drugs. Food often contained harmful additives, and drugs often contained alcohol and opium, among other substances.

In conjunction with the high prevalence of quack medicine at the time, Americans suffered from a dearth of consumer and public health safeguards. Although the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act, the FDCA’s predecessor, attempted to rectify these issues, the Act had many shortcomings and was difficult to enforce.

The FDCA and its amendments require drug manufacturers to submit evidence of drug safety and effectiveness, that drugs meet specific strength and purity standards, and that drug labels list active ingredients and contain truthful statements. The FDA also issues regulations for product labeling and can recall and/or seize products it deems unsafe or not FDCA-compliant. The five most common reasons for an FDA drug recall are mislabeling, contamination, adverse reaction, incorrect potency, and defects.

The FDCA and its amendments have also regulated medicine and pharmacy practices more regulated and evidence-based. This is in stark contrast to the quack medicine that was prevalent in the early 1900s. The Durham-Humphrey Amendment, for example, distinguishes between over-the-counter and prescription drugs, requiring the latter to be dispensed only with a valid prescription from a licensed healthcare professional.

Moreover, new drugs and medical devices are independently evaluated by the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research for risks and benefits before being approved for sale. As a result, FDA-approved drugs that healthcare professionals prescribe are thoroughly vetted and have clinical data supporting their safety and efficacy. Furthermore, the Orphan Drug Act incentivized the development of new medications that healthcare professionals can prescribe to treat a myriad of rare diseases, such as narcolepsy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, that had limited treatment options in the past.