The walls of the inguinal canal include the following:

- An anterior wall that is composed of the aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle and reinforced laterally by the internal oblique muscle. The superficial inguinal ring also contributes to the medial third.

- A posterior wall, also called the floor, is formed by the transversalis fascia, conjoint tendon, and deep inguinal ring.

- A superior wall, also called the roof, is formed by the medial crus of the aponeurosis of the external oblique, the musculoaponeurotic arches of the internal oblique and transverse abdominal muscles, and the transversalis fascia.

- An inferior wall, which is formed by the inguinal ligament, is reinforced medially by the lacunar ligament and laterally by the iliopubic tract.

When an individual develops increased intraabdominal pressure, the contents of the abdominal cavity push down on the inguinal ligament. To prevent herniation of the abdominal contents inside the inguinal canal, the posterior wall of the canal contracts while the muscles of the anterior wall tighten to narrow the canal.

There are two openings to the inguinal canal:

- The deep or internal ring is located just above the midpoint of the inguinal ligament and lateral to the epigastric vessels. The deep ring is formed by the transversalis fascia which provides the posterior covering of the contents of the inguinal ring.

- The superficial or external ring is the terminal end of the inguinal canal. It is located just superior to the pubic tubercle. The superficial ring has a triangular shape that is made by fibers of the external oblique muscle. These fibers continue to cover the inguinal contents as they descend into the scrotal area. Contiguous with the superficial ring are tendinous fibers (i.e., interligamentous fibers) which function to prevent the ring from enlarging.