**Contrast Sensitivity Measurement**

When the grating frequency is presented to the subject, and the contrast below is resolution is not possible, it denotes the contrast threshold, and the reciprocal of this threshold is CS.

The formula for CS measurement-

**Michelson’s Formula**

(L– L)/ (L+ L) where L denotes the luminance of the photocells scanning across the gratings. Lis the luminance on the lighter surface, and Lis the luminance on the darker surface.

**Weber’s Formula**

It is defined as (LL)/ L, where b is the background luminance and t is the target luminance. This formula is used to measure the contrast of the letters.

**Variables in CS measurement**

- The average amount of reflected light depends on the darkness of ink and the illumination of paper.

- The amount of darkness relative to the white background is labeled as a contrast.

- The distance between the cycles per degree of visual angle or grating period.

**Methods of Contrast Sensitivity Measurement**

Various methods have been described for CS measurement. Bodis Wollner described the CS measurements in day-to-day clinical practice. This was labeled as a visuogram to describe the CS curve. The CS deficit is expressed in decibels, and there are three types of deficits.

- High frequency- which is characterized by an increased loss at high frequency

- Level loss type- same loss at all kinds of spatial frequencies

- Selective loss type- Spatial frequency deficits in a narrow band

**Various Recommended Methods for Contrast Sensitivity Measurement**

- Simple plates

- Cathode ray tube display

- Letter acuity charts

- Laser interferometer (LI)

- Visual field testing using low contrast rings

- Pattern discrimination test

- Forced choice printed test

- Visual evoked cortical potentials

- Checkerboard pattern reversal

- Two alternative forced-choice tests

**Arden Gratings**

In 1978, Arden introduced a booklet of seven plates having one screening plate (No.1) and six diagnostic plates (No. 2 to 7). The contrast changes from top to bottom plates, and it covers 1.76 log units approximately. The patient is examined with the plates at a distance of 57 cm with a spatial frequency varying from 0.2 cycles/degree to 6.4 cycles/degree having a double frequency of the previous one. The patient is scored from 1 to 20 depending on the number of the plate covered. The upper limit of 82 is established for normal subjects, consisting of six plates having an interocular difference of less than 12.

**Cambridge Low Contrast Gratings**

It has a set of ten plates consisting of grating in a spiral-bound booklet. The test is performed at a distance of 6 meters with the booklet hung on the wall. The pages are shown in pairs, one above the other. It shows that one page in each pair has gratings and another page is blank, but the mean reflectance of the pages is the same. The test subject is asked to choose the pages from the top or bottom containing gratings. The pages are shown to the subjects in order of descending contrast, and are subject is stopped when the first error is made. A total of four descending series are shown in each eye separately. When an error is made on plate 5, a score of 6 is given. Depending on the total score from the four series, the CS is calculated from the conversion plate.

**Pelli- Robson Contrast Sensitivity Chart**

This chart has letters that subtend an angle of 3 degrees at a distance of 1 meter. The chart is printed on both sides; the other side has letter sequences in a different order. The letters are arranged in a series of two triplets in each line. The contrast reduces from one triplet to the next. The log sensitivity also varies from 0 to 2.25. While examining the patient, the chart can be hung on the wall so that the chart’s center coincides with the patient’s eye. The chart is brightly illuminated so that the luminance varies from 60 and 120 cd/m, which is equal to the exposure of 1/15 to 1/30 s at f/5.6 with an ASA of 100.

The luminance is recorded with the assistance of a light meter. While recording CS with the chart, the patient is seated at a distance of 1 meter. The subject is asked to read or point out the letter on the chart, beginning from the upper left corner and going horizontally across the line. The patient can also guess when the letters are invisible. The test is terminated if the patient wrongly guesses two out of three letters. The patient’s CS is indicated by the best triplets, for which two out of three letters are named correct.

**Mars Letter Contrast Sensitivity Test**

This chart looks similar to the Pelli-Robson test,  but the chart is comparatively smaller and is viewed at a closer distance.

**Vistech Chart**

This consists of sine-wave gratings and is conducted at a distance of 3 meters from the patient. In this, the contrast is tested at several spatial frequencies, and the patient has to pinpoint the orientation of the grating, either vertical or 15 degrees or anticlockwise.

**Functional Acuity Contrast Testing**

Dr. Arthur Ginsburg first described functional Acuity Contrast Testing (FACT). This includes a chart of sine-wave grating with varying frequencies. With the help of this chart, five spatial frequencies and nine levels of contrast can be tested. The contrast of the letter change in the row and decreases from left to right. The spatial frequency increases from top to bottom, and the test is performed at a distance of 10 feet. The patient sees the grating in each row like A, B, C, and D and then reports the orientation right, up, or left. The last grating for each spatial frequency is then plotted for the CS curve.

**Regan Low Contrast Sensitivity Letter Charts**

This consists of three-letter charts printed on white cardboard, having a contrast of 97%, 7%, and 4%. It is tested at 3 meters with eight letters in each line. The patient is told to start from the top of the row until they can no longer identify the letter on the line. The letter size goes on reducing, and the contrast remains the same. Regan, in 1988 said that this has a role in detecting early vision loss in glaucoma and diabetes.

**Spaeth Richman Contrast Sensitivity Test**

Spaeth Richman contrast sensitivity test (SPARCS) is a computerized test to assess CS. It can be accessed online with good internet access. The patient being tested is provided an identification number and instructed regarding the test. The test can be performed in 5 to 10 minutes for each eye and measures the central and peripheral CS. This test can also be employed in illiterate patients as this is based on gratings.