**Endogenous Endophthalmitis**

Disseminated Candida infection is the most significant cause of endogenous endophthalmitis. It has been reported that the incidence of endophthalmitis in patients with candidemia ranges from 9% to 40%.

The fungal infection usually seeds the choroid first since it is highly vascular then progresses anteriorly from the outer to inner retinal layers. As a consequence, endogenous fungal endophthalmitis often presents with choroiditis or chorioretinitis then involves the vitreous as the infection worsens. The nature of progression is typically slow.

Risk factors for endogenous fungal endophthalmitis are mainly related to immunosuppression and other factors that increase the colonization or bloodborne infection of Candida. Systemic immunosuppression per se is not sufficient for the development of intraocular candidiasis because it does not increase the access of Candida to the bloodstream. However, in the presence of candidemia, immunosuppression is likely to increase the risk and severity of the ocular infection. Established risk factors for endogenous fungal endophthalmitis include:

- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other immunosuppressive diseases

- Underlying malignancy

- Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy

- Corticosteroid therapy and other immunosuppressive therapies

- GI trauma or surgery

- Intravenous hyperalimentation

- Indwelling intravenous catheters

- Intravenous drug abuse

- Neutropenia

- Diabetes mellitus

- Renal insufficiency

- Recent hospitalization

- Organ transplant

- Hemodialysis

- Pregnancy, abortion, postpartum state

- Lung disease (specific to Aspergillus)

Two studies found that 90% of patients with endogenous fungal endophthalmitis had one or more underlying medical conditions that predisposed them to the disease.

Candida species are the fourth most common cause of nosocomial bloodstream infections, and C. albicans is the most common cause of endogenous fungal endophthalmitis. It is still unknown as to why the eye is a common end-organ target of fungemia. In an experimental study using a rabbit model of C. albicans endophthalmitis, there was evidence to believe that C. albicans had a marked tropism for the eye similar to its tropism for kidneys and endothelium.

**Neonatal Endophthalmitis**

Neonatal endophthalmitis is very rare. Moshfeghi et al. reported a decreasing trend of neonatal endophthalmitis in the United States and determined that the incidence rate was 0.0045% in 2006. Unlike endophthalmitis in adults, neonatal cases are overwhelmingly endogenously sourced with Candida as the most common cause. Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a significant risk factor for and closely associated with neonatal endophthalmitis. It is theorized that fungal infections may cause the release of proinflammatory cytokines that promote retinal neovascularization and progression of ROP. Low birth weight and prolonged hospital stay are also important risk factors.

**Exogenous Endophthalmitis**

In contrast to endogenous endophthalmitis, exogenous endophthalmitis occurs in otherwise healthy people. Risk factors for exogenous endophthalmitis include intraocular surgery, penetrating trauma, and fungal keratitis. Because of the pathogenesis of exogenous fungal endophthalmitis, the aqueous humor is usually involved first in contrast to endogenous endophthalmitis.

Acute-onset postoperative endophthalmitis is rarely fungal,

Fungal keratitis progresses to endophthalmitis by direct extension of the infection as the fungus invades through the corneal stroma and Descemet’s membrane into the anterior chamber. Contact lens use, trauma with organic matter, and laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) are risk factors for fungal keratitis-derived endophthalmitis. In a retrospective study performed by Henry et al., only 0.5% of eyes with keratitis progressed to culture-proven endophthalmitis. However, fungi accounted for 78% of cases, suggesting that fungal infection may increase the risk of keratitis developing into endophthalmitis. A majority of cases in the study were due to molds, most commonly Fusarium.