Surgical techniques depend on the flap chosen.  In brief, there are two parts of the operation, flap elevation and preparation of the recipient's vessels, which two surgeons can perform simultaneously.  In all instances, the patient gets a usual surgical prep and sterile drape in the supine position unless otherwise stated.  In all cases, surgical staff will mark the patient in the pre-op holding area.  Standard markings include sternal midline and standard breast markings for the mastectomy (ellipse, Wise pattern, vertical reduction pattern, nipple-sparing incisions) depending on patient habitus, tumor characteristics, and surgeon preference.  The donor site is also marked: an elliptical abdominoplasty style incision for DIEP, TRAM, and ms-TRAM flaps, medial thigh lift for TUG (which can be modified based on where the imaging shows the perforator for a PAP), near the superior or inferior gluteal creases for SGAP/IGAP, and an ellipse around the lateral thigh perforator for the LTP flap. The location of these is in the Figure.  The flap is elevated on its perforator for all flaps, dissected down the pedicle,  and kept in situ until the recipient site is prepared.  Once the vessels are ready (internal mammary in most cases), the pedicle is ligated distally, and the flap removed from the site.  The flap is flushed with heparinized saline, and the vessels are cleaned, separated, and prepared for anastomosis.  The recipient vessels are also prepared, distally ligated, and flushed with heparinized saline.  Arterial inflow is checked, and the vessels are temporarily clamped with Acklund clamps to keep a dry surgical field.  The flap is temporarily fixated in a position to allow inset while keeping the flap secure so there is no motion or tension on the vessels during the anastomosis.  It is also crucial to look at the vessel lie to make sure the vessels are straight and that nothing will kink the vessels after anastomosis.  There are many techniques to anastomose vessels.  One preferred technique is a coupler for the vein and an interrupted hand-sewn anastomosis with 8-0 or 9-0 nylon sutures for the artery.  The flap is inset, and the breast gets shaped with sutures, and the cavity drained.

**Elevation of the Flap**

Abdominally based flaps:  The abdomen is marked as described for the use of either the whole abdomen or a hemi-abdomen, depending on the size of flap required.  One preferred method is to make the superior incision first, down to the fascia, and elevate the upper abdominal skin, which is transposed, so one knows where to make the lower incision to be able to close the abdomen.  The inferior incision is then made, with care to find and dissect free the superficial inferior epigastric vein.  Next, (if needed) the midline incision and umbilical incisions are made.  The flap is elevated off the abdominal wall from lateral to medial.  Depending on the type of flap chosen, the whole rectus muscle, part of it, or just the perforator(s) chosen are dissected free.  These are isolated on the deep inferior epigastric artery and vein and taken as described above.  The abdomen is closed over drains by transposing the superior abdominal skin down and closing in layers. The umbilicus is re-sited through the abdominal flap.

TUG: The skin flap marking is as above, and the patient is in the supine frog-leg position.  The flap should center over the gracilis and the pedicle, which is about 10cm from the pubis.  The skin is incised, leaving it attached to the gracilis muscle and staying superficial over the lymphatics.  Once the flap is isolated on the gracilis, the adductor longus is retracted, and the pedicle dissected out to the origin.  When the pedicle is ready, the gracilis is divided, the vessels are taken, and the flap transferred.

PAP: Again, the patient is marked as described and centered on the perforator identified by imaging.  The patients are in a supine, frog-leg position.  The incision is started medially down to the deep fascia. The flap is elevated in a subfascial plane posterior to the adductor longus and proceeding until the perforators are located (usually at the level of the adductor magnus fascia.  The perforator dissection proceeds through the adductor magnus up until its origin at the profunda vessels.  The flap is taken and transferred as above.

SGAP/IGAP: The patient is pre-operatively marked for the flap chosen. The patient's position is either in the prone or lateral decubitus position for flap harvest.  The flap is marked based on anatomic landmarks (SGAP perforators are 1/3 of the distance on a line from the ASIS to the greater trochanter, and the IGAP are 2/3 of the distance on a line from ASIS to gluteal fold).  The incision is made with a bevel so that extra gluteal fat can be included superiorly and inferiorly.  The dissection is taken down to the level of the muscle, and dissection proceeds distally to proximally until the perforator(s) is(are) found.  A perforator of at least 1mm is chosen and dissected down through the muscle to the pedicle off either the superior or inferior gluteal artery.  It is taken at a level with sufficient length and caliber for a microsurgical anastomosis.

Lateral thigh: Again, the patient is in the supine position, and the flap markings get drawn pre-operatively.  The dissection through the skin occurs, and then the flap is elevated medially to laterally until reaching the perforators.  A line is drawn extending from the ASIS to the lateral patella; this is the anterior border of the flap, with another line drawn from the pubic bone perpendicular to that line.  Perforators are usually located along the horizontal line posterior to the vertical line.  During the dissection, the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is identified and preserved.  The perforators are found and dissected into the septum between tensor fascia lata and gluteus medius up to the ascending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery.  The pedicle is taken, and the flap transferred.

Preparation of the recipient's vessels: Many surgeons use the internal mammary vessels as the preferred recipient vessels for our anastomosis.  Either through the old scar or the mastectomy incision, the space between the 3rd and 4th ribs is palpated.   If space is large, a rib sparing approach is possible. If not, the cartilage of the 3rd rib is removed.   The pectoralis muscle is split, leaving a groove for the vessels and the intercostal muscles to be excised.  The vessels are dissected free for the length of the space.