The pathogenesis of SLE is complex, and the understanding of SLE pathogenesis is constantly evolving. A break in the tolerance in genetically susceptible individuals on exposure to environmental factors leads to the activation of autoimmunity. Cell damage caused by infectious and other environmental factors exposes the immune system to self-antigens leading to activation of T and B cells, which become self-sustained by a chronic self-aimed immune response. Cytokine release, complement activation, and autoantibody production lead to organ damage.

Both innate and adaptive immune systems play a role in the pathogenesis of SLE. The innate immune system activation is either Toll-like receptor (TLR) dependent or independent. The cell membrane-bound TLRs (TLR 2, 4, 6) are activated on exposure to the extracellular DNA and RNA from dying cells, which leads to downstream activation of the interferon regulatory family (IRF-3), NF-κB, and MAP-kinases, which serve as transcription factors for the production of proinflammatory mediators such as IFN-b. The endosomal TLRs (TLR 7, 9) are activated by single-stranded RNA and demethylated DNA, leading to interferon-alpha production and RNA binding autoantibodies such as antibodies against Ro La, Sm, and RNP. The TLR-independent pathway is activated by intracytoplasmic RNA sensors (RIG-1, MDA-5) and DNA sensors (IFI16, DAI) and leads to activation of IRF3 and NF-κB. Both self DNA/RNA and foreign DNA/RNA, such as from viruses, can lead to this activation. NETosis has recently gained attention in the pathogenesis of SLE. On activation by various factors such as cytokines, activated platelets, and vascular endothelial cells, neutrophils systematically release their nuclear aggregates in the extracellular environment. These nuclear aggregates can then promote Interferon-alpha production by the dendritic cells, mediate thrombosis and vascular damage and serve as self-antigens for T-lymphocytes.

T-lymphocytes and B-lymphocytes play a significant role in the pathogenesis of SLE. Apoptotic and damaged cell-derived antigens are presented to T-cells by antigen-presenting cells. T-cells in SLE display a distorted gene expression leading to the production of several cytokines. These T-cells produce less IL-2, which leads to altered regulatory T-cell production. Increased IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, and IL-23 increase mononuclear cell production while increased IL-17 and IL-21 lead to increased T-cel production. Increased Interfern-γ leads to defective T-cell production. T-cells lead to the activation of autoreactive B-cells by CD40L and cytokine production, leading to autoantibody production, a hallmark of SLE. Toll-like receptors on interaction with DNA and RNA lead to activation of these B-cells, and the nucleic acid and protein-containing intranuclear complexes are the most prominent antigens leading to B-cel activation. These autoantibodies are pathogenic and cause organ damage by immune complex deposition, complement, and neutrophil activation, altering cell function leading to apoptosis and cytokine production.

Further, the autoreactive B-cells in SLE, stimulated by self-antigens, are not readily eliminated due to a deficiency of the process involved in the functional neutralization of autoreactive B cells. The B-cells can also serve as antigen-presenting cells and activate T-cells by presenting internalized soluble antigens to T-cells. This creates a loop where both B and T cells activate each other, leading to more autoimmunity.