The first step in managing Torsades de Pointes is preventing its onset by targeting modifiable risk factors. This includes discontinuing any QT prolonging drugs and optimizing a patient’s electrolyte profile. Correcting hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalcemia can all help to prevent the onset of torsades. There are a small number of studies that show a possible prophylactic benefit of oral or IV magnesium for those patients with drug-induced prolonged QT. However, the overall benefit is not well established, and there is little evidence that magnesium has any effect on the actual QT interval. The management of Torsades de Pointes begins with assessing if the patient is hemodynamically stable. Most episodes of torsades are self-limiting. However, the danger lies in those patients who go on to develop ventricular fibrillation. For those patients with hypotension or in cardiac arrest from Torsades de Pointes, electrical cardioversion should be performed. Synchronized cardioversion should be performed on a hemodynamically unstable patient in torsades who has a pulse, (100J monophasic, 50J Biphasic). Pulseless torsades should be defibrillated. Intravenous magnesium is the first-line pharmacologic therapy in Torsades de Pointes. Magnesium has been shown to stabilize the cardiac membrane, though the exact mechanism is unknown. The recommended initial dose of magnesium is a slow 2 g IV push. An infusion of 1 gm to 4 gm/hr should be started to keep the magnesium levels greater than 2 mmol/L. Once the magnesium level is greater than 3 mmol/L, the infusion can be stopped. Severe magnesium toxicity is seen with levels greater than 3.5 mmol/L and can present as confusion, respiratory depression, coma, and cardiac arrest. It is important to remember to correct any hypokalemia as well. Serum potassium should be maintained between 4.5 mmol/L and 5 mmol/L when treating Torsades de Pointes.

For a patient that continues to have intermittent runs of Torsades de Pointes, despite treatment with magnesium, increasing the heart rate may also help. This can be done pharmacologically with medications such as isoproterenol. Isoproterenol has been shown to help prevent Torsades de Pointes in patients with prolonged QT that is refractory to magnesium. It is a non-selective beta agonist, which increases the heart rate and shortens the QT interval. This lowers the likelihood of an R-on-T phenomenon that can lead to TdP. Isoproterenol can be given as an IV push of 10 mcg to 20mcg or an infusion titrated to maintain a heart rate of 100 bpm. Isoproterenol is, however, contraindicated in patients with congenital prolonged QT, because it can paradoxically lengthen the QT interval. A final option for terminating torsades is overdrive pacing. There are limited studies on the success of pacing for treatment of Torsades de Pointes; however, there are numerous case reports that show it is a viable option. Overdrive pacing can be used in the setting of both frequent runs of torsades and Torsades de Pointes that is refractory to magnesium. The rate must be set to overcome the patient’s intrinsic rate of ectopy. Ventricular rates of 90 bpm to 110 bpm are usually sufficient to overcome the arrhythmia, however occasionally rates up to 140 bpm have been required for some patients. Overdrive pacing is recommended for both drug and chemical induced Torsades de Pointes.