****Disease Monitoring****

As with any other inflammatory arthritis, patients with psoriatic arthritis require regular disease activity monitoring and appropriate changes to therapy based on the measurement of disease activity. Evaluation of all the domains, including peripheral joints, entheses, digits, axial involvement, and skin and nails, is crucial. The following methods are used to assess disease activity in clinical practice and clinical trials.

**Various Parameters are Used in Assessing Disease Activity in Psoriatic Arthritis**

- Tender and swollen joint counts of 68 joints and 66 joints, respectively, in peripheral arthritis

- Axial disease activity is determined by BASDAI (Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index), also used in ankylosing spondylitis

- Health-related QoL (Quality of Life) as measured by indices like PsAQOL

- Fatigue assessment by FACIT (Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy)

- Composite indices like DAPSA (Disease Activity Index for Psoriatic Arthritis), MDA (Minimal Disease Activity), America's College of Rheumatology criteria viz ACR 20/50/70 (Table 3), Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC)(Table 4), and CDPAI (Composite Psoriatic Disease Activity Index)(Table 5)

- The RAPID3 (Routine Assessment of Patient Index Data), which is useful for assessing disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis, is simple to administer and does not require any laboratory indices. It compares favorably to other, more complicated measures of disease activity in psoriatic arthritis and is more practical for routine clinical care.

A treat-to-target approach to attain remission or minimal disease activity (MDA) is a strong recommendation.

**Minimal Disease Activity (MDA)**

- Tender joint count of less than or equal to 1

- Swollen joint count less than or equal to 1

- Psoriasis Area and Severity Index of less than or equal to 1 or body surface area less than or equal to 3

- Patient pain visual analog scale (VAS) score less than or equal to 15 mm

- Patient global disease activity VAS score less than or equal to 20 mm

- Health Assessment Questionnaire score less than or equal to 0.5

- Tender entheseal points less than or equal to 1

**Specific Agents**

**csDMARDs**

- Methotrexate (MTX): Useful in patients with mild peripheral joint and skin disease; Dose is 7.5 to 25 mg every week, PO or SC usually given with folic acid 1 mg every day; Toxicities include oral ulcers, nausea, cytopenias, increased risk of infections, pulmonary toxicity (pneumonitis), teratogenic; Avoid excess alcohol, be careful with CKD; Check CBC and CMP every 2 to 4 months.

- Sulfasalazine (SSZ): Useful in patients with mild peripheral joint disease, not helpful for skin disease; Dose is 1000 to 1500 mg bid; Toxicities include rash, nausea, diarrhea, elevated LFTs, rarely leukopenia/neutropenia; Check CBC and CMP every 2 to 4 months.

- Leflunomide (LEF): Useful in patients with mild peripheral joint and skin disease; Dose is 10 to 20 mg every day; Toxicities include diarrhea, hair loss, skin rash, leukopenia, elevated LFTs, weight loss; Check CBC and CMP every 2 to 4 months.

- Cyclosporine (CSA): Useful in patients with active skin disease but less so for peripheral joint disease; Dose is 2.5 to 5 mg/kg/day in bid doses (usually 3 mg/kg/day); Toxicities include decreased kidney function, hypertension, headache, elevated cholesterol, excessive hair growth, gum hypertrophy.

**bDMARDs**

- TNF inhibitors (TNFi): Useful for patients with moderate-severe active PsA with peripheral and axial joint disease and skin disease; check TB test before starting, check CBC and CMP every 3-4 months; all TNFi are also approved for RA and AS.

- Monoclonal antibody TNFi is effective for uveitis and IBD.

- Etanercept: p75 TNF-a receptor:IgG Fc fusion protein; Dose is 50 mg SC every week; FDA approved for PsA and PsO.
- Infliximab: chimeric mab to TNF-alpha; Dose is 5 mg/kg IV every six weeks after loading; FDA approved for PsA and PsO.
- Adalimumab: human mab to TNF-alpha; Dose is 40 mg SC every 2 weeks; FDA approved for PsA and PsO.
- Golimumab: human mab to TNF-alpha; Dose is 50 mg SC every month or 2 mg/kg IV every 2 months; FDA approved for PsA and PsO.
- Certolizumab pegol: humanized Fab' fragment specific for TNF-a conjugated to 40kDa PEG; Dose is 200 mg SC every 2 weeks after loading; FDA approved for PsA, effective for PsO.

- Toxicities include administration reactions, increased risk of infections including mycobacterial and fungal infections, demyelination, CHF, drug-induced lupus, and paradoxically psoriasis.

- IL-17 inhibitors (IL-17i): Useful for patients with moderate-severe active PsA with peripheral and axial joint disease and skin disease; check TB test before starting, check CBC and CMP every 3-4 months.

- IL-17i are not effective for uveitis or IBD.

- Secukinumab: human mab to IL-17A; Dose is 150 to 300 mg SC every month after loading; FDA approved for PsA, PsO, and AS. Secukinumab at doses of 300 mg every month was effective in patients with PsA and axial disease in a double-blind, randomized trial.
- Ixekizumab: humanized mab to IL-17A; Dose is 80 mg SC every month after loading; FDA approved for PsA, PsO, and AS.
- Brodaulmab: human mab to IL-17R: Dose is 210 mg SC every 2 weeks after loading; FDA approved for PsO, not for PsA.

- Toxicities include an increased risk of infections, including mycobacterial and fungal infections and candida infections.

- IL-12/23 and IL-23 inhibitors (IL12/23i, IL-23i): Useful for patients with moderate-severe active PsA with peripheral joint disease and skin disease; check TB test before starting, check CBC and CMP every 3-4 months.

- IL-12/23i are not effection for axial disease of AS or nr-AxSpA by may be effective for axial PsA. 

- Ustekinumab (IL12/23i): human mab to IL-12/23 p40 subunit; Dose is 45 mg SC every 3 months after loading (90 mg if weight >100 kg); FDA approved for PsA and PsO, also approved for Crohn's disease.
- Guselkumab (IL-23i): human mab to IL-23 p19 subunit; Dose is 100 mg SC every 2 months after loading; FDA approved for PsA and PsO.
- Tildrakizumab (IL-23i): human mab to p19 subunit of IL-23; Dose is 100 mg SC every 3 months after loading; FDA approved for PsA and PsO.

- Toxicities include an increased risk of infections, including mycobacterial and fungal infections.

- T cell costimulatory inhibitors: Useful for patients with mild-moderate PsA with peripheral joint disease, minimally effective for PsO, check TB test before starting, check CBC and CMP every 3-4 months.

- Abatacept: CTLA4:IgG Fc fusion protein, Dose is 125 mg SC every week or 500 to 1000 mg every month after loading (depending on weight); FDA approved for PsA and RA.

- Toxicities include an increased risk of infections, including mycobacterial and fungal infections.

- In the randomized, placebo-controlled trials of bDMARs, the use of csDMARDs such as MTX did not improve outcomes for PsA or PsO.  Analyses of large cohorts of patients with PsA and csDMARDs such as MTX improved clinical outcomes; using csDMARDs improved TNFi drug survival

- Some retrospective studies suggest that patients with PsO treated with bDMARDs have a lower risk of developing PsA.

**tsDMARDs**

- PDE-4 inhibitors: Useful for patients with mild PsA with peripheral joint disease and skin disease; no laboratory testing is needed to monitor therapy.

- Apremilast: Dose is 30 mg bid after titration.

- Toxicities include GI intolerance, nausea, diarrhea, weight loss, and depression.

- Janus kinase inhibitors (JAKi): Useful for moderate-severely active PsA with peripheral and axial disease, modestly active for PsA, check TB test before starting, check CBC, Neutrophil count, and CMP every three months, lipid panel.

- Tocilizumab: Dose is 5 mg PO bid or XR, 11 mg PO every day; FDA approved for PsA, and also AS, RA, and ulcerative colitis.
- Upadicitinib: Dose is 215 mg daily: FDA approved for PsA, AS, RA, and ulcerative colitis.

- Toxicities include an increased risk of infections including herpes zoster, TB, fungal, neutropenia, elevated LFTs, elevated cholesterol, and GI perforations. There is evidence of an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer (RA trial).