# Introduction

Apical periodontitis is the local inflammation of the periapical tissues that originate from pulp disease.

Apical diseases can manifest with various clinical presentations, ranging from no obvious clinical signs or symptoms to severe destruction of the underlying bone, with or without a draining abscess. Therefore, proper identification, diagnosis, and treatment of apical diseases can prevent severe clinical signs and symptoms.

# Etiology

Dental pulp tissue, the softest and most easily compromised internal structure of healthy dental tissues, is protected by enamel, the dense mineralized outer tooth structure, and intact periodontium, composed of the periodontal ligament, surrounding alveolar bone, and gingival tissue. Bacteria can enter the pulp through cracks, caries, trauma, or exposed cementum.

Severe inflammatory reactions can lead to pulpal cell injury, potentially compromising pulpal vitality and survivability. Although the infection activates an immune response, immune cells and molecules are unable to effectively penetrate dentin to remove pathogens due to the narrow apical foramen of the tooth and the hard enamel surrounding the internal structures.

Once pulpal vascularity is dysfunctional, progression to pulpal necrosis and apical pathosis is typical.

The now infected and necrotic root canal system is a habitat that allows for the growth and establishment of a mixed, predominately anaerobic flora, which mainly grows in sessile biofilms and aggregates or co-aggregates.

As the invading oral microflora and the immune response clash, the periapical tissues surrounding the tooth's root, such as the periodontal ligament and alveolar bone, can be destroyed. This destruction causes periodontal lesions, which may vary in clinical manifestations.

Thus, we can describe apical periodontitis as an inflammatory disease due to the dynamic interaction between oral bacterial invaders and the body's defensive mechanism at the tooth apex.

# Epidemiology

Around 52% of the worldwide adult population has had at least one tooth affected by apical periodontitis (AP).

Patients with diabetes typically have a higher frequency of tooth loss and endodontically treated teeth due to increased chronic inflammation, reduced tissue repair capacity, decreased response to infection, and delayed wound healing.

Patients who previously received endodontic therapy also had a higher incidence of AP than those with non-endodontically treated teeth.

# Pathophysiology

Apical periodontitis results from the encounter between microbial organisms and the host defense system.

As previously stated, the host response includes various cells, mediators, effector molecules, and antibodies. The cellular elements include polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN), lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, and plasma cells.

Polymorphonuclear leukocytes play a significant role in the host response, as they secrete cytoplastic granules with enzymatic properties. Although the primary responsibility of PMNs is to protect the host, they can cause structural damage to tissue cells and extracellular matrices.

# History and Physical

A complete medical history should be taken at every patient encounter, including medications and allergies, as antibiotics aid in treating some apical diseases by decreasing the associated complex bacterial load.

Apical periodontitis can be classified according to its presentation into 1) initial apical periodontitis (also known as acute apical periodontitis) and 2) chronic apical periodontitis.

**Initial Apical Periodontitis**

Initial apical periodontitis can result from both infectious or aseptic inflammation.

Symptoms at this stage include pain, tenderness on pressure, difficulty eating in the area, and sensation of tooth elevation.

The early stage of apical periodontitis is an inflammatory process where neutrophils are extravasated to the area through chemotaxis. The neutrophils attack and kill the offending microorganisms and release leukotrienes and prostaglandins, which attract more neutrophils and macrophages to the site.

Activated macrophages release other cytokines that intensify the vascular response and osteoclastic bone resorption. At this point, the acute phase may take different courses: healing or worsening the infection. When root canal therapy is initiated, and the offending microbes are removed from the root canal system, the lesion may resolve, and the periapical tissues will remain unchanged radiographically.

**Chronic Apical Periodontitis**

If the oral microbes and their by-products remain after the initial host response, the lesion may turn from a neutrophil-dominated lesion to a macrophage-dominated lesion encapsulated in connective tissue.

In the chronic phase, activated T- cells produce a variety of cytokines that down-regulate and suppress the osteoclastic activity (reducing bone resorption) and increase the production of connective tissue growth factor (TGF-beta).

# Evaluation

When evaluating a painful tooth, attempting to reproduce the patient's symptoms is essential before beginning any treatment. Reproducing the patient's symptoms helps formulate the correct diagnosis and ensures that the treatment matches the appropriate diagnosis.

Pulp testing typically consists of various measures, including evaluating tooth vitality, sensibility, and sensitivity.

In acute apical periodontitis, the dental pulp may remain vital or have lost vitality and become necrotic. The tooth will be tender and painful on percussion. Radiographic examination is usually unremarkable, or there may be just a small thickening of the periodontal ligament space and a slight loss of lamina dura in the periapex. By contrast, in chronic apical periodontitis, the pulp is necrotic and infected; therefore, pulp sensibility tests will not elicit a response. The tooth is not tender to palpation, pressure, or percussion, but it may have some mobility and feel different. The finding of a radiolucent lesion in the periapex on x-ray marks the stage of chronic apical periodontitis.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment aims to remove or significantly reduce the intracanal microbes and prevent re-infection by placing a root canal filling.****Apical periodontitis lesions are expected to heal completely within six months to two years, but some may persist.

Follow-up appointments are essential to assess the progression and efficacy of treatment. Further management is indicated when a periapical radiolucency remains unchanged after one year of root canal treatment, when it has increased in size, or if it appears in an endodontic-treated tooth without a prior apical disease.

A periapical radiolucency often persists when the root canal treatment cannot control the infection because some clinical steps were not adequately followed, such as insufficient aseptic control, poor instrumentation, inadequate access cavity design, unreached canals, and restoration leakage.

However, some periapical lesions may persist despite following the most strict and careful clinical protocol due to the complex anatomy of the root canal system.

Antibiotic use is generally contraindicated, except in cases with rapid onset or systemic involvement.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Apical Radiolucencies**

- Periapical granuloma

- Periapical cyst

- Lateral periodontal cyst

- Dentigerous cysts

- Odontogenic keratocysts

- Ameloblastomas

**Apical Radiopacities**

- Hypercementosis

- Cemento-osseous dysplasia

- Idiopathic osteosclerosis

Apical radiopacities are likely not associated with endodontic infection directly but are commonly found on routine radiographic evaluation. Radiopacities are generally benign.

# Prognosis

Long-term outcomes have shown high success rates of 2 to 13 years.

Non-surgical endodontic therapy has a success rate of 85 to 94%, depending on the presence of a periapical radiolucency. Non-surgical endodontic retreatment has a success rate of 74 to 82%, and periapical surgery has a success rate of 60 to 91%.

With microscopes and delicate instruments, periapical surgeries remove the apical portion of the root and fill the root in an apico-coronal direction, known as a root-end resection and root-end fill. The dentist should assess postoperative healing radiographically at 12 months post-treatment. 88% of lesions show evidence of recovery at 12 months postoperatively, compared to only 50% when reevaluated at six months.

It is also important to note the lesion's size, shape, and presentation clinically and radiographically. This practice will provide comparative information for any follow-up visits.

# Complications

Some patients may experience pain and swelling after endodontic treatment. This is commonly known as a flare-up.

A principal cause of microbial flare-ups is the apical extrusion of pulpal debris.

Mechanical flare-ups occur due to over-instrumentation and extrusion of filling materials during obturation.

Odontogenic infections are the leading cause of abscesses of the deep fascial planes in the head and neck.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Vital teeth show a higher incidence of postoperative pain when compared to necrotic pulps and retreated teeth, 64%, 38%, and 49%, respectively.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Regular and comprehensive dental examinations are critical in the early identification of any infectious or carious process throughout the dentition. Therefore, dentists must emphasize to their patients how crucial frequent, comprehensive dental examinations are. In addition, patients who have received endodontic therapy in the past should be routinely evaluated clinically and radiographically to ensure the healing of their infections is progressing normally.

The dentist must examine for any new or worsening symptoms and identify the potential risk of reinfection of the tooth. Patients should also be advised that any posterior tooth that receives endodontic therapy will require a cuspal coverage restoration to support the integrity of the treated tooth.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

It is the responsibility of the interprofessional dental team to work together to treat endodontic infections. Dental hygienists often serve as the first line of evaluation during dental prophylaxis treatment and should report to the dentist any significant concerns from the patient. Dentists should also be prudent in endodontic case selection and management. For example, if a patient requires endodontic therapy, and the recommended treatment is severely complex, or the dental practitioner feels complications could arise, the dentist should refer the patient to an endodontist to ensure proper patient management. In addition, if other healthcare professionals note any intra- or extra-oral swelling, a referral or consultation with a dental professional to evaluate for potential endodontic infections would be appropriate. Ensuring proper continuity of care will result in optimal care coordination between health professionals to improve patient outcomes and patient safety and enhance team performance.