Accurate assessment and management are essential as it has a direct impact on livelihood and work of affected individuals.

Both a systemic and an in-depth examination of both hands is crucial, comparing like for like.

Once that is done, open injuries should be explored with care under local anesthetic and with appropriate magnification.

The radial nerve innervates all extrinsic extensor tendons of the hand. The clinician should look out for radial nerve injury but not forget also to assess median and ulnar nerves.

**Superficial Extrinsic Extensors**

- Extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL)

- Extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB)

- Extensor digitorum communis, (EDC)

- Extensor digiti minimi (EDM)

- Extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU)

**Deep Extrinsic Extensors**

- Abductor pollicis longus (APL)

- Extensor pollicis longus (EPL)

- Extensor indicis proprius (EIP)

The above can be grossly tested even in the case where the patient is unable or unwilling to cooperate by checking for normal tenodesis and digital cascade.

At the level of the wrist, they are divided into six compartments numbered from radial to ulnar side, as shown in figure 1.

- Compartment 1 - APL and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB)

- Compartment 2 - ECRL and ECRB

- Compartment 3 - EPL

- Compartment 4 - EDC and EIP

- Compartment 5 - EDM

- Compartment 6 - ECU

In addition to the above divisions, extensor tendons have been classified into a zone system by Kleinert and Verdan. They have described 8 zones relating to underlying bones and joints. Doyle has later added on an additional 9 zone in the musculotendinous junction in the forearm, which is about 4 cm proximal to the wrist.

Extension in each finger needs to be tested on a joint by a joint basis in isolation, looking at the active range of movement and movement against resistance. Some special considerations need to be taken depending on the zone affected by the injury as per their specialized anatomy and in cases where there is more than one tendon per digit (both EDM and EIP can be tested by extending the relevant finger with the hand flat on a surface). It is worth noting that the full extension of small joints is occasionally possible even after those tendons have been lacerated.

Junctura tendinae prevent independent extension of digits, and they allow for an ongoing extension of the metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ) even if one of the tendons is lacerated. Saggital bands are crucial for MCPJ extension without direct tendon attachment to the proximal phalanx. The extensor mechanism gets more complex past MCPJ (zone V).

Distally lateral bands join and insert into the base of the distal phalanx, just proximal to the nail germinal matrix.