The mainstay of treatment of shigellosis is medical management and includes hydration and electrolyte management. Oral rehydration might be adequate in many cases.

- Antimotility drugs such as loperamide, paregoric or diphenoxylate are not recommended for patients with Shigella infection as they may prolong the infection and increase the shedding of the organism.

- The antibiotic regimen used for the treatment can be divided into two groups based on age. The antibiotic susceptibility testing is highly recommended as resistance to the drugs is common and may vary regionally.

In adults, the choice of empiric antibiotics is based on demographics and regional resistance.  Fluoroquinolone is recommended for patients with no risk factors for resistance while a third-generation cephalosporin is recommended in high-risk patients including infected patients in Africa and Asia, international travelers, HIV-infected patients and men having sex with men.Shigella infection if susceptibility is documented.

In pediatrics, the first-line drug is azithromycin if antibiotic susceptibility is unknown. In a randomized trial,  Azithromycin was found to be clinically and bacteriological successful in 82% and 94% of patients treated respectively.shigella organisms in the stool.

Parenteral antibiotics are indicated in children with suspected and proven shigellosis who have a severe infection with signs of bacteremia including lethargy, temperature >39° C (102.2°F), underlying immune deficiency including AIDS and those unable to take oral medications.

Frequent handwashing with soap and water is recommended especially after bathroom use and before food preparation. Food handlers should not engage in food preparation if stool cultures remain positive. Usually, conversion to negative stool cultures occurs about 2 days after initiation of antibiotic therapy.