Whereas DM1 and DM2 are polygenic, MODY is caused by a single gene mutation that leads to a defect in beta cell insulin secretion in response to glucose stimulation. Most genetic versions of MODY have autosomal dominant transmission, although, less frequently, autosomal recessive versions may also exist and could account for neonatal diabetes. Initially, different types of MODY were described numerically (MODY 1-6). However, they are now classified by their genetic defect.

There are now at least 14 different known MODY mutations. They include GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A, HNF1B, INS,  NEURO1, PDX1, PAX4, ABCC8, KCNJ11, KLF11, CEL, BLK, and APPL1. The different genes vary with respect to the age of onset, response to treatment, and the presence of extra-pancreatic manifestations. The most common gene mutations are the following:

- Gene mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) accounts for 30% to 60% of MODY.

- Gene mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) accounts for 5% to 10% of MODY cases.

- Gene mutations in glucokinase (GCK) account for 30% to 60% of the cases of MODY.

- Gene mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (HNF1B) accounts for less than 5% of the cases of MODY.

The difference in the prevalence of the MODY genes varies from country to country, which may be, in part, due to differences in reporting.

**HNF1A (MODY 3)**

The gene mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha-HNF1A (MODY 3) acts by inhibiting the key steps of glucose transport and metabolism as well as mitochondrial metabolism in pancreatic beta cells. HNF1A is found in the liver, kidney, and intestine, as well as pancreatic tissue. There is progressive beta-cell dysfunction. These patients have a decreased renal threshold for glycosuria. The diagnosis of HNF1A is typically made between the ages of 21 to 26. The gene defect has high penetrance; 63% of carriers develop DM by age 25 years old, 79% by 35 years old, and 96% by age 35 years old.

HNF1A is very responsive to sulfonylureas and meglitinides, even though beta cells do not respond well to hyperglycemia with insulin production and release.

**GCK (MODY 2)**

Glucokinase is an enzyme that enables the pancreatic beta cells and hepatocytes to respond to glucose levels. In the GCK gene mutation (MODY 2), the glucose threshold for insulin secretion is reset, leading to a higher fasting glucose level. Oral glucose tolerance testing reveals a mild increase in glucose concentration. Patients with a GCK mutation typically display mild and nonprogressive hyperglycemia, which is generally not symptomatic. The HBA1C in these patients is usually less than 8%, and the risk of microvascular (and possibly macrovascular) complications is low.

**HNF4A (MODY 1)**

The HNF4A mutation (MODY 1) is less common than HNF1A or GCK.  Its presentation is similar to HNF1A. It should be considered when the patient has features similar to HNF4A, but genetic testing is negative.  Patients with HNF4A mutation may have decreased HDL-C levels and are therefore more similar to DM2. Additionally, these patients have a higher birth weight and a higher level of macrosomia. They may display transient neonatal hypoglycemia.[9] Patients with diabetes and a strong family history of neonatal hypoglycemia should be suspected for HNF4A. Sulfonylureas work well for the treatment of hyperglycemia.

Note: HNF1A and HNF4A are both genes that regulate the expression of numerous genes encoding serum proteins, such as clotting factors and apolipoproteins.

**HNF1B (MODY 5)**

The HNF1B mutation (MODY 5) accounts for less than 5% of MODY. It is associated with a wide variation in presentations. Half of these patients present with early-onset DM. This mutation can affect gene regulation in the liver, kidneys, intestines, lungs, or ovaries. Patients can present with abnormalities such as renal cysts, dysplasia, renal tract malformations, or hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney disease. HNF1B MODY is sometimes referred to as RCAD (renal cysts and diabetes syndrome). There can be a progressive loss of renal function independent of diabetic nephropathy.

Patients with HNF1B generally are not responsive to oral medications and will require treatment with insulin.

**PDX1 (MODY 4)**

A defect in IPF1 (insulin gene promoter factor 1) causes another form of MODY. PDX1 is a homeobox-containing transcription factor that affects pancreatic development and insulin gene expression.

**NEUROD1 (MODY 6)**

NEUROD1 is a mutation in a basic-loop-helix transcription factor that affects pancreatic and neuronal development. Most patients will require treatment with insulin.

**ABCC8 (MODY 12) and KCNJ11 (MODY 13)**

The ABCC8 and KCNJ1 mutations have been associated with a spectrum of disorders, including neonatal diabetes.[9] Neonatal diabetes can be permanent or transient, in which case it often recurs later in life. Neonatal diabetes has been associated with mutations in the potassium-ATP channel genes or mutations in the insulin gene.

**MODY Genes Associated with Syndromes not Involving DM**

MODY mutations have also been noted in several other syndromes.

- Wolfram Syndrome, also known as DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness)

- Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome

- Maternity-inherited diabetes with deafness