Air moves in and out of the lungs through movements of the diaphragm and the chest wall. The diaphragm is the primary muscle of inspiration and is the one that contributes the most to tidal volumes. When the diaphragm contracts, the thoracic cavity expands vertically. As a result, intrapleural pressure decreases from -5 cm H2O to around -8 cm H2O. Since the lungs are connected to the chest wall via the pleura, the negative intrapleural pressure pulls the lungs towards the chest wall leading to an increase in lung volume. As lung volume increases, pressure decreases as per Boyle's law. The resulting sub-atmospheric intra-alveolar pressure then draws air into the alveoli based on the pressure difference. Once the pressure equalized, a tidal volume of approximately 500 mL is delivered.

In contrast, expiration is generally a passive process that occurs due to the lungs' elastic properties once the diaphragm relaxes. Relaxation of the diaphragm causes the rib cage to move closer to the lungs leading to an increase in intrapleural pressure back to -5 cm H2o. As a result, lung volume decreases, and pressure becomes higher than atmospheric pressure. This forces air out of the lungs as per pressure difference and the lungs get back to their resting state.

**Tidal Volume During Sleep**

Sleep alters respiratory physiology in various ways. REM sleep, in particular, is the sleep phase with the highest degree of breathing irregularity, both in frequency and respiratory rate. During REM, almost all body muscles, including respiratory muscles, become hypotonic, except for the diaphragm. Therefore, a person relies on the diaphragm to maintain an adequate tidal volume during REM. Additionally, respiratory response to hypoxic and hypercapnic stimuli decreases, not to mention the decreased central respiratory drive, which, along with accessory muscle paralysis, leads to a slight decrease in tidal volume and minute ventilation. The change is usually not prominent in healthy individuals but becomes prominent in patients with preexisting respiratory disease.