The patient with diabetic ketoacidosis may present with a myriad of symptoms and physical exam findings. Patients may have symptoms of hyperglycemia like polyphagia, polyuria, or polydipsia. As patients become more volume-depleted, they may experience decreased urine output, dry mouth, or decreased sweating indicative of dehydration. They may complain of many other symptoms, including anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and weight loss.

If there is a superimposed infection that triggered the episode of DKA, the patient may have other infectious symptoms like fever, cough, or other urinary symptoms. In patients who may be developing cerebral edema, headache, or confusion may be present. Medication history should also be elicited, including what medications the patient is prescribed and how the patient has been using them. Substance use (drug and alcohol) should be ascertained.

On examination, vital signs typically reveal tachycardia and tachypnea. Due to the possibility of an infectious trigger for DKA, the patient may be febrile or hypothermic. Blood pressure may also vary, though hypotension is possible and indicative of a more severe disease process. Patients are often ill-appearing. Kussmaul breathing, which is labored, deep, and tachypneic, may occur. Some providers may appreciate a fruity scent to the patient's breath, indicative of the presence of acetone. Patients may have signs of dehydration, including poor capillary refill, skin turgor, and dry mucous membranes. Abdominal tenderness is possible. In the most severe cases, altered mental status, general drowsiness, and focal neurologic deficits can be appreciated and are signs of cerebral edema. If found, this needs to be treated immediately.