The spherical equivalent prescription aids in the determination of refractive correction needs (especially high absolute spherical components on refractive findings) among both non-verbal and verbal pre-schooling young children without manifest ocular deviations.

Spherical equivalent determination can assist the subjective refraction procedure in instances when patient-doctor interaction is inhibited by very steep or non-negotiable communication barriers. Spherical equivalents are effectively employed for individuals who fail to adapt to the best minimal sphero-cylindrical spectacle correction. It can be utilized for the correction of aphakic errors, particularly those with low amounts of corneal astigmatism manifest via keratometry.

Other cases for which spherical equivalents are recommended include:

- For ordering a soft contact lens prescription for patients with very low or no manifest subjective astigmatism, especially mild with-the-rule astigmatism.

- Patients implanted with toric intraocular lenses

- Patients triaged for prismatic correction via the Prentice rule

- Refractive conditions secondary to ocular developmental anomalies such as high hyperopia in nanophthalmic eyes and high axial myopia due to buphthalmos.

- Pseudo-astigmatic errors due to tear film anomalies, use of corneal indentation/applanation devices, and patients with regular astigmatic errors preceding pterygium excision.

- Employed for the correction of sphero-cylindrical errors among patients with atypical/anomalous head posture (e.g., torticollis) or certain forms of compensatory head tilt (such as marked chin-up posture among individuals with globe elevation deficits).

- Temporary correction of spherical defocus (in the form of myopic or hyperopic shift) is secondary to the effects of either cholinergic or adrenergic agents and sulfonamide pharmacologics.

- Transient refractive changes attributable to physiological and pathophysiophysologic changes such as hyperglycemia, pregnancy, nuclear cataract formation, ciliary muscle spasm, ciliary rotation, variable retinal edema, etc.

- Longitudinal changes in the cycloplegic spherical equivalent refractive error are employed in monitoring myopia progression (along with changes in the axial length measurement) in juvenile-onset myopia.

- For quantitative determination of the outcomes of myopia control therapies.