The epithelium of the biliary tract under chronic irritation and inflammation goes through a series of changes that are similar to the changes predisposing to other gastrointestinal cancers, i.e., from hyperplasia to metaplasia and dysplasia, finally to carcinoma, which involves mutations in different oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.

Studies have shown that up to 20% of intrahepatic bile duct tumors express Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) genes – IDH1 and IDH2 genes mutations. Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) gene fusion and translocation have also been found in about 13% to 17% of intrahepatic bile duct tumors.

In contrast, perihilar and distal cholangiocarcinoma (pCCA and dCCA) have shown to express fusion genes involving PRKACA and PRKACB and catalytic subunits of the protein kinase A. On the other hand, 8-9% of cholangiocarcinoma exhibit ROS1 gene fusions. The tumor suppressor gene Tumor protein 53 (Tp53) mutation, has been found to occur in about 40% of perihilar (pCCA) and distal cholangiocarcinoma (dCCA) while in 25% of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA). Alteration in the proto-oncogene e.g. KRAS have been identified with more prevalence in distal and perihilar cholangiocarcinoma as compared to intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. i.e. 42% and 22% respectively. Overexpression and mutation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been studied to occur in both intrahepatic (iCCA) and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (dCCA/pCCA), with overexpression of EGFR more prevalent in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma i.e., 11-27% as compared to distal and perihilar type i.e., 5-19%. Furthermore, most of the epithelial tumors, including cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) are frequently reported to have a defective signaling pathway involving RAS/RAF/MEK and the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) pathway.

Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) have been reported recently in a considerable quantity of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA), i.e. 45%.