Hypogammaglobulinemia can be of primary or secondary origin. Primary immunodeficiencies result from genetic disorders and/or chromosomal anomalies during the development of the immune system. Secondary causes are usually induced by an external or acquired factor such as a corticosteroid or immunosuppressant drug, nutritional disorders, infections, chemotherapy, malignancy, nephrotic syndrome, other metabolic diseases, and hazardous environmental conditions.

Categories of primary humoral Iimmunodeficiencies include X-linked Agammaglobulinemia, CVID, Hyper IgM syndrome, selective/Isolated Ig deficiency, and Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of Infancy.

**X-linked Agammaglobulinemia (XLA) or Bruton Agammaglobulinemia**

It is the first primary immune deficiency disease with a genetic cause identified. Mutation noted in the Bruton tyrosine kinase gene (Btk) is an important component for the maturation of pre-B cells. This leads to a lack of plasma cells with low levels of Ig and therefor no humoral response.

**Common Variable Immunodeficiency (CVID, V****ariable Pan-hypogammaglobulinemia)**

It is defined by immune dysfunction of B-cells, T-cells, and dendritic cells due to a defect in the ability of B-cells to differentiate into plasma cells decreasing the secretion of immunoglobulins. Approximately 25 to 50% of CVID patients have a single gene defect which can lead to molecular deficiencies, epigenetic changes affecting gene expression, immune cell abnormalities such as increased B-cell apoptosis, and impaired antibody production. Genetic defects involve mutations in either the nucleus, cytoplasm or cell surface and can be autosomal dominant or recessive.

**Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia of Infancy (THI)**

It is characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia with adequate antibody response. It is observed during the first three to six months of life secondary to prolongation of the physiologic nadir of immunoglobulin levels. Ig levels normalize by three years of age in most children (age range 2-6 years).

**Selective IgA Deficiency**

Decreased levels or complete absence of IgA in both serum and secretory forms (IgA <10mg/dl). B-cells are phenotypically normal. Selective IgA deficiency has autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity. Chromosomal abnormalities and mutations in JAK3, TACI, RAG1, RAG2, STAT1 have been reported as a potential cause of selective IgA deficiency. Patients treated with drugs like phenytoin, gold, D-penicillamine who developed CVID, were found to have secondary IgA deficiency. It is also seen in conditions like ataxia-telangiectasia. Infections like CMV, EBV, Rubella, and Toxoplasmosis may also cause transient IgA deficiency.

**Hyper-IgM Syndrome**

It is a rare primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by normal to elevated IgM levels with decreased levels of IgG, IgA, and IgE immunoglobulins caused by mutations in genes on the X-chromosome and autosomal chromosomes which are responsible for the B-cell class switch from IgM to other classes of antibodies.