Stable patients with type 1, some type 2 (except type 2B), and acquired von Willebrand disease patients are given a trial of desmopressin (DDAVP), which is a synthetic analog of vasopressin to check for a response. This is usually performed when patients are not actively bleeding.

Type 1 usually shows a good response to the DDAVP trial. Type 2A shows a variable and transient response which is often clinically adequate. Type 2M and Type 2N usually show a poor or minimal response. Type 3 von Willebrand disease does not respond to Desmopressin as there is a complete lack of von Willebrand factor. A successful trial sees von Willebrand factor activity levels of at least 30 IU/dL (ideally 50 IU/dL). Desmopressin causes von Willebrand factor release from endothelial cells. DDVAP can be administered subcutaneously, intravenously, and via intranasal spray. It leads to increased von Willebrand factor and factor VIII levels, with response persisting for up to 12 hours. It is useful for minor bleeding episodes (including epistaxis and menses) and elective minimally invasive surgical procedures.

Von Willebrand factor replacement can be considered in patients with type 3 von Willebrand disease or severe variants of type 1 and two that do not demonstrate a sufficient DDAVP response in serious bleeding scenarios. There are many different preparations available, including factor VIII concentrates that also include von Willebrand factor. Von Willebrand factor replacement therapy often is used in serious bleeding scenarios such as trauma or major surgery. Usually, it is administered as a short course. Examples of intermediate-purity vWF concentrates include single factor formulations like alphanate and others that contain both vWF and FVIII. Patients with von Willebrand disease type III need the products mentioned above for episodes of bleeding or surgery. Conversely, for mild type I and type II A disease (or minor procedures in this category), DDAVP might suffice. However, other scenarios might require von Willebrand and FVIII factors mentioned previously.

Tranexamic acid can also be used as an anti-fibrinolytic agent. It prevents the breakdown of fibrin clots. It is useful in case of mucosal bleeding.