Q fever has been a notifiable disease since 1999 in the United States due to its potential as a biowarfare agent. However, it is an underreported and underrecognized disease. The male-to-female ratio is 3 to 1. The positive seroprevalence rate is 3.1% in Americans, more common in males, the elderly, Hispanics, and impoverished individuals. Soft ticks and other arthropods harbor Coxiella and infect domestic and wild animals via bites or contaminating host skin with their excreta. Common reservoirs are domestic cattle, sheep, and goats, followed by horses, dogs, swine, camels, pigeons, ducks, geese, and turkeys. Wild birds, squirrels, mice, rats, cats, and rabbits can also serve as reservoirs. Although Q fever can occur at any time of the year, most cases occur in the spring and early summer months (April and May), which is the birthing season for cattle, sheep, and goats.

Urine, feces, milk, and placenta of infected animals contain a high concentration of Coxiella; hence workers handling contaminated laundry, consuming contaminated raw milk, who have exposure to the placenta of infected animals, live cell therapy with processed animal fetal cells are all sources of infection. Thus, it is an occupational disease involving workers with direct contact with infected animals, e.g., farmers, veterinarians, and slaughterhouse employees. Indirect exposure via tainted manure, straw, and dust from farm vehicles can also cause the disease via contaminated aerosols. Transmission to humans can also occur via blood transfusions, autopsies, during clinical care (delivery of infected pregnant women), infected hardware removal, and raw milk consumption.

Recent outbreaks in European countries were due to sheep and goat farming in urban areas, with increased attack rates in individuals living close to the sheep meadows. Urbanized goat farming was responsible for the recent 2007 to 2010 outbreaks in the Netherlands. HIV-positive and other immunocompromised individuals are at a higher risk for severe symptoms.