**Cerebral Aneurysms**

Many factors should be considered when making decisions regarding the treatment of cerebral aneurysms. These factors include the patient's age and medical conditions, the size and location of the aneurysm, the presence or absence of symptoms, the presence or absence of other risk factors for aneurysm rupture, and if there has been a SAH. There are 3 main strategies for the management of cerebral aneurysms: observation, endovascular therapy, and surgical therapy. All ruptured aneurysms should receive endovascular or surgical therapy.

**1. Observation**

Patients with an unruptured cerebral aneurysm who are older than 64-years-old, aneurysm size less than 7 mm, asymptomatic, location is in the anterior circulation, no personal history of a SAH from another aneurysm or no family history of SAH can be observed with close clinically and radiological monitoring. Serial aneurysm monitoring can be achieved with CTA or MRA. Literature suggests that the annual risk of aneurysm rupture is approximately 1%.

**2. Endovascular Embolization**

This is a minimally invasive technique in which a catheter is advanced from the femoral artery into the cerebral aneurysm, and with the use of a second microcatheter, platinum coils are inserted into the aneurysm. The coiled aneurysm forms a clot (embolization) and obliterates the aneurysm sac, thus preventing future rupture. The procedure can be performed either under local anesthesia or general anesthesia, although the latter is preferred. This procedure can be used to treat aneurysms that are difficult to approach surgically. Recently, flow diversion devices have been used to reduce the flow of blood inside the aneurysm, ultimately thrombosing the sac and creating a new endothelium at the neck. A new treatment with a flow disruption device is currently used in which the self-expanding mesh device is placed inside the aneurysm to prevent blood flow into the sac.

**3. Surgical Clipping**

This procedure is performed in the operating room under general anesthesia and involves making an opening of the skull (craniotomy) and dissection through the brain cisterns and fissures to expose the aneurysm. Once the aneurysm is exposed, a metal clip is placed across the neck of the aneurysm to prevent blood flow into the aneurysm sac.

Those patients with a ruptured cerebral aneurysm should be admitted to the intensive care unit for close monitoring. Endovascular coiling or surgical clipping of the ruptured aneurysm should be performed as early as possible in the majority of the cases to reduce the risk of rebleeding. Patients need to be monitored for the signs and symptoms of clinical deterioration due to vasospasm, rebleeding, seizures, cerebral edema, hydrocephalus, and hyponatremia. In the first 48 hours after a SAH, the major cause of morbidity or mortality is rebleeding. Blood pressure should be maintained near 120/80 mmHg before the definite procedure to occlude the aneurysm, but after the treatment, the mean arterial pressure should be maintained above 100 mmHg to reduce ischemic changes secondary to vasospasm. Cerebral vasospasm resulting in cerebral ischemic and neurologic deterioration starts around day 3 to 5 and peaks at day 7. Oral nimodipine at a dose of 60 mg every 4 hours is given for 21 days to improve outcomes.

**Aortic Aneurysms**

Treatment modalities depend on size, symptoms, location, and other comorbidities. The most important determinant for rupture is the diameter of the aneurysm. The location of the aneurysm, presence of coronary artery disease, and aortic valve pathology dictate the type of repair to be performed.

**1. Conservative Management**

Asymptomatic patients with aneurysm diameter <45 mm are managed with medical therapy and active surveillance.

**2. Repair Management**

**(Open Repair vs. Endovascular Repair)**

All symptomatic unruptured or ruptured saccular aortic aneurysms should undergo repair. The exact diameter threshold for elective treatment of asymptomatic aneurysms is difficult to determine, but a diameter of 45 mm seems to be an acceptable threshold.****is preferred in patients with descending aortic aneurysms.