**Contraindications**

- Theophylline is contraindicated if the patient previously developed a hypersensitivity reaction to the drug or any component of its formulation (such as an allergy to corn-related products (in injection use only).

- Other contraindications include hypersensitivity to xanthine derivatives and patients with coronary artery disease (where the cardiac stimulation effect of theophylline might prove harmful).

**Precautions**

- Patients with cardiovascular disease: Use cautiously in patients who have cardiac arrhythmias (excluding bradyarrhythmias), at it may exacerbate arrhythmias.

- Patients with cystic fibrosis: Use cautiously in patients with cystic fibrosis, as increased theophylline clearance may occur in these patients.

- Patients with hepatic impairment: Use cautiously in patients with a hepatic impairment such as cirrhosis, cholestasis, acute hepatitis because there is an increased risk of severe and potentially fatal complications. This risk exists because clearance decreases by 50% or more in these patients. Frequent monitoring and dose reduction of theophylline are necessary for these patients.

- Patients with hyperthyroidism: Use cautiously in patients with hyperthyroidism, as increased theophylline clearance may occur.

- Patients with peptic ulcer disease: Use cautiously in patients who have active peptic ulcer disease, as the use of theophylline may exacerbate peptic ulcers.

- Patients with seizure disorders: Use theophylline cautiously in patients with seizure disorders, as its use may exacerbate the seizure disorder.

**Special Populations**

- Elderly patients: Theophylline use requires extreme caution in elderly patients as these patients are at an increased risk of serious theophylline toxicity.

- Pediatric patients: Dose selection requires caution, and regular monitoring of concentrations is necessary (especially if the child is younger than 1 year of age) as the rate of clearance varies significantly in these patients.

**Pregnancy**

- Theophylline is a pregnancy category C drug. It should only be used during pregnancy if the potential benefit to the mother outweighs the potential risk to the fetus.