The surgical procedure begins with a tumescent solution or local anesthetic infiltration into the subcutaneous plane. Tumescent anesthesia involves introducing a large volume of dilute local anesthetic combined with normal saline, sodium bicarbonate, and epinephrine into the subdermal plane, producing temporary firmness in the target area.

The flap is then undermined and elevated with scissors, using either a snipping or a spreading technique. The SMAS layer is identified as the fibrovascular layer deep to the subdermal fat and superficial to the parotid fascia. Anteriorly, near the ear, the SMAS is thicker, and it thins as it spreads along the cheek. SMAS plication to achieve the desired lift is then performed using a 2-0 or 3-0 permanent or long-lasting dissolvable suture, such as polyester or polydioxanone, respectively. Excess SMAS in the infra-auricular area is excised. Care must be taken to avoid injury to the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve when working in the lower face and upper neck.

Hemostasis should be meticulous to avoid hematoma formation, which is most likely to occur in the first 24 postoperative hours. Closure of the wound involves the suspension of the skin in an appropriate superolateral vector and excising the excess, taking care to avoid placing too much tension across the wound. The closure is accomplished with sutures on the skin and staples in the hair-bearing scalp or with sutures throughout.

Patients are instructed to sleep upright for the first week to minimize edema and are given a neck support dressing for one to two weeks. The neck can remain tight for up to three weeks. Sutures are removed on postoperative day seven, and patients are seen at three and six weeks for follow-up. Depending on physician preference, medication is prescribed for pain control for at least the first week postoperatively.

An important variation of the SMAS plication technique is the minimally-invasive cranial suspension (MACS) facelift described by Tonnard et al. in 2007.

Because rhytidectomy typically rejuvenates patients by approximately ten years, some patients will return for repeat procedures. While most revision surgery can be more challenging than primary operations, a unique feature of rhytidectomy is that flap elevation in the original surgery causes a delay phenomenon in which the vascularity of the facial skin is improved, and the thin scar plane that remains in the subdermal region after the original surgery is easily divided and, in fact, facilitates subsequent re-elevation of the skin. The primary challenge with revision rhytidectomy is incision placement because each surgeon has a unique preference for incision planning, and operating through a different surgeon's incisional scar may be inconvenient if the same surgeon is not performing the revision operation.