Chest radiographs are usually the initial imaging in patients with a suspected sternal injury. The anteroposterior radiograph has been shown only to be 50% sensitive for detecting sternal fractures. A lateral radiographic view increases the sensitivity and is typically diagnostic, as most sternal fractures are transverse, and any displacement occurs in the sagittal plane.

CT of the chest is another common diagnostic test in patients where a high index of suspicion of sternal fracture exists. Axial CT scan may be less sensitive than plain radiographs, as CT cuts may miss transverse sternal fractures. A spiral CT scan is likely to be most sensitive, but no gold standard exists. CT of the chest is also advantageous to rule out associated injuries secondary to sternal fractures.

Ultrasonography can help to detect sternal fractures with equal or greater sensitivity than plain radiography. Time to diagnosis may be significantly reduced with bedside ultrasonography; however, one must factor in limiting factors, including inter-operator variability.

Cardiac monitoring and pulse oximetry should be obtained in all patients with sternal fractures while in the emergency department. Electrocardiograms should be performed, evaluating for signs of myocardial contusion. Arrhythmias, conduction disturbances, sinus tachycardia, or ST-segment changes may be present. Enzyme markers of cardiac injury may be useful if cardiac contusion is suspected, with troponin elevation being highly specific for myocardial injury. Echocardiography also aids in the detection of myocardial contusions, with a direct view of wall motion abnormalities.