Bacterial diarrhea treatment is best via an interprofessional team paradigm. An epidemiologist will study, analyze, and teach infection causes and patterns. Local health authorities will use such information for screening, management, and public awareness. Primary care providers and physician extenders will encounter such cases first and focus on the treatment for dehydration and upholding the hygienic principles that will help prevent the spread of the disease. For severe illness, including hospitalized patients, infectious disease specialists, and gastroenterologists will be an integral part of the team. Nurses have a significant role in team patient care, including the education of the patients, and increasing the awareness of the causes and treatment of bacterial diarrhea. Patients should receive education on appropriate ways to deal with diarrhea and specifically bacterial diarrhea. An infectious disease board-certified pharmacist should also consult on the case, providing optimal antimicrobial regimen recommendations. Hydration and continuation of oral intake of water and food are essential. ORS should be utilized to maintain hydration. General hygienic principals, including using clean water for drinking, bathing, and cleaning items used for food storage as well as appropriate hand hygiene after stooling, will help prevent infections. Close communication between the primary care providers and the infectious disease expert, as well as the involvement of all members of the interprofessional team, can hopefully lead to better outcomes.