Patients with RCM primarily present with advanced disease and obvious signs of cardiopulmonary compromise, but in some circumstances, the diagnosis is incidental. It is important to suspect RCM in any patient with a normal or close to normal systolic function and evidence of diastolic dysfunction with a restrictive filling pattern on echocardiogram. For those that present symptomatically, there is a wide range of presentations. Some may present in full-blown heart failure (jugular venous distension, ascites, lower extremity edema, and less commonly pulmonary edema). Some may complain of poor exercise tolerance or be newly diagnosed with an arrhythmia such as atrial fibrillation. In the less fortunate cases, some present as sudden cardiac arrest (SCD). Other less common presentations include ischemia, thrombus, and misdiagnosed as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular outflow obstruction. When performing the evaluation and physical in a patient suspected of RCM, it is essential to look for extracardiac manifestations such as carpal tunnel, which may be present in amyloidosis or bilateral hilar infiltrates seen in sarcoidosis.

The cardiac impulse is less displaced than in dilated cardiomyopathy and less dynamic than in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A fourth heart sound is more common than a third heart sound in sinus rhythm, but atrial fibrillation is common. Jugular venous pressures often show rapid Y descents and may increase during inspiration (positive Kussmaul’s sign).