When diagnosing genetic causes of obesity, good history taking, and physical exam skills are extremely important. A detailed history includes personal history, family history, medication history, psychosocial history, diet and activity/exercise history, and history of weight gain. Endocrine causes of obesity like hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, hypothalamic obesity, and Cushing's disease must be ruled out early with history, physical examination, and lab work. Syndromic obesity can sometimes be distinctly diagnosed based on the presence of physical features, like in Prader-Willi syndrome or Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy. After basic lab work is done, including a complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, growth hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and dexamethasone suppression test, physicians can check leptin, insulin, and proinsulin levels. If all the above blood work is negative genetic testing can be carried out.

These genetic tests are expensive and done in limited centers across the United States. They include linkage analysis to look for familial aggregation of Mendelian traits, Sanger sequencing, chromosomal microarrays, next-generation sequencing with whole genome and whole exome sequencing, as well as rare variant association tests.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved two drugs that target patients with genetic causes of obesity-metreleptin and setmelanotide. The other drugs like semaglutide, liraglutide, phentermine-topiramate, and naltrexone-bupropion are approved for weight loss in the general population and may be used to treat patients with genetic obesity.

- Metreleptin is a leptin analog used to treat patients with congenital generalized lipodystrophy in leptin-deficient patients with mutations in the leptin gene. However, metreleptin cannot be used in patients with leptin receptor mutations or mutations downstream in the leptin signally pathway. The use of this drug is monitored by the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) group of the FDA. The dose is generally 0.06 mg/kg/dose once daily for patients with weight <40kg and 2.5 to 5 mg a day for weight >40 kg or adult patients.

- Setmelanotide is an MC4R agonist used in obese patients with genetic mutations in POMC, PCSK1, or LEPR genes and Bardet Biedl syndrome. The advantage of this drug is that it acts directly on the MC4R receptor bypassing multiple targets, which could be mutated in the leptin pathway. It is generally administered as a 2 mg daily subcutaneous dose.

Other drugs studied in Prader-Willi syndrome include beloranib-a MetAP2 inhibitor and nasal oxytocin, but these are not FDA approved.

It is now well studied that distinct interventions can modify the epigenome of the body to benefit patients with obesity. Examples of this are:

- Bariatric surgery can cause changes in adipocyte-derived exosomal micro-RNA and cause epigenetic changes in differential methylated regions in HOXB1, PRKCZ, SLC38A10, SECTM1 genes.

- Regular exercise can cause widespread changes in DNA methylation in the RUNX1, NDUFC2, THADA, MEF2A, PRKAA2 genes. For patients who maintain their weight loss, the DNA methylation profiles resemble lean individuals, as seen in RYR1, TUBA3C, and BDNF genes.

- Fasting can cause changes in DNA methylation of genes-LEP (leptin) and ADIPOQ (adiponectin).

- The use of probiotics, prebiotics, and fecal transplant can restore gut flora and cause positive epigenetic modifications in patients with obesity.