Supraventricular arrhythmias are a diverse group of atrial arrhythmias. Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter are the most common of these atrial arrhythmias, and the other less common supraventricular arrhythmias are atrial tachycardias, atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia, atrioventricular nodal tachycardia, and others.

In this review will summarize the management of atrial flutter.

Atrial flutter is one of the most common arrhythmias and is characterized by an abnormal cardiac rhythm that is fast with an atrial rate of 300beats/min and a ventricular rate that can be fixed or be variable that can cause palpitations, fatigue, syncope, and embolic phenomenon.

Atrial flutter is a macro-reentrant tachycardia and depending on the site of origin can be typical or atypical atrial flutter.

Typical or cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI) dependent is the most common type of atrial flutter; this rhythm originates in the right atrium at the level of the tricuspid valve annulus. Typical atrial flutter is seen in the electrocardiogram as continuous negative modulation in inferior leads (II, III, and AVF) and flat atrial deflections in leads I and aVL; this is due to the way of propagation and activation of the macro-reentrant circuit as will be described in the pathophysiology section.

The atypical atrial flutter is independent of the CTI, and the origin of the arrhythmia can be in the right atrium or the left atrium.

Less commonly, atrial activation can be in a clockwise fashion, and thus electrocardiographic appearance is different, one is unable to differentiate it easily from not isthmus-dependent atrial flutter.