An interprofessional team that includes a nurse, or nurse practitioner, a physician, an exercise psychologist, a dietician, and a psychotherapist, plays a vital role in reducing patient weight and maintain it.

In order to improve health care outcomes for obesity, the following points can be followed regardless of the type and cause of obesity.

1) A thorough history and physical examination prove helpful to identify common as well as rare causes of obesity( for example, leptin resistance).

2) Obesity due to the above-mentioned causes should be addressed, and appropriate counseling and treatment should be prescribed (for example, leptin resistance should be treated with recombinant leptin).

3) Clinicians should remain up-to-date with the obesity management guidelines. Specialized training in obesity management should be provided to physicians, and training should start at the medical school levels. Continue medical education (CME)-based activities also raise awareness of obesity and its management among doctors. Specialist training programs are available, which should be utilized by doctors.

4) Clinicians should communicate empathetically and in a non-judgmental way to patients regarding obesity and its management. The healthcare team should ask permission from the patient to discuss the topic of weight. Appropriate words should be used. Weight and BMI should be used instead of heaviness, fatness, and large size. Safe phrases for addressing patients with obesity include

- How do you feel about your weight?

- Do you observe your weight?

- When did you last weigh yourself?

- Has anyone told you the side effects of extra weight?

- Have you noticed any change in your weight over the last few months?

5) In managing patients with obesity, the viewpoint of the patient should be given consideration, and physicians should tailor their advice for individual patients.

6) Effective support for obesity management and behavioral change should be considered. The "five As" of obesity counseling would be very helpful.

- Ask permission to initiate conversation.

- Assess BMI, waist, and obesity stage, explore drivers of excess weight and complications.

- Advice on the adverse health risk of obesity.

- Agree on realistic weight loss expectations and targets, behavioral changes, and specific details of the treatment options.

- Assist in identifying and addressing barriers, provide resources and assist in identifying and counseling with appropriate providers

7) Appropriate counseling is positively associated with weight loss. Studies have shown that individuals who receive weight-loss counseling from their primary care doctors are more likely to pursue weight loss than those who do not receive counseling. Clinicians should counsel patients to change multicomponent, which include increasing physical activity, improving eating behavior and quality of diet, and reduce energy intake. The patient should also be counseled for self-monitoring of calorie intake, goal setting, and stimulus control.

8) Clinicians should offer the opportunity of a follow-up visit if any patient is not ready to discuss weight loss at the moment.