In the past, medicine was able to stay ahead of antimicrobial resistance through research and the development of new agents to overcome the different types of resistance patterns; however, with the recent development of vancomycin-resistant enterococci and the new subtypes of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, antibiotic resistance is more prevalent and only can be minimized through stewardship. To combat the rising use of antibiotics, medical and public health professionals have to collaborate to reduce the inappropriate use of antibiotics. Physicians will have to balance the risks of not treating or inadequately treating against the risk of antibiotic use regarding adverse effects, drug interactions, cost, and antibiotic resistance. From a clinical perspective, many providers may not be highly concerned about their antibiotic prescribing habits since many patients expect to get an antibiotic when they visit a physician for an issue they perceive as bacterial. A didactic educational discussion with the patient is necessary to change the overprescribing phenomenon. Patients should be educated on the viral etiology of different infectious disease syndromes in which antibiotics are unnecessary. The prescription of antibiotics in these circumstances is futile. It exposes the patients to undesirable side effects or drug-drug interactions and increases healthcare costs, in addition to contributing to the development of antimicrobial resistance. For instance, a patient with infectious mononucleosis is treated with oral amoxicillin and develops a rash.

Antibiotic stewardship aims to provide a guide for the appropriate use of antibiotics. One of the general principles is to manage patients empirically and then tailor antibiotic therapy based on microbiology results. There are multiple strategies a stewardship program can focus on such as educational, antimicrobial formulary restrictions, prospective audit and feedback, computer-assisted notifications, molecular testing technology, application of management guidelines, and interprofessional strategies. The core components of an antibiotic stewardship program are leadership commitment, accountability, antibiotic expertise, actions to tailor antibiotic use, tracking of antibiotic use, reporting antibiotic use, and educating clinicians on appropriate antibiotic use.