The prostate is roughly 3 centimeters long, about the size of a walnut, and weighs approximately 20 grams. Its function is to produce about a third of the total seminal fluid.

The prostate gland is located in the male pelvis at the base of the penis.  It is below (inferior) to the urinary bladder and immediately anterior to the rectum.

The prostate surrounds the posterior part of the urethra, but this can be misleading. The posterior urethra, prostatic urethra, and proximal urethra all describe the same anatomy as there is no difference between the internal lining of the prostate and the urethra; they are the same entity.

The prostate is primarily glandular tissue, which produces fluid that constitutes about 25% to 30% of the semen. This prostatic portion of the semen nourishes the sperm and provides alkalinity, which helps maintain a high pH. (The seminal vesicles produce the rest of the seminal fluid.)

The prostate gland requires androgen (testosterone) to function optimally. This is why hormonal therapy (testosterone deprivation) is so effective. Castrate-resistant tumors are thought to generate intracellular androgens.

Cancer begins with a mutation in normal prostate glandular cells, usually beginning with the peripheral basal cells.

Prostate cancer is most commonly found in the peripheral zone, primarily that portion of the prostate that can be palpated via digital rectal examination (DRE).

- Prostate cancer is an adenocarcinoma as it develops primarily from the glandular part of the organ and shows typical glandular patterns on microscopic examination.

- The cancer cells grow and begin to multiply, initially spreading to the immediately surrounding prostate tissue and forming a tumor nodule.

- Such a tumor may grow outside the prostate (extracapsular extension) or may remain localized within the prostate for decades.

- Prostate cancer commonly metastasizes to the bones and lymph nodes.

- Metastases to the bone are thought to be partially due to the prostatic venous plexus draining into the vertebral veins.

The prostate accumulates zinc and produces citrate. However, increased dietary or supplemental zinc and citrate do not appear to influence prostatic health or the development of prostate cancer.