**Malignant Lesions**

- SCC, basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, sarcomas, and adenosquamous carcinoma

**Benign Lesions**

- Condyloma acuminatum (genital warts): Nontender wart-like lesions or papillary frondular lesions. It is a sexually transmitted disease caused by HPV.

- Papilloma: Benign lesions that consist of rows of 1 to 2 mm white/yellow papules on the corona of the glans. Treatment unnecessary.

**Premalignant Lesions**

- Buschke-Lowenstein tumor (Giant condyloma): Exophytic cauliflower-like mass in the genital or anorectal lesion. It can be locally invasive. HPV6 and HPV11 have been found in these tumors. Treatment is excision.

- Bowenoid papulosis: Red-brown papules on the glans or shaft skin of the penis. HPV has been identified in these lesions. Treatment is surveillance, topical 5-fluorouracil, or ablation.

- Bowen disease: CIS of the penile shaft. 10% of men eventually develop invasive SCC. Treatment includes topical therapy, wide local excision, laser ablation/excision.

- Erythroplasia of Queyrat: CIS of the foreskin or glans. 10% of men eventually develop invasive SCC. Treatment includes topical therapy, wide local excision, laser ablation/excision.

- Lichen sclerosis (LS): Arises from chronic infection, trauma or inflammation. Two percent to 9% of men with this condition develop penile cancer. Presents as flat white patches on the glans and prepuce. It is usually asymptomatic. If symptomatic it may present with burning painful erections, pruritis. Only symptomatic LS requires treatment with topical steroids. It is not recommended to excise this lesion as recurrence is high. Requires long-term yearly follow up due to the risk of malignancy.