The various causes of galactorrhea broadly divide into hypothalamic-pituitary causes and non-hypothalamic-pituitary causes.

Hypothalamic-pituitary causes:

-  Prolactinomas: Prolactinomas are prolactin-secreting tumors and are the commonest hormone-secreting tumors of the pituitary glands. Prolactinomas which are less than 1 cm in size are known as microprolactinomas, whereas those greater than 1 cm in size are known as macroprolactinomas. Prolactin levels correlate well with the size of the tumor with microprolactinomas having prolactin levels of >200 ng/ml and macroprolactinomas having higher prolactin levels of >1000 ng/ml.

- Non-prolactin-secreting pituitary tumor and infiltrative disorders of the pituitary stalk/hypothalamus: These tumors can cause hyperprolactinemia by disrupting the flow of dopamine from the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary by compressing the pituitary stalk. This disruption results in decreased inhibition of prolactin and results in mild hyperprolactinemia, usually less than 200 ng/ml.

Non-hypothalamic-pituitary causes:

- Hypothyroidism: Elevated levels of TRH in hypothyroidism can stimulate the lactotrophs resulting in hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea.

- Medications: Several medications can cause hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea. In most instances, the level of prolactin is less than 200 ng/ml; however, atypical antipsychotics like risperidone carry associations with prolactin levels of >200 ng/ml, which can be confused for a microprolactinoma. Atypical antipsychotics act on the D2 receptors in the hypothalamic tuberoinfundibular areas to cause hyperprolactinemia. Risperidone is a combined dopamine serotonin antagonist which can significantly raise the prolactin levels. Clozapine, olanzapine, and aripiprazole have both agonist and antagonist properties on the D2 receptor and only transiently raise the prolactin levels. Metoclopramide and domperidone, which are used in the treatment of vomiting, are D2 receptor blockers and cause hyperprolactinemia. Tricyclic antidepressants (especially clomipramine) and monoamine-oxidase inhibitors have been associated with mild hyperprolactinemia. The mechanisms by which these medications cause hyperprolactinemia is unknown.  Opioids by acting through the µ receptors decrease the release of hypothalamic dopamine and can elevate prolactin levels. Verapamil has also been associated with hyperprolactinemia by decreasing the production of hypothalamic dopamine.

- Renal failure: Hyperprolactinemia in renal failure is due to the failure of the kidneys to clear prolactin. Prolactin levels of >1000 mcg/liter have been reported with renal failure. Post-kidney transplant the hyperprolactinemia resolves rapidly within a few days.

- Chest wall lesions: Various chest wall lesions including burns, surgeries, herpes zoster have associations with hyperprolactinemia. The hypothesis is that the pain signals transmit to the hypothalamus via the spinal cord which results in decreased dopamine release and causes hyperprolactinemia.

- Idiopathic hyperprolactinemia: Occasionally hyperprolactinemia with no known cause has been reported. These could be secondary to small undiagnosed microprolactinomas. The hyperprolactinemia self resolves in 1/3rd patients and remains stable in half of the patients.