**Hormone Therapy**

According to NCCN guidelines, premenopausal woman with recurrences that are estrogen receptor (ER) positive, and who were not previously exposed to hormone therapy, can be treated with selective modulators alone or ovarian suppression/ablation plus endocrine therapy. The Swiss Group for Clinical research compared tamoxifen versus observation after excision and radiation of isolated postmastectomy locoregional recurrence of breast cancer in 167 women (79% postmenopausal), Tamoxifen improved DFS from 2.7 to 6.5 years (p = .053), mainly due to the reduction of further local relapses. The investigators also reported tamoxifen led to an increase in DFS from 33% to 61% (p = 0.006) in postmenopausal woman

Current recommendations for recurrent disease in postmenopausal women include nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitors, steroidal aromatase inhibitors, ER modulators, ER down regulators, progestin, androgens, and high-dose estrogen (NCCN, 2018). In patients resistant to endocrine therapy or with ER-negative tumors, the addition of everolimus, an mTOR signal transduction pathway inhibitor, showed a complete or partial response rate of 61.1% when combined with tamoxifen versus 42.1% with tamoxifen alone, along with improvements in time to progression (median of 4.5 months in tamoxifen alone versus 8.5 months in combined therapy

**Chemotherapy**

If the patient is deemed a chemotherapy candidate, and their tumor is chemo-responsive, then they may benefit from improved locoregional control. The Chemotherapy for Isolated Locoregional Recurrence of Breast Cancer (CALOR) Randomised Trial, a study of 162 patients with isolated local regional recurrence treated with adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery and radiation, showed that chemotherapy improved 5-year DFS and OS compared to no chemotherapy: 69% versus 57% (p = .046) and 88% versus 76% (p = .02), respectively. The choice of chemotherapy was left to the discretion of the investigators, but at least 2 cytotoxic drugs were recommended

**Treatment Planning for Radiation and Hyperthermia**

**Hyperthermia
**

Local external hyperthermia is most beneficial when delivered twice a week after radiation therapy, for about 1 hour and at least 48 hours apart to relatively small, superficial tumors (less than or equal to 3 cm up to 5 to 6 cm) where the goal is to achieve tumor temperatures between 41 to 44 C.

Ideally, attempts should be made to maximize tumor temperatures while limiting surrounding tissue temperatures to no greater than 44 C. Temperature parameters to be monitored during treatment include initial tumor and tissue temperatures, maximum, minimum, and average temperatures.

**Radiation Dose**

The radiation dosing and fractionation will depend on prior treatment, with lower total doses and sometimes twice-daily RT given in the re-irradiation setting. Doses can range between 30 and 66 Gy for previously irradiated patients, and 60 to 70 Gy for previously un-irradiated patients. Consensus has not been reached on safe cumulative doses, and patients should be counseled on the possibility of grade 3 or 4 late toxicities, including fibrosis, tissue necrosis, pain, infection, and lymphedema.

**Radiation Fields**

The radiation target volume, beam energy and angles, and dose utilized will depend on goals of care, the extent of disease, extent of prior radiation exposure, time between initial radiation treatment and retreatment, skin condition and appearance at the time of retreatment, and doses to the adjacent organs and tissue at risk. Electron or photon fields may be used in patients previously irradiated. In general, if the patient had prior radiation to the whole breast or chest wall, then the whole field is not usually re-treated. The radiation target focuses on the recurrent gross disease plus a margin for microscopic disease and set-up error, with the normal tissue constraints often liming the total dose. The radiation oncologist must customize each radiation plan per patient’s anatomy and goals of care.

The following fields have been used in previously irradiated patients:

- Jones et al. used electron fields encompassing all gross disease with a minimum 2 to 3 cm margin

- Kapp et al. used fields encompassing the entire region of recurrence, with cone down boosts delivered using electron beams in the scar area with 2 to 3 cm margins in all directions

Local breast cancer recurrences often herald a poor prognosis. Despite its association with metastatic breast cancer, aggressive treatment of isolated locoregional recurrence may still improve survival. In addition to current treatment standards, including surgical resection, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and radiation therapy, the addition of hyperthermia has been found to improve outcomes in these patients. While achieving a complete response rate is a worthwhile goal, palliation of symptoms is also invaluable for patients. The utility of concurrent hyperthermia and radiation therapy is apparent; however, hyperthermia is not available at all centers. Physicians should seek out centers with hyperthermia to coordinate external beam radiation treatments for these select patients. There is also a critical need for innovative treatments to help improve outcomes for patients who recur despite previous breast cancer therapies.