Chronic obesity reverberates across many different areas of western society. Since 1970, there has been a nearly doubling incidence of obesity in the United States, reflecting more than two-thirds of Americans now being overweight. In 2008, the estimated cost of obesity was approximately 147 billion dollars annually, representing almost 10% of total healthcare-related spending.

In 2021, that number substantially increased to approximately 260.6 billion dollars.

**Classification of Overweight and Obesity Based on Body Mass Index**

**Class**

**Body Mass Index (kg/m2)**

**Probability of associated comorbidities**

Normal Range

18.5–24.99

Average

Preobese

25.00-29.99

Above-average

Class I Obesity

30.0–34.99

Moderate

Class II Obesity

35.0-39.99

High

Class III Obesity

>40

Very high

Truncal obesity contributes to insulin resistance, the primary pathophysiological mechanism for developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Over a century of research led to discovering a cluster of clinical features, coined in 1988 as metabolic syndrome, or dysmetabolic syndrome X, by Dr. Gerald M. Reaven. These features included elevated blood pressure, blood sugar, serum triglycerides, and low-density lipoprotein.

Although being obese is not necessarily a direct causative factor in developing metabolic syndrome, weight loss can be the most beneficial lifestyle modification a person can make to reduce the risk of complications from metabolic syndrome.

Patients with obesity have elevated cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), contributing to metabolic syndrome.****Chronic obesity is also a risk factor for the development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), leading to an increased risk of all-cause mortality.

Understanding the multifactorial implications of obesity is paramount to accurately diagnosing and treating the condition. In evaluating a patient who demonstrates features of obesity, the first step is to determine whether the cause is predominately lifestyle or if the result of a secondary condition such as medication use.

One should determine if the patient is taking a medication known to cause obesity. Certain atypical antipsychotics like olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone have been shown to cause a net weight gain, with the most substantial weight gain observed with olanzapine. Anticonvulsant and mood stabilizer gabapentin is associated with a 2.2 kg (approximately 5 lb) weight gain within two months.

Also, exercise caution with hypoglycemic agents, particularly in the sulfonylurea class, due to known weight gain associated with tolbutamide (2.8 kg/6 lbs) and glimepiride (2.1 kg/5 lbs). Thiazolidinedione-type hypoglycemic agents have also shown a statistically significant weight gain, particularly pioglitazone (2.6 kg/5.5 lbs).

According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) data, from 2015-2018, approximately 13.2% of adults were on some form of antidepressant medication, with women being the predominant gender receiving prescriptions within this class (17.7%).

However, prescribers should be aware of the antidepressants amitryptiline and mirtazapine, which are associated with a 1.8 kg (4 lbs) and 1.5 kg (3.5 lbs) weight gain, respectively. Glucocorticoids are commonly prescribed in clinical practice for their potent anti-inflammatory effects, which can be useful for treating a broad range of acute and chronic conditions. Unfortunately, glucocorticoids' mechanism of action typically leads to an approximate 4 to 8% rise in weight gain.