**Flushing**

Niacin causes vasodilation of small subcutaneous blood vessels mediated by prostaglandin D2, leading to cutaneous flushing, accompanied by an uneasy sensation of pruritus and warmth. Severe flushing may lead to hypotension and dizziness. Flushing appears earlier after dosing with immediate-release (IR) niacin (approximately 30 minutes) and delayed for sustained-release niacin (2 to 4 hours). Patients should avoid hot showers immediately after a dose, and if necessary, pretreatment with aspirin or ibuprofen is helpful. Laropiprant is a selective prostaglandin D2 receptor 1 antagonist that can decrease niacin-induced flushing.

**Peptic Ulcer Disease**

Niacin therapy may aggravate peptic ulcer disease. Therefore, niacin should be used cautiously with active or chronic gastrointestinal disorders.

**Hepatotoxicity**

The most serious adverse effect is niacin hepatotoxicity. A mild increase in hepatic transaminase levels up to twice the upper limit of the normal range is common.

**Hyperglycemia**

Decreased glucose tolerance and hyperglycemia can occur in individuals with diabetes and appears to result from insulin resistance consequent to the free fatty acid rebound after moderately-sized doses.

**Arrhythmia**

Patients with supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs) may experience unusual chest sensations and palpitations even when the SVTs are under control via concomitant antiarrhythmic therapy.

**Eye Symptoms**

Reports also exist of retinal edema or toxic amblyopia, resulting in blurred vision.

**Hyperuricemia**

Niacin is known to cause hyperuricemia. Therefore, niacin is avoided in patients with a history of gout.