Empiric therapy for gonococcal infections is often administered during the initial clinical visit based on historical factors such as sexual intercourse with a person with an STI or a clinical exam suspicious of an STI, such as penile drip or abnormal vaginal discharge. Worldwide N. gonorrhoeae STI treatment for urogenital infections in males and females most commonly consists of dual therapy with a single intramuscular or intravenous dose of 500 mg ceftriaxone.

In Canada, an alternative antimicrobial regimen is favored for first-line N. gonorrhoeae treatment of urogenital infections, a single dose of oral cefixime 800 mg paired with a single dose of azithromycin 1 g.

For complicated gonococcal infections, including pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), epididymitis, and proctitis, dual therapy with a single intramuscular or intravenous dose of 500 mg of ceftriaxone is paired with oral doxycycline 100 mg BID for seven days, rather than a single 1 g dose of azithromycin, because of doxycycline’s effectiveness against C. trachomatis and documented efficacy in treating epididymitis and proctitis.

N. gonorrhoeae has evolved antimicrobial resistance utilized for its treatment since the first use of sulfonamides in the 1930s. In some parts of Asia and Europe, gonococcal isolates exhibiting elevated mean inhibitory concentrations to ceftriaxone have been identified, and ceftriaxone treatment failures have been reported. When there is a high suspicion or confirmation of N. gonorrhoeae resistance to standard therapy based on culture and sensitivity results, treatment of urogenital infection with a single dose of gentamicin 240 mg IM with a single dose of azithromycin 1 g orally can be administered.

In patients with a documented life-threatening allergy to cephalosporins or B-lactam allergy, aztreonam monotherapy can be utilized to treat N. gonorrhoeae infections. Aztreonam 1 g administered intravenously treats urogenital gonorrhea and may also have efficacy for pharyngeal and rectal gonococcal infection when using a 2 g dose.