The mitral valve (MV) is a very complex bicuspid valve that functions as the inlet to the left ventricle. The normal mitral valve consists of two leaflets, an anterior and posterior leaflet, which are attached by chordae tendineae to two papillary muscles. The papillary muscles are positioned in the superolateral and inferoseptal positions; they attach to the left ventricular walls and prevent the leaflets from prolapsing during ventricular systole. The anterior leaflet is short and covers around one-third of the valve orifice. The anterior leaflet is also called the aortic leaflet as it is in fibrous continuity with the aortic valve. The posterior leaflet, also known as the mural leaflet, covers two-thirds of the mitral orifice. The coronary sinus lies just to the right of the posterior leaflet while the circumflex coronary artery lies to the left of the posterior leaflet; these vessels can be easily damaged by the excessive force on the valve or improper placement of sutures.

**Mitral Stenosis**

- Mitral stenosis (MS) occurs most commonly due to rheumatic heart disease. The Western world has seen a drop over the course of the last several years, but it has recently been on the rise again due to immigration from non industrialized countries.

- MS can also be caused by congenital abnormalities which cause defects in the subvalvular apparatus such as a parachute mitral valve.

- Other etiologies of MS include infective endocarditis, systemic lupus erythematosus, carcinoid disease, rheumatoid arthritis, Whipple disease, Fabry disease, Hunter-Hurler mucopolysaccharidoses, endocardial fibroelastosis, chest radiation, and treatment with methysergide.

- Other valvular lesions such as degenerative aortic stenosis can cause calcific extension that extends into the mitral valve; this can cause mitral annular dilation with calcification of the leaflets, which can eventually cause nonrheumatic mitral valve stenosis.

- The presentation of other diseases can mimic mitral stenosis, such as Cor triatriatum can present as mitral stenosis in adults

- There are several ways to assess the severity of mitral valve anatomy based on two different scoring systems. The Cormier score uses three groups to base the severity of the mitral valve anatomy while the Wilkins score uses four grades to assess the mobility, thickening, calcification, and subvalvular thickening of the mitral valve.

**Presentation**

- Patients often present with fatigue, dyspnea, orthopnea, or even paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Patients may also present with a multitude of symptoms due to left atrial dilation, such as atrial fibrillation, dysphagia due to esophagus compression, and even more rare hoarseness consistent with Ortner syndrome (compression of the recurrent laryngeal nerve). Patients may also have peripheral edema or ascites due to chronic valve disease causing pulmonary hypertension.

**Physical Exam**

- MS may have an irregular low volume pulse, and when listening to cardiac sounds, one may hear a loud S1 with a mid-diastolic rumbling murmur heard best at the apex. The murmur intensity is based on the severity of the mitral valve gradient.

- EKG- MS may show normal sinus rhythm, but advanced MS may show wide p waves that are notched that appear M shaped.

**Imaging**

- CXR may show left atrial enlargement

- Cardiac echo is the mainstay of diagnosis. Echocardiography will allow the evaluation of the entire valve, leaflets, annular size, left atrium size, and left ventricular function. It will also assist in evaluating pulmonary hypertension and measuring the valve gradient. The parasternal short axis view gives the best viewpoint for planimetry, which allows measurement of the mitral valve area. This view also allows viewing for commissural fusion. Long axis views will give the best viewing of the subvalvular apparatus along with the best views of the anterior and posterior leaflets. The best view for evaluation of the MV is through the parasternal long and short-axis views.

- The “hockey stick” sign is seen when the anterior mitral leaflet has restricted leaflet motion.

- The mitral valve area can also be assessed by measuring the pressure half time; this is best calculated using the four-chamber cardiac view. The apical view is best to measure the mean pressure gradient across the valve.

- When reviewing mitral valve parameters, one single value does not change the severity of the disease; all the values matter toward the overall valve morphology, including the mitral valve area, a mean gradient across the valve, and the systolic pulmonary artery pressure.

**Classifications of Mitral Stenosis**

**European Guidelines**

- 
**Mild**

- 
              
- Valve area >1.5 cm^2, mean gradient <5 mmHg, systolic pulmonary artery pressure <30 mmHg

- 
**Moderate**

- 
              
- Valve area 1.0-1.5 cm^2, mean gradient 5-10 mmHg, systolic pulmonary artery pressure 30-50 mmHg

- 
**Severe**

- 
              
- Valve area <1.0 cm^2, mean gradient >10 mmHg, systolic pulmonary artery pressure >50 mmHg

**American Heart Association Guidelines**

- 
**Progressive MS**

- 
              
- Valve area >1.5 cm^2, diastolic pressure half-time <150 msec

- 
**Severe MS**

- 
              
- Valve area ≤1.5 cm^2, diastolic pressure half time ≥150 msec

- 
**Very Severe MS**

- 
              
- Valve area <1 cm^2, diastolic pressure half time >220 msec