Prevention of surgical errors aims to minimize mistakes and adverse events that may happen during the perioperative period. Surgery is a complex, high-risk medical field requiring precise coordination and execution from the surgical team. However, errors can occur at various stages of the surgical process, including during preoperative planning, patient positioning, anesthesia administration, intraoperatively, and postoperative care. Such errors can lead to complications such as bleeding, infection, tissue and organ damage, and even death. By implementing measures to prevent surgical errors, healthcare professionals aim to enhance patient safety and improve the quality of care. These measures may include standardized checklists, team training, advanced technologies, and ongoing quality improvement initiatives.****

The Joint Commission is an independent, nonprofit organization created in 1951 that accredits over 20,000 healthcare organizations in the United States. The mission of The Joint Commission is to provide quality healthcare, prevent patient harm, and improve patient advocacy. Following a review of sentinel event alerts related to wrong-site surgery in 1998, The Joint Commission made an effort to eliminate wrong-site surgery by creating National Patient Safety Goals and a Universal Protocol for Preventing WSPEs.

**The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Goals**

The Joint Commission National Patient Safety Goals to eliminate wrong-site surgery include:

- Use a minimum of two patient identifiers to confirm patient identity.

- Identify and reduce risks to patient safety.

- Prevent infections using hand hygiene guidelines from the CDC or World Health Organization.

- Ensure medical equipment is functional and alarm systems are in working order and audible. If maintenance is required, we must ensure this happens promptly.

- Prevent mistakes in surgery by marking the correct surgical site on the patient, verifying the correct surgery is performed on the correct patient, and taking a brief pause before starting surgery to ensure an error has not been made.

- Ensure medications are labeled correctly, perform accurate medication reconciliation, spend more time with patients on blood thinners, and provide the patient with written instructions on their medications.

**The Joint Commission Universal Protocol for Preventing WSPEs**

This protocol recommends conducting a preprocedural verification process, marking the procedure site, and performing a time-out before the procedure.

**Conduct a Preprocedural Verification Process**

- Confirm the correct procedure, patient, and surgical site.

- Involve the patient before receiving sedative medication if possible. This was noted to be one of the most effective steps in the protocol.

- Identify the instruments needed for the procedure.

- Utilize a standardized list to confirm the availability of instruments needed for the procedure.

**Mark the Procedure Site**

- Minimum requirements include marking the operative site if there is more than one possible location that can be operated on.

- The operative site should be marked by the surgeon and confirmed by the patient in the preoperative holding area.

- When surgical marking sites are anatomically difficult or impractical, use your organization’s protocol to ensure the correct surgical site is operated on.

**Perform a Time-out Before the Procedure**

- A standardized time-out must be performed before making an incision or starting an invasive procedure.

- The time-out involves introducing each member of the operative staff, such as the surgeon(s), surgical technician, anesthesia team, circulating nurse, and patient, if possible.

- At a minimum, the surgical staff must agree on the correct patient identity, site, and procedure. Other items discussed include patient allergies, preoperative antibiotics or other medications, and the American Society of Anesthesiologists classification (ASA).

- If a patient is undergoing multiple procedures and the provider performing the procedure changes, an additional time-out must be completed before starting the following procedure.