To understand the etiology of reflux esophagitis, the physiological mechanisms that regulate esophageal functions and minimize esophageal reflux should be understood first. These factors can be summarized as follows:

- The complex valvular mechanism at the esophagogastric junction antagonizes the positive abdominal pressure and the negative thoracic pressure and acts together to prevent the reflux of gastric acid contents into the esophagus. This complex valvular mechanism comprises the following components:
- The lower esophageal sphincter: This physiological sphincter is composed of different muscle fibers spinning 3 to 5 cm in length and coordinating the passage of food into the stomach and preventing the regurgitation of gastric contents into the esophagus.
- Diaphragm: The diaphragm plays an essential role as the esophagus enters the abdomen through the hiatus. The diaphragm works as an extrinsic component to support the lower esophageal sphincter function.
- Abdominal part of the esophagus: This part of the esophagus is exposed to the positive intra-abdominal pressure causing a collapse of this part of the esophagus and thus supporting the lower esophageal sphincter.
- The angle of His: This is the acute angle between the esophagus and the gastric fundus. Such design enhances the function of the lower esophageal sphincter.
- Phreno-esophageal membrane: This is a fibroelastic ligament that is a continuation of the transversalis fascia that leaves the diaphragm and surrounds the esophagus.

- Protective physiological mechanisms include:

- Esophageal motility: The peristaltic movement of the esophagus enables the movement of any regurgitated acid to return to the stomach.
- Saliva production: Swallowed saliva (alkaline) helps neutralize any acids at the lower esophagus.
- Esophageal epithelial protection: This mechanism comprises pre-epithelial, epithelial, and post epithelial mechanisms (the three mechanisms are discussed later).

Reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus occurs in healthy individuals, but the amounts refluxed are normally cleared through two main mechanisms:

- Clearance by esophageal peristaltic movement

- Neutralization of the small acidic residue by weakly alkaline swallowed saliva

Therefore, the causes of reflux esophagitis could be discussed as follows:

- Transient relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter or a low resting lower esophageal sphincter pressure

- Presence of a hiatus hernia

- Increased intra-abdominal fat, as is the case in obesity, and increased intra-abdominal pressure, such as in pregnancy and patients with ascites

- Impairment of the normal defense mechanisms, including esophageal peristalsis (dysregulation of esophageal peristalsis)

- Impairment of saliva production due to several causes, including chronic inflammation of the salivary glands

- Impairment of esophageal mural defense mechanisms

The factors that increase the risk of development of esophageal reflux include:

- White males over the age of 50 and a family history of reflux esophagitis

- Central obesity: This is associated with ERD and complications, including Barrett esophagus and adenocarcinoma

- Tobacco smoking is considered an etiological factor of reflux esophagitis, while alcohol consumption is considered a triggering factor of reflux

- Delayed gastric emptying

- Esophageal dysmotility

- Increased abdominal pressure

- Hiatus hernia

- Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

- Decreased thoracic pressure, such as in chronic chest problems

- Psychosocial stress and the severity of reflux esophagitis correlate with the degree of stress