Cystitis usually develops due to the colonization of the periurethral mucosa by bacteria from the fecal or vaginal flora and the ascension of such pathogens to the urinary bladder. Uropathogens may have microbial virulence factors that allow them to escape host defenses and invade tissues in the urinary tract. UTIs in males are much less common due to the longer anatomic urethra, the drier periurethral environment, and the antibacterial defenses provided by the prostatic fluid. Traditionally, all UTIs in males were considered complicated. However, uncomplicated UTIs may occasionally occur, especially in males between 15 and 50, especially in those who are sexually active, are uncircumcised, or do anal intercourse, as long as they do not have any risk factors for complicated UTIs such as urologic abnormalities, bladder outlet obstruction, urolithiasis or recent urinary tract instrumentation.

The underlying host factors largely determine the pathogenesis of complicated UTIs. Impairment of the immune system and voiding dysfunction from autonomic neuropathy may predispose patients with diabetes to develop UTIs. In renal insufficiency, accumulation of uremic toxins may reduce host defenses, and decreased renal blood flow may impair antimicrobial clearance. Kidney stones may cause an obstruction and provide a potential nidus of infection. In the setting of urinary catheterization, internal and external biofilms may form on the catheter, and pathogens may persist in retained pools of urine in the urinary bladder.

The overwhelming identifiable bacteria causing most cases of cystitis is Escherichia coli (from 75% to 95% of cases). Other organisms causing cystitis include Klebsiella pneumoniae and Proteus mirabilis. (Klebsiella is the most common cause of UTIs after E. coli.) Patients with recent hospitalizations or prior treatment for a UTI may present with Pseudomonas, enterococci, and staphylococci, such as S. saprophyticus. Many other organisms, such as lactobacilli, Group B streptococci, and coagulase-negative staphylococci, are generally considered contaminants unless there are very high numbers of a single organism where an actual infection is possible.