While damage to facial muscles intraoperatively is unlikely to result in long-term dysfunction of either mimetic function or chewing, facial nerve branches are easily injured during multiple different types of surgery, which may result in temporary or permanent muscle weakness. Iatrogenic injury most commonly results from tumor resection, especially in the parotid and skull base regions, but also occurs with temporomandibular joint replacement, middle ear surgery, and facelifting.

Facial muscles themselves may also play a role in reconstructive surgery, particularly the rehabilitation of facial paralysis. When the facial nerve is dysfunctional, one entire side of the face may be either weak or completely paralyzed. Depending on the etiology of the palsy, numerous treatment options may exist; however, in more severe cases, transfer of a muscle innervated by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve may provide a viable reanimation option. Historically, the masseter was disinserted from the angle of the mandible and attached to the modiolus of the oral commissure so that the act of biting would help to produce a smile, but the unnatural bulk and movement vector that resulted led the procedure to be abandoned in favor of repositioning of the temporalis muscle instead.

Lastly, facial muscles may serve as useful landmarks in facial surgery. The deep plane facelift, a commonly-employed technique originally described by Hamra in 1990, uses the surface of the zygomaticus major muscle as a dissection plane for elevating the malar fat pad.