Before embarking on any treatment, it is important to appreciate that NBS is a hyperalgesic syndrome caused by opioids. Any negative interaction with the patient can lead to disharmony, and that can lead the patient to simply go elsewhere to seek pain medications, which will make the pain worse, which in turn leads to an escalation of narcotic drug use. This then results in more frequent visits to the emergency department, longer hospital stays, readmission for unrelenting pain and often unnecessary invasive procedures including surgery. Even in many of these scenarios, the healthcare workers may be unaware of the presence of NBS and may continue to prescribe opioids for pain control, which leads to exacerbation of the pain.

The critical point is to establish a solid patient-doctor relationship; once trust is developed, the patient may reveal that he or she is taking opioids frequently or at high doses. In return, the healthcare worker should be non-judgemental and be empathic. One should try and address all patient concerns and expectations. These patients are often labile and because of the severe pain have unrealistic expectations; this often leads them to seek help from multiple healthcare workers and even try unproven home remedies, which in most cases results in aggravation of the syndrome. If the treatment is to succeed, then one must motivate the patient. Thoroughly listening and appreciating patient concerns are vital to reducing resistance and improving outcomes. The healthcare worker should closely watch patient cues and be honest in communications.

**Withdrawal and Detoxification**

There is no specific therapy for treatment of NBS; the only recommended treatment for NBS is reduction or discontinuation of the opioid. To manage the pain, one may need to prescribe antidepressants and combine it with non-pharmacological therapies. The majority of patients may benefit from psychological support while transitioning from opioid reduction to non-opioid therapies. The principle behind treating NBS rests on reduction or gradual tapering of the opioids and detoxification. The opioid is gradually withdrawn over a few days/weeks, and at the same time, one may need to treat the withdrawal symptoms and have alternative means to manage the pain. One case report suggests that when NBS is diagnosed the patient should be started on a long-acting opioid like methadone for pain relief. Then the patient should be started on drugs to prevent withdrawal symptoms like clonidine, lorazepam and/or duloxetine. The authors claim that it is easier to taper off the long-acting opioids over several weeks compared to the short-acting drugs like morphine; in addition, the withdrawal symptoms are more manageable.

**Antidepressants**

The drugs of choice to treat patients with NBS are the antidepressants. These drugs have also been used successfully to treat pain associated with irritable bowel syndrome.

The tricyclic drug should be started before the opioid is tapered or discontinued. Once the antidepressant is started, it should be continued indefinitely. The tricyclics do not work immediately but take a few weeks to reach peak therapeutic effect. The use of the antidepressants results in a positive mental effect, improved mood and general well being of the individual. More important these agents also increase the threshold for pain. The lowest dose of the tricyclic should be started and gradually titrated until a response is seen. The newer generation of serotonin reuptake inhibitors is recommended because they tend to have fewer adverse effects compared to the older tricyclic antidepressants. In some people, the adverse effects of sedation, weight gain, and worsening constipation may lead to poor compliance with the older agents. Lower doses of the tricyclic antidepressants are helpful in decreasing pain but higher doses to improve mood are often associated with many adverse effects. The newer serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors like venlafaxine, duloxetine, desvenlafaxine, and milnacipran have all been shown to be effective in easing the pain, along with their positive effects on mood.

In several studies, both milnacipran and duloxetine have been shown to lower the need for opioids for pain control. Unfortunately, all the available antidepressants do not work consistently in all patients with NBS, and it is difficult to know who will respond to these agents. The other difficulty is that since these agents do not work right away, it may take weeks or months of therapy before one can determine if the antidepressant is working, which can lead to unnecessary expense for the patient.

**Benzodiazepines**

Both medium and long-acting benzodiazepines like clonazepam or lorazepam can be used to manage the opioid withdrawal phase. These drugs have anti-anxiolytic properties and also have a calming effect. Prior to starting the opioid tapering, the patient should be started on an oral or intravenous benzodiazepine. Once the withdrawal is complete, the benzodiazepine should also be discontinued to prevent physical dependence. It is highly recommended that the patient is monitored while on benzodiazepines because the drugs can cause sedation and hypotension, when administered intravenously.

**Clonidine**

Clonidine is an alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonist which has been used to manage NBS. The drug does possess anti-anxiolytic properties and helps ease the withdrawal symptoms like muscle pain, restlessness, and chills. Clonidine at doses between 0.1 to 0.4 mg per day is usually started after the opioid dose is reduced by 50% and then the dose is titrated to prevent hypotension. Studies show that clonidine can prevent the withdrawal symptoms and prevent the hyperalgesia of NBS.

**Miscellaneous Agents**

For patients with NBS who fail to respond to the above drugs or continue to have pain, then one may try the off-label use of mood stabilizers (anticonvulsants) or atypical antipsychotics. Pregabalin has been used with some success in the treatment of fibromyalgia, and neuropathic pain and the agent has also been shown to lower the need for opioids in post-surgery patients. It is believed that this anticonvulsant acts by lowering glutamate levels and reducing inflammation in the nerves. Anecdotal reports suggest that gabapentin may also be useful in the treatment of NBS in a select group of patients. Until randomized clinical trials are done, the role of these agents remains experimental.

Other promising agents used to treat refractory pain in patients with NBS include the atypical antipsychotic drug quetiapine, which has been shown to ease the pain in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and fibromyalgia. The drug can also relieve anxiety and stabilize mood, but the quetiapine also has adverse effects which must be taken into account. Even after short-term use, the drug can cause significant weight gain, extrapyramidal symptoms, metabolic syndrome, and sedation. Recently anecdotal reports suggest that the N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, memantine, may help relieve pain in patients being weaned off opioids.

**Behavioral Interventions**

Besides pharmacological therapy, patients with NBS must also be managed with non-pharmacological therapies. Patients with NBS have significant psychosocial issues, and behavior therapy may be beneficial. Reports indicate that a positive relationship between the healthcare provider and the patient can help prevent opioid recidivism and decrease the need for pain medications. Cognitive behavior therapy and hypnosis have been shown to lower pain in NBS, and their effects appear to be mediated by interfering with the parasympathetic nerves that play a role in the brain-gut axis. Studies show that in patients undergoing opioid detoxification, continued psychosocial intervention can improve outcomes in reducing opioid use and prevent release.

**Constipation Management**

The one feature of NBS which must also be addressed is constipation. Opioids are notorious for causing constipation, which can significantly affect the quality of life. Healthcare workers who prescribe opioids must start a laxative at the same time to prevent constipation. Except for bulk-forming laxatives, all other types of laxatives can be used. In addition, the patient should be encouraged to change the lifestyle, drink ample water, exercise, and add roughage to diet.

To prevent electrolyte disturbance, one should not use osmotic laxatives for a prolonged time. If the constipation is severe, one may need to use the newer peripheral opioid antagonists like alvimopan or methylnaltrexone.