**DLT Placement**

The most common method of DLT placement is direct laryngoscopy, followed by FOB to confirm positioning. Video laryngoscopy can be used successfully to place a DLT in a patient with a difficult airway. Because video laryngoscopes typically leave less room in the oropharyngeal cavity to maneuver, DLT placement may be cumbersome after a view of the vocal cords has been obtained. During direct or video laryngoscopy, the bronchial lumen of the DLT should be positioned anteriorly as it passes through the vocal cords. The DLT should then be rotated 45° clockwise or counter-clockwise for a right- or left-sided DLT, respectively.

Placement can be confirmed using auscultation of the chest during selective clamping of the bronchial and tracheal lumens; however, FOB is more definitive and is typically preferred. Examination with FOB can also confirm that the inflated bronchial cuff is visible but not positioned so proximally that it might herniate over the carina, an error in placement that would not be detected on auscultation alone. Some practitioners advocate using FOB to guide the DLT into the correct bronchus at the time of direct laryngoscopy. However, this typically requires a second practitioner.

Another technique particularly useful in difficult airway patients is to intubate with an SLT and then use a tube exchanger to guide placement of a DLT. The tube exchanger should be at least 83 cm long and slender enough to accommodate a single lumen of the DLT. Most tube exchangers have a central hollow lumen that can be connected to an oxygen source with an adaptor or used as a conduit for a fiberoptic bronchoscope.

**BB Placement**

Available BBs are dissimilar in design, requiring different techniques for placement.

The different BBs and techniques for placement are:

- **Wire-guided device:**This involves lassoing the blocker to a fiberoptic bronchoscope, which is then directed into the desired bronchus.

- **BB with an incorporated stylet:**This is inserted through a standard SLT allowing good control of the catheter tip, which can then be easily directed to block a selective lobar bronchus. The stylet is removed after placement, and the 1.4 mm lumen can be used as a suction port for rapid deflation of lobes or oxygen insufflation to apply continuous positive airway pressure to the deflated lobes.

- **SLT with an introducer port through which the BB is inserted:**The balloon tip of this blocker is flexed such that it can be more easily directed into the desired bronchus under fiberoptic guidance.

- **BB with a unique bifurcated distal end****with two separate balloons.**This is designed to allow the placement of the cuffs in the left and right bronchi. Using FOB, the desired bronchus to be blocked is identified, and the appropriate cuff is inflated.

Some practitioners have reported success with placing the BB adjacent to the endotracheal tube rather than within it, a technique that may be advantageous in pediatric patients requiring small endotracheal tubes.