Adverse effects are prominent in the infant and the elderly populations. The chronic use of antacids in this population is not a recommendation due to safety concerns.

**Aluminum Hydroxide**

Aluminum use is associated with an increased risk of toxicity in individuals with renal failure and infants. It presents as

- Osteopenia

- Microcytic anemia

- Neurotoxicity

- Osteomalacia

- Constipation

- Fecal impaction

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Abdominal cramps

- Hypomagnesemia

- Hypophosphatemia

**Calcium Carbonate**

The adverse reactions often seen with this  group of antacids are

- Abdominal pain

- Anorexia

- Constipation

- Acid rebound

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Flatulence

- Xerostomia

- Headache

- Hypercalcemia

- Hypophosphatemia

- Milk-alkali syndrome

Antacids can exhibit clinically significant interactions with other medication a patient may be taking.

- Using antacids concomitantly with acidic drugs (e.g., digoxin, chlorpromazine isoniazid) can result in impaired absorption of these acidic drugs, reducing the blood concentrations of the drugs and impairing their therapeutic effects.

- Concurrent antacid use with some drugs (e.g., pseudoephedrine, levodopa) can result in increased absorption of the drugs, leading to potential toxicity or adverse events from increased serum concentration of these drugs.

- Antacids containing magnesium trisilicate and magnesium hydroxide can bind to drugs like tetracycline and fluoroquinolone antibiotics, impeding their absorption and therapeutic effects.

- Sodium bicarbonate significantly affects urine acidity, which can alter the renal elimination of some drugs by the kidney; sodium bicarbonate inhibits the excretion of basic drugs such as amphetamines and quinidine while increasing the excretion of acidic drugs like aspirin.