The management of anagen effluvium should be aimed at limiting the amount of time the patient suffers from alopecia. To date, several agents have been studied; unfortunately, no treatment appears to be effective in preventing or stopping the hair loss. Although the results have not been impressive in stopping or preventing hair loss, it has been postulated that topical minoxidil is effective in reducing the period of baldness by an average of fifty days. Several studies have described limiting drug delivery to the scalp by using a scalp tourniquet during chemotherapy. It should be noted, however, that if scalp or brain metastases are a possibility, this method should not be used to allow penetration of the chemotherapeutic agent. Another method that has shown success is inducing scalp hypothermia to a scalp temperature of fewer than 24 degrees Celsius during chemotherapy with daunorubicin, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, vincristine, vinblastine, mechlorethamine, actinomycin D, and epirubicin.

Understandably, hair loss associated with this disorder can be emotionally and psychologically distressing to the patient. Because a pharmacologic agent successful in treating and preventing anagen effluvium has not been found, patient education and aesthetic advice on managing hair loss are fundamental to managing androgen effluvium. Expectations should be managed so that patients understand the unfortunate inevitability of the disorder; however, they should also be assured that most cases of anagen effluvium are reversible and they will grow hair once chemotherapy is ceased. Patients should be instructed to avoid chemical trauma to the hair. This includes hot appliances, bleach, or color treatments in the time leading up to and during chemotherapy. If possible, patients should be given resources to obtaining hairpieces or protective scarves before hair loss and educated on the benefits such garments offer, including cold protection in addition to the aesthetic component.