**Early relapse**: Early treatment failure is defined as the progression of follicular lymphoma within 24 months (POD24) of the initiation of immunochemotherapy with R-CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone plus rituximab), BR (bendamustine plus rituximab), R-CVP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone) or within 12 months (POD12) of single-agent rituximab treatment. Asymptomatic relapsed follicular lymphoma cases do not need immediate treatment and should be monitored regularly for symptom development.

The prognostic value of POD24 was validated in a pooled analysis of 13 international clinical trials that included >5000 patients treated initially with chemotherapy (49 percent), chemoimmunotherapy (46 percent), or rituximab alone (5 percent). A 24-month landmark analysis was used to report subsequent overall survival (OS) according to disease status 24 months after initial treatment. After adjustment for gender and stratification per performance status and follicular lymphoma international prognostic index (FLIPI), POD24 was associated with worse subsequent OS (estimated five-year OS 71 versus 94 percent; HR 3.03, 95% CI 2.65-3.47). This prognostic impact was seen in all treatment groups.

In early relapse cases, a biopsy is needed to confirm relapse and exclude aggressive histology or transformation.

Immunotherapy or chemoimmunotherapy alone is not likely to result in long-term survival for patients who experience early treatment failure. Patients who have a complete response to chemoimmunotherapy [bendamustine plus obinutuzumab (BG) or obinutuzumab plus CHOP (G-CHOP)] may benefit from autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) as it improves survival. Individuals who have not achieved a complete response may be good candidates for chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) treatment or one of the novel agents discussed below. For patients who are not HSCT candidates, the use of novel agents such as lenalidomide, copanlisib, and tazemetostat is recommended.

Several retrospective analyses suggest autologous HSCT improves survival when compared with chemoimmunotherapy alone.

CAR-T therapy is an option for patients with multiply relapsed follicular lymphomas. CAR-T cells are created from the patient's own T-lymphocytes that have been genetically modified (transfected) with a gene encoding a CAR to direct the T-cells against the lymphoma cells. The T-cells are genetically changed ex vivo, multiplied in a production facility, and then reinfused into the patient as a form of treatment. Axicabtagene ciloleucel (axi-cel) and tisagenlecleucel (tisa-cel) are CD19-directed CAR-T therapies that are Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved.

- **Axi-cel**– Among the 86 patients with follicular lymphoma treated with axi-cel in ZUMA-5, the overall response rate (ORR) was 94% (79% complete remission [CR], 15% partial remission [PR]) with a median time to first response of one month. Response rates were similar in patients with and without high-risk features, including early treatment failure. The estimated progression-free survival (PFS) at 18 months was 73% (95% CI 64-80 percent), and the estimated OS at 18 months was 92% (95% CI 85-95 percent). Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) of any grade was reported in 78 percent (6 percent ≥grade 3). Management included tocilizumab (50 percent), corticosteroids (18 percent), and vasopressors (5 percent).

- **Tisa-cel**– Among the 90 patients with follicular lymphoma treated with tisa-cel, the ORR was 86 percent (69 percent CR, 17 percent PR) with a median time to first response of 2.9 months. The median duration of response was not reached, with a median follow-up of 9.1 months. The estimated PFS at 12 months was 71 percent (95% CI 58-80 percent). CRS of any grade was reported in 53 percent, all less than grade 3.

CAR-T therapy is associated with significant side effects, such as catastrophic neurologic events and CRS, a severe systemic reaction (e.g., high fever, flu-like symptoms, hypotension, mental state abnormalities) due to the activation and proliferation of CAR-T cells.

**Late relapse**: Relapses that occur more than 24 months or 12 months after the first chemoimmunotherapy or single-agent rituximab, respectively, are associated with a clinically indolent course, needing intermittent treatment across the course of the disease over decades and survival rates that are comparable to those seen in the general population.

For symptomatic late relapsed cases, options include anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, chemoimmunotherapy, or novel agents.

Treatment choice is based on several factors, including the patient's response to prior therapy, the existence or absence of certain mutations, the patient's performance status, and the presence of comorbidities that may influence the patient's tolerance to systemic therapy.

Rituximab monotherapy is recommended for patients with comorbidities that deem them poor candidates for chemotherapy and those with advanced tumor burden and good past treatment response to single-agent rituximab owing to its low toxicity profile. The dosing schedule of the rituximab can be either IV 375 mg/m per week for a total of four doses

When compared with ofatumumab, rituximab was at least as effective in terms of overall response rate (ORR, 66 versus 50 percent) and PFS (median 21 versus 16 months) in randomized phase III trial of patients with rituximab-sensitive indolent NHL (predominant follicular lymphoma) relapsed greater than six months after single agent rituximab or a rituximab-containing regimen.

Chemoimmunotherapy options include anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies (rituximab or obinutuzumab) with CHOP, bendamustine, or lenalidomide. The combination of bendamustine with obinutuzumab or rituximab is preferred for patients previously receiving CVP or CHOP. Bendamustine can be used again in patients who had prolonged remission with the same treatment. In the GADOLIN trial, six cycles of bendamustine plus obinutuzumab followed by maintenance obinutuzumab versus six cycles of bendamustine alone showed superior PFS and OS.

CHOP with either rituximab or obinutuzumab is preferred in patients who received bendamustine-based therapy. Maintenance with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody improves PFS but no OS. If offered, it is usually given every two months for a total of 2 years. If the lymphoma relapses while on maintenance therapy, then continued maintenance with anti-CD20 is not advisable. But patients while on rituximab maintenance might be eligible for obinutuzumab maintenance.

A meta-analysis of nine trials including 2586 adult patients with follicular lymphoma reported that patients who received maintenance rituximab demonstrated superior rates of OS for patients with the relapsed disease (HR 0.72, 95% CI 0.57-0.91) but not for those with previously untreated follicular lymphoma (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.60-1.25) or if the patients were eligible for rituximab retreatment at disease progression (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.49-1.49).

First-relapse patients with EZH2 mutations and second-relapse patients without EZH2 mutations are both eligible for tazemetostat. About 20% of follicular lymphoma cases are associated with EZH2 mutations, and such patients have a better prognosis and a better response to therapy overall. Tazemetostat is approved as a single agent for treating patients with relapsed or refractory EZH2 mutation-positive follicular lymphoma who have received at least two prior systemic therapies.

Tazemetostat is also approved for patients with relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma with no satisfactory alternative treatment options and no EZH2 mutations. Approval was based on phase 1/2 trial - among patients with EZH2 mutated follicular lymphoma, ORR was 69% with 13% CR and 56% PR, and median PFS was 14 months. Among patients with EZH2 wild-type follicular lymphoma, ORR was 35%, 4% CR, and median PFS was 11 months. The most common side effects of tazemetostat include infections, fatigue, muscle pain, nausea, and abdominal pain.

Lenalidomide with rituximab or obinutuzumab are other alternatives. AUGMENT trial evaluated the addition of lenalidomide to rituximab, resulting in improved PFS (39 months versus 14 months); OS data was immature. Patients on lenalidomide plus rituximab had higher rates of infections, cutaneous reactions, and cytopenia.

The phosphoinositide 3'-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor copanlisib is approved by the FDA for use in relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma after two prior systemic therapies. CHRONOS-3 trial randomly assigned 458 patients with relapsed clinically indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (275 with follicular lymphoma) in a 2:1 ratio to receive copanlisib plus rituximab versus placebo plus rituximab.

After a median follow-up of 19 months, copanlisib plus rituximab improved PFS (median 22 versus 14 months, HR 0.52, 95% CI 0.39-0.69). The addition of copanlisib increased serious treatment-emergent adverse events (47 versus 18 percent) with higher rates of grade 3/4 hyperglycemia and hypertension.

High-dose chemotherapy with autologous HSCT, CAR-T, or other experimental treatments is recommended in patients with multiple relapses.