With the increasing aging population in our communities, clinicians have to tackle the challenge of managing patients with multiple comorbidities and pay special attention to caring for the geriatric population. A decline in cognition occurs with increasing age. It is important to understand age-related changes in cognition to separate normal aging from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. The expected changes in normal aging are a decline in processing speed and performance on complex tasks while maintaining simple attention tasks, a decline in auditory discrimination, and learning new information and prospective memory.

In contrast, procedural memory stays intact with aging. There is also a decline in the executive cognition function, which involves problem-solving and decision-making. Lastly, there is a waning of visuospatial processing and judgment with aging. But, the recognition of objects and gestures stays intact.

MCI is a reduced function in either one or more areas of memory, attention, language, and judgment.

The term dementia is used when the cognitive deficiencies become significantly greater and impact daily life. The possible triggers for initiating a geriatric assessment include age, cognitive changes, memory issues, increased frequency of falls, taking multiple medications, frailty, and concerns for safety at home.

The assessment is not beneficial to certain patients with a terminal illness, lack of complete functional independence, severe dementia, and those requiring nursing home placement.