The profunda brachii is classified histologically as a muscular artery.  Muscular arteries serve as a bridge between elastic arteries and arterioles.  Defining characteristics of muscular arteries are the multitude of smooth muscle layers in the tunica media and a clearly defined internal elastic lamina.

Blood supply to the upper extremity is traceable back to the aorta.  Blood initially flows into the brachiocephalic artery and then the subclavian artery on the right and directly into the subclavian artery on the left.  The subclavian artery turns into the axillary artery at the lateral border of the first rib.  The axillary artery turns into the brachial artery at the lower border of the teres major muscle. The brachial artery has five major branches; listed in order of branching are the profunda brachii artery, superior ulnar collateral artery, inferior ulnar collateral artery, ulnar artery, and radial artery. These arteries serve to provide blood flow to the upper extremity musculature.

The profunda brachii is the first of five major brachial artery branches. It arises from the posterior portion of the brachial artery, just below the inferior border of the teres major muscle.

The profunda brachii artery continues on an inferior and lateral course in the radial sulcus, lying between the humerus and the lateral head of the triceps brachii muscle. Below the inferior border of the latissimus dorsi muscle, the profunda brachii artery divides into two terminal branches, the middle collateral artery, and radial collateral artery.  The middle collateral artery courses inferiorly in the medial head of the triceps brachii muscle and anastomoses with the inferior ulnar collateral artery and the recurrent interosseous artery superior to the olecranon of the ulna.  The anastomosis between the middle collateral artery and the inferior ulnar collateral artery contributes to the peri-articular anastomoses of the elbow.