The prevention and treatment of anticholinergic toxicity can be maximized by adopting an interprofessional team-based approach. This interprofessional team will include clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and any needed specialists. Psychiatry services should see any patient with anticholinergic poisoning as an inpatient and refer to outpatient behavioral health resources if the ingestion is due to intentional self-harm. Pharmacists in the hospital and the community are excellent resources for educating patients and the community regarding medication side effects, dosage, and synergistic effects of taking more than one anticholinergic agent. In many emergency departments, pharmacists perform routine reconciliation of patients’ home medications. Thus, pharmacists have a prime opportunity to recognize and alert providers of potential drug interactions, which would place a patient at higher risk for anticholinergic toxicity. Both nursing staff and pharmacy staff can play an increased role in patient education at the time of discharge from the hospital regarding the appropriate consumption of anticholinergic drugs. Nursing staff should also assist in educating all patients on anticholinergic agents and stress the importance of keeping them out of the reach of children. Prehospital providers can also aid clinicians in making the diagnosis of anticholinergic poisoning by interviewing bystanders and observing the scene for any medications or substances that may have been available to the patient.