Treatment involves early recognition and the administration of antibodies specifically against digoxin also known as Fab fragments. Digoxin concentration does not necessarily correlate with clinical symptoms of toxicity however digoxin concentrations may be used for calculating the amount of antidote therapy. Although guidelines are unclear, treatment with digoxin immune Fab is also known by the trade name Digibind, is considered first-line therapy for dysrhythmias including AV block and ventricular tachycardia caused by suspected digoxin toxicity.   Fab fragments are highly effective in binding the digoxin molecule with minimal detrimental side effects.  The antibody fragments form complexes and are secreted via the urine. Empiric treatment consists of 10 vials of Fab fragments for adults and five vials for children. Treatment with digoxin-specific antibodies will lead to hypokalemia, and serum potassium should be monitored frequently. Activated charcoal can be considered in the treatment of acute ingestion within two hours. Further treatment is supportive.  More research is needed for optimal dosing and whether or not the use of digoxin-specific antibodies are cost-effective for use in non-life threatening toxicities.

Hydration, oxygenation, and close monitoring are necessary. The ECG has to be continuously monitored for dysrhythmias. All electrolyte disturbances need to be corrected.

One should remember that if digoxin is neutralized with antibodies, the patient may develop heart failure and lead to worsening of the arrhythmias. Other issues related to the antibody include serum sickness and anaphylaxis.

Supraventricular need to be managed with short-acting beta-blockers. Phenytoin as been shown to suppress digoxin induced tachyarrhythmias. Another option is lidocaine when managing ventricular arrhythmias. Atropine may be used to managed bradycardia. The use of magnesium is not recommended as it can worsen bradycardia or an AV block. Cardioversion is not recommended as it can precipitate ventricular arrhythmias; instead, defibrillation may be used according to ACLS protocol.