Treatment of hypertrophic scars and keloids can be challenging, and there are several modalities available. The most important guideline for scarring is prevention by avoidance of trauma. When these procedures are unavoidable, it is important to add prophylactic therapies, such as topical therapies, during wound healing to prevent the formation of an abnormal scar. However, many patients already have an injury that has formed a keloid or hypertrophic scar. Management of these patients is important to aid in improving pain or pruritus and improving cosmetic outcomes.

First-line therapy of keloids and hypertrophic scarring includes occlusive dressings, compression therapy, and steroids. Occlusive dressings are thought to work by reducing collagen synthesis by decreased delivery of blood, oxygen, and nutrients to the scar. Patients must wear these dressings twenty-three hours a day, and they work best immediately after injury or surgery.

Surgical treatment entails excision of the scar with primary closure, ensuring a tension-free closure to minimize the chance of recurrence. Although there is a high recurrence of keloids with excision, this may be reduced when performed in conjunction with steroids or more involved adjuvants such as radiotherapy and interferon therapy. Cryosurgery works by inducing cellular injury and necrosis to the affected area and reducing the area of the scar.

Radiation therapy is an adjuvant treatment for keloids as an adjunct after surgical excision, especially in multiply-recurrent keloids. Standard external-beam radiation therapy is most commonly used (20-25 Gy total dose, often in three fractions) and is begun the day after surgical resection. Brachytherapy has also been employed but is not as common. Although the radiation dose is low, the risk of subsequent malignancy from radiation therapy exists and is one disadvantage.

Newer adjuvant and emerging therapies include interferon, 5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, tacrolimus, bleomycin, retinoic acid, and botulinum toxin A. Interferon therapy works in vitro by reducing collagen synthesis. 5-Fluorouracil works as an antimetabolic agent by interrupting RNA, causing inhibition of fibroblast proliferation and TGF-beta expression to decrease Type I collagen in scar tissue. In keloidal tissue, imiquimod causes induction of apoptotic genes, causing cell death in these tissues. Tacrolimus is a topical treatment that leads to decreased fibroblast proliferation by downregulating TGF-beta receptors. Bleomycin is used in dermatology primarily to treat recalcitrant warts and keratoacanthomas, but in vitro administration to fibroblasts has been shown to decrease collagen synthesis. Retinoids are inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases that overexpress in keloids and hypertrophic scars. Tretinoin and isotretinoin, both retinoids, cause a reduction in collagen synthesis, leading to improved scar appearance. Tension is thought to be a factor leading to the formation of keloids and hypertrophic scars. Botulinum toxin A is thought to reduce tension on the healing wound, leading to improvement in scarring.