Analysis of synovial fluid is important in determining the cause of the effusion. Synovial fluid can be categorized into non-inflammatory, inflammatory, hemorrhagic, or septic. Please see the attached table for fluid characteristics in each category.

Non-inflammatory synovial fluid may be caused by osteoarthritis.

Inflammatory causes of joint effusion include gout and other crystalline arthropathies, rheumatoid arthritis, and seronegative spondyloarthropathies.

Hemorrhagic effusions may be seen in patients with a bleeding diathesis, either spontaneously or after trauma. These effusions may also be seen in any patient after significant trauma.

Septic arthritis is a severe diagnosis with significant morbidity and mortality if not identified and treated promptly. Septic arthritis can be categorized into nongonococcal arthritis and gonococcal arthritis. More than 80% of septic arthritis is caused by nongonococcal pathogens. Gram-positive staphylococci and streptococci are the most common causes of nongonococcal septic arthritis. Risk factors include intravenous drug abuse, endocarditis, osteomyelitis, abscesses, and other skin wounds. Gonococcal arthritis is more common in young, sexually active patients. This infection can have other clinical symptoms, including migratory arthritis, tenosynovial inflammation, and genitourinary complaints.

**General Appearance**

Visual inspection of synovial fluid can provide diagnostic clues. The clarity of synovial fluid is determined by the leukocyte count. Normal synovial fluid is clear or straw-colored. The inflammatory fluid is more opaque. Hemarthrosis may be seen spontaneously in patients with hemophilia or effusions seen after trauma. Additionally, the presence of lipohemarthrosis may indicate an occult fracture.

**Fluid Analysis**

Common laboratory analyses include cell count, gram stain, crystal analysis, and glucose and protein levels.

Normal synovial fluid will have the following characteristics: Clear or straw-colored, less than 200 leukocytes per microL, variable neutrophil count, and negative gram stain.

Inflammatory synovial fluid will have the following characteristics: Yellow color, 2,000 to 50,000 leukocytes per microL, variable neutrophil count, and negative gram stain.

Hemorrhagic synovial fluid will have the following characteristics: Opaque appearance, less than 2,000 leukocytes per microL, less than 25% neutrophils, negative gram stain.

Septic synovial fluid will have the following characteristics: Cloudy/opaque appearance, greater than 50,000 leukocytes per microL, greater than 90% neutrophils, and a positive gram stain between 30% to 80% of the time.

**Crystal Analysis**

Microscopy can be performed to assess synovial fluid for crystalline pathology. Monosodium urate crystals present in gout, are needle-shaped and negatively birefringent. Calcium pyrophosphate crystals present in pseudogout are rhomboid and positively birefringent.