Primidone appears as a white crystalline powder; it is practically insoluble in water (1/2000), slightly soluble in alcohol (1/200), and soluble in alkaline solutions. The basic skeleton of primidone comprises pyrimidinedione, which after metabolism, converts into phenobarbital and phenylethylmalonamide (PEMA). The chemical structure of primidone differs from phenobarbital due to the substitution in the C2 position of the carbonyl group with the methylene bridge. This chemical modification of the molecule led to a product with a strong anti-convulsive effect and less sedation.

The mechanism of action is not well-demarcated, but it appears to bind centrally with voltage-gated sodium channels and inhibits the monotonous firing of action potentials.

**Pharmacokinetic Factors**

**Absorption**

Primidone is rapidly and completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with a blood peak reached in about 3 hours; it shows a half-life of approximately 10 to 15 hours, shorter than that of the two metabolites while reaching steady-state within 1 to 2 days.

**Distribution**

The volume of distribution (Vd) is 0.8 L/Kg, while the plasma concentrations of primidone are between 5 and 12 mcg/mL; it is rapidly distributed in the tissues and shows a partial serum protein binding (about 35%); the therapeutic range is between 23 to 55 mg/mL. Primidone crosses the blood-brain barrier and the placental barrier and is also distributed in breast milk.

**Metabolism**

In addition to the two primary active metabolites (PEMA and phenobarbital), the drug has a minor metabolite, p-hydroxyprimidone. However, primidone cannot be considered a prodrug because it has intrinsic pharmacological activity. It is subject to two main metabolisms:

- Oxidation in C2 with the formation of phenobarbital

- Cleavage of the ring in C2 with the formation of PEMA.: It is not yet known which isoform of cytochrome P 450 is involved in its metabolism.

The percentage of primidone metabolized to phenobarbital fluctuates between 15% and 25%.

**Elimination**

It is excreted in the urine, in unmodified form, for 40%.