Each technique of intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring monitors a specific neural pathway.

**Somatosensory Evoked Potential (SSEP):**SSEP monitors the dorsal column–medial lemniscus pathway, which mediates tactile discrimination, vibration, and proprioception.

**Motor Evoked Potential (MEP):**MEP monitor motor pathways, transcranial electrical stimulation elicits excitation of corticospinal projections at multiple levels. Depending on the intensity of stimulation and the placement of electrode, motor evoked potentials are generated at different levels of the brain, including superficial white mater just underneath the motor cortex, the deep white matter of the internal capsule, and pyramidal decussation. The electrical potential is recorded at the spinal cord or muscles. MEP is generated and transported via the pyramidal tract.

**Visual Evoked Potential (VEP):**VEP measures the functional integrity of the optic pathways from the retina to the brain's visual cortex in response to light stimulus. Visual stimulus is converted into nerve signals in the retina. These signals are transmitted via the optic pathway to the brain, from the retina to the optic nerve, optic chiasma, optic tract, lateral geniculate body, optic radiation, and visual cortex occipital lobe.

**Brainstem Auditory Evoked Potential (BAEP):**BAEP****monitors the function of the auditory nerve and auditory pathways in the brainstem. The auditory signal travels from the cochlear hair cell to the primary auditory cortex via the vestibulocochlear nerve, superior olivary complex, lateral lemniscus, inferior colliculus, and medial geniculate body.

**Electromyography (EMG):**EMG monitors somatic efferent nerve activity and evaluates the functional integrity of individual nerves. EMG monitors intracranial, spinal, and peripheral nerves during surgeries. Depolarization of a motor nerve produces electrical potential within the muscles innervated by that specific nerve, and the generated electrical activity is monitored using subdermal or intramuscular electrodes.

**Electroencephalography (EEG):**The electrical activity measured by EEG is generated by groups of pyramidal neurons, which has cell bodies in the 3rd and 5th layer of the cerebral cortex.