The pituitary gland is a unique gland due to its dual origin. The organogenesis of the pituitary begins in the fourth week in the development of the fetus. It starts with the formation of a structure called hypophyseal placode. This is formed when there is a thickening of the cells of the oral portion of the ectoderm. The hypophyseal placode brings forth Rathke’s pouch. The pouch extends upward in the direction of the neural ectoderm. It is simultaneously that there is a ventral portion of the diencephalon that gives a downward to expansion to form the neurohypophysis. Around 6 to 8 weeks Rathke’s pouch would constrict at the base, allowing it to separate from the portion of oral epithelium. The cells in the pouch start to undergo proliferation.  The anterior portion of the wall of the pouch undergoes rapid proliferation to give rise to the anterior part of the lobe of the pituitary (pars distalis). The posterior portion of the wall would proceed at a slower rate and gives rise to the intermediate lobe (pars intermedia). There is an upward outward growth of the anterior wall that would form the pars tuberalis.

The pituitary gland development can be a complex embryological process. Transcriptions factors control this process.

**Pituitary Organogenesis Initiation Along with the Formation of Rathke’s Pouch**

SIX

These are homeodomain proteins that are a group of six transcriptional factor activators and inhibitors. The expression of these proteins persists even in adulthood.

HESX-I

This homeobox gene expression begins in the cells that become Rathke’s pouch. This is important in the development of the optic nerves. Clinically loss of function of this gene leads to solitary growth hormone deficiency, underdevelopment of the optic nerve, an absence of the septum pellucidum, and pituitary gland dysfunction giving pituitary hormone deficiency.

Otx2

This transcription factor helps regulate Hesx1. Mutations in this factor also present as ocular disorders that might or might not give hypopituitarism.

Pitx forms 1, 2, and 3

Help decide cell lineage and mutations are found in those showing Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. LH-beta and FSH-beta are not expressed.

Is11

The Is11 is a transcription factor that is involved in the specification of the lineage of the cells seen in the thyrotrophs.

LHX3 and LHX4

LHX3 seen in the early development of Rathke’s pouch. In the absence of the LHX3, there would not be thickening of the Rathke’s pouch, hearing loss that is sensorineural and, a short, stiff neck. When there is a lack of LHX4, there is a marked reduction in the numbers of lactotrophs and somatotroph cells, pituitary hypoplasia, Chiari malformation, and small sella.

SOX2

The factor is expressed in the developing Rathke’s pouch. A mutation in this factor is seen in those with microphthalmia, deficiency of the growth hormone, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Hypopituitarism would occur due to mutations that cause loss of function.

Beta-catenin

This factor would help activate Pitx2 expression. It is also required for cell lineage fate via Pit1 and the adenohypophysis formation.

Notch

It helps determine the fate of cell lineage and lateral inhibition is mediated.

**Migration of Rathke’s Pouch Along with the Proliferation of the Cells**

BMP2

Induces Is11 expression but the prolonged-expression of this factor would result in a hyperplastic pituitary.

BMP4

Required for the formation of the hypophyseal placode; the downregulation of this bone morphogenic protein would result in the arrested development of Rathke’s pouch.

Shh

This factor would be expressed in the oral portion of the ectoderm and ventral part of the diencephalon.

**Determination of Cellular Lineage and Differentiation of Cellular Components**

Pit-I

This transcription factor is observed on the 14th day of fetal development and would continue throughout life. Dimers are formed with other transcription factors such as Zn-15, HESX-I, P-Lim, thyroid hormone, estrogen, and retinoic acid receptor. Loss of this transcription factor would cause the loss of thyrotrophs, somatotrophs, and lactotrophs.

SF1

SF1 regulates the expression of GnRH, LH, and FSH and alphaGSU. The expression of this transcription factor is necessary for the differentiation of the gonadotrophs. Mutations gonadal dysgenesis in males while females would present with early ovarian failure.

GATA2

GATA2 specifies gonadotroph and thyrotroph lineages.

PROP-I

The product of this gene is required for the expression. Loss of the expression of this gene leads to deficiencies in GH, prolactin, TSH, LH, and FSH.

TTF-I

The expression is normally seen in the brain and the posterior pituitary gland. In experimental mice, the disruption of this gene leads to pituitary gland aplasia.

Out of all these transcription factors, it is the mutation of Pit-I and PROP-I that leads to familial cases of multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies.