In addition to history and physical examination, neuroimaging is crucial for stroke evaluation in order to confirm the stroke and understand the underlying etiology. Lacunar infarcts and particularly multiple lacunar infarcts of different ages make an underlying cardioembolic cause unlikely. Lacunar infarcts are small 0.2 to 15 mm in diameter noncortical infarcts caused by occlusion of a single penetrating branch of a large cerebral artery. It is mainly related to small vessel disease, and hypertension remains the most common vascular risk factor associated with this condition.

In contrast, embolic strokes are non-lacunar and may be multiple, simultaneous, or sequential in different vascular territories such as anterior and posterior circulation. Cardiac emboli have large sizes therefore may cause large single or multiple infarcts involving the large vessels such as the middle cerebral artery with subsequent disabling symptoms. Embolic strokes are associated with increased risk for hemorrhagic transformation particularly cardioembolic strokes because of early vessel recanalization and reperfusion injury.

Patients with non-lacunar strokes should be monitored for underlying atrial fibrillation. In the absence of a clear etiology despite continuous cardiac rhythm monitoring, patients should be discharged on Holter monitoring. Although the ideal recommended monitoring time is unknown, the longer the duration the higher the chance to detect an underlying paroxysmal AF. In such patients, post-hospitalization monitoring may detect AF in 10% to 25% of cases.