Newborn hearing screening: The universal newborn hearing screening program (UNHS) has significantly improved the diagnosis of childhood hearing loss and reduced the average age of diagnosis from 24-30 months to 2-3 months. The screening utilizes an otoacoustic emissions (OAE) test, and children who fail will undergo a repeat test in several weeks. If the child continues to fail the hearing tests, auditory brainstem evoked (ABR) testing is required to confirm the hearing loss. The use of evoked otoacoustic emissions and auditory brainstem response testing has substantially increased the number of children identified to have hearing loss and reduced the number of infants falsely identified as having a hearing impairment.

Genetic testing: 50% of all childhood hearing loss and 66% of prelingual hearing loss result from genetic causes. Current hearing screening programs can only detect hearing loss beyond 35 dB. Thus, genetic screening can help identify children with mild SNHL that are missed with conventional screening. Clinicians should aim to answer three key questions: is there an environmental cause? Is there a constellation of signs and clinical features to suggest a syndrome? Is there a family history with similar patterns of onset and type of hearing loss?

After ruling out environmental causes, genetic mutation testing for DFNB1 in the gene GJB2 is recommended as it is the most common cause of non-syndrome hearing loss. For children in whom syndromic hearing loss is suspected, gene-specific mutation screening should be performed to confirm the syndrome. Genetic screening for mitochondrial A1555G can also help minimize hearing loss by protecting them against aminoglycoside antibiotics. Additionally, genetic tests will depend on the pedigree constructed by the medical geneticist. It is important to note that a negative genetic test does not rule out a genetic cause for hearing loss.

Computed tomography (CT): CT scans can be used to visualize the temporal bones, mastoid, otic capsule, and middle ear for any anatomical anomalies responsible for hearing loss. One of the most common CT findings of SNHL is Mondini dysplasia, which is the hypoplasia of the cochlear basal turn, leading to progressive SNHL. In cases of dilated vestibular aqueducts, genetic screening for Pendred syndrome is warranted.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): Nuclear MRI with high resolution can detect deformities of the membranous labyrinth, internal auditory canal, and cerebellopontine angle. Scheibe dysplasia or cochleosaccular dysplasia affects the pars inferior. Alexander malformation affects the cochlear duct and the basal turn of the cochlear, leading to high-frequency hearing loss. MR imaging is also useful to identify any cochlear nerve dysplasia or aplasia that might be responsible for sensorineural hearing loss.

Electrocardiogram: It is recommended due to the remote possibility of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome.