Thrombosis is the process of blood clot (thrombus) formation in a blood vessel. Virchow triad is an important concept that highlights the primary abnormalities in pathology that can lead to the clotting mechanism proceeding to thrombosis. The triad is composed of stasis or turbulent blood flow, endothelial injury, and hypercoagulability of the blood.

- Abnormal (stasis) or turbulent blood flow can lead to thrombosis. Normal blood flow is laminar. Turbulent blood flow leads to endothelial injury thus promoting the formation of a thrombus. An example of turbulent blood flow is in the aneurysm of weakened vessels. Another aspect of abnormal blood flow, venous stasis, such as in post-operative bed rest, long distance traveling in a car or plane, or immobility due to obesity can lead to endothelial injury thus promoting thrombosis.

- Endothelial Injury leads to platelet activation and the formation of a thrombus. This may be a result of inflammation of the endothelial surface of the vasculature. Hypercholesterolemia is an example of a chronic inflammatory condition which progresses into endothelial injury.

- Hypercoagulability (thrombophilia) is any disorder of the blood that predisposes a person to thrombosis. This may be a result of inherited clotting disorders such as a Factor V Leiden mutation or an acquired clotting disorder such as disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Hemorrhage occurs when blood escapes from its vessel walls.

Platelet dysfunction, or clotting factor dysfunction, can be further broken down into which part of the clotting mechanism physiology is affected.

**Disorders of Primary Hemostasis: vWF, Platelet defects, or Receptor Interference
**

- Von Willebrand Factor disease

- Bernard-Soulier disease

- Glanzmann thrombasthenia

- Medication-induced

**Disorders of Secondary Hemostasis: Clotting Factor Defects
**

- Factor V Leiden

- Vitamin K deficiency

- Hemophilia

- Anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation

- Liver disease

- Medication-induced

**Defects in Small Vessels
**

- Trauma

- Aneurysm rupture

- Vasculitides