Early diagnosis and management are essential for preventing ocular and systemic complications. Usually, these children present with ophthalmic features like exposure keratopathy and dermoid, and the ophthalmologist should offer an interprofessional approach with complete systemic evaluation for the holistic care of the child. Early management of ear anomalies, facial deformities, and ocular anomalies also prevents social stigma in the child and leads to better mental and social development with higher self-esteem.

Complete ophthalmic evaluation is necessary at the time of presentation, including orthoptic workup. Visual acuity testing, ocular movements, strabismus evaluation, lid and adnexa examination, ocular surface, anterior and posterior segment examination, gonioscopy for angle evaluation are required. Eyelid coloboma causing exposure keratopathy is a surgical emergency and requires early correction to preserve vision.

**Evaluation of Epibulbar Dermoid**

Limbal dermoid is a benign congenital tumor or a choristoma which consists of normal tissue in an abnormal location, often leading to visual disturbance. They present as elevated, opaque, yellow-white mass at the limbus with hair follicles and sebaceous glands over the surface. The most common site is the inferotemporal limbus. Mann et al. initially graded the dermoids anatomically into three grades:

- Grade I: superficial lesions up to 5 mm in size and localized to the limbus. These can result in oblique astigmatism and flattening of the cornea adjacent to the lesion, leading to anisometropic amblyopia.

- Grade II: larger (>5mm) lesions involving most of the cornea up to the stroma without involving Descemet’s membrane

- Grade III: large lesions involving the whole cornea and extending into the anterior chamber and iris.

Zhong et al. proposed a new clinical grading system for limbal dermoids for predicting the visual outcome after surgery.

Parameter

Score 0

Score 1

Score 2

Score 3

Area of corneal involvement

None

< Outer 1/4 quadrant, not involving the optical axis

Outer 1/4 to 1/2 quadrant, not involving the optical axis

More than 1/2 quadrant, involving the optical axis

Surface shape

None

Slightly raised, cannot be observed when the eye is closed

Moderately raised, can be observed when the eye is closed

Highly raised, interferes with closing the eye

Area of conjunctival involvement

None

<50%

>50%

Sclera and orbital tissue involved along with conjunctiva

A total score of 0 to 3 classifies as grade I, 4 to 6 as grade II, and more than 6 as grade III. The authors also reported that grade I dermoids were most common, followed by grade II and III. Following surgical resection, the visual outcome was best in grade 1 dermoid with a mean logMAR (logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution) BCVA (best-corrected visual acuity) of 0.38 ± 0.05. There was a significantly worse visual outcome in grade 2 and grade 3 dermoid patients with a mean logMAR BCVA of 0.61 ± 0.09 and 0.94 ± 0.11, respectively. Zhong et al. also reported an association between clinical grading and postoperative pathology that mild pathology including dermoid and lipo-dermoid was present in large proportions of grade 1 and low clinical score dermoid whereas, complex pathology including complex choristoma and epibulbar osseous choristoma was present in high clinical score grade 2 and grade 3 dermoid patients.

**Ocular Investigations**

Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) helps to look for depth of the lesion and corneal stromal involvement and planning of surgery.

Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) is used to look for the depth of the lesion and the involvement of the angle of the anterior chamber.

After a complete ophthalmic evaluation, an interprofessional approach is necessary. The patient should be referred for ENT (ear nose throat), cardiology, orthopedics, pediatric assessment, anesthesia, and oro-maxillofacial examination.

Ear malformations are diagnosed and classified using CT (computed tomography) or MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scans. Conduction and brainstem audiometry is required to assess the hearing loss. Neuropsychiatric assessment is needed to identify disturbances in intellectual functioning and the autistic spectrum. MRI and CT brain should be evaluated by a neuroradiologist to identify all CNS anomalies.

**Genetic Tests and Counseling**

The diagnosis of OAVS is mainly clinical, and there are no specific genetic tests for diagnosis. Moreover, a lack of clearly defined diagnostic criteria often leads to difficulty in genetic counseling. Counseling should be done for those patients who have an inherited or a de novo chromosomal abnormality. Examination of other siblings and family members should be done, and a family tree can be made to identify any inheritance pattern. Genetic counseling should be done if any other family member with similar features is identified. The risk of OAVS in a sibling in case of a proband with OAVS, with normal chromosomes and no family history, has been reported to be 2 to 3%.

**Prenatal Diagnosis**

Prenatal diagnosis is advised in families with inherited OAVS or when a previous child is born with the disease. Non-invasive investigations include fetal ultrasound to detect ear anomalies like microtia, preauricular tags, and mandibular hypoplasia in severe defects—early diagnosis of microphthalmia and orbital hypoplasia is possible with sonography even at 14 weeks of gestation. Detailed 3D scans can help to identify milder cases. Invasive diagnostics, including puncture of trophoblast or amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling, should be advised only when genetic mutation causing OAVS is confirmed in the fetus.