The etiology of granular cell tumors to-date is poorly described, and its genetic underpinnings and pathophysiology are not well understood. Although it is known that these tumors may demonstrate recurrent genetic mutations in the setting of specific syndromes, the mutations driving sporadic tumorigenesis have only recently become evident with the use of whole-genome sequencing.

**Syndrome Associations**

It is known that the clinical finding of multiple granular cell tumors is associated with Noonan syndrome, neurofibromatosis I, and LEOPARD syndrome.

It is important to note that many of these syndrome-associated gene mutations have not yet been tested in large studies and are mostly derived from case studies or small case series. To the contrary, one small follow-on study attempting to confirm the importance of PTEN and PTPN11 mutations in granular cell tumors could not detect either of them and instead found KDR, GNAQ, and ATM mutations in a small sample of granular cell tumors, none of which were recurrent within the sample.

**Non-Neural Tumors**

Although the question of shared cell lineage with conventional granular cell tumors is debated, there is also a subset of non-neural, S100-negative granular cell tumors which reportedly harbor an ALK gene fusion and which stain positively for Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase immunohistochemistry.

**ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 Mutations**

Recently, whole-genome sequencing and targeted sequencing analysis have been used to identify mutations in granular cell tumors. In 2018, Pareja et al. used whole-exome sequencing and targeted sequencing analysis to identify recurrent ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 inactivating somatic mutations in 72% of their sampled granular cell tumors.

**Malignant Tumors**

Further studies have sought to specifically characterize malignant granular cell tumors via whole-genome sequencing, finding mutations in the new tumor suppressor candidate BRD7 and in GFRA2 of the tyrosine kinase receptor pathway.