CDC and WHO have set criteria for women who want to initiate COC or POP. Patients need to be screened for contraindications before starting COC or POP are summarized below, and CDC criteria are listed in The 2016 U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use.

**Combined Oral Contraceptive**

- There are a few absolute and relative contraindications of oral contraceptive use. For example, women with uncontrolled hypertension should not initiate oral contraceptive use until their hypertension is being managed; people with diabetes may experience some hyperglycemia when starting OC’s, but these are issues that can be addressed.

- However, OCP’s are contraindicated in smokers (more than 15 cigarettes per day) over age 35 due to significant risk for cardiovascular events and specifically deep vein thromboembolism. The risk of venous thromboembolism increases among OC users 3-9/10,000 woman-years compared with nonusers who are not pregnant and not taking hormones (1-5/10,000 woman-years). The risk is even greater in those over 35 and smoking.

- Women with hypertension (systolic BP ≥140 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥90 mmHg as per the CDC), breast cancer,  known ischemic heart disease, migraines with auras, endometrial cancer, cirrhosis, hepatocellular adenoma, or malignant hepatoma are contraindicated to use combined hormone contraceptive pill.

- Women with a history of VTE, stroke, breast or endometrial cancer, and valvular heart disease (history of subacute bacterial endocarditis, the risk for atrial fibrillation, or pulmonary hypertension) should not use OC’s as these conditions represent unacceptable health risks to the users.

- Women who have two or more risk factors for cardiovascular diseases such as older age, diabetes, hypertension, or smoking should also not use COC as the risk outweighs benefits.

- Women with thrombogenic mutations like prothrombin mutation, factor V Leiden, protein C, protein S,  and antithrombin deficiencies should not use COC. There are too many available alternatives for the patient to prevent pregnancy and not increase the patients’ health risk.

**Progesterone Only Pill**

- Women with suspected or known pregnancy

- Patient with undiagnosed abnormal uterine bleeding

- Patient with breast cancer or suspected

- Acute liver disease, benign or malignant liver tumors, or severe cirrhosis

- History of bariatric surgeries

- Women taking certain antiseizure medicine