Management of post-transplant patients is an interprofessional healthcare team endeavor. A combination of the skills and knowledge of each profession contributes to the successful longevity of the transplanted organ and a higher quality of life for the patient. As per the CMS guidelines, an interprofessional team for transplant must include the following disciplines at the minimum:

- Medical/surgical (transplant physician)

- Nursing

- Clinical transplant coordinator

- Social services

- Nutritional services

- Pharmacology

- Financial coordination

Awareness of all aspects of the transplant journey, education, and support are at the core of graft longevity. Patients must receive instruction on not only the medical aspects of the transplant, but the financial needs, necessary dietary changes, and effects of the medication. This area is where specialty nursing can play a significant role and counsel the patient appropriately.

Post-transplant, the patient is closely followed by the team, both inpatient and outpatient. Nursing again will be performing the initial dosing of tacrolimus, and of course, they should coordinate with the pharmacy staff regarding proper dosing and administrator. The pharmacy will also perform medication reconciliation, both initially and as the overall drug regimen changes, to preclude drug interactions. Nursing will also be in the best position to monitor for adverse effects and report these promptly to the physician in charge of the case. Collaborative, interprofessional evaluations by nursing, medical, and pharmacy of patient's state of health and being, as well as the medication efficacy and adverse effects, allow for thorough vigilance through the eyes and expertise of various professionals. [Level 5]