The clinician should be familiar with the glenohumeral (GH) joint and shoulder girdle anatomy to prevent complications.

**Osseous Elements**

The shoulder girdle consists of the scapula and clavicle, which articulate with the chest wall, and the proximal humerus, which articulates with the scapula (the glenoid).  The humeral head and the glenoid vault of the scapula form the osseous components of the shoulder's glenohumeral joint.

Surrounding osseous components that can potentially be implicated in associated/related pathologic conditions include the other portions of the scapula, including the body, spine, and most laterally, the acromion.  The latter can be implicated in conditions relating to shoulder external impingement and rotator cuff syndrome

**Soft Tissue Components**

Bursa

Shoulder injections technique can include extra-articular and periarticular injections to various anatomic locations.  The most common location is the subacromial space of the shoulder.  The subacromial space exists as a bursal cavity lying between the rotator cuff (inferiorly) and the acromion process (superiorly).  Also, the most lateral component of this cavity becomes contiguous with the subdeltoid bursa/space.

Neurovascular elements

Critical knowledge of the surrounding neurovascular structures is of the utmost importance when planning for a shoulder joint aspiration/injection.

The shoulder joint derives its nerve supply from three branches of the brachial plexus (C5/C6):

- Suprascapular nerve

- Axillary nerve

- Lateral pectoral nerve

The axillary nerve and the posterior circumflex humeral artery pass through the quadrilateral or quadrangular space, which lies inferior and posterior to the GH joint.  The quadrangular space includes the following borders/boundaries:

- Superior: Teres minor

- Inferior: Teres major

- Medial: Long head of the triceps

- Lateral: Proximal humerus/humeral shaft