The understanding of CBF is critical especially in patients who have suffered strokes and have cerebral vascular disease. Patients who have suffered ischemic strokes have a better prognosis if there is adequate flow through collaterals to supply the affected region. If the normal distribution through individual arteries is known then abnormal distribution through collaterals and normal perfusion would indicate that this patient is using circulation which is not ordinarily present.

Patients who suffer intracerebral hemorrhages (ICH) or subarachnoid hemorrhages (SAH) have intact cerebral autoregulation at first to protect the brain but can eventually lead to secondary dysfunction. Often with ICH or SAH, there is an increase in intracranial pressure which leads to a reflex decrease in CBF. However secondary brain injury from these hemorrhages degenerative changes next to hematoma formation, as well as edema can further lead to increases in intracranial pressure and potentially lead to a global decrease in CBF.

Hypertensive patients were found to have reduced CBF because of the higher pressure gradients exerted on the vessel walls.  Hypertension is known to cause smooth muscle hypertrophy and vascular remodeling in arterioles leading to decreased lumen size, thus potentially permanently reducing CBF. However the use of anti-hypertensive medication, those of which specifically reserve or decrease vascular remodeling (like ACE inhibitors or hydralazine) can restore some of the lost CBF to hypertensive patients.