Locked-in syndrome is precipitated by any lesion affecting the ventral pons or the caudal ventral midbrain while the integrity of the cerebrum remains intact.

The nucleus of the 3rd cranial nerve lies ventromedial in the midbrain near the cerebral aqueduct. Tracts project anteriorly from this nucleus to innervate muscles of the eye. Pupillary reflex mediated by parasympathetic nerves that travel on the 3rd cranial nerve distally may be variably conserved in episodes of ischemia.

Cranial nerves 4 and cranial nerve 6, which control downward eye movement via the superior oblique muscles and the abduction of the eyes via the lateral rectus muscles respectively, may be affected in a ventral pons lesion.

The corticobulbar tracts passing through the midbrain and pons contain upper motor neurons for cranial nerves 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12. The pontine respiratory group located in the pons tegmentum could be affected in large lesions leading to signs of apnea and respiratory distress. The reticular activating system, which lies dorsally, is responsible for wakefulness and is not damaged by such ventral lesions.

The corticospinal and spinothalamic tracts mediate limb and truncal motor and sensory functions. Both of these tracts travel through the crus cerebri of the midbrain and ventral pons and will subsequently be affected by a ventral brainstem lesion.

The ventral pons is supplied by the basilar artery, which is fed by two vertebral arteries. Any abnormalities of these arteries can present with signs of locked-in syndrome. The presentation may vary on a case-to-case basis due to the nature of the causative agent, which makes a correct initial diagnosis difficult.