The specific management depends on the presenting features. Targeted management protocol includes

**Lenticular Myopia**

- All patients should be checked for underlying refractive errors. Timely refractive error correction helps in avoiding irreversible vision loss, thus preventing amblyopia. The patient should be followed up closely for any change in refractive error and appropriate correction.

**Pupillary Block**

- This is a common complication owing to the spherical shape of the lens. Pupillary block glaucoma is preventable by prophylactic Nd-Yag laser iridotomy. An acute attack can be controlled with the help of cycloplegics. Cycloplegics relax the ciliary muscles, thus tightening the zonules and pulling the lens iris diaphragm posteriorly. Intravenous mannitol also helps by causing the vitreous shrinkage and thus relieving the pupillary block.

**Angle-Closure Glaucoma**

- These patients might gain control of intraocular pressure following YAG iridotomy. Some patients might need additional antiglaucoma medications to control the intraocular pressure. Advanced cases might need glaucoma surgery in the form of a filtration procedure or glaucoma drainage device to attain further lower intraocular pressures and prevent additional damage to the disc.

**Subluxated Lens**

- The spherical lens with a smaller equatorial diameter and weak zonules is prone to anterior or posterior subluxation.

**Low Vision**

- These patients often have low best-corrected visual acuity resulting from high lenticular myopia and refractive amblyopia, thus needing low vision assistive devices. Low vision in the form of reduced best-corrected visual acuity or restricted fields can also result from an advanced stage of glaucoma.

**Systemic Conditions**

- Evaluation by a physician to rule out any systemic associations is mandatory. These patients might need holistic management by ophthalmologists, optometrists, orthopedics, and a cardiologist.