Essential equipment and supplies for radionuclide cystography (RNC) are:

- Equipment for foley catheterization and installing the radiopharmaceutical into the bladder (if a retrograde examination is performed). Latex materials should be avoided to prevent the development of hypersensitivity disorders.

- Radiopharmaceutical (discussed below)

- Sterile saline

- Gamma camera with low-energy all-purpose (LEAP) or high-resolution collimator. Magnification views may be necessary for children.

- Equipment for storage, collection, disposal, and decontamination of the contaminated urine and other materials is necessary and must comply with local regulations.

**Radiopharmaceuticals**

The radiopharmaceuticals used in retrograde RNC are: technetium-99m (Tc-99m) sodium pertechnetate, Tc-99m sulfur colloid, or Tc-99m diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid (DTPA). The administered dose is 0.2-1 mCi. The administered activity should not exceed 1 mCi for each cycle of voiding in pediatric patients. Sodium pertechnetate should be avoided in patients with surgical neobladders (if gastric or intestinal tissues are used for bladder augmentation), as sodium pertechnetate avidly binds gastrointestinal tissue.

In antegrade RNC, radiopharmaceuticals are administered intravenously, excreted into the urinary tract via the kidneys. This method avoids bladder catheterization and allows for the relative assessment of renal excretory function. The radiopharmaceuticals most commonly used for the antegrade technique include technetium-99m-mercaptoacetyltriglycine (Tc-99m-MAG3) or technetium-99m-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Tc-99m-DTPA). The minimal administered activity for each of these radiopharmaceuticals is 0.5 mCi.

Technetium-99 emits photons, which are detected by the gamma camera. To ensure sufficient photons to generate an image, the technetium-99m activity must be checked before administration. This activity can be measured based on the number of disintegrations that occur per second, which correspond to the number of photons emitted. These disintegrations are measured using the becquerel (Bq), equivalent to one disintegration per second. The minimal activity for technetium-99m-pertechnetate for RNC is 0.5 to 1.0mCi.

**Gamma Camera**

A gamma camera is a specialized piece of equipment used to image gamma radiation, a process that is also called scintigraphy. This equipment's basic components include a collimator, a large sodium-iodide (NaI) crystal, multiple photomultiplier tubes, and image processing electronics. The collimator absorbs scattered gamma rays, thereby increasing the resolution of the camera. The NaI crystal absorbs the gamma photons and scintillates. This flash of light that is produced is detected by the photomultipliers, which sends the count to the computer, which reconstructs a two-dimensional image. The attached computer is also used to post-process the images. A further discussion on the physics and applications of gamma cameras can be found elsewhere.