The AT and MAT tests are used to ensure adequate collateral circulation in the hand prior to performing any procedure that has the potential to interrupt blood flow in either the radial or ulnar arteries. The test can also be used as a diagnostic tool for any number of disorders that cause reduced vascularity in the arm. It is most commonly used to assess collateral flow to the hand through the ulnar artery when the radial artery is going to be used for drawing samples for blood gas analysis, cannulation for placement of arterial lines, cardiac catheterization, radial artery harvest for bypass surgeries, and radial forearm flap harvest for reconstructive surgeries.

The radial artery is often selected as a puncture or vascular access site because it is often more readily palpable than the ulnar artery. One of the risks associated with arterial punctures is ischemia distal to the puncture site, which could compromise the limb if there is inadequate collateral blood flow. Though ischemia is only a rare complication of arterial puncture, many healthcare providers do not perform either the AT or MAT prior to accessing the radial artery because there is conflicting evidence supporting the accuracy of this test in assessing ulnar artery patency or adequacy of collateral circulation. A 2007 study by Kohonen et al. found that the MAT had a 73.2% sensitivity and 97.1% specificity for determining circulatory deficits before radial artery harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting.

A 2017 meta-analysis, however, reported a lower sensitivity of 93% and an interobserver agreement rate of only 71.5%, casting some doubt on the test's usefulness.