The function of reporting error-prone situations is to mitigate future medical errors. Multiple studies have identified that if error-prone situations are reported and managed by a modification of the system, a decrease in the frequency of the error and concomitant errors associated with it will occur.

**Reporting**

The Joint Commission requires member healthcare agencies to report sentinel events. A sentinel event, according to the Joint Commission, is "any unexpected occurrence involving death or serious physical or psychological injury, or the risk thereof." Sentinel events signal the need for investigation and response. The intense analysis is often required to confirm medication errors and transfusion reactions.

The Joint Commission reviews events that have resulted in unexpected mortality, major permanent harm, or severe temporary harm requiring intervention to sustain life. A sentinel event may stem from the following:

- Abduction of any patient

- Any intrapartum maternal death

- Any unauthorized departure of a patient from a staffed-around-the-clock care setting resulting in death or harm

- Unanticipated death of a full-term infant

- Discharge of a child to the wrong family

- Hemolytic transfusion reaction involving administration of blood/blood products with major incompatibilities

- Procedures on the wrong patient or at the wrong site

- Prolonged fluoroscopy with a total dose greater than 1500 rads to a single field

- Radiotherapy to the incorrect body region or more than 25% above the planned dose

- Rape, assault, or homicide of any patient receiving care

- Severe maternal morbidity resulting in permanent harm or severe temporary harm

- Severe hyperbilirubinemia in a neonate greater than 30 milligrams/deciliter

- The suicide of any patient receiving care in a staffed-around-the-clock care setting within 72 hours of discharge

- Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient during surgery

Most sentinel event reporting occurred in acute care hospitals, while approximately 10% were reported in psychiatric hospitals.

Reporting medical errors and requiring institutions to develop plans to correct errors is a national agenda. Two major frameworks for analysis are used: root cause and failure mode effect analysis.

**Root Cause Analysis**

Root cause analysis (RCA) is used to identify the causative factors that underlie variations in performance.

The Joint Commission requires healthcare institutions to do a root cause investigation after any sentinel event. This process discovers the causative event and factors that resulted in the occurrence of a sentinel event and helps prevent future repeat errors. The process for improvement is developed into action plans.

- For example, a provider prescribed Azithromycin for a patient allergic to erythromycin and the patient developed acute anaphylaxis and died. This sentinel event was reported to The Joint Commission. The hospital conducted a root cause investigation and action was developed to educate the entire medical staff on drug-drug interactions.

- The Joint Commission receives a copy of the report. The Joint Commission aggregates all of the reports and publishes risk-reduction strategies in the “Sentinel Event Alert” newsletter.

RCA is designed to help discover the causes of errors and get to the source. It is intended to discover the hidden cause or causes of an error. The individuals on the RCA team focus primarily on systems and processes, not on the action of the individual. The team identifies changes in systems and processes that will improve performance and reduce the incidence of the same sentinel event.

If a healthcare agency fails to perform an RCA, the institution is placed on an accreditation watch.  This is a publicly disclosable indication that a sentinel event occurred without having an acceptable action plan completed. When patient health and safety are threatened by a sentinel event, the Joint Commission conducts onsite reviews. An RCA should lead to action plans that include strategies that identify and reduce the risk of future similar events. Because patient safety is the goal of healthcare agencies, reporting should be encouraged. Information from reports should be shared and published across the entire organization to prevent future errors.

**Failure Mode Effect Analysis**

Failure mode effect analysis fosters safety and the prevention of accidents through a proactive process of identifying potential or real failures, causes, and effects. Failure mode effect analysis concludes errors will occur even if healthcare professionals are careful. Failure mode effect analysis engages in a continual process of quality improvement to assess and correct areas where an error has occurred or is likely to occur. The strategy with failure mode effect analysis is to build redundancies to serve as safety nets that trap errors.

Examples of failure mode effect analysis include:

- Provider writes an order, a unit clerk reads and transcribes the order, a nurse checks order, and the clerk confirms the accuracy.

- A pharmacist dispenses a drug, a nurse confirms the pharmacists are dispensing accurately, and the drug is administered.

**Error-prone Situations**

- The following are the most common medical errors (AHRQ, 2020):

- Adverse drug events

- Catheter-associated urinary tract infections

- Central line-associated bloodstream infection

- Injury from falls and immobility

- Obstetrical adverse events

- Pressure ulcers (bed sores)

- Surgical site infections

- Venous thrombosis (blood clots)

- Ventilator-associated pneumonia

Medications that commonly result in errors include:

- Antithrombotic agents (e.g., insufficient dosing leading to a thrombotic event like a stroke, excess dosing resulting in bleeding)

- Cardioplegic solutions (e.g., errors in preparation, team breakdown, lack of technical competence, and poor monitoring of the patient)

- Chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., administering the wrong dose, wrong drug, wrong number of days supplied, and missed doses). In addition, drug administration errors including wrong flow rate or failure to monitor the site of intravenous (IV) transfusion are often reported with chemotherapeutic drugs administered intravenously.

- Dialysis solutions (e.g., administering the wrong medication, wrong dose, infection at the site, hyperkalemia, patient falls, and access-related errors)

- Epidural or intrathecal medications (risks include erroneous infusions-administering an IV medication via the intrathecal route, giving wrong medication or wrong dose)

- Hypertonic solutions (known to cause renal failure, edema, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, coagulation abnormalities)

- Hypertonic sodium chloride for injection (associated with renal failure, confusion, coma, seizures)

- Hypoglycemic agents (known to cause hypoglycemic episodes when the dose is unmonitored)

- IV Adrenergic agonists such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, and phenylephrine (administered in a vein that infiltrates, can lead to severe vasoconstriction leading to ischemia and gangrene of the hand and digits)

- IV Adrenergic antagonists such as labetalol, metoprolol, and propranolol

- IV Anesthetic agents such as propofol

- IV Antiarrhythmics such as amiodarone and lidocaine

- IV Inotropic agents such as digoxin and milrinone

- IV Radiocontrast agents

- Liposomal drugs such as liposomal amphotericin B

- Medication ordering and delivery

- Narcotics and opioids (prescribing and dispensing high doses of opiates to native opiate users resulting in respiratory depression, seizures, and even death)

- Neuromuscular blocking agents such as succinylcholine, rocuronium, succinylcholine, vecuronium

- Parenteral nutrition preparations

- Patients with impaired cognition, flexibility, or strength, flexibility

- Sedation agents such as dexmedetomidine, midazolam, and chloral hydrate

- Sterile water for injection, inhalation, and irrigation

- Transfusion of blood products

High-risk medications have the potential to cause significant patient harm or even death when used erroneously. Special safeguards are in place in most healthcare institutions to minimize the risk of errors associated with these medications

- Epinephrine

- Vasopressin

- Epoprostenol

- Insulin

- Heparin

- Magnesium sulfate

- Nitroprusside sodium

- Potassium chloride

- Potassium phosphates

- Promethazine

- Benzodiazepines

- Opiates

- Medications administered by anesthesiology