**Typical CHRPE**

Lesions are flat (or minimally elevated) and highly pigmented, appearing black in color. In some cases, lesions may lack pigment entirely (12%) - these are referred to as amelanotic lesions. Lesion borders are well-defined and are smooth or scalloped in appearance. In 52% of patients, there is a ring of hypopigmentation or "halo" surrounding the borders of the lesion. Solitary CHRPEs are most commonly found in the mid- or far-peripheral fundus of the temporal quadrant of the retina. In rare cases (2%), lesions may be peripapillary or macular in location.

Approximately half (43%) of pigmented CHRPEs present with hypopigmented areas of RPE atrophy, known as lacunae, within the lesion. On average, about 56.5% of the lesion surface is atrophic; however, the presence, appearance, and extent of the atrophy vary between patients and do not change the patient's prognosis.

The mean size of solitary CHRPEs is estimated to be 4.67 +/- 1.21 mm^2. Although the lesion is generally regarded as non-progressive and stationary, numerous studies have demonstrated slow, benign enlargement over time in up to 83% of patients.

Lesions are most often found incidentally during a routine eye examination, and patients are rarely symptomatic. Visual field defects corresponding to the area of the lesion are possible; however, lesions are generally located peripherally and are unlikely to be noticeable.

**Grouped Pigmentation of the Retina (GPR)**

Grouped pigmentation of the retina, often called "bear tracks," appears similarly to solitary CHRPE but presents unilaterally with anywhere from 3-30 discreet lesions of various sizes. They are generally smaller than unilateral cases, ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 mm in diameter, and confined to a single quadrant within the retina. These lesions differ from solitary CHRPE in that they generally lack surrounding haloes and lacunae.

**Pigmented Ocular Fundus Lesions of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (PO-FLs)**

Due to their association with serious systemic disease, clinicians must accurately differentiate between PO-FLs and benign CHRPE. As opposed to their benign counterpart, PO-FLs are bilateral and multifocal, with lesions in more than one quadrant. They often have a "pisciform" (fish-shaped) appearance and irregular, depigmented borders.