Guyon canal is about 4 cm in length and housed by four borders. The roof consists of the volar carpal ligament. The floor is made of the transverse carpal ligament. The radial border has the hook of the hamate, and the medial border is composed of pisiform bone along with pisohamate ligament. Inside this canal runs the ulnar nerve and artery. The ulnar nerve enters the canal as a mixed sensory and motor nerve. As it travels through it, the nerve splits into superficial sensory and deep motor branches.

Each part of the ulnar nerve which is affected within the Guyon canal region is represented by a particular zone and gives its unique constellation of symptoms.

**Zone 1:**proximal to the motor/sensory bifurcation

- Area of the distal portion of the ulnar nerve (main trunk) before it splits into its superficial sensory and deep motor divisions

- Etiologies include hook of hamate fracture/malunion/nonunion, ganglion cysts

- Zone 1 Guyon canal injury to the ulnar nerve results in mixed motor and sensory symptoms

**Zone 2 (most commonly affected):**distal to motor/sensory bifurcation, and radial to zone 3

- Corresponds to the deep terminal motor branch of the ulnar nerve, if affected, it produces only motor symptoms (e.g. weakness)

- Etiologies include hook of hamate fracture/malunion/nonunion, ganglion cysts

- This deep branch of the ulnar nerve innervates all the interosseous muscles, fourth and fifth lumbricals, hypothenar muscles (opponens digiti minimi, abductor digiti minimi, flexor digiti minimi brevis), and adductor pollicis muscle.

**Zone 3:**distal to motor/sensory bifurcation, and ulnar to zone 2

- The superficial sensory terminal branch of the ulnar nerve is compromised in this zone producing sensory symptoms only (e.g., numbness and tingling, burning sensation)

- Etiologies include ulnar artery aneurysm and/or thrombosis