For the loss of cabin pressure at high altitude, the treatment for hypoxia is 100% oxygen.  In large, multiplace aircraft, aircrew are to wear masks and breathe 100% oxygen.  Passengers in passenger planes should put on the deployed yellow masks when there is a loss of cabin pressure. Symptoms will resolve almost immediately.  The aircrew should simultaneously return to below 3048 meters (10,000 feet) as fast and safely possible.  In small military tactical aircraft, aircrews wear masks all the time, and when the need arises, they switch to 100% oxygen. These small aircraft also will descend to 10,000 feet or less if the situation allows.

In consideration of barosinusitis, it is a strong consideration for pilots to take preventive measures.  There is a saying amongst aerospace medical professionals that holds value, "Never fly with a cold."  Indeed the best treatment for sinus barotrauma is prevention, especially considering the most likely cause is mucosal inflammation/edema blocking the sinus ostia.  Causes include viral, bacterial, or fungal sinusitis, allergic rhinosinusitis, polyps, papillomas, benign or malignant growths, or aberrant anatomy such as concha bullosa. The use of intranasal or oral decongestants can be very useful both in prevention (use prior to flight), and in the treatment of acute symptoms.  Also for the treatment of acute symptoms, a steroid burst may be considered to aid in decreasing mucosal edema, and it is often recommended to use intranasal steroids and sinus irrigations.  Diagnosis and treatment of the underlying cause should be addressed, and antibiotics may or may not be necessary.  In cases of recurrent barosinusitis, surgical intervention with an otolaryngologist trained in sinus surgery should be considered.

Passengers and aircrew with symptoms of aero-otitis will typically resolve once they are to equalize pressure in the ears, and any mucosal edema or middle ear effusion will resolve without treatment in a few days or weeks.  The practice of performing the valsava maneuver prior to symptoms starting, and repeating the maneuver multiple times can often prevent pressure build-up in the middle space and is recommended.  For cases of recurrent aero-otitis or other symptoms associated with eustachian tube dysfunction, interventions such as eustachian tube dilation or myringotomy (opening the eardrum) with the insertion of pressure equalization tubes, may be considered.  Treatment with intranasal steroids or intranasal decongestants has been debated, with recent data showing that there is not a difference.  Still, many practitioners consider these as first-line medical treatments.

Mountain climbers also risk altitude-related illness. High altitude illness (HAI) is a term used to describe pathologic conditions that occur when unacclimated individuals are exposed rapidly to elevations above 2500 meters (8000 feet). "Rapid" means a change that happens within a few hours. Change that takes days will allow one to acclimate to the new altitude and prevents high-altitude illnesses. Illnesses associated with altitude exposure include acute mountain sickness (AMS), high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), and high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). Definitive treatment of these conditions is moving to a lower altitude, but this may not be necessary in mild AMS or HAPE cases. Prophylactic use of acetazolamide has been shown to decrease the risk of AMS.  AMS may be treated with rest, hydration, NSAIDs, and not moving any higher until symptoms have resolved. AMS is considered an early form of HACE. If AMS worsens or if one suspects HACE then an immediate descent of 762 to 914.4 meters (2500 to 3000 feet) or more is extremely important to avoid severe consequences. HACE and HAPE have caused death and should be treated as soon as the condition is suspected. Additionally, there are portable, inflatable hyperbaric chambers available and utilized by professional organizations that can be used when the descent is not possible. Pharmacologic therapy of HACE and HAPE differs and is beyond the scope of this article.