The only true contraindication to buprenorphine use is a hypersensitivity reaction to it. Its use requires caution in patients with respiratory depression and gastrointestinal obstruction.

Buprenorphine is also not a recommended agent for patients currently using full opioid agonists, such as heroin or morphine, because the concurrent use of a full and partial agonist may result in acute withdrawal (see "Monitoring"), thus defeating the purpose of buprenorphine administration.

In patients with renal impairment, the dose of buprenorphine does not require alteration. However, in patients with liver dysfunction, the dose has to be modified to prevent toxicity.

**Buprenorphine Use in Special Populations**

**Pregnant Patients**

It is well-known that in-utero exposure of infants to opioids can result in withdrawal symptoms after birth, referred to as neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). Buprenorphine is classified as category C for use during pregnancy, which means that the risk of adverse effects on the fetus cannot be ruled out. Buprenorphine does cross the placenta, and the use of opioids during pregnancy may result in neonatal withdrawals soon after birth. Symptoms of this may include irritability, apnea, increased tone, tremor, convulsions, or respiratory depression in the neonate. The onset of withdrawal in a neonate whose mother has taken buprenorphine during the pregnancy could be from the first day of life to the eighth day of life.

Medication-assisted treatment (MAT), including opioid treatment programs (OTPs), is a combined therapeutic approach using behavioral therapy and medications to treat substance use disorders. There is ample evidence indicating that methadone maintenance does improve maternal and newborn outcomes in pregnant opioid-dependent patients. Similarly, evidence suggests that maintenance with buprenorphine may also improve fetal and maternal outcomes. The resultant NAS may be less intense than that observed after methadone. At present, buprenorphine is listed as a category C drug in pregnancy, whereas methadone is category B in pregnant patients. Buprenorphine is classified as category C for use during pregnancy, which means that the risk of adverse effects on the fetus cannot be ruled out. Buprenorphine does cross the placenta, and the use of opioids during pregnancy may result in neonatal withdrawals soon after birth. Symptoms of this in the neonate may include any of the following:

- Tremors (trembling)

- Fever

- Irritability

- Sleep problems

- Tachypnea

- Excessive and/or high-pitched crying

- Increased muscle tone

- Hyperreflexia

- Seizures

- Yawning, stuffy nose, and sneezing

- Poor feeding and sucking, slow weight gain

- Vomiting

- Diarrhea

- Dehydration

- Sweating

The onset of withdrawal in a neonate whose mother has taken buprenorphine during the pregnancy could be anywhere from the first day of life to the eighth day of life (Nguyen et al., 2018). According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration (SAMHSA), the following are the recommendations:

- The woman should understand that experts are undecided about whether intrauterine exposure to methadone, buprenorphine, or buprenorphine/naloxone leads to lasting developmental issues for the infant. The clinician should further inform her that the benefits of pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder outweigh the risks.

- There is no evidence to date showing buprenorphine or methadone result in increased birth defects, and it has a minimal long-term impact on neurological development.

- Experts are not in agreement whether a woman in early pregnancy or who states her intention to become pregnant with opioid use disorder should be switched from a buprenorphine/naloxone combination to buprenorphine alone and that any switch from the combination to the buprenorphine-only product should only be made based on the specifics of the case, with the woman's full informed consent.

- There is increasing evidence that newborn outcomes are not adversely affected by the combination product; the decision should remain with the clinician and the patient based on the benefit vs. risk.

**Breastfeeding Women**

Research has shown that buprenorphine does pass into breast milk. Still, because it has low bioavailability, it is not well established how much enters the systemic circulation in the breastfed infant. A few case reports indicate that buprenorphine does not suppress NAS and that the syndrome doesn't develop even after discontinuation of breastfeeding. While the manufacturers of buprenorphine advise against the use of buprenorphine in breastfeeding women, the limited evidence to date reveals that buprenorphine appears to be safe, and discontinuation may not be necessary.

**Elderly**

So far, there is very little data on the use of buprenorphine in elderly patients. Because geriatric patients do have altered absorption, distribution, and metabolism, one should exercise caution when prescribing buprenorphine to this population. Plus, the potential for drug interactions also exists.

**HIV Patients**

Common comorbidity in HIV patients is opioid addiction. While highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) can prolong life and improve the quality of life, opioid dependency still needs to be treated. In one study, researchers found that buprenorphine-treated patients were more compliant with HAART compared to untreated patients, but the drug does not change the effectiveness of HAART.

Since many HAART drugs also affect the liver microsomal enzymes, healthcare workers should closely monitor liver function and drug levels in patients who have buprenorphine prescribed simultaneously. In some patients, the dose of buprenorphine may require alteration.

**Hepatitis**

Both hepatitis B and C are common comorbid conditions in opioid-dependent patients. Since buprenorphine breakdown occurs in the liver, these patients should have their liver function and drug levels closely monitored. Clinicians should caution patients with hepatitis that intravenous use of buprenorphine has correlations with liver damage.

**Patients with Pain**

Even though buprenorphine is an opioid, it only has partial analgesic activity at the mu-opioid receptor. The two reasons why buprenorphine has limited use as an analgesic are it is only a partial agonist and has a ceiling effect. It binds tightly to the mu receptors and will prevent the binding of full agonists at the mu receptor. Thus, in patients with pain managed with buprenorphine, the other options for analgesics include the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. If the patient is on a low dose of buprenorphine (2 to 8 mg), this can be increased to up to 24 mg every day. Other options include regional anesthesia, nerve blocks, or the use of anticonvulsants.