Ibutilide is a potassium channel blocker that prolongs phase 3 of the cardiac action potential, resulting in increased refractoriness of atrial and ventricular myocytes, the atrioventricular node, and the His-Purkinje system.

The cardiac action potential divides into the following five stages:

**Phase 0: Rapid Depolarization**

During phase 0, fast sodium channels open when the cell reaches the threshold, which results in a rapid depolarization of the myocyte that continues until inactivation gates close, thus abolishing sodium conductance. A time-dependent mechanism mediates the closure of inactivation gates. Reopening of inactivation gates occurs during cell repolarization, specifically upon re-approaching the threshold.

**Phase 1: Early Repolarization**

Potassium channels open, causing an efflux of potassium called the transient outward current (ito). The end of phase 1 is characterized by a balance between calcium influx and potassium efflux, leading to the plateau phase.

**Phase 2: Plateau**

The plateau phase consists of a balance between calcium influx and potassium efflux. The calcium channels are L-type dihydropyridine-receptor channels that inactivate slowly. Drugs that alter the conductance of calcium modulate this phase and belong to Class 4 of the Vaughn-Williams classification system.

During the latter stages of the plateau phase, delayed rectifying potassium channels (iKr) open and allow the myocyte to begin repolarization as the calcium current declines.

**Phase 3: Repolarization**

In phase 3 of the cardiac action potential, potassium efflux exceeds inward calcium current causing repolarization. When positively charged potassium ions move out of the cell, it restores the negative potential of the cardiac myocyte. Three potassium channels are involved in the repolarization phase. While the cell membrane remains depolarized, iKr and ito are the major contributors to potassium efflux. As the myocyte approaches the threshold, the inwardly rectifying current (iK1) channels open and contribute to repolarization. Although iK1 channels are termed “inwardly rectifying,” potassium efflux occurs due to the electrochemical potential of potassium derived from the cord conductance equation.

Ibutilide is a potassium-blocking agent that primarily exerts its effect on the delayed rectifying potassium channels (iKr). By blocking potassium channels, phase 3 is lengthened, prolonging the QTc interval and increasing the refractoriness of the atrial and ventricular myocytes. When a myocyte is in the absolute refractory period, a subsequent action potential cannot be propagated, thus causing a decrease in the heart rate of patients presenting with tachydysrhythmias.

Ibutilide has also been shown to activate a slow, delayed, inward sodium current during the early stages of repolarization. However, the blockade of iKr channels is the major contributor to its antiarrhythmic properties.

**Phase 4: Resting**

Na+/K+ ATPase dominates phase 4. For every three Na+ ions pumped out of the cell, two K+ ions are pumped in, resulting in a negative resting membrane potential.

A primary active transporter called the calcium ATPase re-sequesters the majority of the intracellular calcium into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The sarcoplasmic calcium ATPase regulation occurs by an intracellular protein called phospholamban. When phospholamban undergoes phosphorylation via protein kinase A (PKA), the calcium ATPase is active and incorporates cytosolic calcium ions into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. During the next action potential, more calcium is released into the cytosol, thus causing increased contractility. When phospholamban is de-phosphorylated, it inhibits the sarcoplasmic calcium ATPase.

The remaining calcium ions get pumped out of the myocytes by secondary active transport through the Na+/Ca++ exchanger.

It is important to note that the cardiac myocyte Na+/K+ ATPase is inhibited pharmacologically by the cardiac glycosides (digoxin). Inhibition of the Na+/K+ ATPase causes an increase in intracellular Na+ ions and leads to a series of biochemical changes, beginning with the reverse action of membrane-bound Na+/Ca++ exchangers. The change in polarity of Na+/Ca++ exchangers causes an efflux of Na+ and an influx of Ca++ to restore the resting membrane potential in the absence of Na+/K+ ATPase activity. The increased concentration of intracellular calcium is responsible for the positive inotropic properties of digoxin therapy.

**Notable ECG Changes**

- Slowing of heart rate

- Prolongation of QT interval (risk of developing torsades de pointes)