# Introduction

The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (sedimentation rate, sed rate, or ESR for short) is a commonly performed hematology test that may indicate and monitor an increase in inflammatory activity within the body caused by one or more conditions such as autoimmune disease, infections, or tumors. The ESR is not specific for any single disease but is used in combination with other tests to determine the presence of increased inflammatory activity. The ESR has long been used as a "sickness indicator" due to its reproducibility and low cost. Over many decades, several methods have evolved to perform the test. However, the reference method for measuring the ESR proposed by the International Committee for Standardization in Haematology (ICSH) is based on the findings described by Westergren a century ago.

The Westergren method measures the distance (in millimeters) at which red blood cells in anticoagulated whole blood fall to the bottom of a standardized, upright, elongated tube over one hour due to the influence of gravity. The tube used for the test is called the Westergren tube. Today, these tubes are made of either glass or plastic, with an internal diameter of 2.5 mm and lengths of 190 to 300 mm.

Perhaps the first to notice a change in blood sedimentation due to illness was a British surgeon John Hunter (1728–93), in his posthumous publication, A Treatise on the Blood, Inflammation, and Gun-Shot Wounds. A Polish physician, Edmund Faustyn Biernacki (1866–1911), later refined the clinical use of the ESR near the end of the 19th century.Gazeta Lekarska in Poland and the Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift in Germany) and developed his test for measurements. These findings were not widely propagated in the English-speaking medical communities. Because of his work, the ESR is occasionally called the Biernacki Reaction worldwide.

The applied use of ESR in clinical diagnostics by Biernacki was refined by Dr. Robert Fahraeus in 1918 and Dr. Alf Vilhelm Albertsson Westergren in 1921.

The Westergren method for measuring the ESR proposed by the International Committee for Standardization in Haematology (ICSH) has allowed reproducibility for almost a century. Over time, this same method has established comparable reference values within the same laboratory and even between different facilities across the globe. The ICSH adopted the Westergren method as the gold standard for ESR measurement in 1973.

# Pathophysiology

The ESR test measures the rate at which the red blood cells (RBCs), or erythrocytes, in a whole blood sample fall to the bottom of the Westergren tube. This process of "falling" is called sedimentation.

Typically, RBCs have negative charges on the outside of the cells, which cause them to repel each other. Many plasma proteins have positive charges and can effectively neutralize the negative surface charges of the RBCs, which allows for the formation of the rouleaux. Therefore, an increase in plasma proteins (present in inflammatory conditions) will propagate an increase in rouleaux formations, which settle more readily than single red blood cells.

Rouleaux formation (and thus the ESR) is affected by the amounts of immunoglobulins and acute phase proteins (prothrombin, plasminogen, fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, alpha-1 antitrypsin, haptoglobin, complement proteins) that are present in several inflammatory conditions.

The detection of the first acute phase protein in the 1930s, the C-reactive protein (CRP), occurred during the analysis of the plasma of patients diagnosed with acute pneumococcal pneumonia.

Although many inflammatory illnesses will increase the ESR, other conditions exist that can lower the ESR. These "lowering factors" can exist either as isolated disease processes or in conjunction with other pathologic conditions that raise the ESR, thus giving a "lower than expected" ESR result in light of a serious underlying inflammatory process.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

The Westergren method involves a simple blood draw that should take only a minute or two to obtain.

Blood is typically collected in a black top ESR vacuum tube that contains a 3.2% sodium citrate anticoagulant. Whole blood collected in a lavender EDTA tube is also acceptable. The sample must be in its own tube (black or lavender) and cannot be combined with other tests due to the volume required.

The blood sample will be sent to a laboratory. A lab technician will then transfer the anticoagulated whole blood to a vertical test tube (Westergren tube), which is inserted into the vacuum tube. When this sample is allowed to stand in the vertical tube for one hour, the red blood cells will slowly fall (settle) to the bottom due to the influence of gravity. This will leave a clear, straw-colored fluid at the top of the tube. This clear fluid is plasma, the portion of blood that remains after the red blood cells and other cellular components have settled to the bottom of the tube.

The test result will depend on the amount of plasma at the top of the tube, measured after one hour. The result will be reported in millimeters per hour (mm/hr).

# Diagnostic Tests

ESR can be measured by various methods, including the Westergren, Wintrobe, micro-ESR, and automated machines.

The Westergren method has classically been used to measure the ESR based on the distance RBCs settle to the bottom of an elongated tube with a 2.5 cm internal bore. It is graduated downward in millimeters, from 0 to 200, allowing the clear plasma to remain at the top of the tube after the RBCs have settled toward the bottom due to gravitational force after one hour of observation.

Many additional methods have been proposed, including the Linzenmeier method, the Graphic or Cutler method, the Wintrobe-Landsberg method, and the Landau method. Only the Westergren and Wintrobe methods are common today. The Wintrobe method uses tubes only 100 mm long with a smaller bore (thinner tube) than standard Westergren tubes. It is considered less sensitive than Westergren.

Although the Westergren method is commonly used for determining the ESR, it is time-consuming, and there is room for error. In an attempt to find faster and more reliable means of obtaining the ESR, newer methods have evolved.

The micro-ESR is a method of obtaining the ESR using capillary tubes and quicker testing times. This method uses four drops of capillary blood drawn via fingerstick, then mixed in a 4:1 ratio on a slide with a 3.8 percent sodium citrate solution. The sample is then drawn into a 7.5-centimeter heparin-free microhematocrit capillary tube.

Several new automated and semi-automated techniques have become available for determining the ESR; these methods are safer and faster with higher accuracy. The International Council for Standardization in Haematology (ICSH) has reviewed the accuracy and consistency of over a dozen methods. Recommendations have been made for the manufacturers for the validation of new ESR methods.

# Interfering Factors

Technical factors, such as seasonal variations in room temperature, time from specimen collection, tube orientation and inclination, and vibration, can affect the results.

A blood sample allowed to sit too long before starting the test will cause RBC sphering and decrease the ESR value. The test should be run within two hours of collection. A clotted blood sample will inhibit rouleaux formation and decrease the ESR.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

As with other tests, the actual reference range used for the ESR should be established by the laboratory performing the test.

The ESR is typically higher in females than males and increases gradually with age.

- Male <50 years old: ≤15 mm/hr

- Female <50 years old: ≤ 20 mm/hr

- Male >50 years old: ≤20 mm/hr

- Female >50 years old: ≤30 mm/hr

- Child: ≤10 mm/hr

# Clinical Significance

Several factors may influence the ESR. Females tend to have slightly increased ESRs compared to males.

The ESR is neither sensitive nor specific as a general screening test. Because an elevated ESR may occur in multiple clinical settings, it is meaningless as a stand-alone laboratory value. Furthermore, some patients with malignant lesions, serious infections, or significant inflammatory disorders may have normal ESR values.

- Anemia

- Arteritis

- Infections (including bone and joint)

- Kidney disease

- Low serum albumin

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Lymphoma, including lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma

- Multiple myeloma

- Polymyalgia rheumatica

- Red blood cell abnormalities

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Systemic vasculitis

- Thyroid disease

Any process that elevates fibrinogen levels (e.g., pregnancy, infection, diabetes mellitus, end-stage renal disease, heart disease, malignancy) may also elevate the ESR. An extremely high ESR value (>100 mm/hr) may indicate the presence of infection, multiple myeloma, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (Waldenström macroglobulinemia), giant cell (temporal) arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, or hypersensitivity vasculitis. One study reported that the average ESR was over 90 mm per hour in patients with temporal arteritis, with values over 30 mm per hour in 99% of the patients.

- An elevated ESR may be an important adjunct in detecting coronary artery disease.

- There may exist a relationship between the ESR in ischemic stroke and the amount of local brain injury, atherosclerosis, and short-term outcomes.

- Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell (temporal) arteritis are inflammatory conditions that usually occur in persons older than 50 years.

- In rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and osteoarthritis, ESR levels are frequently used to help make the diagnosis; the levels may be poorly correlated with the clinical aspects of disease intensity.

- Periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) is an adverse complication of total hip and knee arthroplasty. ESR has low sensitivity in a suspected PJI, ranging from 42% to 94%.

- An isolated ESR is of variable sensitivity and is not optimal to rule out septic arthritis. However, in combination with an inability to bear weight normally and increased temperature, the ESR may be a helpful test, especially when using a low ESR threshold (>15 mm/hr).

- An elevated ESR may be useful in the diagnosis and follow-up in patients with osteomyelitis. Optimal ESR cutoff levels for the diagnosis are variable.

- An elevated ESR is associated with metastasis and a worse prognosis in patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma.

- ESR may be used as an indicator of the presence of invasive bacterial infection in children.

Aside from factors that increase ESR, the healthcare team should consider the factors that decrease ESR. This is especially important because circumstances that decrease the ESR may coexist with diagnoses that increase the ESR result, leading to missed diagnoses. Factors that lower the ESR include an increased number of red blood cells (polycythemia), which causes an increase in blood viscosity.

Regular alcohol use is negatively associated with ESR. Alcohol drinkers of low, moderate, and high quantities of alcohol will show a lower ESR than abstainers and occasional drinkers. Regular physical exercise at moderate and high levels was associated with lower ESR rates than typically expected.

The test must be performed using blood drawn within two hours of testing. In standing blood, erythrocytes tend to become spherical, which impedes rouleaux formation. Anisocytosis and poikilocytosis also interfere with erythrocyte stacking, thus decreasing the ESR.

Certain medications (valproic acid, statins, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) may lower the ESR value.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. Laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance. To minimize QC when performing tests for which manufacturers’ recommendations are less than those required by the regulatory agency (such as once per month),

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations.

Consider all specimens, control materials, and calibrator materials as potentially infectious. Exercise the usual precautions required for handling all laboratory reagents. Disposal of all waste material should be in accordance with local guidelines. Wear gloves, a lab coat, and safety glasses when handling human blood specimens. Place all plastic tips, sample cups, and gloves that come into contact with blood in a biohazard waste container.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Individuals with elevated ESR values may not always have a medical condition that requires treatment. A result outside the usual range is not necessarily a cause for concern. Slightly higher levels can occur due to laboratory errors, pregnancy, menstruation, or advancing age. The ESR result may establish the presence of an inflammatory condition within the body, but the test is not specific to any disease process. It must be combined with other modalities to define an underlying ailment. The use of the ESR as a screening test in asymptomatic patients is limited due to the low sensitivity and specificity.

If there exists a suspicion of disease, the ESR may have some value as a “sickness index.” If the level is extremely elevated (>100 mm/hr), an apparent cause is usually present (malignancy, infection, temporal arteritis). If the level is mild to moderately elevated without obvious causes, additional testing may be added in an extensive search for the underlying disease process. There is no evidence to suggest that an elevated ESR not supported by an alarming history, physical, or other modalities should prompt an extensive workup or further invasive procedures.

Collaboration amongst the interprofessional team to correctly understand and interpret the ESR results is paramount to guide further diagnostics, therapeutics, and consultations for the overall benefit of the patient.