The discussed practice guidelines for fluid management in burn patients were designed for a primary audience of health care professionals responsible for providing acute care fluid management for burn patients. Although the recommendations have been crafted to include protocols germane to resource-limited sites, the material should also be pertinent in high-resource settings. Policy-makers, public health experts, and hospital managers can also use these outlines. Optimal management of burn patients requires mandatory, explicit communication between emergency medical service (EMS), nursing staff, and physicians. Balancing fluid resuscitation in these patients is the most essential and critical aspect of their care. There exists a finite window of appropriate resuscitation in which too much or too little fluid can have catastrophic consequences.

Communication is a multi-dimensional, multi-factorial tool that is critical to all aspects of health care. Generally, an intensivist and/or plastic surgeon leads burn victim cases. However, in addition to nursing and ancillary staff, other specialists will be involved in the patient's care. A cross-sectional, descriptive, analytic study identified communication barriers for these patients, including the hectic environment of the intensive care unit (ICU) and poor communication of symptoms by the patient due to a medical condition.

For burn victims, an interprofessional approach must be incorporated to obtain the best outcomes. The nursing staff needs to work with the clinical team (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) to monitor fluids, urine output, vital signs, and breath sounds to avoid fluid overload while maintaining appropriate hydration. Any patient status changes require immediate documentation and communication to the appropriate interprofessional team member(s), so any necessary interventions can be initiated. Burn victims are challenging; untoward changes may be caused by sepsis, cardiac deficiency, neurogenic causes, or lack of fluid balance. An astute team of experienced nurses and clinicians is needed for the best clinical success. [Level 5]

This research was supported (in whole or part) by HCA Healthcare and/or an HCA Healthcare affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA Healthcare or any of its affiliated entities.