Evaluation of PCNs involves laboratory and imaging modalities to distinguish these types based on morphological and radiological patterns. In the last 15 years, there has been a 20-fold increase in the detection of PCNs, mainly by cross-sectional imaging such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

The advent of imaging modalities led to the detection of four morphological serous cystadenomas patterns: microcystic, macrocystic, mixed microcystic, and macrocystic and solid.

**Ultrasound (US):**serous microcystic adenoma usually presents as a well-circumscribed, loculated lesion. The fibrous portion of the lesion is hyperechoic, and the cystic portions appear hypoechoic. In lesions where the cysts are only a couple of millimeters in size (microcysts), the tumor appears solid due to the innumerable interfaces. Areas of calcification also appear hyperechoic with posterior acoustic shadowing.

**Computed tomography (CT) scan:**serous microcystic adenomas most commonly have a lobular shape.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**on T1-weighted fat-suppressed imaging, the cystic portions are classically hypointense, but areas of hyperintensity may appear if there has been intracystic hemorrhage.

**Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)**can readily identify pancreatic cysts through high-resolution imaging. When EUS is used in addition to other imaging modalities, the accuracy of diagnosis is greatly improved, by providing high-quality imaging and detecting small areas of closely assembled microcysts. EUS allows for accurate diagnosis in all cases that were misdiagnosed by other imaging modalities. EUS-guided fine needle aspiration usually provides a definitive diagnosis, but the sensitivity may decrease when there is no adequate sample for analysis.

**Pancreas Cyst fluid analysis**includes chemical analysis (Amylase), tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen(CA19-9), and cytology. Serous cystadenoma shows low viscosity, low amylase level, and low CEA levels (<5 to 20 ng/mL), with variable levels of pancreatic enzymes such as Amylase isoenzymes and CA-125. Cancer antigen (CA 72-4) level is low as well. Cytology reveals cuboidal cells with glycogen-rich cytoplasm. The combination of these parameters helps in classifying these cysts and differentiating serous cystadenoma from malignant or mucinous cysts.