HLH presents as two distinct clinical entities: primary or secondary

- Primary HLH presents in early childhood as the result of genetic mutations that impair the interaction between NK cells, CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells, and antigen-presenting cells. As a result, these ineffective and dysregulated cells increase their production of pro-inflammatory cytokines leading to systemic activation of macrophages and the subsequent cellular destruction that ensues. Primary HLH is further subdivided by the hereditability of the genetic mutations involved (X-linked versus recessive versus dominant) or the clinical syndromes with which it can be associated (i.e., Chediak Higashi syndrome, Griscelli syndrome, X-linked lymphoproliferative disorder, etc.). Forms without an associated genetic syndrome are typically referred to as familial HLH.

- Secondary HLH presents in adults (mean age of approximately 50) in response to an acute illness trigger rather than an underlying genetic mutation. The most common triggers involved in secondary HLH include infection, malignancy, and autoimmune disorders. Classically, HLH, which occurs in the context of an autoimmune disorder, is referred to as macrophage activation syndrome (MAS). This is more a historical relic than an indication of a separate disease process. Interestingly, around 14% of adult patients have allelic abnormalities in primary HLH genes. The significance of these allelic polymorphisms is not fully understood; however, it is hypothesized that they serve as predisposing factors in the face of specific triggers.