The assisting team in the operating room should be sensitized towards the techniques of preservation, preparation, and use of the vitreous substitutes. All the substitutes should be appropriately labeled during storage as well as usage. It should be ensured that the correct gas concentration has been achieved before injecting. It is imperative to understand that a gas injection of incorrect concentration can lead to catastrophic outcomes. The gas or air-gas mixture should be used immediately after preparation as any air influx from the surroundings can cause inaccuracy in its concentration.

Similarly, the liquid substitutes (PFCL, SO) can be easily confused with each other and viscoelastic and anesthetic agents. A wrong injection can similarly be disastrous for the eye. The assistant should be explained that the fluid infusion should not be switched on until the presence of the infusion cannula tip inside the vitreous cavity has been confirmed by the surgeon. The fluid infusion should not be stopped during the vitrectomy.

Interprofessional collaboration plays a crucial role in ensuring the best visual outcomes. Optometrists and technicians help in documenting the best-corrected visual acuity and intraocular pressure. The pharmacist helps in dispensing the preoperative and postoperative medications. The nursing staff ensures compliance with therapy. Collaboration with anterior segment surgeons and glaucoma surgeons is needed to manage cataracts and glaucoma, respectively. Physicians should optimize systemic therapy so that the patient can undergo retinal surgery safely. The anesthetist ensures anesthesia and analgesia during surgery. If intravitreal gas is planned, anesthesia with nitrous oxide should be avoided or stopped at least 15 to 20 minutes before the intravitreal gas injection to avoid dangerously high levels of intraocular pressure.