The course of autoimmune hepatitis during pregnancy is unpredictable. Though the literature is limited, up to 20% of patients with AIH will flare during pregnancy, which is associated with a high rate of fetal and maternal complications.

**Medical Treatment**

The preferred treatment for AIH during pregnancy include glucocorticoids at the lowest possible doses, alone or in combination with azathioprine.

**AIH Treatment and Breastfeeding**

Breastfeeding is also safe with prednisone. Azathioprine is excreted at low levels in breast milk, and most experts recommend continuing azathioprine use during breastfeeding despite manufacturers’ recommendations against using them during lactation.

**Management of AIH Flare**

During flares, the management of pregnant patients with AIH should be similar to non-pregnant patients, with higher doses of prednisone and/or the addition of azathioprine.

**Patients with Cirrhosis and AIH**

Cirrhosis can occur as an initial presentation at the time of AIH diagnosis in up to 40% of patients. Therefore, providers will not infrequently encounter pregnant females with cirrhosis secondary to AIH.

During pregnancy, compensatory dilation of collateral veins that join the portal circulation and the azygos vein occurs, causing expansion of the circulating blood volume and extrinsic compression of the inferior vena cava by the pregnant uterus, leading to increased portal hypertension and variceal bleeding, especially during the third trimester and labor and delivery.

**Postpartum Care**

AIH may flare with the return of normal immunity after delivery, and, in fact, flares are twice as frequent in the postpartum period during pregnancy.