The diagnosis and management of medulloblastoma are best done by an interprofessional team that consists of a pediatrician, neurologist, neurosurgeon, oncologist, radiation therapist, and specialty trained nurses. The majority of children first present with cerebellar symptoms to the primary provider, pediatrician, or nurse practitioner. Once diagnosed the treatment modalities for medulloblastoma combine surgical resection with chemotherapy and radiation. Oncology board-certified pharmacists can consult with the oncologist on the regimens for chemotherapy, and the alternatives based on patient response. The pharmacist should also educate the patient on the management of headache and emesis. The oncology nurse is vital for patient monitoring and educating the patient and family. The oncology nurse should educate the patient on the types of treatments, their benefits, and potential complications. Mental health professionals may be important is vital as many patients develop depression and anxiety. The role of speech, occupational, and physical therapy cannot be understated. The members of the team should communicate and hold weekly meetings to determine the steps in care and ensure that the patient is receiving the current standard of care.

By traditional risk stratification, cure rates in the average-risk group reached three-quarters of patients. However, post-surgical treatment-related neurologic, cognitive, and endocrinologic sequelae, including intellectual retardation and growth hormone deficiency, remain a source of morbidity in up to 80% of survivors. The high-risk patient may have mortality in excess of 50%-75%. For those who survive, complete functional recovery may take months or even years, but an interprofessional team will optimize outcomes.