Pembrolizumab is an FDA-approved monoclonal antibody directed against programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and sold in the US. It initially received FDA accelerated approval for refractory, advanced melanoma in September 2014. Subsequently, it has received approval for the treatment of many other oncologic conditions, and many more are currently in clinical development.

**FDA-approved indications (with clinical trial summaries)**

**Melanoma**

- Unresectable or metastatic melanoma

- In an advanced melanoma population naive to ipilimumab therapy, median overall survival was not reached in two different pembrolizumab doses (every two weeks, every three weeks dosing) as compared to ipilimumab alone at 16.0 months (hazard ratio = 0.68, p<0.001) at a median follow-up of 22.9 months.
- In previously treated, ipilimumab refractory, advanced melanoma, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in overall survival of 13.4 months (2 mg/kg dose) and 14.7 months (10 mg/kg dose) as compared to investigator choice chemotherapy at 11.0 months (results were not statistically significant) at a median follow-up of 28 months.

- Adjuvant therapy following complete resection of lymph node involved melanoma.

- In patients with completely resected stage III melanoma, pembrolizumab showed a recurrence-free survival of 75.4% vs. placebo of 61.0% (hazard ratio=0.57, p<0.001) at a median follow-up of 15 months.

**Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)**

- First-line metastatic non-squamous NSCLC without EGFR/ALK tumor abnormality in combination with platinum chemotherapy and pemetrexed.

- In patients with metastatic non-squamous NSCLC, first-line treatment of pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy (pemetrexed and carboplatin or cisplatin) showed a median progression-free survival of 8.8 months as compared to 4.9 months from chemotherapy alone (p<0.001) with a median follow up of 10.5 months.

- First-line metastatic squamous NSCLC with paclitaxel (or paclitaxel protein-bound) and carboplatin

- In patients with metastatic squamous NSCLC, first-line treatment of pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy (carboplatin plus paclitaxel or nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel) showed a median overall survival of 15.9 months as compared to 11.3 months for chemotherapy alone (p<0.001) with a median follow up of 7.8 months.

- First-line single-agent use for nonresectable or metastatic NSCLC without EGFR/ALK tumor abnormality with tumor PD-L1 expression greater than 1%.

- In patients with previously untreated advanced NSCLC with a PD-1 score greater than 50%, first-line treatment of single-agent pembrolizumab showed a median overall survival of 30.0 months as compared to chemotherapy (investigator’s choice platinum-based regimen) control arm of 14.2 months(hazard ratio = 0.63), with a median follow up of 25.2 months.

- Single-agent use for metastatic NSCLC with tumor PD-L1 expression greater than 1% who have progressed after platinum-based chemotherapy. (EGFR/ALK tumor abnormality patients with progression after targeted therapy for their respective tumor abnormality).

- In patients with previously treated, advanced NSCLC with a PD-1 score greater than 50%, subsequent treatment with pembrolizumab (10mg/kg) showed a median survival of 17.3 months as compared to the docetaxel arm of 8.2 months (p<0.0001).

**Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC)**

- First-line metastatic or unresectable/recurrent HNSCC in combination with FU and platinum.

- In patients previously untreated for locally incurable recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer, treatment with pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy (cisplatin or carboplatin/5-FU) resulted in median overall survival of 13.0 months as compared to cetuximab plus chemotherapy(cisplatin or carboplatin/5-FU) of 10.7 months.

- First-line single-agent use in metastatic or unresectable/recurrent HNSCC with tumor PD-L1 expression greater than 1%.

- Single-agent recurrent or metastatic HNSCC with progression after platinum-based chemotherapy

- In patients with previously treated advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, a single-arm study showed that treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in an 18% objective response rate; overall survival was 38% at 12 months (after a median follow up of 9 months).

**Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC)**

- First-line advanced RCC in combination with axitinib

- In patients previously untreated for advanced clear-cell renal cell carcinoma, treatment with pembrolizumab plus axitinib resulted in a 12-month survival rate of 89.9% compared to treatment with sunitinib at 78.3% (p<0.0001) at a median follow-up of 12.8 months.

**Urothelial Carcinoma**

- Locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma who have progressed on platinum-based chemotherapy

- Locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma within 12 months of neoadjuvant/adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy.

- In patients with previously treated advanced urothelial cancer, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in a median one-year survival rate of 44.2% compared to 29.8% for chemotherapy (paclitaxel or docetaxel or vinflunine) alone. The median two-year survival rate was 26.9% for pembrolizumab compared to 11.0% for chemotherapy alone (at a median follow-up of 27.7 months).

**FDA-approved indications under accelerated approval (with clinical trial summaries):**

**Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (cHL)**

- Refractory cHL for pediatric and adult patients who have relapsed after three or more treatments

- In patients with relapsed/refractory classical Hodgkin lymphoma, pembrolizumab monotherapy resulted in a 69.9% objective response rate and a complete response rate of 22.5% at a median follow-up of 13 treatment cycles.

**Primary Mediastinal Large B-Cell Lymphoma (PMBCL)**

- Refractory PMBCL for pediatric and adults who have relapsed after two or more treatments

- In patients with relapsed/refractory Primary Mediastinal Large B-cell lymphoma, pembrolizumab treatment resulted in a 41% objective response rate and a 12-month overall survival rate of 62% after a median follow-up of 6.6 months.

**Urothelial Carcinoma**

- Locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma with tumor expression PD-L1 of greater than 10%, ineligible for cisplatin-containing chemotherapy.

- In patients with advanced urothelial carcinoma who were ineligible for cisplatin, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in a 29% objective response rate and a median follow-up of 7.8 months.

- Locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma not eligible for any platinum-based chemotherapy

**Microsatellite Instability-High (MSI-H) Cancer**

- Previously treated adult and pediatric unresectable or metastatic MSI-H solid tumors with no remaining alternative treatments.

- Adult and pediatric unresectable or metastatic MSI-H colorectal cancer following treatment with irinotecan, oxaliplatin, and fluoropyrimidine

- In patients with previously treated microsatellite instability-high colorectal cancer, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in a 32% objective response rate, a 4.1 month PFS and a 76% 12-month overall survival rate after a median follow-up of 12.6 months.

**Gastric Cancer**

- Locally advanced, metastatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma with tumor PD-L1 expression greater than 1% with disease progression after at least two lines of therapy, including platinum or fluoropyrimidine chemotherapy (and HER2/neu targeted therapy, if appropriate)

- In patients with previously treated gastric and gastroesophageal junction cancer, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in an 11.6% objective response rate at a median follow-up of 5.8 months.

**Cervical Cancer**

- Metastatic or recurrent cervical cancer, following chemotherapy, with tumor expression of PD-L1 greater than 1%.

- In patients previously treated for advanced cervical cancer, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in an objective response rate of 12.2% at a median follow-up of 10.2 months.

**Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC)**

- HCC patients previously treated with sorafenib

- In patients with previously treated hepatocellular carcinoma, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in an objective response rate of 18% at a data cutoff of February 2018.

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC)**

- Pediatric and adult recurrent or locally advanced MCC.

- In patients naive to systemic treatment for advanced Merkel cell carcinoma, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in an objective response rate of 56% and 24-month overall survival of 68.7% at a median follow-up of 14.9 months.

**Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC)**

- Metastatic SCLC following platinum-based chemotherapy and at least one other therapy

- In patients with previously treated advanced small cell lung cancer, treatment with pembrolizumab resulted in an 18.7% objective response rate and a median overall survival of 9.1months.

**Non-FDA approved indications in later-stage clinical trials**

- Nasopharyngeal cancer

- Mesothelioma

- Liver cancer

- Esophageal cancer

- Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma

- Colorectal cancer

- Breast cancer

- Prostate cancer

- Ovarian cancer