**Second Victim Symptoms**

Scott et al. performed a qualitative study of 31 providers after a second victim event describing the provider’s experience during the aftermath.  She divided the progression into the six stages below:

- Chaos and accident response – The adverse event is noted, and the provider performs required emergent patient care tasks to stabilize the condition.

- Intrusive reflections – After the patient has stabilized, the provider worries, ruminates, and mentally “replays” the incident for days, weeks, months, or even sometimes years.  This often interferes with providers’ personal and professional lives.

- Fear of rejection versus seeking confirmation – The provider worries about others’ perceptions of what happened and that others may doubt their competence.  They may confide in trusted peers, seeking affirmation that the poor outcome was not entirely their fault, and may try to identify other factors that contributed to the adverse outcome.

- Enduring the inquisition – Administrative or legal parties may investigate the incident, such as peer review, quality improvement review, licensing boards investigations, or lawsuits. Providers perceive these reviews as inquisitions of their competence.

- Emotional first aid - The provider connects with a colleague, mentor, and/or mental health professional to assist in processing the event.

- Final disposition -In the long term, a provider may “drop out,” “survive,” or “thrive” after the event. This is discussed in more detail later.

As mentioned earlier, these post-event symptoms fall on a spectrum of severity and length of time to resolution. Subsequent qualitative studies demonstrate that many providers fail to progress in this order or even experience all the stages consistently. Additionally, there is a broad variation in the length of time providers spend in each phase.

A recent systematic review of 18 studies involving 11,649 healthcare providers suffering from SVS found the following symptom prevalence:

- Troubling memories (81%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 46–95)

- Anxiety/concern (76%, 95% CI = 33–95)

- Anger toward themselves (75%, 95% CI = 59–86)

- Regret/remorse (72%, 95% CI = 62–81)

- Distress (70%, 95% CI = 60–79)

- Fear of future errors (56%, 95% CI = 34–75)

- Embarrassment (52%, 95% CI = 31–72)

- Guilt (51%, 95% CI = 41–62)

- Sleeping difficulties (35%, 95% CI = 22–51)