Even though true femoral artery aneurysms are rare, pseudoaneurysms of the femoral artery are relatively common on the cardiology floor where patients often undergo cardiac catheterization. The monitoring and management of femoral artery aneurysms is usually done by a nurse. Once a patient returns from a cardiac catheterization lab, the nurse should not only monitor the groin site for bleeding but also assess the pulses in the leg. The groin should be observed for expansion and ecchymosis. Any changes in the groin size or loss of distal pulses should result in an immediate call to the patient's physician. Today, the management of femoral artery aneurysms involved placement of a stent, ultrasound-guided compression or surgery. While surgery is the gold standard, some patients may be too ill to undergo the procedure and may benefit from a less invasive percutaneous procedure. After the procedure, the patient's distal pulses have to be monitored. Some patients may be placed on a heparin drip, and hence the coagulation parameters need to be monitored. Prior to discharge, patients should be urged to lose weight, discontinue smoking, control the blood pressure and diabetes and exercise regularly. Close communication between the team members is essential in order to improve outcomes.

**Outcomes**

The majority of patients with a femoral artery aneurysm have a good outcome, provided they lower the risk factors for peripheral vascular disease. Unfortunately, for those who do not change the lifestyle, the peripheral vascular disease is progressive and often leads to limited exercise endurance and ischemic changes in the limbs. For those who throw an emboli distally, some people do end up with toe amputations.