Cetirizine is a relatively safe and effective medication for treating allergic rhinitis, urticaria, and allergic conjunctivitis. As cetirizine is also available over the counter, prescribers should educate patients on possible side effects, such as drowsiness, fatigue, and dry mouth, while dispensing medicine. Healthcare providers should be careful when prescribing cetirizine to patients with impaired renal or hepatic function. Ophthalmologists should educate contact lens wearers to exercise precautions and proper direct use of eye drops. Patients using eye drops should be informed that local pain at the instillation site, ocular hyperemia, and decreased visual acuity are common adverse reactions with the ophthalmic formulation.

Immunologists play a crucial role in the management of refractory urticaria. Nurses should monitor therapeutic success and consult patients not to combine cetirizine with drugs that cause central nervous system depression. Pharmacists should perform thorough medication reconciliation and verify that the patient is not taking any medications or supplements that could exacerbate cetirizine's adverse effects. Clinicians(MD, DO, NP, PA), nurses, and pharmacists who prescribe or recommend cetirizine to patients should also provide information on the safe storage of cetirizine to prevent accidental overdose by children. If the overdose of cetirizine is intentional, a psychiatrist should be consulted. Communication and collaboration among interprofessional teams can achieve the best patient outcomes and reduce healthcare service utilization costs. [Level 5]