A gummy smile is multifactorial in etiology, and more than one factor can present simultaneously. Professionals must accurately identify the cause of the condition since the treatment differs according to the etiology.

- Short upper lip length

- Hypermobile upper lip

- Altered passive eruption

- Gingival hyperplasia

- Vertical maxillary excess (VME)

- Dentoalveolar extrusion

**Vertical Maxillary Excess (VME)**

Vertical maxillary excess is the overgrowth of the maxillary bone in the vertical plane that gives an elongated appearance to the lower half of the face.

Excessive gingival display results from an occlusal plane that is lower than expected. The lower lip covering the incisal edges of the upper canines and premolars is almost a pathognomonic feature of the disorder. In VME, the anterior occlusal plane continues without interruption with the posterior occlusal plane, which differs from the overeruption of incisors.

**Altered Passive Eruption**

Teeth erupt in an active phase, where the tooth reaches its occlusal position, and a passive phase, where the gingival tissues migrate apically, exposing the crown.

Altered passive eruption is the gingival tissue's incapacity to migrate apically past stage 2.

Vital elements to diagnosing altered passive eruption include ruling out a hypermobile lip and checking the CEJ and alveolar crest location. The lips should be examined while resting and smiling. In a hyperactive lip, a translational movement from rest can be up to 10 mm, while in a normal lip activity, between 6 and 8 mm.

The alveolar crest level is the same as in a healthy condition: at the level of 1 to 2 mm apical to the CEJ.

**Anterior Dentoalveolar Extrusion**

Anterior dentoalveolar extrusion is the overeruption of the maxillary incisors, resulting in excessive gingival display due to a more coronal position of the gingival margins.