Complications of macular hole (MH) surgery include complications of general intraocular surgery, pars plana vitrectomy (PPV), and other surgical steps i.e., ILM staining and peeling.

Complications of intraocular surgery, in general, include endophthalmitis, sympathetic ophthalmia, intraocular hemorrhage, glaucoma, hypotony, and recurrent corneal erosion.

Complications of pars plana vitrectomy (PPV): nuclear sclerotic cataract (most common), intraoperative cataract, intraoperative/postoperative retinal break (RB), retinal detachment (RD), and vitreous hemorrhage (VH), uveitis, anterior segment neovascularization, primary open-angle glaucoma.

**Retinal Detachment (RD)**

The incidence of RD after MH surgery is decreasing from 14% to 2% gradually.

**Complications of ILM Staining and Peeling**

Among the dyes used to stain ILM, ICG causes concentration and osmolarity-dependent retinal pigment epithelium and ganglion cell toxicity, which is minimum with BBG. Another complication of ILM peeling is corrugations or irregularities in the retinal surface known as dissociated optic nerve fiber layer (DONFL). The incidence of DONFL was similar when cleavage plain was created with a diamond-dusted scraper or with forceps.

DONFL causes ganglion cell damage resulting in microperimetry changes.

**Visual Field Defects**

Postoperative inferotemporal visual field defect is not very uncommon.

Reopening of MH: Reopening of MH is not very common now after incorporating ILM peeling as a part of the surgery. Before the ILM peeling era, its incidence was 5% to 7%, then gradually decreasing to 0 to 2%.

A prolonged postoperative prone position may lead to ulnar neuropathy, which is a non-ocular complication of macular hole surgery.

**Side Effects of Intravitreal Ocriplasmin Injection**

There can be a reduction in visual acuity, reduction in peripheral vision, retinal arterial attenuation, zonular damage/subluxation, or dislocation of the lens, ellipsoid zone integrity loss with poor response in electroretinogram are not uncommon. Pupillary abnormalities may also be there along with other side effects of any intravitreal injection i.e., cataract, vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment.