Similar to diagnosis, there is no current 'gold standard' treatment or management of primary ciliary dysfunction. Given that no curative therapy exists, treatment primarily relies on symptom management and varies based on the clinical presentation. Most current treatment options are largely extrapolated from other diseases that cause bronchiectasis, such as cystic fibrosis.

Unlike cystic fibrosis, the lung clearance index does not seem to be a helpful monitoring tool for patients with PCD. Additionally, children with primary ciliary dysfunction should be evaluated by an ear-nose-throat specialist one to two times per year and as needed in adults. An audiology assessment should be performed since there is a high incidence of recurrent otitis media with chronic middle ear effusions and associated complications of conductive hearing loss.

While there are many similarities between the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF) and PCD, it has been found that certain mucolytic agents, such as DNase, while effective in CF, are not effective for PCD. When prevention fails and acute exacerbations occur, antibiotics are the mainstay of treatment and should be started even when symptoms appear mild. Obtaining regular sputum samples helps guide antibiotic choice for empiric coverage during an acute exacerbation. Pseudomonas aeruginosa should always be considered, and patients may require IV antibiotics for such infections. For recurrent exacerbations, prevention with chronic antibiotic suppression, such as azithromycin, can effectively reduce the number of infections.

A bilateral lung transplant may be necessary for patients with end-stage respiratory disease.