EGFR binding by various ligands, including epidermal growth factor (EGF) and tumor growth factor-alpha (TGF-a), results in routine cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, and cellular development.

EGFR is a 170 kDalton single polypeptide chain of 1186 amino acids expressed on the majority of human cells. This receptor is made up of an extracellular, intracellular and transmembrane region. The extracellular region facilitates ligand binding. Binding ligands include EGF, heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF), TGF-a, amphiregulin, epiregulin, betacellulin, and epigen. These ligands share a conserved motif of six cysteines. The intracellular carboxy-terminal region is a tyrosine kinase. This tyrosine kinase autophosphorylates specific intracellular tyrosine residues, with Tyr-1173 serving as the major autophosphorylation site. The transmembrane region is a single hydrophobic anchor which traverses the cell membrane.

EGFR binding and activation results in many downstream processes. The EGFR tyrosine kinase domain activates Ras, which eventually leads to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation. The MAP kinase pathway is also activated through EGFR binding of Grb-2, with subsequent recruitment of the Ras GDP/GTP exchange factor Sos, for intracellular binding to the activated EGFR. EGFR tyrosine kinase activity also influences the progression of cells from G1 to S phase. While the specific functions of EGFR activity are still a subject of scientific research, the general function of EGFR is indicated to be cellular growth, proliferation, and differentiation. As a specific example, EGFR agonism with amphiregulin and other ligands has been shown to induce ductal and lobuloalveolar development, demonstrating its effects on proliferation of mammary glands and ductal development.