Assessment for theoretical knowledge in clinical clerkships is generally constructed around learner performance in examinations and assignments. Assessment for clinical competence, however, is more complicated and involves the degree to which theoretical knowledge is applied, decision-making skills, and the ability to act in a shifting environment.

Traditionally, oral examinations have poor content validity, high inter-rater variability, and are inconsistent, depending on the grading schema. Thus, this assessment tool is susceptible to bias and is intrinsically unreliable. Alternatives to this assessment approach include short answer questions, extended matching items, key feature tests, OSCE, Mini-CEX, and DOPS. A short description follows here:

The Short Answer Question (SAQ) or Modified Essay Question (MEQ) is an open-ended, semi-structured question format. The questions can incorporate clinical scenarios, and equivalent or higher test reliabilities can be reached with fewer items when compared to true/false questions.

Extended Matching Item is based on a single theme and is a written examination format similar to multiple-choice questions (MCQ). The key difference between EM and MCQ is that it can be used for the assessment of clinical scenarios and diagnostic reasoning while maintaining objectivity and consistency that is not likely from MCQs.

Key-feature questions (KFQs) have been developed to assess clinical reasoning skills. Examinations using KFQs focus on the diagnosis and management of a clinical problem where the learners are most likely to make errors. More than other methods, KFQs illuminate the strengths and limits of a learners' clinical competency, and this assessment tool is more likely than other forms of evaluation to differentiate between stronger or weaker candidates in the area of clinical reasoning.

Objective Structured Clinical examination (OSCE) involves multiple locations where each learner performs a defined task. This tool can be used to assess competency-based on direct observation. Unlike a traditional clinical exam, the OSCE can evaluate areas critical to performance, such as communication skills and the ability to handle changing patient behaviors.

The Mini-Clinical Evaluation Exercise (Mini-CEX) is a rating scale in which an expert observes and rates the learner's performance. It was developed to assess six core competencies in residents, such as medical interviewing skills, physical examination skills, professionalism, clinical judgment, counseling skills, and organization and efficiency.

Similarly, Direct Observation of Procedural Skills (DOPS) is a structured rating scale for assessing and providing feedback on practical procedures. The competencies that are commonly evaluated are general knowledge about the procedure, informed consent, pre-procedure preparation, analgesia, technical ability, aseptic technique, and counseling and communication.