The topic of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIED) is still debatable. More than three-fourths of the patients require MRI at some point in time after implanting a pacing device.

MRI-conditional pacemakers are better able to handle the interference due to magnetic resonance imaging. The term MRI-conditional refers to devices with no known hazards or risks under specific magnetic resonance conditions. Notably, there are no “MRI-safe” devices, which are devices that have no known hazards or risks under all conditions. MRI-conditional devices have minimal ferromagnetic material, altered filtering, as well as specially designed lead conductors, which minimize current induction and heating of the tissue. MRI conditional leads are also required for a device to be labeled as MRI conditional.

CT scan of the patient does not usually cause problems in the pacemakers. Therefore, the presence of an implanted pacemaker should not hinder such investigative imaging modality. In rare cases, it might lead to transient changes in the output of the pacemaker.

Some CIEDs make use of piezoelectric crystal components in the circuitry or lead connections. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy can damage such components due to its effect on those components leading to device malfunction.

Therapeutic radiation can produce undesirable outcomes in patients with pacemakers. These outcomes include reprogramming resulting in aberrant behavior, resetting the device, or permanent malfunction due to damage to the semiconductor insulation. There will be precipitous output failure of the pacemaker in case of permanent damage to its components.