**Unexplained Vision Loss**

**Diabetic Retinopathy**

- To rule out macular ischemia in cases of diabetic retinopathy with unexplained poor vision.

- To differentiate between focal or diffuse leakage in cases with macular edema. The focal leak occurs from microaneurysms, and the diffuse leak arises from the retinal capillaries. This helps to decide the target areas for the macular laser. A focal laser targets the leaking microaneurysm in focal macular edema, and a macular grid may be used to manage diffuse macular edema.

- To confirm cases of proliferative diabetic retinopathy where neovascularization is not well demarcated on clinical examination.

- In cases with asymmetric diabetic retinopathy, look for signs of choroidal filling delay and rule out other differential diagnoses.

- To document and confirm findings in cases with asteroid hyalosis.

- To differentiate between diabetic macular edema (DME) and Irvine Gass syndrome (pseudophakic cystoid macular edema).

**Retinal Vein Occlusions**

- It may be prudent to wait for 2 or 3 months to allow for the resolution of hemorrhages before considering angiography in these cases, as the hemorrhages cause blocked fluorescence.

- To classify ischemic and nonischemic central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO). The central vein occlusion study (CVOS) defined ischemic CRVO or nonperfused CRVO as having at least 10 disc areas of nonperfusion in the central 7 field FFA. However, this definition may need re-evaluation with the advent of ultra-widefield FFA.

- It helps in cases with clinically undetectable tributary vein occlusions.

- To confirm the areas of subtle neovascularization.

- To look for areas of capillary nonperfusion.

**Choroidal Neovascularization**

- To identify and document the activity of choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM) in various retinal diseases, including age-related macular degeneration (AMD), pigment epithelium detachment (PED), choroidal rupture, RPE rip, angioid streaks, serpiginous choroiditis, presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome, Best vitelliform macular dystrophy, choroidal osteoma, healed choroidal tuberculoma, and others.

- To confirm the diagnosis in cases of myopic CNVM. Myopic CNVM may not show hyper-cyanescence and thus may not be detectable on Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) imaging.

- To classify classic and occult CNVM.

**Other Indications**

- To confirm the diagnosis of ocular ischemic syndrome in cases with neovascularization of the iris, venous dilatation, and mid-peripheral retinal hemorrhages.

- To identify the type of leak in cases of central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR). The location of the leak helps in planning focal laser photocoagulation in these cases.

- Confirmation of diagnosis of parafoveal telangiectasia and to identify and confirm CNVM in these cases.

- To confirm the diagnosis of ischemic optic neuropathy and other neuro-ophthalmic diseases.

- To confirm activity in cases of retinal vasculitis.

- To look for capillary nonperfusion areas and neovascularization in cases of resolved retinal vasculitis.

- To evaluate cases of uveitis, retinitis, and posterior scleritis.

- To evaluate intraocular tumors.

- To evaluate various retinal vascular disorders, including retinopathy of prematurity, sickle cell retinopathy, and others.

- To evaluate the retinal dystrophies.

- To evaluate and document neovascularization and vascular status of the anterior segment, including cornea and iris.