Biotin deficiency leads to variable clinical presentations, mainly neurological and dermal abnormalities. Biotinidase deficiency is the commonest etiology; in many countries, including the US, screening for biotinidase deficiency is a part of the newborn screening program. Therefore the condition is identified in many individuals before symptoms develop. History includes recognizing risk factors for biotin deficiency, such as history related to gastrointestinal disease or inflammatory bowel disease. Any history of drug intake that interferes with biotin metabolism or uptake is significant, e.g., antiepileptics, antibiotics, or isotretinoin. Dermal abnormalities in biotin deficiency are due to impaired fatty acid metabolism. These include hair loss (alopecia) and periorificial dermatitis; scaly, red rash around the orifices, i.e., eyes, nose, and mouth (also called “biotin-deficient face”). The rash is similar to that of zinc deficiency. Patients may also develop conjunctivitis and skin infections.

Neurological symptoms include hypotonia, seizures, ataxia, numbness and tingling of the extremities, mental retardation, and developmental delay in children.

Intestinal symptoms may also develop in patients with biotin deficiency, such as nausea, vomiting, and anorexia.

Other biotin deficiency presentations include ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis, and organic aciduria.Candida. Biotinidase deficiency typically shows symptoms at the age of 1 week to more than one year and may have additional symptoms like hearing loss and optic atrophy.

As observed in swine, initial clinical symptoms of acquired biotin deficiency include gradual onset of hair loss, dry skin, and lesions on the feet and legs after six months of biotin deficiency.

Once biotin deficiency is confirmed, a physical exam should be carried out focusing on the extent of the disease and must include a thorough neurological exam, developmental assessment (age-appropriate), hearing evaluation, and visual assessment.