The clinical presentation of osteoma cutis is variable and can range from asymptomatic single to multiple lesions. They range in size from 0.1 cm to 5.0 cm.

In rare cases, the overlying epidermis may be ulcerated with the release of bony spicules. This rare form corresponds to perforating osteoma cutis.

There are four distinct clinical variants of osteoma cutis:

- Solitary: Occurs anywhere on the skin as a solitary nodule

- Widespread:****Characterized by the presence of multiple generalized osteomas that arise in the neonatal period

- Plate-like:****Is often present at birth or grows during the first years of life

- Multiple miliary osteomas: Characterized by the presence of multiple punctate foci of bone tissue inside the skin

For the diagnosis of plate-like osteoma cutis to be made, four criteria are required, including:

- The presence of a bony plate since birth

- The absence of metabolic disorder

- The presence or not of osteomas elsewhere in the body

- The absence of trauma, infection or other underlying events

Physical examination:

Physical examination of patients with osteoma cutis is crucial in order to eliminate dysmorphic features. Primary osteoma cutis can occur in association with progressive osseous heteroplasia, Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy, or fibrodysplasia of progressive ossification.

Progressive osseous heteroplasia:

Progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH) is a rare entity, which can be either sporadic or an autosomal dominant inherited disease. It is characterized by progressive ossification of the dermis in infancy. Whereas, during childhood, there is progressive ossification of the subcutaneous and deep connective tissue. This disease is not accompanied by endocrinological anomalies. Its clinical course is slower in adulthood and may result in ankyloses of the joints as well as growth retardation of the limbs.

Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy:

Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) is a disease clinically characterized by short stature, a round face, obesity, and mental retardation. It can be associated with osteoma cutis (25-50%) and with endocrinological abnormalities.