# Introduction

The orbital apex disorders include superior orbital fissure syndrome, cavernous sinus syndrome, and orbital apex syndrome.

Orbital apex syndrome (OAS), also called Jacod syndrome, is a complex neurological disorder characterized by a constellation of signs resulting from multiple cranial nerve involvement.

**Anatomy of the Orbital Apex**

The orbital apex is an opening connecting the orbit and the cranial cavity.

The intracanalicular part of the optic nerve is present above the orbital apex, passes through the optic canal, and runs to the posteromedial optic chiasm. The middle portion of the superior orbital fissure contains the cranial nerves III, IV, and VI and the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (V1). The annulus of Zinn is a fibrous chord located superior and medial to the superior orbital fissure.

Knowledge of the anatomy of the orbital apex and its contents is essential to diagnosing and managing orbital syndromes.

# Etiology

Orbital apex syndrome (OAS) has multiple etiologies, and the management is directed toward the specific cause in each patient.

OAS can be caused by bacterial, fungal, viral, and parasitic infections. These organisms primarily involve the surrounding structures like the orbit or the paranasal sinuses, from where they spread contiguously to the orbital apex resulting in the typical clinical features.

**Bacteria**

Gram-positive cocci like Staphylococcus and Streptococcus pneumoniae and gram-negative bacilli like Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, Proteus, and anaerobic bacteria may cause sinusitis or orbital cellulitis that spreads to involve the orbital apex.Mycobacterium tuberculosis and spirochaetes have also been implicated in causing OAS.

**Fungi**

The most common fungi involved in OAS include Mucor and Aspergillus. They commonly occur in patients with uncontrolled sugars, immunosuppression, and patients undergoing treatment for various malignancies. They primarily affect the paranasal sinuses or the vertebrae and spread to the orbital apex by hematogenous spread. If left untreated, they may involve the central nervous system and may be fatal.

**Virus**

OAS can occur following herpes zoster ophthalmicus in immunocompromised individuals. The mechanism may be due to the direct cytopathic effect of viruses, immune-mediated damage, or due to inflammatory edema.

**Parasite**

Cysticercosis occurs due to infection with Taenia solium or Taenia saginatum. Though the central nervous system and the eye are the most commonly involved organs, the cysts may also affect the optic nerve or the orbital apex.



OAS may occur secondary to systemic autoimmune disorders like granulomatosis with polyangiitis, sarcoidosis, microscopic polyangiitis, Churg Strauss syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and giant cell arthritis. OAS may occur secondary to idiopathic orbital inflammation. Tolosa hunt syndrome is an idiopathic granulomatous inflammation affecting the orbital apex or cavernous sinus. Other systemic manifestations involving the kidneys, lungs, skin, and central nervous system may be present. Infectious causes must be ruled out before commencing treatment for inflammation.

**Benign**

Neurofibromas, dermoid cysts, epidermoid cysts, and fibrous dysplasia may cause OAS by compression of structures at the orbital apex.

**Malignant**

OAS may be caused by primary head and neck malignancies or by secondary metastasis. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma have been documented to be associated with OAS. The common sites of origin of metastasis to the orbital apex include breast, lung, and renal carcinoma and malignant melanoma. Leukemias and nonhodgkins lymphoma may also cause OAS.

# Epidemiology

Orbital apex syndrome is a rare condition, and limited data are available on the incidence of orbital apex syndrome in the United States of America and worldwide. No specific racial or male-female predisposition for this condition is evident. OAS is found worldwide and may occur secondary to one of the etiological conditions described below.

# History and Physical

Characteristic signs of orbital apex syndrome (OAS) are painful external ophthalmoplegia with vision loss. The ophthalmologist may be the primary physician to suspect and diagnose orbital apex syndrome. Patient symptoms include reduced or total loss of vision on the involved side, torsional, horizontal, or vertical diplopia, inability to open the eye, prominence of the eyeball, difficulty moving the eye in different gazes, facial pain, and abnormal head postures.

The prior medical history may be significant for one or many conditions predisposing to OAS. Patients may have a history of uncontrolled high blood sugars at presentation or in the recent past; a history of immunosuppression or malignancy may predispose an individual to infectious involvement of the orbital apex.

The clinical signs of orbital apex syndrome are due to the involvement of the optic nerve, oculomotor nerve, trochlear nerve, abducens nerve, and the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve. The signs which may be present on examining a patient with orbital apex syndrome include proptosis, defective vision, a relative afferent pupillary defect due to involvement of the optic nerve, restricted ocular movement due to the involvement of the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerve, facial pain and paresthesia over the forehead and the upper lid due to the involvement of the ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve, and anisocoria due to the involvement of the pupillary fibers. In addition, optic disc edema, pallor, or choroidal folds may also be seen. Pulsatile proptosis with a preceding history of a head injury may indicate a vascular etiology like a carotid-cavernous fistula.

# Evaluation

Evaluation is directed toward identifying the specific cause to institute appropriate therapy.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

Various tests are required in appropriate clinical settings.

- Complete blood count, peripheral smear

- Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein

- Gram stain and culture on blood agar

- Potassium hydroxide mount, Sabourauds dextrose agar

- Polymerase chain reaction

- Veneral Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test, Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA), rapid plasma reagin (RPR)

- Mantoux test, high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest, interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) for tuberculosis

- Blood sugars, glycosylated hemoglobin

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme

- Perineuclera and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P ANCA & C ANCA) and anti-nuclear antibody (ANA)

- Orbital doppler, orbital ultrasounds, CT angiography, and catheter angiography

**Radiological Investigations**

The 3-tesla MRI is superior to 1 to 1.5-tesla MRI to visualize the sellar anatomy and deduce the involvement of the cavernous sinus. MRI imaging with contrast and fat suppression may help us to visualize the orbital apex. Computed tomography (CT)  is superior to magnetic resonance imaging in visualizing the bony anatomy.



CT may help in imaging the paranasal sinuses to look for features of sinusitis, pre-existing orbital cellulitis, or subperiosteal abscess.

Hypointense in T1 weighted images and hyperintense in T2 weighted images. It has a cone shape when the infection is localized to the orbital apex and a dumbbell shape when the superior orbital fissure is involved.

MRI is preferred over CT.

- MRI helps detect optic nerve involvement by nerve enhancement and optic nerve sheath thickening.

- Idiopathic orbital inflammation may be characterized by involvement of the lacrimal glands, diffuse extraocular involvement, including tendons and orbital fat, and optic nerve enhancement.

- Thyroid ophthalmopathy is characterized by the involvement of the muscle bellies with sparing of the tendinous insertions.

- Tolosa Hunt syndrome is characterized by extension into the cavernous sinus through the orbital fissure.

# Treatment / Management

In the presence of significant optic nerve involvement, high-dose steroid therapy can be initiated with appropriate antimicrobial cover.

Bacteria

The organisms are isolated from swabs, tissue culture, blood or urine culture, and sensitivity to various antibiotics is deduced to initiate the appropriate systemic antibiotics.

Fungi

Mucor is usually treated by intravenous infusion of liposomal amphotericin B, a broad-spectrum anti-fungal agent, and aspergillus is usually treated with intravenous voriconazole.

Virus

Combined antiviral and steroid therapy is required for patients with OAS following herpes zoster ophthalmics. Intravenous acyclovir is the drug of choice for orbital apex syndrome following herpes zoster ophthalmicus.

Parasite

Cysticercosis is treated with anti-helminthic agents along with steroids to avoid adverse reactions due to intense inflammation caused by the death of the cestode. Surgical treatment is required in patients unresponsive to anti-helminthic therapy or with compressive symptoms.

OAS secondary to various systemic autoimmune disorders is usually managed by systemic steroid therapy. Patients with recurrences while tapering steroids and steroid dependant patients may need immunosuppressive. Methotrexate and azathioprine have been used successfully in the management of Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of OAS is the other two orbital syndromes - the superior orbital fissure syndrome and the cavernous sinus syndrome.

The superior orbital fissure syndrome (SOF), also known as the Rochen- Duvigneaud syndrome, is characterized by the involvement of the III, IV, VI, and the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve. Still, it differs from OAS with the sparing of the optic nerve.

The causative pathologies of these orbital apex syndromes are identical and are named individually to highlight the anatomical site of involvement and may represent a continuum of the same spectrum. One of the predominant features of OAS is total ophthalmoplegia; hence other muscular and neuromuscular causes of total ophthalmoplegia, like myasthenia gravis, congenital muscle fibrosis, and supranuclear palsy, should be ruled out.

# Prognosis

OAS responds to treatment within 48 to 72 hours once therapy is initiated. An accurate diagnosis of the etiology and instituting prompt specific treatment determines the prognosis of patients with OAS. A subset of patients with Tolosoa-Hunt syndrome may relapse, present with residual neurological deficits, and may need immunosuppressants. The presence of orbital apex syndrome in a patient with primary or secondary neoplasms and hematological malignancies may indicate a poor chance of survival.

# Complications

The involvement of the optic nerve may result in optic atrophy in certain patients, resulting in subnormal visual acuity, color vision, and permanent field defects. Sub-optimal management of infections and inflammations may prolong the clinical course and result in frequent relapses and permanent visual disability. Irreversible vision loss may occur on the involved side in case of optic nerve damage. If it extends to involve the cavernous sinus and is left untreated, it may be potentially fatal for the patient.

# Consultations

The crux of orbital apex syndrome lies in identifying the etiological cause, prompt diagnosis, and a multidisciplinary approach. Though the initial presentation may be to the ophthalmologist, referral to a neuro physician, neurosurgeon, diabetologist, otorhinolaryngologist, and ophthalmologist may be required in appropriate clinical settings.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with uncontrolled diabetes, immunosuppression, and undergoing immunosuppressive treatments for autoimmune and other conditions must be educated about the risks of infections and how a delay in seeking medical attention can cause a risk of spread of infections to involve vital orbital and intracranial structures. Patients must be educated about the symptoms of orbital apex syndrome and instructed to seek medical evaluation at the earliest.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Any patient presenting with a single cranial nerve palsy should be thoroughly investigated for focal neurological deficits and the involvement of other cranial nerves.

Neuroimaging, including computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, is done to diagnose associated bony abnormalities and soft tissue pathologies, respectively.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of orbital apex syndrome (OAS) requires a multidisciplinary approach to identify the cause and institute specific therapy. The ophthalmologist may be the first to diagnose orbital apex syndrome since most of the symptoms are visual, like a decrease in best-corrected visual acuity, diplopia, and reduced eye movement.

The otorhinolaryngologist plays a vital role by performing endoscopic resection of tissues through functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS), the histopathological examination of which may be vital in identifying the cause. Clinicians and rheumatologists are indispensable in managing OAS secondary to systemic autoimmune diseases. The oncologist plays a crucial role in identifying and managing orbital apex syndrome secondary to primary malignancies and metastasis, thereby improving the patient's chances of survival.

The vascular surgeon is essential in managing carotic cavernous fistula, sinus, and cavernous sinus thrombosis. The general physician, diabetologist, and infectious disease specialist are vital in managing infectious causes of orbital apex syndrome. The outcomes and prognosis of OAS depend on the cause and the patient's general systemic condition; hence a multispeciality approach may help adequately treat the patient.