Management of pancreatic ascites has three approaches: medical, endoscopic, and surgical intervention. A combination of these approaches is often used and clear superiority of one over another is not established.

Medical management consists of keeping the patient nothing by mouth and providing nutrition via total parenteral or nasojejunal route. Electrolyte imbalances often associated with active fistulous losses must be carefully managed. Somatostatin or octreotide are used to decrease the exocrine function of the pancreas and allow for healing of the disrupted duct, though their efficacy is questionable. For patients symptomatic from their ascites, repeated therapeutic paracentesis can be considered. A course of medical treatment for less severe cases is proposed since resolution without intervention can occur in approximately 30% to 50% of patients. The mainstay of management remains endoscopic therapy. A transpapillary stent at the pancreatic duct sphincter decreases intraductal pressure and diverts pancreatic secretion to the small bowel, thereby enhancing healing of the ductal disruption. Ideally, the ductal disruption should be bridged by the stent to maximize the outcome. In cases with large pancreatic necrosis, stenting through the disruption is challenging. In these cases, transpapillary stenting has shown a 48% to 100% success in controlling pancreatic ascites and distal pancreatic segment atrophies over time. Other endoscopic interventions include the use of injectable endoscopic glues or fibrinogen injections into the fistula to block further leakage of fluid into the peritoneum, though strong evidence is lacking for recommending their use. Overall, the endoscopic approach has shown promising results without the higher mortality and morbidity associated with a surgical approach.

The surgical approach to pancreatic ascites was formerly the standard of care in those failing medical therapy; however, now it is mostly reserved for failure of endoscopic intervention or for cases where there has been complete disruption of the pancreatic duct with no opacity proximal to the duct disruption on cholangiography. Surgical intervention must carefully weigh the risks and benefits for the individual patient. Specific surgical interventions depend upon the location of ductal disruption with distal lesions often being amenable to partial pancreatectomy if the remaining pancreatic volume is deemed likely able to carry out sufficient endocrine and exocrine function. More proximal lesions of the main pancreatic duct are often treated via pancreaticojejunostomy.