Patients who inherited a heterozygous gene for the disease will have relatively low HDL with no deposition of cholesterol esters within body organs. In contrast, individuals who inherited both the recessive genes will have a cholesterol deposition manifestation and an extremely low HDL.

Clinical Findings:

- Oral cavity: Cgolesterol deposition in tonsils is one the salient features. Cholesterol deposits appear yellow/orange in color, significantly enlarged in children and young adults—usually the first observed presentation.

- Cardiovascular system: Affected people will have premature atherosclerosis; therefore, they are more prone to coronary artery diseases, and strokes usually occur in an early stage of their age. Sometimes heart valves could also be affected.

- Nervous system: deposition of cholesterols in peripheral nerves inside Schwann cells cause demyelination of nerve fibers, which can appear in different manifestations: Syringomyelia-like neuropathy (loss of pain and temperature sensation mainly affecting the upper extremities), multifocal sensorial and motor neuropathy(relapsing-remitting pattern) and distal symmetric polyneuropathy subtype.

- Cornea: The clouding of the cornea has been reported and usually mild with no vision loss.

- Reticuloendothelial System: cholesterol deposition in these organs leads to hepatosplenomegaly. The involvement of spleen can also lead to thrombocytopenia. It also could be deposited within the lymph nodes.

- Pancreas: Diabetes has been reported due to deposition inside the Alpha cells of the pancreas.

- Hematologic manifestations: They include thrombocytopenia, reticulocytosis, hemolytic anemia, and stomatocytosis.

Tangier disease appears earlier in life in the 1st decade as a tonsillar enlargement and clouding of the cornea. Neuropathy and cardiovascular disease are the most devastating developments caused by Tangier's disease.

There are other clinical signs that can be found:

- Abdominal pain

- Chronic noninfectious lymphadenopathy

- Dry skin

- Nail dystrophy

- Facial diplegia