To better understand the molecular diversity among morphologically similar variants of DLBCL, high throughput technology such as gene expression profiling (GEP) could classify DLBCL into germinal center B-cells (GCB) and activated B-cells (ABC). Most of the patients with DLBCL show gene rearrangements in the heavy and light chains of the immunoglobulin. About 80% of DLBCL expresses B cell leukemia or lymphoma 2 (BCL2) protein, and 70% expresses B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) protein.MYC. The flow cytometry reveals CD19, CD20, CD22, CD45 and CD79a. CD30 can be seen in 25% and carries a favorable prognosis. Very rarely, they can express CD5, which has a poor prognosis.

More than 50% of the DLBCL expresses surface or cytoplasmic immunoglobulin IgM. Double hit lymphoma presents like DLBCL but has MYC along with BCL2 and/or BCL6. A triple hit lymphoma has rearrangements in BCL2, BCL6, and MYC. The (14;18) translocation is related to disseminated and nodal disease and does not imply a poor prognosis. The t(14:18) is seen in more than 90% of FL and about 30% of DLBCL patients. DLBCL commonly involves extranodal sites, which include the brain, bones, kidneys, adrenal glands, and other soft tissues.

Pathophysiology of non-Hodgkin B cell lymphomas is dependent on the type of lymphoma. B cell lymphomas are categorized based on the stage of B cell development that has resulted in malignancy (i.e., mantle cell vs. marginal cell lymphoma). Lymphadenopathy occurs due to the proliferation of B cells in or around the germinal center. Systemic symptoms (B-symptoms) are due to increased cytokine production. Elevated levels of LDH and uric acid suggest high cell turnover and release of degradation products into the bloodstream.