The standard of care for patients with or without metastasis includes interprofessional treatment with chemotherapy and local therapy, including surgery and radiotherapy (RT).

**Localized Disease**

Historically, Intergroup Ewing Sarcoma Study trials (IESS-I and IESS-II) showed better results with RT plus adjuvant chemotherapy with VACA (vincristine, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin) as compared to VAC (vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide). Due to the dose limitation of doxorubicin in dactinomycin regimens, trials thereafter demonstrated no significant impact on clinical outcomes with the omission of dactinomycin. Several studies evaluated the addition of ifosfamide and etoposide to standard chemotherapy. The Pediatric Oncology Group-Children’s Cancer Group study INT0091 demonstrated that the VACD-IE group had significantly better survival rates than the VACD group. Also, the VACD-IE group was associated with a lower incidence of local failure.

In the EICESS-92 study (European Intergroup Cooperative Ewing Sarcoma Study), VACA (vincristine, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin) and VAIA (vincristine, dactinomycin, ifosfamide, and doxorubicin) were compared in the standard risk patients (SR), and the effect of cyclophosphamide was found similar to ifosfamide in SR; however, cyclophosphamide was associated with increased toxicity.

Euro-EWING99-R1 trial (noninferiority trial based on EICESS-92 protocol) evaluated whether cyclophosphamide could replace ifosfamide in consolidation therapy including vincristine and dactinomycin in patients with standard-risk and it suggested that VAC (vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide) was statistically not inferior to VAI (vincristine, dactinomycin, and ifosfamide); however, VAI was associated with slightly higher 3-year EFS.

In a phase III trial (AEWS0031) from the Children’s Oncology Group (COG), patients on the standard arm received VDC alternating with IE every three weeks compared with patients who received the same chemotherapy every two weeks. The study demonstrated that 2-week intervals were more effective than 3-week intervals without increasing toxicity.

This has led to VDC/IE being the standard of care in the United States. The chemotherapy is started before the local therapy and continued postoperatively if no evidence of progression.

Surgical resection and RT are local control treatment approaches. There are no trials to date comparing the efficacy of these two approaches. The INT-0091 study did not find significant differences in local failure or event-free survival between surgery alone and RT alone. However, surgery plus RT was found to be associated with a lower incidence of local failure.

The data of 1058 patients from CESS 81, CESS 86, and EICESS-92 trials showed that surgery with or without postoperative RT had a significantly lower rate of local failure than definitive RT. The incidence of local failure was comparable in the preoperative RT group and surgery with or without the postoperative RT group.

Data from patients enrolled in INT-0091, INT-0154, or AEWS0031 studies were analyzed by COG that also showed surgery plus RT was associated with a lower risk of local failure than definitive RT.

**Metastatic Disease**

Similar systemic chemotherapy discussed previously are also used for metastatic disease. The addition of ifosfamide and/or etoposide to standard chemotherapy was found ineffective with no survival benefit for patients with metastatic disease.

A prospective study for the treatment of metastatic ES evaluated the dose-intensification approach (doxorubicin, vincristine with or without high-dose cyclophosphamide, followed by ifosfamide and etoposide); however, this approach did not change the survival rates.

The role of high-dose chemotherapy with hematopoietic cell rescue (HDC/HSCT) was also studied for patients with metastatic disease. EURO-EWING 99-R2pulm randomized trial of patients with lung metastases demonstrated no significant survival benefits in patients who underwent busulfan/melphalan high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue (BuMel) compared with those who underwent conventional chemotherapy with whole-lung irradiation.

Local control of the primary site should be considered for metastatic disease. In a retrospective study, patients treated with radiation therapy for local treatment of metastases had significantly better 3-year EFS (35%) than did the patients without local treatment (16%).

**Recurrent Disease**

Recurrent Ewing sarcoma is associated with poor prognosis, and treatment options are limited. Several studies evaluated gemcitabine, docetaxel, bortezomib, and ecteinascidin-743; however, no clinical benefit was reported. These patients should be considered for participation in clinical trials with new therapeutic agents if available.