Selecting appropriate statistical tests is a critical step in conducting research.

If you believe these numbers are wrong (alternate hypothesis) or you want to test the original hypothesis, you could collect blood from a set of subjects, measure the sodium concentration in each sample, and then take the mean of this set. If the mean is 140.1 mEq/L, you probably do not have convincing evidence that the numbers mentioned above are faulty (since 140 and 140.1 are fairly close). Thus, you would fail to reject the null hypothesis. However, if your sample has a mean of 70 mEq/L, this could be preliminary evidence (assuming, of course, rigorous methodology) and could end up rejecting the null hypothesis. The decision-making process would be trickier if the mean of the sample were 134 or 150 mEq/L. The t-test can be used to reduce subjective influence when testing a null hypothesis. Before testing a hypothesis, researchers should choose the alpha and beta values of the test. Loosely, the alpha parameter determines the threshold for false-positive results (e.g., if the actual mean serum sodium concentration is 140 mEq/L, but the t-test rejects the original hypothesis in favor of your new hypothesis), and the beta parameter determines the threshold for false-negative results (e.g., if true mean serum sodium concentration is 200 mEq/L, but the t-test fails to reject the old hypothesis). Methods of selection of alpha and beta are outside the scope of this article.

While the one-sample t-test allows you to test the statistic of a single set of numbers against a specific numeric value, the two-sample t-test allows testing the values of a statistic between two groups. In this case, a research question could be: do children and adults have the same mean serum sodium concentration? Testing this hypothesis would require sampling two groups, a group of adults and a group of children, and comparing the mean serum sodium concentrations between these two groups in a manner analogous to the one-sample t-test described above. The paired t-test is used in scenarios where measurements from the two groups have a link to one another. In the example above concerning the mean serum sodium concentration of children and adults, the implicit assumption was that all the measurements would all be completed at one point in time in a set of children and a distinct set of adults. However, it would also be possible to measure serum sodium concentrations in a set of children, wait a few years until they are adults, then measure the serum sodium concentrations again. Here, each adult sodium concentration corresponds to exactly one child sodium concentration. A paired two-sample t-test can be used to capture the dependence of measurements between the two groups.

These variations of the student's t-test use observed or collected data to calculate a test statistic, which can then be used to calculate a p-value. Often misinterpreted, the p-value is equal to the probability of collecting data that is at least as extreme as the observed data in the study, assuming that the null hypothesis is true.

In the above scenarios, before using any form of the t-test, one must ensure that the assumptions for the test have been met. This article does not list or explain these assumptions in detail. Please follow the guidance of a trained statistician when designing research studies and conducting data analysis.