Women presenting with an ectopic pregnancy will often complain of pelvic pain; however, not all ectopic pregnancies manifest with pain. Women of childbearing age who complain of pelvic pain/discomfort, abdominal pain/discomfort, nausea/vomiting, syncope, lightheadedness, vaginal bleeding, etc. should merit consideration for the possibility of pregnancy. Providers need to identify when the patient's last menstrual period occurred and whether they have monthly routine menstrual periods. If patients have missed their last period or have abnormal uterine bleeding, and are sexually active, then they may be pregnant and thus need further testing with a pregnancy test. Providers should identify any known risk factors for ectopic pregnancy in their patient's history, such as if a patient has had a prior confirmed ectopic pregnancy, known fallopian tube damage (history of pelvic inflammatory disease, tubal surgery, known obstruction), or achieved pregnancy through infertility treatment.

After obtaining a thorough history, an attentive physical exam is the next step. Evaluation of vital signs to assess for tachycardia and hypotension is pivotal in determining the patient’s hemodynamic stability. When examining the abdomen and suprapubic regions, attention should focus on the location of tenderness as well as any exacerbating factors. If voluntary/involuntary guarding of the abdominal musculature is elicited on palpation, this should raise concern for possible free fluid or other cause of peritoneal signs. Palpating a gravid uterus may suggest pregnancy, however, does not exclude other pathologies such as progressed ectopic pregnancy or heterotopic pregnancy. Patient’s presenting with vaginal bleeding would likely benefit from a pelvic exam to assess for infections as well as assess the cervical os. Bimanual pelvic exams additionally allow for palpation of bilateral adnexa to assess for any abnormal masses/structures or to elicit adnexal tenderness. A thorough history and physical exam will lend better certainty with testing obtained when evaluating for possible ectopic pregnancy.