Facial aging is due to the gravitational effect on soft tissues, the weakening of suspensory ligaments, and skin laxity, lipoatrophy, and bony resorption. This process results in the classic appearance of hollowing in the temporal, infracomissural, pre-jowl, and cheek areas. Sagging facial fat pads and surrounding anchoring ligaments deepen the MLFs, pre-jowl sulci, and nasojugal folds. Preferential bony resorption in the maxilla and periorbital bones also accentuates the palpebral-malar groove and causes sagging of lower eyelid soft tissues. Jowl formation from the descent of the buccal fat pad distorts the jawline and is a common reason for people to seek rhytidectomy. Jowls can often be addressed with SMAS rhytidectomy alone; however, if midface structures such as nasojugal folds or MLFs require rejuvenation, a deep-plane or composite rhytidectomy may be more appropriate.

A thorough understanding of anatomy, in particular the relationship of fascial planes to one another, is critical to the success of any surgery and the avoidance of complications. This is especially true in the face, where important structures are in close proximity, and damage may alter a patient's aesthetic appearance in a way that is not easily hidden or reversed. The elucidation of the SMAS, in particular, has had a huge impact on rhytidectomy, affecting both the current understanding of the facial aging process and the evolution of techniques to combat it. The SMAS is a fibrofatty layer of soft tissue overlying the parotid gland in the lateral face and investing the muscles of facial expression medially (see image). It is contiguous with the platysma inferiorly, the temporoparietal fascia (TPF) or superficial temporal fascia superior to the zygomatic arch, and the SMAS attaches to the deep investing fascia of SCM posteriorly.

Another major consideration in any facial surgery is the location of the facial nerve. The facial nerve exits the temporal bone of the skull via the stylomastoid foramen and travels through the parenchyma of the parotid gland, where it divides into its main branches at the pes anserinus, so-called because its branching appearance resembles that of a goose's foot. The facial nerve branches are classified into five major divisions: frontal/temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical, although several different branching patterns have been described.

Cervicoplasty, or neck lift, is often performed at the same time as face lifting to achieve a balanced, rejuvenated appearance. The Dedo classification of the aging neck is often used to assess the condition of the skin, submental adipose tissue, platysma, and bone positioning.

**Surgical Landmarks and Considerations**

- **Pitanguy's****line**Approximates the course of the frontal branch of the facial nerve: a line drawn from a point 0.5 cm below the tragus to a point 1.5 cm superior to the lateral brow. The nerve travels deep to the TPF and superficial to the superficial layer of the deep temporal fascia (see image).

- **McKinney's point:**Identifies the location of the GAN: 1/3 of the distance from the mastoid tip to the clavicular head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM). The GAN can be consistently found at this location at the posterior border of SCM before branching into anterior and posterior segments. The external jugular vein can also be found consistently 1 cm anterior to this location, parallel to the nerve.

- **Transverse facial artery:**A branch of the superficial temporal artery can be consistently found 2.5 cm lateral and 3 cm inferior to the lateral canthus. Injury to this vessel may contribute to necrosis of skin flaps and delayed healing. Usually, the buccal branches of the facial nerve are superior and inferior to this vessel, and Stensen's duct from the parotid gland lies inferior to it but in the same fascial plane.

- **Zuker's****point**: Used to identify the motor branch to the zygomaticus major muscle: midway along a line between the root of the helix and the oral commissure, and the nerve that crosses this point is typically the branch lying superior to the transverse facial artery (see image).

- **Facial nerve arborization**: In general, injuries to the facial nerve medial to a vertical line through the lateral canthus may be less apparent due to redundancy and anastomoses of buccal and zygomatic branches in the midface and do not generally warrant nerve exploration or repair.

- **Marginal mandibular nerve**: Located superficially to the facial vessels, often closely associated with or wrapping around the facial vein. Posterior to the gonial notch of the mandible, this nerve can be found below the inferior margin of the mandible in 20% of patients and above it in 80%. Anterior to the gonial notch, the marginal mandibular nerve runs superior to the lower edge of the jaw in nearly all patients.

- **Cervical branch of the facial nerve**:  Located 1 cm below the midpoint of a line running between the mentum and the tip of the mastoid process, the cervical branch innervates the platysma muscle as well as the depressor labii inferioris muscle.