Implicit biases are subconscious associations between two disparate attributes that can result in inequitable decisions. They operationalize throughout the healthcare ecosystem, impacting patients, clinicians, administrators, faculty, and staff. No individual is immune from the harmful effects of implicit biases. Unconscious bias-based discriminatory practices negatively impact patient care, medical training programs, hiring decisions, and financial award decisions and also limit workforce diversity, lead to inequitable distribution of research funding, and can impede career advancement.

When implicit biases are ignored, they jeopardize delivering high-quality healthcare services.

**Explicit versus Implicit Bias**

With explicit bias, individuals are aware of their negative attitudes or prejudices toward groups of people and may allow those attitudes to affect their behavior. The preference for a particular group is conscious. For example, a hospital CEO may seek a male physician to head a department due to his explicit belief that men make better leaders than women. This type of bias is fully conscious.

Implicit bias includes the subconscious feelings, attitudes, prejudices, and stereotypes an individual has developed due to prior influences and imprints throughout their lives. Individuals are unaware that subconscious perceptions, instead of facts and observations, affect their decision-making. Implicit bias and explicit bias are both problematic because they lead to discriminatory behavior and potentially suboptimal healthcare delivery.

We all hold implicit biases. Implicit bias is challenging to recognize in oneself; awareness of bias is one step toward changing one's behavior.

**Stigmatized Groups and the Implicit Association Test (IAT)**

Although we may consciously reject negative associations with stigmatized groups, it is virtually impossible to dissociate from a culture impregnated with such stereotypes. Patients from stigmatized groups may have one or more of these characteristics or conditions: advanced age, non-White race, HIV, disabilities, and substance or alcohol use disorders.

Implicit biases in healthcare are well-characterized by studies that use Implicit Association Tests (IAT) to evaluate medical decision-making toward stigmatized groups. The IAT measures the strength of associations between concepts and evaluations or stereotypes to reveal an individual's hidden or subconscious biases (Project Implicit - implicit.harvard.edu). The IAT is a highly validated measure for implicit biases; although vulnerable to voluntary control, the tool remains a gold standard in implicit bias research.

Implicit biases become destructive when they translate into microaggressions, defined as verbal or nonverbal cues that communicate hostile attitudes towards those from stigmatized groups.

**Implicit Bias Awareness and Training**

Comprehensive implicit bias training enhances the healthcare workforce's financial value, productivity, and longevity. The recognition of implicit bias is the first step in mitigating its effects. Many states in the US require implicit bias training for employment and licensure in the healthcare profession. The ongoing engagement of implicit biases among HCPs promotes cultural safety in healthcare organizations, representing a critical consciousness that welcomes accountability in the collaborative effort to provide culturally safe healthcare as defined by patients and their communities. HCPs should be aware of their implicit biases but not blame themselves when situations out of their control arise—respect for themselves, peers, and patients is the utmost priority. Progress toward reducing implicit bias is limited without personal discomfort and vulnerability.

Currently, very limited knowledge exists on how to conduct effective implicit bias training. However, studies show that incorporating mindfulness, coalition-building, and personal retrospection alongside broader structural changes is integral in reducing the harmful effects of implicit bias in the clinical environment.

**Implicit Bias Training: State Legislation and Requirements for Healthcare Providers**

California - AB241

Illinois - Sec. 2105-15.7

Michigan - R 338.7001

Maryland - HB28. Sec. 1-225

Minnesota - Sec. 144.1461

Washington - Sec. 43.70.613

Massachusetts - 243 CMR 2.06(a)3

New York - S3077

Pennsylvania - HB 2110. Title 63. Sec. 2102a

Indiana - HB 1178

Oklahoma - HB 2730

South Carolina - H 4712. Session 123

Tennessee - SB0956 and HB0642