Myoglobin is a relatively small globular protein composed of a single polypeptide chain of 154 amino acids and an iron-containing heme prosthetic group identical to that of hemoglobin.

Due to its relatively low molecular mass, myoglobin may leak from muscle tissue into the bloodstream due to skeletal or cardiac muscle injury and then show up in the urine.

Since myoglobin is also present in skeletal muscle and is cleared almost exclusively through glomerular filtration, myoglobin will increase after acute muscle trauma, acute or chronic kidney injury, severe heart failure, prolonged shock, and in patients with myopathies of a variety of causes.

In addition, serum myoglobin levels have been used to evaluate neuromuscular diseases such as muscular dystrophy, muscular atrophy, and polymyositis.

In studies conducted on myopathies in children, serum myoglobin concentrations for subjects 0.6 to 20 years were lower than in adults, so using assays with a high sensitivity of 2 µg/L or less is necessary.

Investigations in children with muscle diseases, however, have been somewhat disappointing. Only 2 out of 14 patients studied had increased serum myoglobin concentrations. The patients evaluated in this study were relatively young, ranging from 0.3 to 16 years of age, and were presumably in the relatively early stages of the disease.

Myoglobin measurements are also used for the diagnosis of patients with rhabdomyolysis.

Other symptoms seen with rhabdomyolysis include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, tachycardia, fever or chills, dehydration, confusion, or an altered level of consciousness which may present as a coma.

Although myoglobin is easily filtered by the glomerulus and rapidly excreted into the urine in health, it is important to recognize the presence and severity of myoglobinuria and intervene as early as possible. Aggressive hydration or alkalinization of urine may facilitate the excretion of myoglobin and prevent acute kidney injury.