**Dosage Formulations**

- Oral:Ofloxacin tablets 200 mg, 300 mg,400 mg

- Topical: Ofloxacin Ophthalmic Solution USP 0.3% is used

- Topical: Ofloxacin Otic Solution USP, 0.3%

General infections receive oral or intravenous ofloxacin. In severe infection, intravenous administration is preferable as it allows higher dosing, leading to higher drug concentrations, ultimately increasing clinical cure rates.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Renal Impairment:**Clearance of ofloxacin is reduced in patients with impaired renal function (creatinine clearance rate ≤50 mL/min), and dosage adjustment is required.

**Hepatic Impairment:**No dosage adjustments are provided in the manufacturer's labeling; use caution. Administer ofloxacin with caution in patients with hepatic insufficiency and /or impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Contraindicated during pregnancy or breastfeeding and in children < 18 years old due to possible damage to the cartilage. Based on available data, an increased risk of teratogenic effects has not been observed following ofloxacin use during pregnancy, and literature is conflicting regarding their safety in humans. Ofloxacin should be used for pregnant women only if the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk to the fetus. Alternative antibiotics should be preferred till more safety data is available. (FDA Pregnancy Category C).

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Ofloxacin is distributed in breastmilk at low levels. Fluoroquinolones have traditionally not been used in infants because of concern about adverse effects on the infants' developing joints. However, recent studies indicate little risk. The calcium in milk might prevent the absorption of small amounts of fluoroquinolones. Insufficient data exist to prove or disprove this assertion. Developmental problems have been reported in two infants exposed to ofloxacin in breastmilk, but their mothers were also exposed to several drugs during the peripartum period; hence the adverse drug reaction cannot necessarily be attributed to ofloxacin. The use of ofloxacin is permitted in nursing mothers with monitoring of the infant for potential effects on the gut flora, such as diarrhea or candidiasis (thrush, diaper rash).

Avoiding breastfeeding for 4 to 6 hours after a dose should decrease the infant's exposure to ofloxacin in breastmilk. Maternal use of an ear drop or eye drop that contains ofloxacin presents a negligible risk for the nursing infant. To substantially decrease the amount of drug that reaches the breastmilk after eye drops, apply pressure over the tear duct by the corner of the eye for one minute and remove the leftover solution with an absorbent tissue. A literature search reveals that ofloxacin was used to treat two pregnant women with MDR tuberculosis. Subsequently, the children had normal development except for a mild speech delay and hyperactivity in the other.