In pheochromocytoma, episodes of hypertension tend to be paroxysmal and are described in the literature as associated with headaches, tachycardia, and sweating. However, it is not uncommon for patients to present with sustained resistant hypertension. The presence of hypertension resistant to multiple antihypertensive medications therapies should raise suspicion for pheochromocytoma.

Episodes of severe hypertension may be precipitated by dopamine receptor antagonists, beta-blockers (typically non-selective), tricyclic antidepressants, corticosteroids, sympathomimetics, and neuromuscular agents; or may be noted in the setting of surgery or induction of anesthesia.

When associated with familial syndromes associated with pheochromocytoma, the condition may be diagnosed during screening tests (after diagnosis has already been established); many such patients do not have hypertension at diagnosis. Giant lesions can paradoxically present only as abdominal lumps with the paucity of the characteristic symptoms of pheochromocytoma owing to tumoral necrosis, comparatively higher volume of interstitial tissue compared to chromaffin cells, and encapsulation by the connective tissues.

**Familial Pheochromocytomas**

Pheochromocytomas are known to occur in multiple hereditary syndromes: von Hippel Lindau (VHL) syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). All these are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

VHL disease: Typical phenotype would include hemangioblastomas (brain and spine), retinal angiomas, clear cell renal cell carcinomas, pheochromocytomas, paragangliomas, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, endolymphatic sac tumors of the middle ear and cystadenomas (pancreas, epididymis, and broad ligament). The disease is usually caused by mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor gene.

MEN2: Typical phenotype includes medullary thyroid cancer, pheochromocytomas, primary hyperparathyroidism, mucocutaneous neuromas, skeletal deformities, intestinal ganglioneuromas, and cutaneous lichen amyloidosis. This syndrome is caused by mutations in RET proto-oncogene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

NF1: This is caused by mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor gene and is also inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.

**Subclinical Presentation**

Pheochromocytoma can have varied clinical presentations depending on tumor secretory patterns. Dopamine-secreting tumors and tumors with scant hormone secretion can result in subclinical & mild disease presentation. Dopamine-secreting tumors tend to secrete noradrenaline simultaneously; these hormones exert counteractive effects on vessels and attenuate the development of clinical signs and symptoms.

Secretory paragangliomas (secretory tumors outside the adrenal gland) can have varied clinical presentations depending on the location and size of the tumor. Head and neck region paragangliomas (HNPGL) are parasympathetic in origin compared to pheochromocytomas and other secretory paragangliomas, which are sympathetic in origin.

The recent increase in genetic screening of family members has also resulted in increased detection of patients with subclinical diseases. Succinate dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB) mutation in tumors have been reported to have undifferentiated catecholamine biosynthetic phenotype containing low concentrations of catecholamine and can have a subclinical presentation before it reaches a larger size to produce signs and symptoms.

Catecholamine secretory patterns can give rise to a different clinical picture. Adrenaline-secreting tumors usually lead to paroxysmal episodes of hypertensive crisis and otherwise can have a silent course, whereas noradrenaline-secreting tumors usually lead to essential hypertension. Chronically elevated levels of noradrenaline can result in the down-regulation of adrenoreceptors and lead to mild clinical presentation.

Patients with subclinical disease also appear to have significant cardiovascular risk. Some cases reports of sudden hypertensive crisis associated with sudden death have been described.

Another important aspect of the subclinical presentation is incidentalomas discovered on CT scanning. These findings are prevalent in 6% of autopsy studies and 4% of CT scans.

In summary, examination findings may include the following:

- Hypertension

- Tachycardia

- Anxiety

- Diaphoresis

- Subcutaneous neurofibromas

- Cafe-au-lait macules

- Thyroid mass

- Axillary freckling

- Lisch nodules on the iris

- Retinal angiomas

- Abdominal mass