**Laboratory**

24-hour urine collection: To evaluate the uric acid level, urine pH, citrate excretion, and volume. Urine pH below 5.5 is usually seen with uric acid nephrolithiasis.  Hyperuricosuria is not necessarily associated with hyperuricemia which should be investigated separately with a serum sample. Hyperuricosuria is usually defined as daily urinary uric acid excretion >800 mg for men and >750 mg for women.

On careful review, having different normal values based exclusively on gender makes very little sense as there is nothing that would justify using sex alone to differentiate normal from abnormal chemistry with regards to uric acid crystallization or stone formation.  Ultimately, it is the chemistry that determines stone risk.  If temperature, uric acid content, fluid volume, concentration, and pH are identical between two specimens, should gender alone determine that one patient (female) is diagnosed with hyperuricosuria and will form stones while the other patient (male) is normal and not expected to produce stones? Would not body weight, uric acid concentration, or renal function be better parameters to help determine the presence of hyperuricosuria? There is a similar problem with hypercalciuria. In our practice, we typically will use a daily urinary excretion of 800 mg as being sufficient to consider treatment in uric acid and calcium oxalate stone formers.

Spot urine: To evaluate urine pH and routine urinalysis. Typical uric acid crystals can often be observed on microscopic urinalysis given sufficient aciduria.

Blood workup: To evaluate creatinine, uric acid levels, GFR, serum electrolytes, calcium, and a complete blood count.

**Radiographic**

After necessary fluid resuscitation and pain control, imaging is performed. Urgent radiological investigations are done in patients with signs of infection, solitary kidneys, and when the diagnosis is unclear.

**Plain Abdominal X-ray (kidney, ureter, and bladder or KUB)**

The KUB is simple, quick, and extremely useful in tracking stones over time. However, uric acid stones are radiolucent, which will not typically show up on standard plain abdominal x-ray films but can be easily identified by CT scan.

**Ultrasonography**

Ultrasound is easily available, cheap, free from harmful ionizing radiation, and can be performed easily at the bedside. It can easily diagnose kidney stones if they are large enough (more than 0.4 cm), identify hydronephrosis, echogenicity, and other abnormal renal changes. However, it cannot differentiate hydronephrosis from ureteropelvic junction obstruction or the benign extra-renal pelvis. It also cannot identify ureteral stones or differentiate uric acid from calcium stones. Ultrasound can also be used to measure the resistive index, which is elevated in the presence of any obstructive uropathy on the affected side.

The combination of a KUB and a renal ultrasound is very helpful in the diagnosis of renal stone disease, especially where a CT scan is not available for some reason. This combination has sometimes been called a "poor man's CT scan".

**Non-Contrast Computed Tomography (CT) Scan**

Non-contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the kidney is the standard imaging modality in the diagnosis of nephrolithiasis. It is more precise and effective than intravenous urography or ultrasound. It can identify the size and density as well as the location of any kidney or ureteral stones. It can also reveal associated deformities even in the absence of uric acid stones.

Non-contrast CT scan studies, often referred to as the "renal colic CT scan", are preferred because the contrast makes the urine "white" on the images. Since stones will also appear white, adding contrast will tend to hide the stones and make them harder to locate and diagnose. It will also interfere with the follow-up KUB which will now only show contrast and not the stone, making it useless for tracking unless it is done prior to the CT scan which is what we recommend in all cases of abdominal pain with any of the following:

- Personal or family history of kidney stones

- Flank pain

- Abdominal pain that has moved

- Constant patient movement

- Hematuria

- Crystalluria

- Urinary tract infection