Automated perimetry is an indispensable tool for assessing the visual field. The analysis of visual field defects helps in the localization of the disorders along the visual pathway. It is also of use in diagnosing and following individuals with glaucoma and other optic nerve and retinal disorders. Optic nerve pathologies like ischemic optic neuropathies, optic neuritis, and papilledema show characteristic field defects on visual field evaluation. Visual field examination is also useful in the assessment of legal blindness.

**Results of Humphrey Field Analyzer in Various Clinical Scenarios**

Field defects indicative of glaucoma (early-onset glaucoma to advanced disease ) include:

- A nasal step respecting the horizontal meridian

- Paracentral scotoma or cluster of low sensitivity points 10 to 20 degrees from the blind spot

- A seidel's scotoma, where the paracentral scotoma reaches the blind spot

- This seidel's scotoma then extends in an arcuate shape to reach the horizontal meridian (arcuate defect)

- With the progression of the disease, a ring defect is formed when two arcuate scotomas are seen in the superior and inferior hemifields

- Advanced glaucomatous defects show a severe generalized defect with the sparing of a temporal island.

Other than glaucoma, perimetry can detect pathologies affecting the optic nerve pathway (**Figure**) and neuropathies.

**Idiopathic intracranial hypertension:**The field defects commonly found in these patients are enlargement of the blind spot, generalized constriction of the visual field, loss of inferonasal visual field, or nasal step.

**Papilledema:**Enlargement of the blind spot is the most commonly seen visual field defect, with constriction of the visual field seen in late cases where optic atrophy has started.

**Optic neuritis:**The common field defect patterns documented in the optic neuritis treatment trial (ONTT) were diffuse field loss, altitudinal field defect, central scotoma or centrocecal scotoma, arcuate or double arcuate defects, and hemianopic defects. Patients with hemianopia field defects were more likely to show demyelinating lesions on magnetic resonance imaging of the brain.

**Ischemic optic neuropathy:**Superior or inferior hemifield or altitudinal defects are the most common. Other field defect patterns include central scotoma, diffuse-field loss, or quadrantic field defects.

**Toxic optic neuropathy:**Central scotomas are the commonly found field defect in cases of ethambutol optic neuropathy.

The visual loss due to vigabatrin is usually irreversible.

**Disorders involving chiasma:**Bitemporal hemianopia (**Figure**) and junctional scotomas are the common field defects that indicate lesions affecting the optic chiasma. Perimetry helps in the follow-up of the patients after surgery for pituitary gland tumors.

**Disorders involving the lateral geniculate nucleus:**Lateral geniculate nucleus is situated in the posterior aspect of the thalamus. It receives dual blood supply from the anterior choroidal artery (AChA, a branch of the internal carotid artery) and the lateral posterior choroidal artery (LPChA, a branch of the posterior cerebral artery).

Depending on the artery involved, the field defect may be a wedge-shaped congruent homonymous sectoranopia (LPChA lesion) or a quadruple sectoranopia, or loss of upper and lower homonymous quadrants (AChA lesion) (**Figure**).

**Disorders involving the optic tract:**Homonymous hemianopia (usually incongruous) is the typical field defect in these cases. Perimetry is useful in localizing the lesions along the visual pathway. Follow-up perimetry has been found to show improvement in 50 to 60% of these cases.

**Optic disc drusen:**Disc drusens do not cause visual symptoms; however, field defects are common. Field defects are more common in individuals with superficially located or visible disc drusens. The field defects vary from inferonasal visual field defects, arcuate field defects, nasal steps, and enlargement of blind spots to constriction of visual fields.

**Tilted optic disc:**A congenital anomaly where the optic nerve makes an angled entry into the eye. This results in inferior tilt, more commonly inferonasal ectasia or crescent, which causes a myopic refractive error. Perimetry of these individuals shows a superotemporal field defect similar to the defect found in chiasmal disorders. However, unlike chiasmal disorders, field defects due to the tilted disc crossing the vertical midline as these defects are caused by the refractive error induced by the tilt.

**Toxoplasma retinochoroiditis:**Lesions within one disc diameter of the optic nerve head are known to involve all the layers of the retina. Visual field testing of such lesions after healing has shown absolute scotomas with breakout to the periphery, probably because of the involvement of photoreceptors and the nerve fiber layers. Visual field testing in these cases will help in testing the treatment efficiency of such cases.********

**Malingering:**Individuals****who feign visual loss for personal gain may present with complaints of tunnel vision or constriction of the visual field. This can be differentiated from constriction of the visual field due to organic causes by testing their field by kinetic Goldmann perimetry. The degree of peripheral constriction of the visual field will remain the same even after increasing the distance between the individual and the tangent screen in the case of malingerers.

Unlike individuals with an organic cause for the peripheral constriction will have a lesser extent of peripheral constriction when their distance from the tangent screen is increased. Another way of differentiating functional visual loss from organic causes is that the constriction of the visual field will be the same for stimuli of different sizes or contrast.

Individuals may also claim to have monocular hemianopias. These can be differentiated from organic causes by performing binocular visual field testing on the Goldmann perimeter. The monocular hemianopia is compensated by the overlapping visual field of the normal eye in the case of individuals with organic causes.

**Branch retinal vein occlusion:**The field loss is segmental with involvement of the retina from the macula up to the periphery corresponding to the area drained by the occluded vein. Kinetic perimetry can better document the peripheral field loss as automated perimetry documents the field loss up to 30 degrees.

**Central retinal vein occlusion:**Both central and peripheral scotoma is more common in patients with ischemic central retinal vein occlusion than in non-ischemic central retinal vein occlusion. The more common peripheral field defect seen with ischemic central retinal vein occlusion is an inferonasal defect.

**Branch retinal artery occlusion:**The field defect varies with the duration of onset of the disease. Patients presenting within one week of onset may have central scotoma or central altitudinal defects corresponding to the area of affection. Peripheral field defects commonly found are inferior nasal or superior nasal field defects.

**Retinitis pigmentosa:**The field defect characteristic of this disease is gradually progressive peripheral field loss. The superior visual field is often involved first due to the early involvement of the inferior retina.

**Birdshot chorioretinopathy:**Constriction of the peripheral visual field, enlargement of blind spot, central or paracentral scotoma, or generalized diminished sensitivity are some of the common visual field defects associated with birdshot chorioretinopathy.

**Migraine:**Patients with migraine may present with visual field defects. The prevalence of field defects is known to increase with the individual's age and the disease's duration.

**Riddoch Phenomena:**This is also known as statokinetic dissociation.