After the area has been prepared with a sterile solution, the two oblique "arms" of the Z-plasty are drawn at both ends of the scar to be revised. Generally, it is preferable to mark the Z-plasty prior to injecting the local anesthetic, as adding volume will distort the tissue. There are myriad options for flap design, with larger angles resulting in greater lengthening and rotation of the scar and smaller angles causing the opposite. The prototypical Z-plasty has equal-length arms with 60-degree take-off angles from the central scar, which will rotate the scar by 90 degrees and lengthen it by 75%, but different angles may be used, and the two limbs do not necessarily have to have the same lengths or angles; these asymmetric Z-plasties are known as "skew Z-plasties," and are most commonly used when an anatomic structure prevents a Z-plasty design with symmetric limbs.

When angles greater than 60 degrees are required, some surgeons will divide the angle into two flaps (e.g., a 90-degree angle split into two flaps of 45 degrees each) that will both come off the same end of the primary scar, thus resulting in a "compound" Z-plasty. The advantage of this technique is that it minimizes standing cutaneous deformities but at the expense of an additional scar. When scars are particularly long, it may be helpful to add more limbs to the Z-plasty along the length of the scar in addition to those placed at the ends; this is called a "serial" or "running" Z-plasty (see figure).

After injection of local anesthetic and sterile preparation of the surgical field, the central scar is excised, and hemostasis is obtained. The Z-plasty limbs are then incised with a No. 15 scalpel, and the flaps elevated in a subdermal plane, assuming the procedure is being performed on the skin - a submucosal or submuscular plane may be required in other areas, such as the palate (see below). The wide undermining of the surrounding area - roughly 2 to 4 cm - should be performed to facilitate flap transposition. Hemostasis is then obtained again, taking care to avoid aggressive electrocautery on the undersurface of the flaps to minimize the chance of flap necrosis due to disruption of the subdermal plexus. The flaps are then transposed, and the incisions are closed in layers, providing sufficient tissue depth.

An important application of the Z-plasty in a non-cutaneous location is that of the cleft palate. The Furlow double-opposing Z-plasty technique, originally described in 1986, is commonly employed to repair clefts of the soft palate while simultaneously lengthening the palate and reorienting the muscles to improve velopharyngeal function.

Another common use of the Z-plasty is the release of stenosis, which is analogous to simpler scar releases. In these applications, the central limb of the Z-plasty should be designed along the rim of the stenosis or along the free edge of the scar web, which may be initially counterintuitive to the surgeon, who would be tempted to divide the scar transversely. By placing the central segment of the Z along the scar rather than across it, the flaps can then be transposed in such as way as to lengthen, i.e., release the stenosis or web.

Lastly, several local flap techniques include Z-shaped designs without being true Z-plasties because no flap transposition takes place - only advancement and/or rotation. Examples of these are the "planimetric" Z-plasty, in which opposing triangles of tissue are removed to allow triangular flaps to advance and close a defect without leaving a linear scar along the axis of the original lesion or scar; this technique is very similar to S-plasty closure, which is an offset variant of simple fusiform excision and closure. The O to Z-plasty is another good example, in which a circular defect is closed with a Z-shape due to the advancement and rotation of two flaps into its center, even though the flaps do not undergo transposition and therefore do not constitute a true Z-plasty (see figures). On the other hand, transposition of a rhombic flap does constitute the use of a true Z-plasty, albeit a skewed Z-plasty in which one flap does nearly all of the movement and the other, because of an obtuse angle, moves very little - the evidence for rhombic flaps being Z-plasties is clear, however, when the final Z-shaped scar is observed (see figure).