Heart failure symptoms are representative of 2 key factors: the inability to adequately oxygenate tissues and the overloading of volume in the heart. With HF, the patient will exhibit fatigue, dyspnea, and exercise intolerance due to the decreased perfusion of essential organs with oxygenated blood. To understand other symptoms of HF, it is important to appreciate the cardiac cycle and how blood flow changes with an overloaded heart. A helpful way of classifying heart failure to describe symptomatology is right versus left-sided heart failure. Left-sided heart failure involves, intuitively, the left side of the heart; this is the most common HF of the 2, and a common cause would be chronic hypertension. The left side of the heart pumps out to the body; therefore, a higher-pressure environment in the body will cause an increased workload on the left side of the heart and eventual left-sided heart failure. The most common cause of right-sided heart failure is left-sided heart failure, and the mechanism of such is explained below. The pathophysiology of right versus left-sided heart failure involves following the excess volume of blood. With left-sided heart failure, the blood will back up and create a volume-overloaded state in the lungs. This increase in volume in the lungs will create a high-pressure environment that can lead to pulmonary hypertension, as well as explain symptoms such as dyspnea. As the lungs continue to increase pressure, the right side of the heart will begin to work harder to overcome this increased pressure gradient. The increased workload of the right ventricle will cause hypertrophy and can lead to right-sided heart failure as well. With right-sided heart failure, the right heart will become overloaded and back up into the body through the SVC and IVC. This will cause symptoms such as peripheral edema, jugular venous distension, and hepatic congestion as the body adapts to its increased volume state.