**Azoospermia Management**

In this era of advanced assisted reproductive techniques, infertile couples have several options to complete their family biologically.

**Obstructive Azoospermia**

The main aim of managing obstructive azoospermia is to correct the site of obstruction by using reconstructive surgical techniques, e.g., vasoepididymostomy and vasovasostomy. Assisted reproductive techniques are useful in patients suffering from congenital absence of vas deferens, as surgical reconstruction in these patients is not feasible. In cases of ejaculatory ductal obstruction, surgical correction with transurethral resection is done to achieve the patency of the ejaculatory ducts. Intraoperative vasography gives better results than vasoepididymostomy. Transurethral resection improves semen parameters in about 50 to 70% of cases.

Sperm retrieval for assisted reproduction is an excellent option for managing obstructive azoospermia, as successful sperm recovery is close to 100%. ICSI has increased pregnancy rates as the sperm obtained are motile, and samples can also be cryopreserved.

The area of obstruction most commonly found is in the epididymis. Current success rates for vasoepididymostomies are 85% patency rates with a 50% spontaneous pregnancy rate. Collecting and cryopreserving sperm at the time of surgery is recommended if the outcome is unsuccessful. Inguinal approaches for microscopic vasovasostomy have been described, and laparoscopic and robotic techniques for vas isolation before a microsurgical anastomosis.

In obstructive azoospermia, microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration (MESA) is optimally used for sperm retrieval when possible. This is almost always successful for extra-testicular obstructions. If the blockage is intratesticular, then TESE or TESA will be required. Post-vasectomy obstructions can be treated with microscopic vasectomy reversals, which currently achieve a reported post-operative patency rate of 90 to 97%.

Obstruction from scarring, inflammation, or ejaculatory duct cysts is typically treated with transurethral resection of the duct. Reported pregnancy rates following such procedures are 12.5% to 31%, while side effects include failure, incontinence, reflux into the seminal vesicles and ejaculatory ducts, as well as epididymitis. Intraoperative transrectal ultrasound and the use of methylene blue to verify patency can help reduce complications and increase the safety of the procedure.

Percutaneous procedures, including TESE, percutaneous epididymal aspiration of sperm, and percutaneous testicular biopsy, can be performed to obtain sperm in couples desiring fertility. However, the highest rates of successful sperm retrieval are reported with microdissection testicular sperm extraction techniques.

**Non-Obstructive Azoospermia**

Advanced assisted reproductive techniques are required for most patients with non-obstructive azoospermia. Both ICSI and microscopic testicular sperm extraction (micro-TESE) are potentially beneficial to these patients. In testicular sperm aspiration (TESA), a needle is inserted into the testicular parenchyma percutaneously. The failure rate of sperm retrieval in non-obstructive azoospermia is high and varies with the underlying etiology. Overall success in sperm retrieval in these patients is reportedly as high as 75% but averages about 50%. There is also a significant risk of vascular injury. In addition, it has been observed that the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities and DNA damage in the sperm is relatively high in patients with non-obstructive azoospermia, and potentially inheritable infertility-related genes may be passed on to male offspring. Repeat micro-TESE procedures can be performed successfully, if necessary, to retrieve sperm.

To stimulate spermatogenesis in cases of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism or pre-testicular azoospermia (secondary hypogonadism), gonadotropin analogs or FSH and HCG are preferred. This therapy has demonstrated success in achieving at least some sperm in the ejaculate of 75% to 77% of men with non-obstructive azoospermia due to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, but treatment may require as long as six months.

While up to about 11% of azoospermic men who received hormone therapy (usually clomiphene) have shown improvement with the presence of sperm in the ejaculate, there is no standardization of this therapy and no good-quality randomized trials. Therefore, many experts and the European Association of Urology (EAU) do not recommend the general use of hormone therapy in men with non-obstructive azoospermia and primary hypogonadism.

The role of estrogen receptor modulators, gonadotropins, and aromatase inhibitors in men with primary hypogonadism and non-obstructive azoospermia is much more controversial. These are frequently used to improve sperm parameters in infertile oligozoospermic men, and some evidence supports their use.

Treatment of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is relatively effective. One regimen for azoospermic men due to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is the pulsatile administration of 5 to 20 micrograms of GnRH every two hours using a portable infusion pump. The return of sperm in the semen was generally noted after six months of therapy, and 77% of initially azoospermic men were found to have spermatogenesis after 12 to 24 months of treatment.

FSH stimulation before GnRH therapy seems to improve the outcomes. GnRH is only effective in men with normal pituitary activity. Gonadotropin treatment with HCG (with or without FSH) is preferred in patients with decreased or absent pituitary function. The suggested dosage is 1,000 to 3,000 IU two to three times weekly. This typically leads to sperm production after 3 - 6 months. If unsuccessful, FSH is added at a 75 to 150 IU dose twice a week.

Men with non-obstructive azoospermia tend to have a higher incidence of other health-related disorders, including pituitary prolactinomas, various neoplasms (including Sertoli cell, Leydig cell, and germ-cell tumors) and have three times the overall risk of developing a future malignancy compared to infertile men without azoospermia.

The only absolute contraindications for an attempt at sperm retrieval in male non-obstructive azoospermic patients are Y chromosomal microdeletions of the AZFa or AZFb subregions and post bilateral orchiectomy as the sperm retrieval rates will be zero! Even in cases of Sertoli cell-only syndrome, there is a reported sperm retrieval success rate with micro-TESE of at least 24%, with a mean average rate of about 50%.

Good predictive indicators of successful sperm retrieval with micro-TESE in non-obstructive azoospermic men include focal type Sertoli cell-only syndrome, late-stage maturation arrest (compared to early maturation arrest), hypospermatogenesis (as opposed to maturation arrest or Sertoli cell-only syndrome), and viable sperm visible in the seminiferous tubules on testis biopsy. With micro-TESE, the successful sperm retrieval rate is about 50%, while ICSI also has approximately a 50% success rate giving an overall pregnancy rate of only 25%. Given the associated costs and potential genetic consequences, couples should seriously consider artificial insemination or ICSI using donor sperm or adoption before starting advanced reproduction treatments.