It is important to know that spontaneous recovery does occur and hence the role of treatment remains questionable.

Corticosteroids are the main treatment with a common regimen consisting of 60 mg to 80 mg a day for approximately 1 week. There is also some evidence stating corticosteroids and antivirals combined improved the outcome of BP compared with corticosteroids alone. A meta-analysis in 2009 found that steroids alone were the treatment of BP and the addition of antivirals did not meet statistical significance.

For patients with severe facial nerve palsy (House-Brackmann IV or greater) can be offered combination therapy with steroids and antivirals. There was no significant increase in adverse reactions from antivirals compared with either placebo or corticosteroids. Patients should be instructed to use eye lubrication and patch the affected eye at bedtime to reduce the likelihood of a corneal abrasion.

Surgical options can be considered when there is no improvement in symptoms after weeks or months. Techniques to present eye desiccation range from eyelid weights to muscle transfers. Facial nerve decompression has not been found to be a recommended treatment option and is considered on a case by case basis. Prior studies evaluating facial nerve compression have been of poor quality. It is recommended to refer to a specialist (plastic surgery, neurology, otolaryngology) sooner rather than later if no improvement has been seen in 4 weeks to explore more aggressive treatments.