Lenvatinib is a multiple receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor that demonstrates potent antiangiogenic properties indicated as monotherapy or combination therapy for certain malignancies. Lenvatinib is FDA-approved for radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC), unresectable or advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC).

Lenvatinib was approved for its use in radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer following a randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled Phase III study (SELECT). The trial included 392 participants with radioactive iodine-refractory DIC and was subject to random assignment to either a treatment group of 24 mg lenvatinib once a day or the placebo group at a 2 to 1 ratio.

The randomized, non-inferiority, Phase III trial REFLECT demonstrated lenvatinib use in HCC as non-inferior to sorafenib, a kinase inhibitor approved to treat HCC. The trial also demonstrated lenvatinib prolonged progression-free survival of 7.3 months and an objective response rate (ORR) of 24% compared to sorafenib, 3.6 months and 9%, respectively. The REFLECT Phase III trial's efficacious results gained FDA approval for its use as first-line therapy in unresectable or advanced HCC in patients not undergoing prior treatment.

Lenvatinib was also approved as a combination therapy with everolimus for RCC based on a randomized phase II trial.

**FDA Approved Use**

- Radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC)

- Unresectable or advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)

- Advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC)