**Chronic Pain**

There are over 100 million people in the United States who would meet the criteria for chronic pain syndrome.

Chronic pain is estimated to cost over $600 billion annually in lost productivity and medical treatment. Lifetime chronic pain is common, with over 50% of adults being affected at some point in their lives. Over 40% of chronic pain patients indicated their pain is not controlled, and over 10% suffer long-term disabling chronic pain.

Research has shown the lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

The incidence of chronic pain is increasing due to the prevalence of obesity-related pain conditions, increased survival of trauma and surgical patients, an aging population, and heightened public awareness of pain as a treatable condition.

**Opioids**

Opioids are the most used therapeutic agent for chronic pain and are derived synthetically from generally unrelated compounds. Opiates are derived from the liquid of the opium poppy either by direct refinement or by relatively minor chemical modifications. Both opioids and opiates act on three major classes of opioid receptors: mu, kappa, delta, and several minor classes of opioid receptors like nociceptin and zeta. Simplifying significantly, the mu receptors are thought to provide analgesia, respiratory suppression, bradycardia, physical dependence, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and euphoria. The kappa agonism can yield hallucinations, miosis, and dysphoria. The delta receptor likely has pain control and mood modulation effects, but some have suggested that mu agonism is necessary for the delta receptor to function strongly for analgesia.

In the past, providers in the United States rarely prescribed opioids for any condition except chronic cancer pain. This approach began to change in the 1990s.  Dr. James Campbell addressed the American Pain Society (now bankrupt) in 1995 and urged healthcare providers to treat pain as the fifth vital sign.