A mechanism for LAST has been difficult to establish, as its clinical presentation is highly variable. Additionally, the number of randomized clinical trials exploring specific mechanisms is limited. Most theories are based upon which binding site, ion channel, signaling pathway, or enzyme is involved in CNS and cardiac toxicity or their treatment.

Local anesthetics inhibit many components of the oxidative phosphorylation pathway. Thus LAST affects the 2 organs that are inherently less tolerant of anaerobic metabolism, the heart, and brain.

Cardiac toxicity is an important component of LAST, and most instances are related to accidental intravascular injection. Local anesthetics bind to and inhibit voltage-gated sodium channels. Leading to conduction disturbances, contractile dysfunction, and ventricular arrhythmias that are seen in local anesthetic-induced cardiac toxicity. The incidence of cardiac toxicity increases with bupivacaine, a longer-acting anesthetic. Bupivacaine avidly blocks inactive sodium channels during the cardiac action potential at a concentration of 0.2 micrograms/ml. This is done in a “fast-in/slow-out fashion,” meaning bupivacaine binds very quickly to a large proportion of sodium channels during the cardiac action potential, but releases from the channels slowly during diastole, resulting in a large proportion of the medication accumulating at 60 to 150 beats per minute. Lidocaine at 5 to 10 micrograms/ml will also result in substantial sodium channel blockade during a cardiac action potential. However, in contrast to bupivacaine, lidocaine follows the “fast-in/fast-out” principle, meaning it releases from sodium channels rapidly during diastole. This allows for a quicker recovery, and a reduced incidence of cardiac toxicity when compared to bupivacaine.

CNS toxicity is another important consequence of LAST. While it is comprised of many initial prodromal features, it most often manifests as seizures. One mechanistic theory is centered around Twik-related acid-sensitive K+ channels (TASK). These pH-sensitive channels generate neuronal potassium "leak" currents. Local anesthetic inhibition causes membrane depolarization and increased neuronal excitability. As these channels are expressed throughout the brain, this is the suggested mechanism for seizures in this setting.