The following equipment may be needed:

- Operating microscope

- Ossicle holder

- Microdrill for sculpting

- Otologic instrumentation tray

- Ossicular prosthesis

There are three types of synthetic ossicular prostheses: partial ossicular replacement prosthesis (PORP), total ossicular replacement prosthesis (TORP), and incus interpositional or incus replacement prosthesis. PORP links an intact stapes suprastructure to the malleus or tympanic membrane. TORP links the stapes footplate to the malleus or tympanic membrane. An incus interpositional prosthesis is used when the long process is compromised.  It connects the stapes superstructure to the remnant incus long process. An incus replacement prosthesis is used when the incus is missing, and the prosthesis is placed between the manubrium and stapes capitulum. Ossiculoplasty improves hearing with a success rate of 75% for PORP and 68% for TORP at 12 to 18 months.

The use of autologous versus artificial synthetic materials for prostheses has been debated since the 1950s. Autografts were first used in ossicular reconstruction in 1957 by Hall.

The first use of artificial ossicular prostheses dates back to 1952 with the use of vinyl-acryl plastic. Over the last few decades, artificial prostheses have been manufactured from plastics (polyethylene, polytetrafluorethylene, Teflon, plastipore, proplast, silicone), metals (stainless steel, titanium, platinum, gold, tantalum), and biomaterials (aluminum oxide ceramic, bioglass, Ceravital, hydroxyapatite, carbon).

Artificial prostheses must be inert in the middle cavity to prevent foreign body reaction and chronic inflammation as they can result in an osteolytic process that leads to ossicular remnant necrosis.

Hydroxyapatite is composed of calcium phosphate ceramic and is similar to the mineral of bone and has good biocompatibility.

Titanium is lightweight, rigid, biocompatible, and has gained recent popularity.

Bone cement serves as a good adjunct for ossiculoplasty. It is easy to prepare and apply with fast setting times and good biocompatibility. It can be molded to augment the ossicular remnant, allowing ossicle preservation. Ninety percent of patients who underwent bone cement reconstruction have reported an air-bone gap closure of 20dB or better.

Today, the use of autograft and homograft prostheses has largely been replaced by the more readily available, versatile, and durable artificial synthetic prostheses.