The physiologic factors controlling LES function are interrelated in a complex fashion. They include the autonomic nerve supply, gastrointestinal hormones, and specific characteristics of the circular smooth muscle at the EGJ. A defect in any of these three controlling mechanisms would result in a clinically recognizable symptom complex. Abnormalities with either high or low LES pressure have been shown to relate to these specific aspects. Studies of the effects of various foods and other agents that decrease or increase LES pressure are of therapeutic interest in patients with reflux symptoms. Decreases in LES pressure after fat ingestion may explain a mechanism for many cases of fatty food intolerance. Pressure decreases after chocolate ingestion, after smoking, and after alcohol; all have strong therapeutic implications in patients with chronic heartburn.

With GERD being a chronic and highly prevalent disorder worldwide, it is a diagnosis that a healthcare provider will undoubtedly see. Understanding the myogenic factors, neural circuitry, and neurotransmitters involved in maintaining the basal tone, sphincter relaxation, and induction of TLESR is of significant clinical importance in the clinical and pharmacologic approaches to anti-reflux therapy.

While it is well known that the LES must relax for vomiting to occur, it is also clinically important to understand at which age this is a normal process. Esophageal peristalsis has been observed by ultrasound examination in the 2nd trimester of pregnancy, but the LES is found to be immature at term. Reflux of breast milk from the stomach into the esophagus through the immature LES is quite common. Approximately 75% of newborns suffer from regurgitation within the first two weeks of their life. The pressure of the LES becomes equal to that of adult pressure at approximately the 3rd to 6th week of life, with regurgitation almost entirely resolved without intervention by the end of the first year of life.

As the LES plays an essential role in swallowing, detailed knowledge of its physiology and pathophysiology can assist in the understanding and diagnosis of esophageal pathology, dysphagia, and related disorders. Normal LES function allows food transit from the esophagus into the stomach and prevents the reflux of gastric contents back into the esophagus. Improper relaxation of the LES can lead to food entrapment in the esophagus, achalasia, and an increased risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. An incompetent LES can lead to GERD, increasing the risk for metaplasia and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Rapid identification of esophageal disorders is of utmost clinical importance and can impact a patient's quality of life and long-term morbidity and mortality.