HMPV infection can lead to visits to the Emergency Department or a primary care physician’s office. An interprofessional team approach is an important component of disease prevention, recognition, and treatment. If the patient is stable for treatment as an outpatient, the doctor and nurse need to educate parents and patients on proper handwashing and the importance of wiping down surfaces with disinfectants at home. This is crucial when there are other members of the family at home, especially those who are susceptible to infections.

In the hospital setting, the nurse should ensure that the patient is under respiratory droplet precautions and placed in a separate part of the hospital, especially if being admitted in order to prevent transmission. The doctor, nurse, patient, the parents of the patient, or anyone involved in the direct care of the patient should wear a mask to cover their nose and mouth. They should also wash/sanitize their hands before entering and exiting the room. The doctor should also verify the patient’s medical history in order to determine illness severity, progression, and those who are at high risk.

While the workup of the patient is in progress, the nurse should alert the doctor regarding changes in vital signs and respiratory status. This helps identify the need for acute management for the patient, such as supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation. If needed, the pharmacist can help educate patients and parents that treatment is mainly supportive, and there are no pharmacological treatments available for HMPV. These measures enhance patient-centered care to improve outcomes and provide safety for the patient with HMPV as well as others.