Specialized dive tables and procedures are required for planning all dives at elevations greater than 1000 ft (305 m). These tables should be used for any elevation over 300 ft (91 m) if the planned depth of the dive is greater than 145 ft. No correction is necessary for dives between sea level and 299 ft (90 m).

Standard depth gauges are zeroed at sea level and read less than zero at altitude. Some gauges can be calibrated or re-zeroed at altitude before the dive. Alternatively, the diver will roughly correct for altitude by adding approximately 1 fsw/1000 ft in altitude, with a conversion to ffw if indicated.

Dive computers use decompression algorithms to reduce the risk of decompression illnesses by continually updating depth profiles and re-computing the decompression risk variables. Most modern dive computers will automatically adjust for starting altitude and freshwater versus seawater conditions, but some require manual input. Many calculate additional risk according to temperature, but none can factor in individual risk factors such as age, body weight, and/or habitus, presence of patent foramen ovale (PFO), alcohol consumption, or dehydration. Many dive computers formally tested have significant errors and are unreliable at altitude. Consequently, meticulous manual dive profile planning is essential, even with dive computers.

Adequate periods of acclimatization should be calculated into the dive profile. Additional post-dive surface intervals (time spent at the altitude of the dive) should be planned to reduce the nitrogen load before any travel (whether by air or automobile) with altitude changes greater than 1000 feet (305 m).

Hemoconcentration may occur as a protective function of acclimatization with elevations in erythropoietin seen as early as 2 hours after arrival to altitude and a red cell mass increase within 2 to 4 days.

Prior exposure to cold immersion improves adaptation to cold and may mitigate the risk of hypothermia. Surface-level swims, with or without a wetsuit, within days of the dive may improve cold adaptation.

Having a portable one-man hyperbaric chamber or Gamow bag on-site for higher risk altitude dive profiles is recommended.