**Classification**

The pharmacology behind antibiotics includes destroying the bacterial cell by either preventing cell reproduction or changing a necessary cellular function or process within the cell. Antimicrobial agents are classically grouped into two main categories based on their in vitro effect on bacteria: bactericidal and bacteriostatic. Common teaching often explains that bactericidal antibiotics "kill" bacteria and bacteriostatic antibiotics "prevent the growth" of bacteria. The true definition is not so simple. To accurately define each category, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) must be understood. The lowest concentration that inhibits visible bacterial growth at 24 hours is the MIC.

Bacteriostatic activity is further defined by an MBC to MIC ratio greater than 4, whereas an MBC to MIC ratio less than or equal to 4 is bactericidal.Streptococcus pneumoniae.

**Types of Antimicrobial Agents**

**Drug Class and Specific Antibiotics**

**Bacteriostatic**

- Glycylcyclines: Tigecycline

- Tetracyclines: Doxycycline, minocycline

- Lincosamides: Clindamycin

- Macrolides: Azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin

- Oxazolidinones: Linezolid

- Sulfonamides: Sulfamethoxazole

**Bactericidal**

- Aminoglycosides: Tobramycin, gentamicin, amikacin

- Beta-lactams (penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems): Amoxicillin, cefazolin, meropenem

- Fluoroquinolones: Ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin

- Glycopeptides: Vancomycin

- Cyclic Lipopeptides: Daptomycin

- Nitroimidazoles: Metronidazole

**Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics**

Pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) parameters are used together to maximize the efficacy of antimicrobial therapy through optimization of dosing in patients. Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion are the PK components that affect the antibiotic concentration over time.

Bactericidal activity is either concentration-dependent or time-dependent. If an antibiotic displays concentration-dependent killing, for example, fluoroquinolones or daptomycin, the efficacy of bacterial killing increases as the concentration of the antibiotic increases.

After an antibiotic is absorbed, the distribution influences the extent of antimicrobial activity. The total amount of drug in the body to serum concentration is the volume of distribution.

The location of infection is crucial to note because some antibiotics are inappropriate for treating certain infections. In the treatment of meningitis, for example, the penetration of the blood-brain barrier is critical if one wants to achieve therapeutic antibiotic levels at the site of infection to prevent treatment failure.