Migraine is a clinical diagnosis. A good history and physical examination are necessary to diagnose.

The necessary information that has to be gathered consists of these simple questions:

- Demographic features of the patient: age, gender, race, profession

- When did the headache start?

- Where does it hurt? Location, irradiation.

- What is the intensity of the pain?

- How is the pain? Which are the qualitative characteristics of pain?

- How long does the pain last?

- In which part of the day does the pain appear?

- How has it evolved since it started?

- What is the frequency of appearance?

- What are the triggering situations?

- Simultaneous symptoms?

- Is it related to sleep?

- How does it get better or worse?

- Which medications do you take to make it better? What is the frequency of this medication?

Following are certain criteria specified by the International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition (ICHD-3), which can help in diagnosing migraine with aura:

- A. At least two attacks that fulfill criteria B and C

- B. One or more of the following aura symptoms that are reversible:

- Visual, retinal, sensory, brainstem, motor, speech, or language

- C. At least three of the six characteristics below:

- At least one aura symptom that spreads gradually over greater than 5 minutes
- Two or more symptoms in succession
- At least one unilateral aura symptom
- At least one positive aura symptom
- Each aura symptom lasts 5 to 60 minutes
- Aura accompanied by or followed by headache within 60 minutes

- D. No other ICHD-3 diagnosis accounting for the symptoms

Patients should also be inquired about somatosensory disturbances, such as spreading unilateral numbness or tingling in the face and arm, as well as about disturbances in speech or thinking. Some aura symptoms, as described below, could indicate uncommon types of migraine:

- Motor weakness

- Dysarthria

- Hypacusis

- Diplopia

- Ataxia

- Vertigo

- Tinnitus

- Decreased level of consciousness

There is no diagnostic test for migraines. Hence, most patients do not need any neuroimaging. Neuroimaging may be indicated in the following situations:

- Sudden onset of severe headache

- New neurological symptom or sign-on examination

- Headache not responding to treatment

- Headache lasting > 72 hours

- New-onset headaches in patients greater than 50 years of age

- A significant change in the frequency, pattern, or severity of headaches

- Severe headache pain ("worst headache of life") or headache causing awakening from sleep

- New-onset headache in patients with HIV infection or cancer

- Associated symptoms or signs suggestive of meningitis or stroke