Upon pregnancy diagnosis, it is important to discuss the results with the patient. It is essential to determine whether the pregnancy was desired, if the patient has a strong support system, if she feels safe in her current living conditions, and what resources she has available. The patient should be provided with appropriate protections and resources as deemed appropriate by the medical team.

Patients with confirmed intrauterine pregnancies in the emergency department should be directed to follow-up with an obstetrician. Pregnancy must be followed by a healthcare professional. Regular imaging via ultrasound is the standard of care in the United States to monitor fetal development. Additionally, genetic testing is also part of routine pregnancy care.

High-risk pregnancies are considered to be those that pose a potential health or life risk to the mother or fetus.

Patients should be encouraged to start or continue to take prenatal vitamins; some patients may need additional folic acid supplementation if their fetus is at increased risk of neural tube defects, as per the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.

In the case of a patient with an indeterminate first-trimester ultrasound with an initial beta-HCG level under the discriminatory zone, the hemodynamically patient should be instructed to return in 48 hours for repeat beta-HCG level testing. If this same patient is unstable, an emergent OB/GYN consultation is needed, as ruptured ectopic is the most worrisome consideration. Hemodynamically stable patients with ultrasound findings concerning for ectopic pregnancy (not ruptured), mass, or other complications should be directed to an obstetrician.