Typically, scarlet fever is associated with acute pharyngitis. As a result, fever, sore throat, pain with swallowing, and cervical adenopathy is present. If there is no pharyngitis, the source of infection can be a wound or burn which is infected with GAS. The two vectors of infection can both cause scarlet fever and are not distinguishable from one another. The rash itself is a blanching, papular rash. It is distinguished from the macular rash found an allergic reaction by its insidious emergence and lack of confluence of the lesions. This lack of confluence is the primary reason it feels like sandpaper. Also of note, there are no vesicles or pustules present. Vesicles are more associated with the “dew on a rose petal” appearance of chickenpox in its initial stages. Pustules are more indicative of a local infection such as impetigo or erysipelas. The rash develops within 2 to 3 days after infection but can be delayed up to 7 days. The trunk, underarms, and groin are affected first, and then it spreads to the extremities. Usually, the palms and soles are spared. The circumoral area is also spared, making it pallor-like. The “strawberry tongue” begins with a white coating of the tongue with hyperplastic papillae. As the white coating resolves, the papules remain, giving the appearance of a strawberry. Pastia lines are found in the folds of the skin such as the neck, antecubital fossa, and groin. This appears as a linear accumulation of papules around pressure points. After the initial rash begins to resolve, a period of desquamation can occur and last up to two weeks in some cases.