A coordinated treatment program should include patient input for compliance.

- **Immediate Care:**The patient with an extremely high blood alcohol level should be treated for acute alcohol poisoning and stabilized.

- **Drug therapy:**Prescribe drug therapy based on culture and sensitivity results for the identified yeast or bacteria. Most patients require a course of one or more of the azoles or polyenes. Rare or resistant microbes require an echinocandin or an antibiotic.

- **Diet therapy:**An essential treatment of auto-brewery syndrome is diet modification requiring high protein and low carbohydrates until symptoms subside. Sugar is fermented into alcohol, and a diet that eliminates simple and complex sugars will decrease the alcohol fermented from the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tract.

- **Supplements:**Multistrain probiotic supplements help balance bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract and have been used in the treatment of auto-brewery syndrome but have yet to be studied as a treatment

The risk of relapse of auto-brewery syndrome is lessened by avoiding carbohydrates. A nutritionist should be involved in the treatment and management of the disease.

Anything that causes an imbalance between harmful and beneficial bacteria can potentially increase fermentation in the gut. Antibiotics should be avoided if possible. If a course of antibiotics is required, a plan should be in place to again test for fermenting pathogens and treat if necessary.

In single and various combinations, dietary carbohydrate control, antifungal or antibiotic therapy, general antibiotic avoidance, and probiotics have all been reported as successful treatments. However, patients with long-term, chronic relapses may require fecal microbiota transplants.