The temporal bone is divided into four portions: the squamous, which makes up part of the lateral portion of the cranial vault; the tympanic, which contains the middle ear cleft; the mastoid, which contains the air cells contiguous with the middle ear via the antrum, and the petrous pyramid, which contains the otic capsule - the densest bone in the human body. Temporal bone fractures typically occur in the setting of high-energy blunt head trauma; the force required to fracture the temporal bone is approximately 1,875 lbs.

Historically, temporal bone fractures have been divided into longitudinal and transverse patterns based on the vector of fracture propagation relative to the petrous pyramid.

Otic capsule sparing fractures travel from the squamosal portion of the temporal bone and the posterosuperior wall of the external auditory canal through the mastoid air cells and middle ear into the tegmen mastoideum and tegmen tympani (roof of the mastoid air cells and middle ear, respectively). These fractures typically result from a blow to the temporoparietal region and account for 95% of temporal bone fractures.

Otic capsule-disrupting fractures pass through the otic capsule and proceed from the foramen magnum to the petrous pyramid and otic capsule. These fractures do not typically affect the ossicular chain or the external auditory canal but almost always result in sensorineural hearing loss and are two to eight times more likely to result in CSF otorrhea than otic capsule sparing fractures.

Most facial nerve injuries due to temporal bone fractures occur in the labyrinthine portion, specifically in the geniculate ganglion.