Capsaicin, a member of the vanilloid family, is a group of compounds that possess a vanillyl group. It binds as an agonist to vanilloid receptor subtype 1 (TRPV1 - transient receptor potential V1), which is an ion channel type trans-membrane receptor. The TRPV1 receptor also is stimulated by temperature changes, physical abrasion, pH changes, and endogenous lipids. When activated, it starts a depolarization cascade that allows the influx of sodium and calcium ions. TRPV1 receptors are found on C- and A-delta fibers in the nociceptive sensory pathway. When depolarization occurs along fibers, signals propagate into the spinal cord to the brain.

Capsaicin reduces pain transmission by desensitizing the sensory afferent axons. This phenomenon occurs due to the high permeability of the TRPV1 channels for calcium ions. This excess influx of calcium causes loss of mitochondrial function (as well as other cellular organelles) and thus renders the afferent nerve fiber inoperant.

As these nerve fibers lose functionality, all of the mediators produced within these fibers will also show a marked decrease. One of these substances is a well-known potent local pain mediator, substance P.

Constant usage of capsaicin further promotes calcium influx into more of these nociceptive nerve fibers. This promotes preformed substance P release during the first applications, which causes initial neurogenic inflammation, but after repeated application, capsaicin depletes the neuron of substance P, and the further inoperability of the cell prevents it from forming more of this pain chemo-mediator.

An alternative mechanism of analgesia is suggested by studies using a potent capsaicin analog, resiniferatoxin. Activation of TRPV1 receptors by resiniferatoxin (RTX) results in a sustained rise in free intracellular calcium levels, which leads to calcium-induced cytotoxicity and the selective death of cells bearing TRPV1 receptors. RTX produced a prolonged increase in intracellular calcium in vanilloid-sensitive neurons in cultures of human dorsal root ganglion, but adjacent non-TRPV1 bearing neurons were not affected.