The exact cause of GPA is not well understood. The etiopathogenesis has been credited to anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Several complex interactions involving genetics and microbes have been implicated in pathogenesis. It is now widely presumed that ANCA are responsible for inflammation in GPA. Defective immune-regulatory responses to environmental insults such as infection or autoantigens lead to excessive production of Th1 and Th17 cytokines (interleukin 17, tumor necrosis factor, and interferon-gamma), which in turn can lead to the development of an inflammatory granulomatous vascular lesion. ANCA in GPA reacts with proteinase 3 (PR3), an enzyme prevalent in neutrophil granulocytes. ANCA activates neutrophils, which leads to increased adherence to endothelium and induces their de-granulation that can damage endothelial cells.

Genetic associations in GPA include:

- A defective allele for alpha 1 antitrypsin

- Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), which is involved in T-cell activation

- Proteinase 3 (PRTN 3) gene

- Major histocompatibility complex, class II, DP alpha 1 (HLA-DP) gene

- Certain types of FC gamma receptor III b on the surface of neutrophils and macrocytes/monocytes

Infections:  In addition to the initiation and exacerbation of the vasculitic process, infectious agents have also been known to modulate the clinical phenotype of the disease.

- Bacterial: Colonization with Staphylococcus aureus has been hypothesized as an initiating factor for inflammation seen in GPA.

- Viral: Association with various viruses including hepatitis C virus (HCV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and parvovirus have been reported.

Medications: Various medications like hydralazine, phenytoin, antithyroid medications, sulfasalazine, and allopurinol have been implicated.