Current ACG guidelines recommend that a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis should include at least two of the following: abdominal pain consistent with acute pancreatitis, a serum lipase level at least three times the upper limit of the normal range, and findings of acute pancreatitis on abdominal imaging. These guidelines also state that imaging (including computed tomography scans and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) need not be performed in every patient at the time of diagnosis, but in those whose symptoms fail to resolve or in whom the diagnosis remains in question 2 to 3 days after admission to hospital.

Whenever a patient with acute pancreatitis is admitted to the hospital, an assessment of the initial severity of pancreatitis, including evidence of organ failure (particularly respiratory, cardiovascular, or renal compromise) should be made. The recently revised Atlanta classification can be used to classify these patients as mild, moderately severe, or severe cases of acute pancreatitis.

Laboratory work ordered on admission should include a complete metabolic panel, complete blood count, serum lipase, lactate, serum triglycerides, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. The best assessment of evolvement of acute pancreatitis can be made using a rising blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level or a rising hematocrit level.

In patients with chronic pancreatitis, amylase/lipase levels can be elevated or normal. Fecal fat, stool elastase, and alpha-1-antitrypsin level can also be checked for these patients. An HbA1c level can provide an estimate of the possible endocrine dysfunction caused by chronic pancreatitis. Other tests including IgG4/ANA levels, genetic testing (CFTR, SPINK1, PRSS1) can be ordered if the patient is young or has a positive family history. Imaging studies including Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or CT scans can be ordered. These imaging studies may reveal pancreatic calcifications, pancreatic ductal obstructions, or dilations.