The treatment for choledocholithiasis is the removal of the obstructing stones via endoscopic means. An ERCP can be performed under general anesthesia, with the patient in either prone, left lateral, or supine position, though prone is the most common position used. The endoscopist will then place a duodenoscope into the second portion of the duodenum and advance a catheter and guidewire into the common bile duct. A sphincterotome then is used to cut the papilla, using cautery, and enlarge the ampulla of Vater. Often, the stones will be released with this maneuver. A variety of snares and baskets can be used to grasp the stones and remove them if needed. A balloon catheter also can be used to sweep the common bile duct to remove any stones. The endoscopist also can place a stent in the common bile duct, which will serve two purposes. First, any remaining stones will be softened, and potentially easier to remove with a second ERCP. Second, the stent will allow bile drainage to occur, preventing obstructive jaundice. If the stones are large, stuck, or there are many stones within the biliary tree, surgical removal is indicated. A laparoscopic or open common bile duct exploration is needed to remove any stones that can not be removed via endoscopic methods. An elective cholecystectomy is also recommended, during the same hospital admission, to prevent future episodes of choledocholithiasis.

Cholecystectomy in patients with choledocholithiasis remains controversial, but most experts recommend it. Arguments can be made against cholecystectomy in patients who cannot tolerate surgery well (eg, due to age, medical problems), as long as the organ is asymptomatic.

Cholecystectomy is not indicated for primary CBD stones. Other surgical options include open choledochotomy, transcystic exploration (a technique to clear the CBD of stones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy), percutaneous extraction, and extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. The choice of treatment for choledocholithiasis found during surgery being done for cholelithiasis or cholecystitis includes intraoperative common bile duct exploration, intraoperative ERCP, and postoperative ERCP. The intraoperative procedure can be performed if consent was obtained preoperatively. Otherwise, ERCP is recommended at a later time, but during the same hospitalization.

There are no medications that will cure choledocholithiasis. However, a one-time dose of 50 mg to 100 mg rectal indomethacin can be used to prevent post-procedure pancreatitis if the pancreatic duct was manipulated during an ERCP. Antibiotics are typically not needed for choledocholithiasis unless the patient also has associated cholecystitis or cholangitis.