As previously stated, patients may have a history of viral infection or recent vaccination. The most common initial symptom is acute onset of intense pain. This pain occurs in 95% of patients. The pain may involve:

- Shoulder, with or without radiation to the upper arm (39.7%)

- Neck with radiation down the arms (35.4%)

- Scapular or posterior chest wall region radiating to the arm or anterior chest wall or both (18.8%)

- Distribution of the lower brachial plexus (6.1%).

It is a constant pain with variable quality, often exacerbated by movement of the shoulder or arm. It can be somewhat relieved by elbow flexion and shoulder adduction (minimizing shoulder and arm movement). On average, the pain may last from two to three hours to more than eight weeks.

Weakness ensues after the acute onset of pain. The onset of the weakness is sudden in 80% of patients. It can coincide with the pain or in a delayed fashion. Seventy percent of patients report the weakness within two weeks of the onset of pain. Fifty percent of patients have isolated shoulder girdle weakness, while only 10% have weakness localized to the distribution of a single peripheral nerve. The most commonly affected muscles are the spinati, serratus anterior, deltoid, biceps, and triceps. Despite this, cases of unilateral or bilateral phrenic nerve neuropathy have been described, resulting in diaphragmatic paralysis. Sixty-six percent of cases are unilateral, and 34% of cases are bilateral. Of the cases that are unilateral, 54% involve the right side. No statistically significant relationship has been described between unilaterality of the disease and the patient's dominant side. A winged scapula may be observed in 20% of cases.

Sensory deficits have been described in 78% of cases. Paresthesias have been described in 35% of cases. Isolated paresthesias or a combination of paresthesia and hypoesthesia are the most common sensory complaints. They usually involve the deltoid and lateral aspect of the upper arm and the radial aspect of the forearm.

Patients also reported other, less common symptoms such as autonomic dysfunction, craniofacial dysmorphisms, and unusual skin folds.