Granulation tissue is considered a contractile organ, characterized histologically by the presence and proliferation of fibroblasts, keratinocytes, endothelial cells, new thin-walled capillaries, and inflammatory cell infiltration of the extracellular matrix. The formation of granulation tissue is complex and requires an intricate interplay between the cell types at the wound site.

**Fibroblasts**

This cell type is responsible for the formation of the granulation tissue extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM initially consists of type III collagen, which is a rapidly produced and a weaker form of collagen that is ultimately replaced by the stronger type I collagen at the end of wound healing and scar formation. TGF-β is a growth factor produced by both fibroblasts and keratinocytes during the wound healing process and has been shown to induce granulation tissue formation and the differentiation of myofibroblasts.

**Keratinocytes**

The keratinocytes are responsible for re-epithelialization of the epidermis after injury. The ability of the keratinocytes to differentiate and proliferate depends on the stem cell population at the wound site and stimulation by various cytokines and growth factors (epidermal growth factor, TGF-α & KGF: keratinocyte growth factor). The cell to cell binding between keratinocytes is looser during the wound healing process and becomes stronger by its completion. Immediately after injury, the keratinocytes adjacent to the wound undergo an activation process that alters gene expression and promotes their migration over the bed of the wound.

In an autocrine and paracrine fashion, keratinocytes produce signals that regulate more keratinocyte activation and stimulate other cell types (fibroblasts) during wound closure. IL-1 increases keratinocyte migration and proliferation, activate nearby fibroblasts, increases KGF (keratinocyte growth factor). TNF-α acts similarly to IL-1 and activates the FGF (fibroblast growth factor) pathway. TGF-β, produced by keratinocytes and fibroblasts, acts to revert keratinocytes to their basal cell phenotype. This signaling process is deficient in venous ulcers and contributes to non-healing.

**Endothelial Cells**

The endothelial cells are responsible for revascularization/angiogenesis at the site of the wound. Initially quiescent, the resident endothelial cells become activated by several angiogenic factors, including fibroblast growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), angiogenin, and transforming growth factors α & β (TGFα & TGFβ). Once activated, the endothelial cells undergo four events in the formation of new blood vessels:

- Protease production: breakdown of ECM

- Chemotaxis

- Proliferation

- Remodeling and differentiation

Angiogenesis requires that the endothelial cells grow quickly into the new tissue from the older intact blood vessels that branch out and form anastomoses with other vessels and restoring blood flow. This process is important for the restoration of the flow of nutrients and oxygen to the site, removing waste, and transportation of leukocytes to the site. Without this, granulation tissue formation would be stunted and wound healing prolonged.

**Myofibroblasts**

Myofibroblasts are responsible for the contractile process in wound closure. When granulation tissue is forming, fibroblasts slowly modulate into myofibroblasts, characterized by bundles of actin microfilaments along their cell's plasma membrane. Prostaglandins, bradykinins, epinephrine, and norepinephrine modulate the function of contraction by the myofibroblasts. Eventually, the actin binds to the extracellular component fibronectin, attaches to the collagen fibers, retracts, and draws collagen fibers toward it. The mass effect causes wound contraction and closure.

**Immune Cells**

Neutrophils (first to the wound) and macrophages are the primary immune cells at the site of wounds that aid in wound healing and protect against invading pathogens. Both cell types are phagocytic, meaning that they engulf and ingest pathogens, debris, and damaged tissue, allowing for protection and healing.