Although the treatment and management of gallstone ileus are still under controversy, the main therapeutic goal is the extraction of the offending stone after resuscitation. Gallstone ileus involves three key elements: cholelithiasis, biliary-enteric fistula, and intestinal obstruction. Cholelithiasis and fistula are typically addressed by stone removal and fistula closure. Stone removal typically addresses intestinal obstruction. The current surgical options are 1) simple entero-lithotomy; 2) entero-lithotomy, cholecystectomy, and fistula closure (one-stage procedure); and 3) entero-lithotomy with cholecystectomy performed later (two-stage procedure). Most conclude that entero-lithotomy alone is the best option for most patients. Some have advocated that a one-stage procedure (cholecystectomy and fistula repair) should be considered in low-risk patients in good general condition and adequately stabilized preoperatively. Two-stage surgery is usually an option for those with persistent symptoms despite entero-lithotomy surgery. Whether interval biliary surgery should be performed at the same time as the obstruction relief (one-stage procedure), performed later, or not at all remains unanswered.

Endoscopic management can be done but it depends on the location of the stone. Anecdotal reports indicate that it is difficult and can be associated with bleeding. Plus, if the bowel enterotomy is large, closure can be difficult.

Prior to surgery, patients need aggressive hydration and the replacement of electrolytes. Admission to the ICU for patients with numerous comorbidities is recommended.