Islet beta cell autoimmunity antedates the onset of LADA by several years. This was observed in nearly two-thirds of patients with LADA in a prospective study and substantiated autoimmunity as the first insult. This is followed by insulin resistance that causes overt hyperglycemia and the diagnosis of autoimmune insulin-independent DM. An assessment of insulin resistance (IR) using HOMA-IR has shown patients with LADA have IR similar to T2DM even after correction for BMI. Thus, the pathophysiology of LADA involves both autoimmunity and the metabolic derangements of IR.

Most patients with T2DM and some with LADA and T1DM present with features of metabolic syndrome (MetS). Irrespective of glucose as a criterion, MetS was more frequent in T2DM than in LADA. When glucose levels were included, MetS was higher in LADA than in T1DM.

Pancreatic pathology:

Pancreatic tissue from humans with LADA and from a rat model mimicking LADA were analyzed using immunohistochemistry and PCR. Predominant macrophage (CD68) infiltration was shown in the islet cells as opposed to T1DM, which showed CD8T lymphocytes. There were islet groups with and without infiltration. The cell type shift translated to greater expression of Interleukin 1 beta cytokine secretion and decreased expression of TNF alfa in T lymphocytes. Also, the proliferation marker of nuclear antigen (PCNA) and the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 10 (IL10) were elevated while the apoptotic promoters caspase3 and TUNEL were diminished. The result was increased beta-cell gene transcription, greater C-peptide levels, slower progression of beta-cell destruction, and slower onset of LADA compared to T1DM.

The presence of more than one diabetes-associated autoantibody (DAA) predicts a faster progression of beta-cell failure. In patients with LADA, the sensitivity of GADA in predicting insulin requirement diminishes in older patients.

In a Chinese study, it was shown that GADA alone was insufficient to identify all cases of LADA, although it was the most dominant. This highlights the geographic and ethnic variability in the distribution of DAAs in LADA.

Anti-gliadin antibodies (both IgA and IgG) are increased in LADA compared to T2DM and compromised intestinal mucosal barrier may allow environmental antigens to gain access via the oral route and initiate immunological events to induce the disease. Furthermore, similar to T1DM, anti-TPO antibodies are increased in LADA when compared to T2DM.

LADA subtypes differ with GADA titers that are inversely related to BMI.

Regulatory T lymphocytes produce proteins like transcription factor forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), which suppresses autoimmunity. Hypermethylation of DNA and decreased expression of FOXP3 diminish protection against immune destruction. It has been shown that FOXP3 and other proteins are lower in high GADA subtype compared to low GADA, indicating higher beta-cell destruction in the former.

The IgG4 class of GADA is more prevalent in LADA than T1DM, and this yields a T helper 2 lymphocyte (TH2) immune response, which may be one explanation for delayed onset of diabetes in LADA compared to T1DM. Another reason may be the binding site on the GAD molecule for the GADA. In LADA, there is more amino-terminal binding, whereas, in T1DM, it is in the carboxy-terminal. In the UKPDS, some patients who were GADA positive even after 5 years did not progress to insulin requirement, and the epitope specificity may explain this. Also, a high-affinity subtype of GADA to GAD65 antigen predicts the rate of beta-cell failure.

A variant of the IA2A antibody (256-760) is more frequently found in LADA and may prove useful in its detection.

In the UKPDS and subsequent studies, a subset of T2DM negative for islet autoantibodies had T lymphocytes that were immunoreactive to islet cell antigens. The autoimmunity in these patients was more severe than in those with autoantibodies alone. They demonstrated a lower stimulated C-peptide response and subsequently went on to require insulin earlier than the group of T2DM without both antibodies and reactive T cells, thus creating a separate category of T-LADA.

The inflammatory biomarkers which are associated with obesity vary when sera from various types of DM are analyzed. If these results are reproduced in larger populations, their utility to diagnose and differentiate LADA from T1DM and T2 DM in conjunction with antibody testing may be enhanced.

LADA shares immunological features with both T1DM and T2DM. In a recent study analyzing fresh-blood-derived peripheral blood mononuclear cells, it was shown that LADA was similar to T2DM in antigen-presenting cell characteristics and the number of regulatory B lymphocytes, whereas it mimicked T1DM in the number of Natural killer cells.

In patients with LADA, there is a positive correlation between BMI and interleukin 17, a pro-inflammatory cytokine from peripheral B lymphocytes implicated in T2DM and obesity.

LADA has more genetic similarity to T1DM than T2DM. Studies have shown certain HLA types increase while others decrease the risk for LADA.PTPN22, SH2B3, and INS. In a recently published study, the key T2D risk allele TCF7L2 had a lower occurrence in LADA cases; it appears that this locus may not play a role in the etiology of LADA.

The only genetic similarity with T2DM at the HNF1A locus was not reproduced in a subsequent study by the same investigators who instead found a strong signal at the PFKFB3 locus during a landmark Genome-wide association study (GWAS).

Recent data do not support the independent effects of class I MHC in LADA, unlike in T1DM.

Modulating immunoreactivity of T cells may be a viable therapeutic target in LADA, just like T1DM.

Serious life events did not seem to precipitate LADA, unlike childhood T1DM.