If TCS is suspected based on clinical presentation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine is the radiographic modality of choice. MRI aids in demonstrating the level of the conus medullaris, identifying lesions associated with the tethered spinal cord, and surgical planning. Despite the variability, the normal level of the conus is at or above the second lumbar level.

The thickness of the filum terminale can also be evaluated; a thickness greater than 2 mm can be considered abnormal in children, although this is somewhat controversial.

MRI can further aid in visualizing the underlying pathology associated with the spinal cord tethering, including myelomeningocele, lipomyelomeningocele, split cord malformation, tumor, etc. Constructive interference in steady state (CISS) MRI sequence may be used in indeterminate cases as it has been shown to have superior sensitivity to T2-weighted MRI sequences.

In shunted hydrocephalus, the evaluation of TCS should begin with an assessment of shunt function, as shunt malfunction can have a similar presentation. A malfunctioning shunt should be revised, and the patient should be reassessed several weeks post-operatively. If there is no clinical improvement following shunt revision, then TCS should be strongly considered.

Urodynamic testing plays an important role in establishing sphincter dysfunction. Relevant parameters in evaluating a neurogenic bladder include bladder compliance, total bladder capacity and pressure, uninhibited contractions, leak point pressure, sensation, and electromyogram activity.

Detrusor hyperreflexia is the most common finding, but dyssynergia, decreased bladder compliance, and decreased sensation can also occur.