Gastrointestinal bleeding is a well-known adverse effect of ibuprofen usage and can lead to gastritis, ulceration, hemorrhage, or perforation. Inhibition of COX isoforms in ibuprofen usage leads to the reduction of prostaglandins, which play a role in the secretion of gastroprotective mucus.

Diminished renal function is also a concern with ibuprofen usage, with a recent surveillance study showing NSAIDs having nephrotoxic properties even in patients with no deficit in kidney function.

Rashes are also a known adverse effect of ibuprofen usage, usually due to drug hypersensitivity or skin irritation via topical administration. A rash may also be part of a more severe syndrome caused by ibuprofen use, such as anaphylaxis or drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome. A case in 2016 reported a rare instance of DRESS syndrome, which causes skin, liver, and hematologic abnormalities, with ibuprofen use in a pediatric patient. DRESS syndrome is known to result more commonly with anticonvulsants, sulfa derivatives, and antimicrobials, and the number of known cases related to ibuprofen is limited. The etiology of DRESS syndrome is also unknown, with theories focusing on hypersensitivity to toxic metabolites or pathology involving human herpesvirus-6 currently postulated.

The association between hypertension and NSAID use has undergone research previously. A cross-sectional study of an elderly population in 1993 showed NSAID usage to be an independent risk factor in developing hypertension in this population.

Intravenous ibuprofen in the treatment of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) has shown an increased incidence of hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubin displacement due to the high protein binding of the medication.