Simulation has provided pediatric educators an invaluable tool in which to practice high-risk and low-frequency events safely. As with any educational modality, several challenges must be faced to optimize effectiveness. Cost is one of the most common constraints cited in implementing a simulation curriculum. In addition to the purchase prices, there are costs associated with the storage, maintenance, and management of equipment as well as associated personnel costs. The time and commitment required for the development of a high-quality scenario-based curriculum must also not be underestimated.

In regards to the clinical application, translation to patient care outcomes and skill retention has been debated in the past. Though there has been conflicting data, a meta-analysis published in 2015 showed a frequently positive correlation between simulation-based assessments and patient-related outcomes.

High-quality simulation research is critical to continue to provide the best practice of evidence-based educational modalities. A review of healthcare simulation research shows a consistent need for high-quality methodologies between adult and pediatric specialties.

The desire for improved simulation research in pediatrics has led to the development of research groups, including the International Network for Simulation-Based Pediatric Innovation, Research, and Education (INSPIRE) group, which is dedicated to advancing pediatric simulation training and research. In pursuing their mission, INSPIRE published a guideline for simulation-based research in 2014, and again reemphasize the difficulty in measuring patient outcomes of simulation training. They hope that the creation of registries of educational interventions will improve power and sample size of simulation studies to draw better conclusions from SBME research.