An accurate clinical examination and a detailed personal and familial medical history are essential for proper diagnosis and treatment. Radiographs such as panoramic, periapical, occlusal x-ray, computed tomography (CT), or cone beam CT (CBCT) are valuable diagnostic tools for dental impaction.

The radiographs provide the position and inclination of impaction, diagnostic certainty of the impaction, and its relations with adjacent anatomical structures. CT or CBCT provides a 3-dimensional position, making it the best diagnostic tool for assessing dental impaction. The presurgical assessment must include a thorough history, a clinical evaluation, and good imaging.

Some common indications for the extraction of unerupted teeth include pain, dental caries, periodontal disease, odontogenic pathology, infection, damage to adjacent teeth, failure of spontaneous eruption, ectopic eruption, prophylactic extraction for medical/surgical condition or treatment, teeth in the line of bony fracture, traumatic injury to the tooth, insufficient space for normal eruption, and to facilitate trauma management or orthognathic surgery.

Often these teeth are asymptomatic and disease-free. It is common to extract them prophylactically. The evidence behind the effectiveness of prophylactic extraction is minimal.

Not all impacted teeth require surgical intervention. When considering an extraction, a surgeon must minimize injury to the teeth and periodontium whenever possible. It is not always feasible to reposition impacted teeth within the alveolar bone, leaving extraction as the only viable treatment option in some cases. The provider must evaluate the patient's age, gender, tooth position, dental status of the impacted and adjacent teeth, arch length, and occlusal relationship before extraction.

A study suggests that the impacted teeth could result in a more severe position with being a female, retained lower primary canines, delayed treatment, and the presence of maxillary peg lateral incisors.

Untreated unerupted, and impacted teeth can lead to complications.