**History**

A complete and thorough history and physical examination are necessary to make the diagnosis and to exclude various other childhood disorders that have a similar presentation. Most symptomatic patients report malaise and high-grade fever, which may be high enough to provoke febrile seizures. Young children usually exhibit fussiness, poor feeding, and anorexia. Older children may report back pain and headache. Most patients also develop sore throats a day before the onset of the enanthem. Some patients may also develop anorexia, dehydration, and abdominal pain. An exanthem is also frequently reported by patients with herpangina, but the specific characteristics and rates of occurrence vary depending on the subtype of enterovirus causing the infection. Depending on the severity and organ system involvement, the patients may also report headaches, neck stiffness, confusion, seizures, muscle weakness, and difficulty breathing.

**Physical Examination**

Herpangina is associated with a painful enanthem that typically occurs on the soft palate, tonsils, and posterior pharynx. It is usually characterized by hyperemia of the pharynx with discrete erythematous macules that evolve into vesicles and eventually ulcerate centrally. The lesions are usually smaller than 5 mm and may occasionally appear on the buccal wall and posterior tongue. They persist for up to one week. Other physical examination findings include pharyngitis and cervical lymphadenopathy.

A variant of herpangina caused by the Coxsackie A10 virus serotype is the acute lymphonodular pharyngitis. This condition is characterized by nodular lesions in the same location and distribution as the lesions of herpangina but does not undergo vesiculation or ulceration.

The history and physical examination should also focus on ruling out other serious and potentially life-threatening febrile exanthems, including Kawasaki disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, eczema herpeticum, and toxic shock syndrome that have a similar presentation.