Abdominal hysterectomy remains a common surgical route for hysterectomy for benign disease for a wide range of clinical indications. Optimal healthcare outcomes are achieved when there is a collaboration among the healthcare team involved in the care of the patient, from the time the patient checks into the facility at pre-op until the patient is discharged from the hospital, whether from the post-op recovery unit or after an inpatient stay. An interprofessional team may be made up of nurses, technicians, physicians, surgical assistants, residents, medical students, among other personnel.

The initial care begins prior to the day of operation at the office visit, where it is the responsibility of the physician to discuss the procedure at length, including an assessment of risks vs. benefits and alternative options, while addressing any concerns, expectations, and questions that the patient may have. On the day of the operation, nurses have an important role in assessing the patient’s vital signs and clinical conditions to ensure clinical stability. Physicians obtain all necessary informed consent for the procedure. Prior to obtaining consent, the physician should ensure that the patient is fully informed, understands the nature of the disease for which the procedure is being proposed, the anticipated results and prognosis, risks of not receiving treatment, and recognized possible alternative forms of treatment. All possible complications should be discussed as well as that additional treatment for complications may be required. It is important that the patient is assessed by both the surgeons and anesthesiologists prior to the operation. Calm reassurance and the professional nature of the entire operative team is helpful to the patient and their loved ones prior to surgery.

Once in the operating room, scrub technicians and nurses prepare and confirm the proper functioning of all necessary instruments and equipment. Nurses should assist the physician with all preoperative procedures. The surgeon performs a final assessment of the anatomy prior to surgery with a pelvic examination. During the surgery, the surgical assistants and scrub technician should assist the surgeon in handling the instruments and ensuring proper lighting for maximum visualization of the surgical field. The nurse remains alert to any needs of the surgical team, such as equipment adjustments, patient positioning, or communications with outside personnel. At the conclusion of the procedure, the nurse documents the intraoperative blood loss and urine output. The anesthesiologist should continue to monitor vitals and hemodynamic stability, while all members of the team are responsible for ensuring the general status and comfort of the patient.

The best surgical outcomes for abdominal hysterectomy occur when the interprofessional team taking care of the patient is coordinated and agreeable in their efforts. Effective communication and cooperation among nurses, physicians, technicians, and learners are key.