HGH has two mechanisms of effect: direct action and indirect action. The direct effects of HGH on the body are through its action on binding to target cells to stimulate a response. The indirect effects occur primarily by the action of insulin-like growth factor-1, which hepatocytes primarily secrete in response to elevated HGH binding to surface receptors. Once activated, the Janus activating tyrosine kinases (JAKs) 1 and 2 will bind to the latent cytoplasmic transcriptions factors STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5, and be transported into the nucleus inducing increased gene transcription and metabolism to produce insulin-like growth factor-1 for release into the circulation. Insulin-like growth factor-1 then has an impact on the growth and metabolism of peripheral tissues. One can think of the effects of HGH as a combined effect of both HGH and insulin-like growth factor-1.

**Growth**

HGH induces growth in nearly every tissue and organ in the body. However, it is most notorious for its growth-promoting effect on cartilage and bone, especially in the adolescent years. Chondrocytes and osteoblasts receive signals to increase replication and thus allow for growth in size via HGH’s activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases designated ERKs (extracellular signal-regulated kinases) 1 and 2 cellular signaling pathways. Activation of this phosphorylation intracellular signaling cascade results in a cascade of protein activation, which leads to increased gene transcription of the affected cells and ultimately causes increased gene replication and cellular growth.

Insulin-like growth factor-1 binds to its receptor, IGF-1R, on the cellular surface and activates a tyrosine kinase-mediated intracellular signaling pathway that phosphorylates various proteins intracellularly leading to increased metabolism, anabolism, and cellular replication and division. Furthermore, it acts to inhibit apoptosis of the cell, thus prolonging the lifespan of existing cells. The net result is to encourage the growth of tissue and to create a hyperglycemic environment in the body.

**Metabolic Effects**

HGH impacts metabolism primarily by up-regulating the production of insulin-like growth factor-1 and its subsequent effect on peripheral cells. The intracellular signaling activation that occurs, as stated above, also has a significant impact on the basal metabolic functions of organ tissues. In general, cells enter an anabolic protein state with increased amino acid uptake, protein synthesis, and decreased catabolism of proteins. Fats are processed and consumed by stimulating triglyceride breakdown and oxidation in adipocytes. Additionally, HGH suppresses the ability of insulin to stimulate the uptake of glucose in peripheral tissues and causes an increased rate of gluconeogenesis in the liver, leading to an overall hyperglycemic state.