A diagnosis of lymphoma is confirmed by tissue biopsy, and commonly used methods include fine-needle aspiration, core biopsy, incision/wedge biopsy, and excisional biopsy. Excisional biopsy is considered the "gold standard" as it allows for the assessment of whole lymph node architecture. The different pathologic characteristics and histologic patterns of common lymphomas are as below.

**Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL)**

HL is defined by the presence of pathological Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, which are of B-cell origin on the background of nodular sclerosis, lymphocyte-predominant, or depleted stroma. Classical HL is divided into four different types, which in decreasing order of frequency are: nodular sclerosing, mixed cellularity, lymphocyte rich, and lymphocyte depleted. Non -classical HL is of an only single type, nodular lymphocyte-predominant.

HL presentation is bimodal with one age peak in the early 20s and second in the mid-60s.  For most cases, no underlying cause is found, but for some subtypes of classical HL, a significant number of patients test positive for EBV. The causative relationship between EBV and HL been investigated extensively. Other risk factors are genetic predisposition (high incidence among patient's relatives), immunodeficiency states, and environmental factors (high incidence in farmers, woodworkers, and meat processors).

Histologic features of HL: are HRS cells, which are odd-looking large, bilobed cells with two nuclei, appearing within a background of non-malignant inflammatory cells. Immunohistochemical staining of HL shows positive markers for CD30, CD15, but negative for CD20, making it difficult to determine the B-cell lineage.

**Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL)**

**Diffuse large B Cell lymphoma (DLBCL)**

It is the most common NHL, accounting for 25% to 30% of cases.  It is a clinically aggressive lymphoma. DLBCL often arises in the lymph nodes but can also present anywhere else in the body, and the gastrointestinal tract is the most common system outside the lymphatic system. Other common involvement sites are testes, eyes, and central nervous system.

When an extranodal disease is present with minimal or no lymph node involvement, the disease is considered primary extranodal DLBCL, whereas when both nodal and extranodal disease is present, the disease is considered nodal lymphoma.

It is classified based on gene expression into three categories according to the cell of origin: germinal center B cell-like, activated B cell-like, and type 3; the last two have unfavorable prognosis.

Low-grade lymphomas like follicular lymphoma, small lymphocytic lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma, and lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma can develop into high-grade through a transformation of disease into DLBCL, which is triggered by accumulation of additional transforming mutations.

Histologic features: include areas of diffuse involvement by large lymphoid cells that stain positive for B-cell markers CD20 and CD19. The proliferation index, determined by staining with Ki67 antibody is moderate to high.

**Follicular Lymphoma (FL)**

It is an indolent lymphoma and accounts for about 20% of lymphoma diagnoses, making it the second most common lymphoma. Overall survival ranges from 8-15 years. It originates from the follicular cells in the germinal center of the lymph node. The tumor cells have overexpression of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2, due to translocation of the BCL-2 gene on chromosome 14 to the immunoglobulin or B-cell receptor gene on chromosome 18, t(14:18). It can transform into more aggressive DLBCL in some cases.

Histologic features: histologic diagnosis requires areas of considerable follicular proliferation and expansion within the lymph node. Within the expanded lymph node follicles,  small and large cells proliferate (similar to reactive lymph node), but instead of a  combination of B cells (CD20+) and some T cells (CD3+), the follicles are composed mostly of B cells positive for BCL-2 in FL. However, in FL, as in a reactive node, there is a difference in the size of follicle B cells, small cells, which are called centrocytes and large cells called centroblasts. The proportion of large cells, centroblasts, is measured as being either greater than or less than 15 cells per high-power field (HPF). The larger the number of centroblasts, the higher the grade; in grades I and II, there are 0 to 15 centroblasts/HPF, whereas, in grade III, there are more than 15 centroblasts/HPF. The difference between grade IIIA and grade IIIB is the presence of a mixture of centrocytes and centroblasts in all follicles in grade IIIA, whereas, in grade IIIB, follicles consist exclusively of centroblasts, immunoblasts (activated lymphocytes), or both. Of note, FL grade IIIB is managed the same way as DLBCL.

**Extranodal Marginal Zone Lymphoma of Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue**

Normal mucosal tissue contains non-continuously spread collections of lymphocytes called mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). Lymphoma that originates from the marginal zone of such collection is called MALT lymphoma and constitutes 7% of all lymphomas. It is a slow-growing B-cell lymphoma. Repeated antigen stimulation in the setting of infection, autoimmune disease, or other inflammatory condition predisposes to the pathogenesis. Some well-known associations are H.pylori (gastric), C. psitacci (ocular), C. jejuni (small intestine),  B. burgdorferi (skin), Hashimoto thyroiditis (thyroid) and Sjögren syndrome (salivary gland). It originates from a marginal zone cell, a B-cell.

Histologic features: Aggregates of small lymphocytes with IHC staining positive for CD20 and negative CD5 and CD10.

**Mantle Cell Lymphoma**

It comprises 6% of lymphomas. It has the worst prognosis among all lymphoma subtypes with a median overall survival of 5 years. Despite that, it has a wide range of presentations, and in some older patients, it has a very slowly progressive course where close surveillance without immediate treatment initiation has been used. It has a male predominance. It usually presents as a widespread disease; bone marrow and gastrointestinal tract are the most common sites of involvement. In the gastrointestinal tract, it can cause obstruction due to the formation of multiple polyps, a condition called lymphomatous polyposis.

Histologic features: lt arises from the mantle zone cell of the lymph node, which is a post–GC (germinal center) B-cell. Histologic diagnosis is made by visualizing areas of small lymphoid cells, arising from mantle zone directly in some cases, with characteristic IHC staining and being always positive for cyclin D1, a protein involved in cell cycle regulation. It results from a translocation of the gene encoding for cyclinD1 on chromosome 11 and the one encoding for Ig (immunoglobulin) on chromosome 14, t(11;14).

**Burkitt Lymphoma (BL)**

It was first described by the Irish surgeon Denis Burkitt in 1958 and is a very aggressive B-cell lymphoma. It is divided into three types: endemic, spontaneous, and immunodeficiency associated. The endemic form of BL is a pediatric tumor in Africa, usually presenting as a mandibular mass and is strongly associated with chronic EBV infection. In the United States, spontaneous BL is the most common form and usually presents as an abdominal mass or lymphadenopathy. Immunodeficiency associated BL is seen in HIV infection, and its presence can be an AIDS-defining condition. The pathogenesis is caused by translocation of the cell proliferation proto-oncogene, C-Myc to one of the sites encoding Ig expression, either the heavy chain t(8;14) or one of the two light chains, t(2;8) or t( 8;22).

Histologic features: histologic diagnosis is made by recognizing medium to large B-cells with a very high proliferation rate (Ki67 of almost 100%), with the classic starry sky appearance due to tingible body macrophages with surrounding clearing.

**Peripheral T Cell lymphomas**

The peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are a diverse group of diseases that constitute approximately 5% to 10% of NHL.

The PTCLs are classified into three main categories with predominantly leukemic, nodal, or extranodal involvement. The first subset of the peripheral T-cell lymphomas frequently presents with a leukemic phase. It includes T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, T-cell large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia, natural killer/T (NK/T)-cell leukemia, and adult T cell leukemia/ lymphoma. The second set presents with adenopathy, and it includes angioimmunoblastic T- cell lymphoma (AITL), systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), and peripheral T- cell lymphoma (PTCL).

The extranodal PTCLs include mycosis fungoides (MF) and cutaneous ALCL.  These have chronic and slow progression with long term remission. Sezary syndrome represents the leukemic transformation of MF, presenting with abnormal circulating lymphocytes (Sezary cells), adenopathy, and erythroderma and has a worse prognosis.

Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (nasal NK/T lymphoma) is an aggressive lymphoma that is the most common cause of the "lethal midline granuloma" syndrome. It is strongly associated with EBV infection and is frequently seen in East Asia and among the indigenous population in Peru. It affects both children and adults and presents as a locally invasive disease presenting with nasal obstruction and destruction of nasal passages, hard palate, and sinuses