**Synapses**

As previously mentioned, there are 2 major types of synapses: electrical and chemical.

In mammals, the majority of synapses are chemical. Chemical synapses can be differentiated from electrical synapses by a few distinguishing criteria: they use neurotransmitters to relay the signal and vesicles are used to store and transport the neurotransmitter from the cell body to the terminal; furthermore, the pre-synaptic terminal will have a very active membrane and the post-synaptic membrane consists of a thick cell membrane made up of many receptors. In between these 2 membranes is a very distinct cleft (easily visualized with electron microscopy) and the chemical neurotransmitter released must diffuse across this cleft to elicit a response in the receptive neuron. Because of this, the synaptic delay, defined as the time it takes for current in the pre-synaptic neuron to be transmitted to the post-synaptic neuron, is approximately 0.5 to 1.0 ms.

This is different from the electrical synapse, which will typically consist of 2 membranes located much closer to each other than in a chemical synapse. These membranes possess channels formed by proteins known as connexins, which allow the direct passage of current from one neuron to the next and do not rely on neurotransmitters. The synaptic delay is significantly shorter in electrical synapses versus chemical synapses.

The rest of the discussion will focus on chemical synapses, which have a lot of variation and diversity of their own. They vary not only between shape and structure, but also the chemical that is transmitted. Synapses can be excitatory or inhibitory, and use a variety of chemical molecules and proteins that will be discussed shortly.

Multiple types of neurotransmitters used in synaptic communication including, but not limited to:

- Acetylcholine (ACh): One of the most important neurotransmitters found in multiple synapses in the body, including, but not limited to, the neuromuscular junction, autonomic ganglia, caudate nucleus, and the limbic system. Generally, ACh is an excitatory neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction and in the autonomic ganglia. In the brain, Ach is synthesized in the basal nucleus of Meynert.

- Norepinephrine (NE): The most important molecule in sympathetic nervous system signaling, except for the sweat glands. In the brain, NE is mainly found in the locus coeruleus and lateral tegmental nuclei.

- Dopamine (DA): Dopamine signaling is generally inhibitory. There are three major dopaminergic pathways in the brain, the nigrostriatal, mesolimbic, and mesocortical; each of which serve different roles. One of the most well-known disease states involving dopamine is Parkinson's disease, where there is degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.

- Serotonin (5-HT): Produced from tryptophan using tryptophan hydroxylase, which is mostly found in the brain (raphe nucleus) and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Serotonin is mostly known for its role as a regulatory neurotransmitter and is therefore implicated in various mood states and diseases.

- Other common neurotransmitters include other catecholamines, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glycine, and glutamic acid.

The easiest approach to understanding synaptic transmission is to think of it as a stepwise process beginning with the synthesis of the neurotransmitter and ending with its release.

- Synthesis:****The neurotransmitter is synthesized in the cell body, where it will then be transmitted down the microtubules of the axon to the pre-synaptic terminal, or it is synthesized directly in the pre-synaptic terminal from recycled neurotransmitters. The neurotransmitter is then stored in presynaptic vesicles until its release.

- Release:****The neurotransmitter is released in a regulated fashion from the pre-synaptic neuron into the synaptic cleft.

- Receptor activation:****The neurotransmitter binds to post-synaptic receptors and produces a response in the post-synaptic neuron.

- Signal termination:****The signal must be terminated by some mechanism, normally by the elimination of excess neurotransmitters from the synaptic cleft.

**Synthesis**

Neurotransmitters are synthesized differently depending on which type they are. They can be a small molecule chemical, such as dopamine and serotonin, or they can be small neuropeptides, such as enkephalin.

- Neuropeptides are synthesized in the cell body using the typical protein synthesis and translation pathways (rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus), then will be packaged into large, dense-core vesicles along with a protease. These vesicles are rapidly transported down the axon using microtubular proteins such as kinesin.  When they arrive at the pre-synaptic terminal, they are ready to be released.

- Small molecule neurotransmitters are synthesized in the cell body, where they are then transported down the axon in small, clear core vesicles. Upon arriving at the pre-synaptic terminal, enzymes will modify the small molecule neurotransmitter, and they can then be released from the vesicles into the cleft.

**Release**

Now that the neurotransmitters are stored in the vesicles in the pre-synaptic terminal, they must be released into the cleft. Along the membrane of the vesicle and the presynaptic membrane are proteins known as SNARE proteins; these proteins are essential in the binding of the vesicles to the membrane and the release of their contents. As the action potential propagates down the pre-synaptic neuron, the membrane will depolarize. Once the action potential arrives at the pre-synaptic terminal, the depolarization of the membrane will allow the voltage-dependent calcium channels to open, allowing the rapid influx of calcium into the pre-synaptic terminal. The influx of calcium causes the SNARE proteins to activate and change conformation, allowing the fusion of vesicles to the membrane and the release of their contents. The neurotransmitter will spill into the synaptic cleft, and the vesicle membrane is recovered via endocytosis.

**Receptor Activation**

Once the neurotransmitter binds to the post-synaptic neuron, it can generally cause one of 2 types of receptors to be activated. It will either activate a ligand-gated ion channel or a G-protein receptor.

- Ligand-Gated Ion Channel: When the neurotransmitter binds to this receptor, there is a direct opening or closing of the attached ion channel. In other words, the neurotransmitter acts directly on the target ion channel. This type of receptor is described as “fast” because it generally only takes a few milliseconds to produce a response and is terminated very quickly. Depending on which neurotransmitter is binding to the receptor, these types of receptors can be excitatory or inhibitory.

- G-Protein Coupled Receptors: These types of receptors are will produce a response (open or close an ion channel) by activating a signaling cascade involving secondary messengers. The most common secondary messengers are cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), inositol triphosphate (IP3), and diacylglycerol (DAG). When the neurotransmitter binds to the receptor, it activates the G-protein, which binds to guanosine triphosphate (GTP), and is activated. This will activate the secondary messenger cascade, which will eventually lead to the phosphorylation of ion channels. Due to multiple steps having to take place to generate the final response, this pathway is generally described as “slow,” and generally, the effects last longer (seconds to minutes).

**Signal Termination**

Inactivation of the signal must involve clearing the neurotransmitter from the synapse in at least 1 of 3 ways:

- Re-uptake: Re-uptake can either be pre-synaptic or by glial cells. One important point to remember involving reuptake is that only small molecule chemical neurotransmitters can be taken back up, neuropeptides cannot participate in re-uptake; they must be eliminated by other means, such as degradation.

- In pre-synaptic reuptake, the pre-synaptic neuron will use either endocytosis or specific transporters to remove the neurotransmitter from the synapse. The advantage of this mechanism is that the neurotransmitter can be recycled, which will prevent the neuron from having to re-synthesize the neurotransmitter every cycle of release. 
- In some cases, such as with glutamate, a glial cell will be involved in the re-uptake. Glutamate is toxic to the cell, so it is stored inside the neuron as glutamine. When glutamate is released into the synapse, it will be taken up by the glial cell using a specific transporter, converted into glutamine via glutaminase, then returned to the neuron to be recycled.

- Enzymatic Destruction: The neurotransmitter can be destroyed directly either in the cleft or in the pre-synaptic terminal using certain enzymes. Two major enzymes are involved in the destruction of the neurotransmitter:

- Monoamine Oxidases (MAO): These enzymes are responsible for oxidizing, and therefore inactivating, the monoamines. They do this by using oxygen to remove the amine group. These are split into MAO-A and MAO-B based on substrates. MAO-A is mostly responsible for breaking down serotonin, melatonin, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Both forms break down dopamine, tyramine, and tryptamine equally. MAO-B also breaks down phenethylamine and benzylamine.
- Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT): Generally, COMT is responsible for degrading catecholamines, including dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, as well as most substances with a catechol structure.

It is important to note that both of the above enzymes are very frequent targets of therapeutic medications. By eliminating these enzymes, the neurotransmitter will remain in the synapse for longer, which can be beneficial in eliminating the symptoms of many disease processes.

- Diffusion:****In the simplest form of termination, the neurotransmitter can simply diffuse out of the synaptic cleft and away from the receptors and into nearby blood vessels. This will decrease the concentration of the neurotransmitter in the synapse, gradually reducing the effect the neurotransmitter has on the post-synaptic neuron.