The following are helpful in the evaluation of FHCS and PID.

**Lab Tests**

- Performing a pregnancy test will not only guide the choice of antibiotic therapy but also address the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy.

- Complete blood count (CBC) to assess for leukocytosis. Know, however, that only up to 50% of women with PID have a clinically significant leukocytosis. Blood cultures can vary and are generally negative in the setting of PID.

- Complete metabolic panel to assess for any electrolyte, renal, or hepatic derangements.

- Vaginal secretions can be assessed for leukorrhea.

- Quantitative culture for chlamydia along with gonorrhea and chlamydial DNA probes can aid in diagnosis.

- Other tests to consider include RPR, Hepatitis B & C, HIV, and urinalysis.

**Radiological Findings**

- CT scan will show increased perihepatic enhancement in the arterial phase, with a majority of patients also showing pelvic fat infiltration. Other findings associated with PID can be found: pyosalpinx, tubo-ovarian abscess, and fluid collection in the pelvic cavity.

- Transvaginal ultrasonographic scanning is a favorable option for cases in which a clinical picture of PID may be unclear. Findings can include hydrosalpinx, pyosalpinx endometritis, tubo-ovarian abscess, oophoritis, and ectopic pregnancy.

- MRI can show tubo-ovarian abscess, edematous tubes, or free pelvic fluid collections.

**Procedural Findings**

- Laparoscopy is the gold standard for diagnosing FHCS and PID. In the setting of PID, laparoscopy can show edema with exudates on tubal surfaces, ectopic pregnancy, or tubo-ovarian abscess. FHCS can be diagnosed directly via visualization of adhesions between the diaphragm and liver or liver and the anterior abdominal wall.

- An endometrial biopsy can show endometritis.