# Continuing Education Activity

Aspergillosis is a spectrum of infections caused by fungi from the Aspergillus genus. The species most involved include A. fumigatus, A. terreus, A. flavus, and A. niger. Clinical syndromes depend on the host's immune status, with invasive syndromes predominantly affecting immunodeficient individuals. Pulmonary aspergillosis and rhinosinusitis are the most prominent examples of invasive diseases. Other more indolent forms, such as chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA), aspergilloma, and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), often occur in patients with underlying lung disease. Finally, cutaneous aspergillosis is often seen when wounds in immunocompromised patients are inoculated with Aspergillus. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of aspergillosis, which varies significantly depending on the clinical syndrome, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this spectrum of conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the role of Aspergillus in the etiology of aspergillosis.
- Describe the use of a fungal sputum stain in the evaluation of aspergillosis.
- Review the use of voriconazole as the first-line treatment of aspergillosis.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by aspergillosis.

# Introduction

Aspergillus is a ubiquitous, filamentous fungus that primarily causes infection in immunocompromised hosts and individuals with underlying pulmonary disease.Aspergillus species obtain nutrients from dead material and reproduce asexually via conidia.Aspergillus are capable of causing human disease, but A. fumigatus, followed by A. terreus and A. flavus, is the most implicated as a pathogen.

There are three major types of bronchopulmonary aspergillosis: invasive aspergillosis, chronic aspergillosis, and allergic aspergillosis.Aspergillus species.

# Etiology

The primary route of infection and cause depend on the clinical syndrome.

**Pulmonary**

Pulmonary aspergillosis is contracted via inhalation of Aspergillus conidia.Aspergillus is ubiquitous in the environment, present in concentrations between 1 and 100 m, depending on whether the location is indoors or outdoors. It can be higher in certain areas, such as where the soil is disturbed.A. fumigatus.

**Rhinosinusitis**

Rhinosinusitis is contracted via the inhalation of conidia via the nasal route and predominantly occurs in severely immunocompromised hosts.A. flavus.

**Cerebral**

Aspergillus species reach the brain either hematogenously in the case of disseminated infection or via direct extension from contiguous areas, such as the mastoid, middle ear, or paranasal sinuses.

**Endophthalmitis**

Cataract surgery can serve as the entry point for Aspergillus species, causing fungal endophthalmitis.

**Osteomyelitis**

Aspergillus enters the bone via disseminated infection in severe immunocompromise or direct inoculation, such as intravenous drug use

**Cutaneous**

An entry into the skin via venous catheters, predisposing chronic inflammatory skin condition, or trauma is necessary.Aspergillus species.Aspergillus species have been increasingly recognized as a cause of onychomycosis, with nail trauma, immunodeficiency, and exposure of the nails to the soil as gateways to procuring this infection.

**Disseminated and Other Sites**

Disseminated infections often originate from one of the sites above in the immunocompromised host, but dissemination from the pulmonary route is common.

In the past, it has been challenging to identify the exact species causing disease in many cases, leading to reporting the isolates as part of a complex. However, molecular diagnostics have helped aid in identification.Aspergillus fumigatus has previously been thought to be the cause of around 90% of invasive aspergillosis.

# Epidemiology

Invasive aspergillosis overwhelmingly affects the immunocompromised population, composed of patients with AIDS, those with hematologic malignancies, prolonged neutropenia, long-term corticosteroids, and recipients of transplants on anti-rejection medications.

Patients with underlying lung diseases such as chronic obstructive lung disease, tuberculosis, asthma, lung cancer, and sarcoidosis are at risk for developing the chronic form of aspergillosis.Aspergillus infection due to chronic exposure in their work environments.Aspergillus infections have been reported from hospital showers and healthcare facilities undergoing construction.

# Pathophysiology

In an immunocompetent person, Aspergillus conidia are inhaled and taken up by phagocytes in the lungs.Aspergillus infection is kept at bay.

Aspergillus is notable for angioinvasion, with thrombosis of blood vessels causing tissue necrosis and allowing spread to distant sites.

In patients with underlying pulmonary disease, colonization of Aspergillus in a preexisting cavity allows a large mass of fungal hyphae, fibrin, and other debris to form an aspergilloma.

In the case of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), Aspergillus conidia do not trigger the typical immune response and instead activate TH2 CD4 T-cells.

# Histopathology

Correctly sending appropriate specimens is paramount for accurate and timely diagnosis.

Stains often employed while examining Aspergillus species include Periodic acid-Schiff and Gomori's methenamine silver stain.Aspergillus have characteristic features. Aspergillus fumigatus is notable for having a uniseriate conidiophore with phialides sporulating from the upper two-thirds of the vesicle.A. niger is notable for having larger conidia.Aspergillus than those that did not stain positive.

Tissue pathology from patients with invasive fungal sinusitis reveals pale and necrotic mucosa, as infarction occurs due to angioinvasion of the fungi.

# History and Physical

A thorough history and physical exam should be performed on every patient suspected of having an Aspergillus infection. Care should be taken to understand a patient’s risk factors for invasive disease and focus on eliciting all history related to immunosuppression. A careful history of any chemotherapy, glucocorticoids, and immunosuppressants received should be elicited. Attention should be paid to any history of malignancy with detailed treatment history, including a history of ibrutinib, fludarabine, venetoclax use, or history of CAR-T therapy.

Transplant history should be noted with a careful review of the post-transplant course, including the history of graft versus host disease and length and depth of any neutropenia. A history of lung disease and any environmental exposures, such as construction work, gardening, or work in wastewater treatment, should be noted carefully. History should also delve into recent pulmonary infections like COVID-19 or influenza. Finally, the clinician should investigate in-depth current and past medical problems to assess the potential for an immunocompromised state, including taking a detailed sexual history to assess the likelihood of HIV and carefully reviewing the history for frequent infections that could raise concern for immunodeficiency, such as chronic granulomatous disease.

The invasive aspergillosis patient will often be critically ill with immunocompromised status. This condition should also be considered in critically ill patients with underlying lung disease. The most common initial symptoms of pulmonary infection include fever, worsening dyspnea, increased sputum production, hemoptysis, and pleuritic chest pain. Fever may not manifest in the severely immunocompromised; therefore, fever can be absent, despite progressive infection.

Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis most commonly presents with a cough.

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis will present with recurrent asthma exacerbations, with the most prominent finding being dyspnea and wheezing, along with coughing up large amounts of sputum with brown plugs.

Physical examination findings vary depending on the infected area. There may be sinus tenderness, nasal discharge, pallor or necrosis of the oral or nasal mucosa or conjunctiva, new mobility or hypesthesia of teeth, proptosis, or cranial nerve abnormalities in invasive fungal rhinosinusitis.

# Evaluation

A strong clinical suspicion for aspergillosis should prompt the evaluation due to the ubiquitous nature of Aspergillus conidia in the environment. The presence of Aspergillus in a sputum sample in and of itself does not indicate infection unless other signs, symptoms, and host risk factors are present. Alternatively, invasive aspergillosis can present with subtle symptoms.

**Invasive Fungal Rhinosinusitis**

Suspicions of invasive fungal rhinosinusitis should prompt emergent evaluation by an otolaryngologist so that nasal endoscopy with culture collection or other surgery can be performed urgently. These patients should be managed by infectious disease clinicians, otolaryngologists, and transplant physicians (if appropriate). Adjunctive imaging, such as CT of the maxillofacial sinuses and MRI of the brain, helps to evaluate for bone abnormalities and characterize the extent of sinus disease. However, one should note that CT can underestimate the extent of the infection, and MRI may better characterize disease progression.

**Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis**

Patients with suspicions of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis should undergo chest CT to evaluate the presence or extent of the disease as well as to direct further efforts, such as bronchoscopy.Aspergillus species in the sputum or by bronchoalveolar lavage supports the diagnosis of aspergillosis, but tissue sampling revealing invasive Aspergillus hyphae finalizes the diagnosis.

Patients within the first three months of lung transplant are at risk of invasive fungal infection at the anastomosis of the transplant.

Biomarkers and Other Laboratory Investigations

Serum biomarkers such as galactomannan are helpful in the right population. It has the best-studied utility in patients with hematologic malignancy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, with an approximate 70% sensitivity.

Galactomannan can also be measured from bronchoalveolar lavage samples and has a sensitivity of 93.2% when an OD of 0.5 is used.

1,3-beta-D-glucan tests are very sensitive but are nonspecific as this is a component of the fungal cell wall and is not specific to Aspergillus species.

It should be noted that blood cultures are very rarely positive for Aspergillus species, even with a severe disease burden of disseminated disease.

**Chronic Pulmonary Aspergillosis**

Several criteria must be met to diagnose chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. At least three months of pulmonary symptoms, systemic symptoms, or progressive characteristic radiologic findings must be noted along with microbiology or serology confirming Aspergillus involvement.Aspergillus IgG can also help diagnose chronic aspergillosis.

**Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis (ABPA)**

Patients with cystic fibrosis or asthma suspected of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) should undergo Aspergillus skin testing or IgE against A. fumigatus, chest imaging, a measurement of total IgE level, A. fumigatus specific IgG, serum precipitins, and blood eosinophil count. Patients noted to have positive Aspergillus skin testing or IgE, total IgE greater than 1000 IU/mL, and at least two of the three other criteria meet diagnostic criteria for ABPA.A. fumigatus specific IgG or serum precipitins, blood eosinophil count greater than 500 cells/L without systemic corticosteroids use, and chest imaging consistent with ABPA.

**Rare Manifestations**

Rarely is a thoracentesis required for pleural effusion. A rare manifestation of aspergillosis includes black pleural effusion, rarely reported with Aspergillus niger infection.

**Radiology**

Radiology is a critical adjunct for the diagnosis of aspergillosis.Aspergillus, and the ground-glass opacities are observed due to the surrounding thrombosis and hemorrhage.

In chronic, necrotizing aspergillosis, consolidation can be seen that generally starts in the upper lobes with bronchiectasis that evolves into cavitation.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of suspected invasive aspergillosis should be promptly initiated while investigations are ongoing due to the rapidly progressive nature of the infection. When selecting an antifungal, one must consider the general resistance profiles of Aspergillus species in the area of practice, the history of anti-mold prophylaxis used (if any), the species of Aspergillus involved, if known, and the patient's comorbidities, such as QT prolongation.A. terreus and A. alliaceus are intrinsically resistant to amphotericin B, and A. calidoustus is intrinsically resistant to azoles.

In most instances, the drug of choice is voriconazole.

For patients receiving mold prophylaxis with voriconazole, liposomal amphotericin B is recommended to be used until susceptibility testing is available.

Treatment of patients with chronic pulmonary aspergillosis exhibiting pulmonary symptoms and loss of pulmonary function is accomplished with oral therapy with itraconazole or voriconazole.Aspergillus IgE.

Surgery may be required to remove an aspergilloma and should be considered in cases of hemoptysis.

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis exacerbations are typically treated with corticosteroids to control the immune response and itraconazole to decrease the fungal burden.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Asthma

- Atypical mycobacterial infection

- Bacterial pneumonia

- Bacterial sinusitis with abscess

- Blastomycosis

- Bronchiectasis

- Cavitary lung cancer

- Cavitary polyangiitis with granulomatosis

- Coccidioidomycosis

- Cystic fibrosis

- Eosinophilia

- Eosinophilic pneumonia

- Histoplasmosis

- Hypersensitivity pneumonitis

- Interstitial lung disease

- Nocardiosis

- Pulmonary sarcoidosis

- Tuberculosis

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

A landmark trial in 2002 noted decreased mortality in invasive pulmonary aspergillosis patients treated with voriconazole (survival rate at twelve weeks: 70.8%) versus amphotericin B deoxycholate (survival rate: 57.9%).

# Prognosis

The prognosis of allergic bronchopulmonary pulmonary aspergillosis is good in patients with mild alterations in function.

For patients with invasive aspergillosis, the prognosis is poor.

# Complications

- Continued wheezing

- Lung fibrosis

- Hemoptysis

- Respiratory failure

- CNS infection

- Endocarditis

- Death

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Patients with invasive aspergillosis often require prolonged hospitalizations due to their critical illness.

# Consultations

- An infectious disease consultation is imperative in invasive aspergillosis and can be helpful in other forms of aspergillosis to manage antifungal therapy.

- Pulmonology evaluation is highly recommended for patients with pulmonary forms of aspergillosis.

- Otolaryngology evaluation is imperative when invasive fungal rhinosinusitis is suspected.

- Those with allergic aspergillosis may also need a referral to an allergist.

- A thoracic surgeon should be consulted to evaluate patients who do not respond as expected to antifungal therapies or have hemoptysis.

- An interventional radiologist may be very helpful for embolization therapy in patients with acute hemoptysis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The best way to decrease morbidity and mortality from aspergillosis is to place hospitalized patients at risk of invasive aspergillosis in private rooms with HEPA filtration, lowering fungi concentration.

In select patients, prophylactic antifungal therapy decreases the risk of fungal infections. Antifungal prophylaxis with voriconazole or posaconazole is recommended for patients with several risk factors. These include prolonged periods of neutropenia from chemotherapy, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, severe or prolonged graft-versus-host disease, lung transplant within the first 3-4 months post-transplantation, and some other solid organ transplant recipients.Aspergillus airway colonization within the first six months of transplant or that have received increased immunosuppression for rejection within the last three months, it is recommended that they preemptively receive a course of antifungal therapy.

# Pearls and Other Issues

When aspergillosis is suspected, remembering the following pearls is helpful:

- Send all tissue and fluid for cytology, culture, and histopathology.

- If invasive pulmonary aspergillosis is suspected, anti-fungal therapy and CT chest should be ordered. Bronchoscopy should be considered if possible.

- Galactomannan is a valuable adjunct in diagnosing invasive aspergillosis in patients with hematological malignancies and those with a history of hematopoietic stem cell transplant.

- Fungal rhinosinusitis is a medical emergency, and the patient should be evaluated by otolaryngology urgently for consideration of surgical management.

- The halo and air crescent signs are radiographic signs of invasive aspergillosis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Aspergillosis has a better prognosis in immunocompetent individuals but is very guarded in transplant and immunocompromised patients. Evidence-based guidelines are recommended to be followed in managing all cases of invasive fungal disease. An interprofessional team should include healthcare professionals from various disciplines to assist with care, including infectious diseases clinicians, pulmonologists, otolaryngologists, transplant physicians, pathologists, microbiology laboratory personnel, nurses, pharmacists, and infectious diseases pharmacists. Open communication among consultants and adherence to clinical pathways is critical to expedite care and decrease mortality. Integrated diagnostic measures for aspergillosis, including appropriate imaging, galactomannan, and bronchoscopy in appropriate patients, is critical to expedite the diagnosis. [Level 1, Level 3] When there is clinical suspicion of invasive aspergillosis, the patient must be immediately started on targeted antifungal agents.