**Eyeball Painting and Draping**

The eye is painted with a 5% povidone-iodine solution and dried with cotton using artery forceps. Then drape is applied, and the eyeball is exposed using a lid speculum.

**Paracentesis**

Initially, a small paracentesis is made, and pilocarpine is injected if the lens is clear and needs to be preserved. If cataract removal is also attempted, tropicamide is injected, followed by 0.06% trypan blue and viscoelastic substance.

**Host Trephination**

First of all central cornea is marked with blue ink of a marker. A caliper or a sinkey hook having blue ink can be used to mark the center of the cornea. The host marking is usually kept at 7 to 7.5 mm, and a 7 to 7.5 mm trephine marks the cornea. A radial keratotomy dipped in ink can also make markings over the host cornea.

The cornea is dried before marking the host cornea. The trephine is gently rotated between the thumb and the forefinger up to 80% depth of the cornea. Care should be taken to avoid 100% depth of the cornea to prevent injury to the iris and lens diaphragm. An MVR blade is used to do a guarded entry at the trephine site, and then a corneoscleral or vannas scissor is used to enter the anterior chamber. One should remember that the small the graft, the more astigmatism and the less the chance of rejection. The larger the graft, the less astigmatism and rejection is more possible.

**Donor Corneal Button Preparation**

The graft is taken out from the storage media in a petri dish. The donor button is held with conjunctival forceps, and the scleral rim is dried with a cotton sponge preventing damage to the endothelium. Moreover, the iris remnants can be removed using a dried cotton bud or cotton piece.

The donor button is kept on the Teflon block and punched with pressure downwards. Care should be taken so that the Teflon block doesn't slip. The graft size is usually kept 0.5 mm larger than the host except in cases with keratoconus, where the graft size is kept the or 0.25 mm larger to compensate for myopia.

The majority of surgeons use hand-held trephines. The various punches available are Cottingham's punch, Barron vacuum corneal donor punch, IOWA PK press corneal punch, and Rothman Gilbard corneal punch. The excimer laser can also be used to trephine the donor corneal button.

If the host dissection is larger than 9 mm and smaller than 7 mm, the graft should be kept 1 mm larger than the host. If the host dissection is between 7 and 9 mm, the graft should be kept 0.5 mm larger than the host. In the case of aphakia, it is recommended to keep the graft size more than 0.5 mm, and in case it is phakic, the diameter should be kept at 0.25 mm larger.

**Anterior Chamber Entry**

The controlled anterior chamber should be done under viscoelastic cover, and peripheral anterior synechiae, if any, should be released.

**Peripheral Iridectomy**

A peripheral iridectomy (PI) should be done with the help of vannas scissors and forceps. A PI can bleed hence care should be taken to avoid the formation of blood clots. If there is a bleed, adrenaline can be injected to stop the bleeding, and the anterior chamber should be washed with saline to remove the bleeding or any blood clot.

**Suturing of the Donor Tissue to the Host Rim**

The donor tissue should be sutured to the host rim with 10-0 nylon sutures. Initially, 4 cardinal sutures are placed at 12, 6, 9, and 3 o'clock positions. The 4 cardinal sutures should form a square.

There are 4 suturing techniques:

- Single interrupted suturing technique

- Combined continuous and interrupted suturing technique

- Single continuous suturing technique

- Double continuous suturing technique

The single continuous suturing technique has 3 different subtypes

- **Torque**- this rotates the graft counter-clockwise 0.7 ± 0.1 mm at the wound or 11 degree

- **Antitorque**- Rotate the graft clockwise 0.7 ± 0.1 mm at the wound or 11 degree

- **No torque -**By this technique, an isosceles triangle is formed, which produces no rotational effect

**Advantages of Interrupted Sutures**

- They are recommended in children and infants, highly vascularized corneas, and patients with therapeutic keratoplasty.

- This gives the advantage of selective suture removal.

- The needle should pass just above the Descemet membrane. The suture length should be 2 mm on the host site and 1 mm on the donor site.

- Full-thickness sutures should be avoided as they damage the endothelium, and aqueous can leak through the suture tract postoperatively.

- The suture knots should ideally be buried on the host site because it would invite vascularization if buried on the recipient site.

**Postoperative Management**

**Corticosteroids**

In OPK, postoperatively, the patient should be started hourly on topical steroids (1% prednisolone or 0.1% dexamethasone) for the first 2 days. Then the steroid regimen should be tapered 6 times for 15 days, and then 4/3/2/1 times 3 months each. For the first 3 days, intravenous steroids such as methylprednisolone should be injected at 1 g twice daily. This should be followed by oral steroids (prednisolone) in a tapering regimen of 40/30/20/10 mg for 3 to 5 days each. The steroid regimen can be altered based on the patient's clinical response.

**Antibiotics**

Antibiotics should be given 4 to 6 times daily for the first 2 weeks to prevent secondary bacterial infection. In cases with graft infection, antibiotics may be required for a prolonged period.

**Antiglaucoma Medications**

In these cases, adjuvant drugs like timolol, betaxolol, or other antiglaucoma are required to counteract secondary glaucoma. Antiglaucoma medications are also helpful in pre-existing glaucoma and OPK with combined procedures such as vitrectomies, cataract surgery, synechiolysis, hyaluronidase use, synechiaolysis, and anterior segment reconstruction. Topical prostaglandin use is controversial. Dorzolamide affects the corneal endothelium and may result in prolonged graft edema and should be avoided post-keratoplasty.

**Cycloplegics**

Cycloplegic drugs like topical homatropine, cyclopentolate, and atropine should be added for the initial period to relieve pain and ciliary spasm. Cycloplegics should be used cautiously as there is a risk of Urretz-Zavalia syndrome.

**Lubricants**

Topical preservative-free lubricants should be used to prevent suture-induced irritation.