Although CN0 is closely positioned next to the CNI (olfactory nerve), its functionality is distinct from the classical olfactory sensory role of perceiving odorant molecules via the olfactory receptors (ORs), which belong to a superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs).

The CN0's proposed neuromodulatory role of sexual behaviors via GnRH poses an interesting connection with the hypothalamic KP neurons. While there are various elegant studies describing the human KP efferent projections, the afferents to this important hypothalamic cellular network are poorly understood.

Furthermore, during the last several decades, the idea of pheromones influencing human sexual behaviors has been a controversial topic.

Despite all these important considerations, recent studies on the VNO suggest this sexually dimorphic structure is just vestigial in adult humans, namely a remnant from our embryological differentiation stages. This suggests that although unequivocally present, this structure is not physiologically active in adult life. Accordingly, the hypothesis correlating the VNO to detecting pheromones in adult humans lacks scientific support. Alternatively, a reasonable notion may implicate the nasal mucosa nerve projections from CN0, transducing the inscrutable chemical signaling from adult human pheromones and regulating the hypothalamic GnRH secretory pulses via the KP neurons and consequentially, controlling gonadotropins and sex steroids secretions in response to the pheromones' chemical cues. However, this conceptual cascade of neuroendocrinological events is only hypothetical since the CN0 projections to the hypothalamic KP neurons are merely speculative. Considering that the VNO may lack physiological competence concerning biological pheromones detection in adults, the CN0 may be a plausible candidate for this novel physiological role independent from the VNO.