Mycobacterial infections, including M. kansasii infections, can be categorized into six clinical patterns: pulmonary disease, skin, and soft tissues, musculoskeletal infections (monoarticular septic arthritis and tenosynovitis), disseminated disease, catheter-associated disease, and lymphadenitis.M. kansasii infections. Not surprisingly these patients may be initially diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis. In one study, the mean age of patients with M. kansasii infection was 58 years, and 64% were men. However, M. kansasii can infect adults of any age, sex, or race. Infection results in symptoms in 85% of cases.

The most common symptoms of pulmonary M. kansasii infection include a cough (91%), sputum production (85%), weight loss (53%), breathlessness (51%), chest pain (34%), hemoptysis (32%), and fever or sweats (17%). Of all the NTM infections, M. kansasii infections most often resemble Mycobacterial tuberculosis infections.M. kansasii infections are the same as those for other mycobacteria, namely, smoking, pneumoconiosis, silicosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, malignancy, immunosuppressed state, chronic kidney disease, alcoholism and concurrent or prior M. tuberculosis infection.

While cavitary disease occurs in 90% M. kansasiiI infections, nodular and brochiectatic disease can also occur. If left untreated pulmonary infections (both cavitary and nodular) are characterized by the persistence of AFB in the sputum and progressive destruction of the lung architecture. Pulmonary disease may be present in AIDS patients but there is less likelihood of cavitations; hilar lymphadenopathy and interstitial infiltrates are more common. However, if the CD4 count is high there is an increased chance of cavitary disease.

The second most frequent organ involved in M. kansasii infection is the skin.

In disseminated disease, the symptoms are vague and nonspecific. In a series of 49 patients, fever was present in 60%, hepatosplenomegaly in 40%; pulmonary infiltrates in 25% and lymphadenopathy in 10%. Bone involvement, such as vertebral osteomyelitis and sacroiliitis, is common with M. kansasii disseminated diseases. Psoas abscess, bone marrow granuloma, liver granuloma, and possible spleen abscesses have been described.

In patients with an advanced immunocompromised state, HIV and M. kansasii co-infection can occur and reported average CD count in these patients has been less than <50/mm3.