When considering a diagnosis of anoxic encephalopathy, examination and observation are required to ensure no confounding factors contribute to the current neurologic presentation. Therefore, metabolic abnormalities such as hypernatremia, hyponatremia, and hypoglycemia, among others, must be considered and corrected prior to the diagnosis of anoxic encephalopathy. Sepsis also merits consideration. Drug overdose or alcohol intoxication can also present with neurologic findings that may mimic anoxic injury. Sedation medication or neuromuscular blocking agents will also demonstrate neurologic findings and deficits that may be mistaken for anoxic injury.

Anoxic encephalopathy and neurologic injury can also have various presentations. Anoxic injury can present as an initial comatose state, where self-awareness and sleep-wake cycles are absent. Typically, in two to four weeks, a comatose patient will either show some recovery or may progress to a persistent vegetative state or brain death. The persistent vegetative state (PVS) lacks self-awareness but maintains the sleep-wake cycle.

Locked-in syndrome is a state where self-awareness is likely to present in addition to preserving the sleep-wake cycle. Typically this will result in persistent quadriplegia, although it does have the potential for prolonged survivability. Akinetic mutism, a condition where damage to the frontal lobe of the brain results in a lack of movement or speech initiation, is also a potential condition that may be the result of anoxic injury, among other causes. Dementia, particularly advanced dementia, should also be considered, especially with a known history.

A physical feature that may be present is post-hypoxic myoclonus.