Patients should undergo a thorough preoperative consultation to allow for the opportunity to assess comorbidities and deliver an anesthetic plan that is safest for the patient while facilitating the ophthalmologic surgeon. This pre-operative examination should assess patient cooperation and the ability to communicate effectively. Eye surgeries are common in elderly patients, and thus, assessing cognitive function is paramount to predict if the patient will be able to respond and communicate appropriately if the anesthetic plan involves monitored anesthesia care under sedation in conjunction with topical or regional anesthesia. Elderly patients may have a higher incidence of undiagnosed cardiac disease, and thus, an accurate assessment of their cardiac risk factors and metabolic equivalents should be performed prior to surgery.

Moreover, patients lie in the supine position, and the head may be strapped to a headrest on a specific operating room table designed for performing eye surgeries. Patients must be able to tolerate this position, and there are various patient factors that may make this challenging such as obesity, heart failure, COPD, claustrophobia, and chronic cervical or spinal pain. Anxiety and claustrophobia may make certain patients unable to tolerate this positioning, especially when sterile drapes are placed over their head and body, which is standard for operating room surgeries. A focused medical history is also essential and is primarily important for identifying medications that have anesthetic implications. For instance, many patients presenting for eye surgeries may be on topical drops like timolol, carteolol, pilocarpine, and phenylephrine. Many of these drugs are absorbed (usually through the nasal mucosa) and can have hemodynamic effects intraoperatively.