Prolonged ischemia and reperfusion place patients at risk for compartment syndrome of the lower extremities. Compartment syndrome is less common in proximal injuries as compared to femoropopliteal or distal injuries; however, they remain a clinical concern in any above-knee injuries requiring operative vascular intervention.

External iliac/femoral arterial injuries are associated with arterial thrombosis (1%), need for amputation (5 to 9%; up to 20% with associated femur fracture), and chronic neurologic sequelae. Iliac/femoral vein injuries are associated with DVT (22%), PE (2.5%), and chronic lower extremity edema/venous insufficiency. Pseudoaneurysms and traumatic arteriovenous fistulas may also result.

Gastrointestinal complications include leaks from anastomosis or site of primary repair. Additional surgical intervention is requisite for intraabdominal sepsis from leaks or missed injuries. Contained leaks are manageable with drains placed by interventional radiology. Anastomotic strictures present a potential long-term complication following bowel resection. Wound infections and deep space infections can occur.

Persistent bladder leaks can occur after repair or attempts at nonoperative management of extraperitoneal injuries. The site of repair can present a nidus for stone formation if using a nonabsorbable suture. Urethral strictures requiring dilation or other intervention are possible if a urethral anastomosis is necessary. Erectile dysfunction may occur in patients following urethral trauma, particularly if there was surgical intervention.