Most of the patients with helminthiasis are from developing countries, especially from rural areas with poor sanitation and poor hygiene maintenance. Most are also preschool and school-aged. In most cases, clinical presentation depends on the burden of helminth infection because some patients may be mildly infected. In contrast, others may be heavily infected and harbor almost all of the worms.

Patients with adult**ascariasis**may also have an acute abdominal presentation like upper gastrointestinal bleeding, acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, biliary colic, acute cholangitis, and hepatic abscess for which patient may present with anemia, fever, jaundice, abdominal pain and tenderness. The heavy burden may present as small bowel obstruction with abdominal distension, tenderness, and increased bowel sound. Volvulus, intussusception, gastric perforation, and peritonitis are a very critical presentation of adult ascariasis. Vomiting (may contain long cylindrical worm), weakness, loss of appetite, weight loss, diarrhea, or altered bowel habit are also common in intestinal ascariasis. Pleuritis or pleural effusion may occur in rare cases. Diminished physical fitness, growth stunting, memory, and cognitive impairment is seen in young patients.**Eosinophilic pneumonia (Loeffler syndrome)**that occurs by A. lumbricoides may present with urticaria, cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, and abnormal breath sound on auscultation.

Patients with **A. duodenale and N. americanus infections**commonly remain asymptomatic. After penetration of the skin, migrating larvae may cause intensely pruritic, tortuous, and vesicular lesions. These worms can also cause eosinophilic pneumonia that presents with cough, respiratory distress, and hemoptysis.**Wakana syndrome**occurs in the perioral infection that presents as a constellation of symptoms such as pharyngeal irritation, cough, nausea, vomiting, and respiratory distress. Intestinal infection can cause various presentations like weakness, fatigue, abdominal pain, tenderness or discomfort, tachycardia, tachypnea, anemia, and edema due to extensive blood loss and protein loss respectively through the gastrointestinal tract, joint pain and sternal pain, headache, and impotence.

**S. stercoralis**
**infection**is commonly asymptomatic, although it may present with eosinophilic pneumonia just like hookworms andA. lumbricoides. Chronic strongyloidiasis might present with anorexia, nausea, weakness, abdominal pain, tenderness, and diarrhea. Larva currens is present as serpiginous urticaria due to chronic infection, mostly over the abdomen, torso, groin, and buttocks. Rarely, reactive arthritis may occur by the immune-mediated mechanisms. Strongyloides hyper-infection syndrome occurs by autoinfection in immunosuppressed individuals who present with intestinal failure or pulmonary failure. If untreated, the mortality ratio is approximately 100%. When large numbers of parasites spread into the different organs of the body, it leads to disseminated strongyloidiasis that present with catastrophic clinical manifestations such as meningitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, shock, and renal failure. Those who are taking immunosuppressive drugs such as corticosteroid and vincristine, hematological malignancies, hypogammaglobinaemia, and human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 infection are vulnerable to develop disseminated strongyloidiasis.

**T. trichiura infection**is asymptomatic in most cases. Loeffler syndrome does not develop in trichuriasis. Symptomatic individuals may present with weakness, abdominal pain. Patients may also present with iron deficiency anemia, finger clubbing, abdominal tenderness, mucoid diarrhea, rectal bleeding, rectal prolapse, this syndrome has traditionally named Trichuris dysentery syndrome (TDS). Children with severeT. trichiura infection can cause growth stunting, mental retardation, and decrease cognitive function.

**Schistosomiasis**can be classified as an acute and chronic infection. Acute schistosomiasis also is known as Katayama syndrome and typically presents with sudden onset of fever, fatigue, malaise, myalgia, rash (generally urticarial), wheeze, headache, abdominal pain, eosinophilia, it may also present with hepatosplenomegaly.

In the case of chronic schistosomiasis, **intestinal schistosomiasis**may present with intermittent abdominal pain, chronic diarrhea, and rectal bleeding. Some people withS. mansoni and S. japonicum infection may develop the hepatosplenic disease with periportal fibrosis, upper abdominal discomfort, palpable nodular, and hard hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and portal hypertension. Ascites and haematemesis may occur from esophageal varices. The chronic form of the disease may also present as **pulmonary hypertension**.**Urogenital schistosomiasis**may present with haematuria, increased urinary frequency, dysuria, and suprapubic discomfort. Urinary tract fibrosis may lead to obstructive uropathy (hydroureter and hydronephrosis), which can cause bacterial superinfection and renal dysfunction.S. hematobium infection also causes squamous-cell carcinoma of the bladder. Female genital schistosomiasis by S. hematobium may present with pain, stress incontinence, infertility, and increased risk of abortion. For men, urogenital schistosomiasis may present with oligospermia, hematospermia, orchitis, and prostatitis. Some non-specific but disabling systemic morbidities are associated with all Schistosoma species, including a pruritic rash that is commonly called ‘swimmers itch, other features include low-grade fever, anemia, and malnutrition with impaired childhood development. Ectopic eggs deposition can lead to very rare but important morbidities. The most common morbidities are spinal compression or encephalopathy. **Cerebral schistosomiasis**can also occur that may present with symptoms of meningoencephalitis such as headache, vomiting, blurred vision, high-grade fever, and altered sensorium or Jacksonian epilepsy. Spinal cord involvement can present as acute transverse myelitis or subacute myeloradiculopathy, although it is more common in acute schistosomiasis that results in acute lower limb paraplegia or lumbar and leg pain, muscle weakness, sensory loss, and bladder incontinence.

**Elephantiasis**mostly caused by filaria called**Wuchereria bancrofti** is asymptomatic in most of the case. Symptomatic patients may present fever, malaise, headache, and chills. The patient may present with swelling of the limbs or scrotum, also known as elephantiasis or hydrocele, respectively. Swelling is usually limited to single limbs. Red streaks present on the skin of the arms and legs, and lymphatic trunks become very painful. Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia also caused by this filaria that presents with asthma-like symptoms, restrictive lung disease, and high eosinophilia levels. In addition to these, extreme pain in the genital area may also develop as well as filarial abscesses.

For **echinococcosis**, most of the patients remain asymptomatic unless complications occur and are diagnosed accidentally. During patient admission, the most common presentation is pain at the right hypochondrium. Mechanisms by which a cyst becomes symptomatic include rupture with resultant infections or anaphylaxis, development of fistula with surrounding structures such as biliary tract, intestine, and bronchus.

**Taeniasis**may be asymptomatic in most of the cases. When present, it may be due to abdominal pain and abdominal distension for intestinal taeniasis. Neurocysticercosis may present with recurrent seizures, paresis, obstructive hydrocephalus, headache, features of intracranial hypertension, stroke, cognitive decline, and depression.

**Diphyllobothriasis**causes a variety of symptoms in different organs such as the central nervous system is affected and manifested as paresthesia, subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord due to megaloblastic anemia as a cause of vitamin B12 deficiency. Long-standingDiphyllobothrium latum infection also causes gastrointestinal symptoms like diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction, cholecystitis, cholangitis, and also subacute appendicitis. Hematological manifestations include megaloblastic anemia, pancytopenia, pernicious anemia, and eosinophilia. Diphyllobothriasis may also cause dyspnea due to prolonged vitamin B12 deficiency.