The complications include graft displacement, shrinkage, necrosis, wound site infection, granuloma formation, and lid thickening in the long term. Donor site complications include infection, mucosal necrosis, non-healing of the site, lip margin scarring, hematoma formation, persistent pain, and perioral numbness due to inadvertent damage to the mental nerve. Oral tightness may occur with wound contracture leading to limitation of jaw opening. Bleeding and buccal hematoma may require surgical intervention. Parotid duct injury can lead to abnormal salivary gland function.

Contracture after buccal mucosal grafts leading to difficulty opening the mouth is variable and reported to occur from 0% to 32% of patients.

Lower lip paresthesia may persist for many months after surgery but generally resolves unless the mental nerve has been injured. Cauterization in this area can cause nerve injury as well.

Although lip mucosa is best for harvesting mucosal salivary glands, the risk of lip contracture and lip inversion of the vermilion is significant if the donor site is not carefully chosen.

Transient decrease in salivary flow may occur because of trauma to Stenson's duct or due to edema following surgery.

Alcohol abuse and smoking may lead to dysplastic changes in the oral mucosa with poor donor and recipient site outcomes. Medications such as clindamycin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may alter mucosal anatomy.

Full-thickness mucous membrane grafts will remain pink and can be a cosmetic concern when visible. Split-thickness mucous membrane grafts are less pink but liable to shrink more and should not be used for fornix reconstruction. They are more suitable for bulbar conjunctival replacement as done after extensive recurrent pterygium surgery.

Failure of mucosal grafts with necrosis may be seen when used with osteo-odonto keratoprosthesis with necrosis rates of 8% to 50% reported.

Nodules (Fordyce nodules) may develop on the mucosa when transplanted to the ocular surface and necessitate surgical excision.

Disturbance of the conjunctiva in patients with ocular pemphigoid disease when applying mucous membrane grafts can activate local disease. It is important to only perform reconstructive surgery in these patients after the use of systemic immunosuppression.

Overall, mucosal grafts from the inner cheek give less postoperative discomfort, fewer neuro-sensory deficits, and fewer patients have salivary flow changes when compared to lower lip mucosal grafts.