Administer injection subcutaneously at separate sites in the thigh or lower abdomen (avoid areas within 2 inches of the navel); rotate injection sites; may leave at room temperature for 15 to 20 minutes before use; do not remove cap or cover while allowing the product to reach room temperature; not for administration to the skin which is red, tender, bruised, hard, or that scars, stretch marks, or psoriasis plaques.

The recommended doses for each indication are:

- Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis: 40 mg every other week.

- Juvenile idiopathic arthritis or pediatric uveitis
- 10 kg to less than 15 kg: 10 mg every other week
- 15 kg to less than 30 kg: 20 mg every other week
- Greater than 30 kg: 40 mg every other week

- Adult Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis
- Initial dose (day 1): 160 mg
- The second dose is two weeks later (day 15): 80 mg
- Two weeks later (day 29): Start a maintenance dose of 40 mg every other week.
- For patients with ulcerative colitis only: Continue adalimumab in only the patients who have shown evidence of clinical remission by eight weeks (Day 57) of therapy.

- Plaque psoriasis or adult uveitis
- 80 mg initial dose, followed by 40 mg every other week, starting one week after the initial dose.

- Hidradenitis suppurativa
- Initial dose (day 1): 160 mg
- The second dose is two weeks later (day 15): 80 mg
- Third (day 29) and the subsequent doses: 40 mg every week.

The injection is available as a pre-filled glass syringe or pen or single-use glass vial in doses of 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg, or 80 mg. Patients may use the adalimumab pen for self-administration. The vial is for institutional use only.

Following a single 40 mg subcutaneous dose, the pharmacokinetics of adalimumab are as follows:

- Absolute bioavailability: 64%

- Time to peak concentration: 131 +/- 56 h

- Maximum serum concentration: 4.7 +/- 1.6 mcg/ml

- The volume of distribution: 4.7- 6 L

- Steady-state concentration:

- Without concomitant methotrexate: 5 mcg/ml
- With concomitant methotrexate: 8 to 9 mcg/ml

- Systemic clearance: 12 ml/hr

- Terminal half-life: 2 weeks