A primary indication for a portacaval shunt is in relation to upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The portacaval shunt is utilized to control massive upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage due to varices that cannot be trolled with endoscopic ablation and transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt, TIPS, the procedure is not available. Oftentimes, a portacaval shunt is the preferred surgical option when a patient has undergone a prior splenectomy, splenic vein thrombosis, throughout post splenorenal shunt, ascites, the reversal of flow in the portal vein, or hepatic vein thrombosis. To select for patients for a direct portacaval shunt procedure, demonstration of a patent portal vein whether preoperatively or via laparotomy should be done.

Shunting procedures are also performed for portal hypertension. Indications for such include portal decompression in patients who have had portal hypertension that is complicated by hemorrhage due to esophageal varices uncontrolled with sclerotherapy. Procedures cannot completely interrupt the portal venous flow provided to the liver such as an end-to-side portacaval shunt, while selective decompression of the portal system using a collateral shunt like a side-to-side portacaval shunt.

Shunting plays a role in the management of a patient with portal hypertension. Portal venous pressure greater than 5 to 10 mmHg defines portal hypertension. A wide variety of etiologies can contribute to the development of portal hypertension and it can be classified as pre-hepatic, intrahepatic, or post hepatic. About 90% of cases within the USA are related to cirrhosis. Some pre-hepatic etiologies include portal vein thrombosis, arteriovenous fistulas, and splenic vein thrombosis. Intrahepatic causes include primary biliary cirrhosis, cirrhosis, infiltrative liver diseases, polycystic liver disease, venous-occlusive disease. Post-hepatic causes include, but are not limited to Budd-Chiari syndrome, inferior vena cava webs or thromboses, congestive heart failure, constrictive pericarditis.

A clinically significant manifestation of portal hypertension is variceal hemorrhage, which has substantial morbidity and mortality. Portal hypertension causes vascular channel dilatation in collateral portosystemic channels which arise where the systemic veins and portal veins meet. A common site of varices includes gastroesophageal with portal inflow coming from the left gastric vein and short gastric veins and systemic outflow from the intercostal, diaphragmatic, and esophageal veins. Collateral sites also include hemorrhoids via the superior hemorrhoidal vein and middle and inferior hemorrhoidal veins, caput medusa a where the left portal vein and umbilical and abdominal wall veins meet. In patients with cirrhosis, 50% have the presence of gastroesophageal varices. An annual rate of variceal hemorrhage is estimated to be between 5% to 15%, with size being the dominant predicting factor of hemorrhage.

When dealing with variceal hemorrhage, rapid and aggressive initial management alongside with prevention of recurrent bleeds is crucial as the mortality rate for each bleeding episode approaches about 20%. When managing an acute variceal hemorrhage, the patient should be admitted to the ICU for monitoring, resuscitation, definitive treatment. Airway protection is often needed with endotracheal intubation, which is useful during endoscopy. Venous access should be obtained with large-bore IVs and rapid initiation of blood products for volume replacement. Any existing coagulopathy can be corrected with transfusing FFP and platelets.

Antibiotic prophylaxis with a third-generation cephalosporin is typically employed as cirrhotic patients are at increased risk for infection due to impairment of post defenses particularly after an episode of large gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis but attributes to about 50% of these infections with urinary tract infections as well as pneumonia contributing to the remainder. The somatostatin analog, octreotide, vasoconstrict the splanchnic vessels and inhibits glucagon. It is often used as adjunctive therapy to endoscopic therapy when attempting to control acute variceal bleeding.

Rebleeding is a significant risk for untreated patients after the initial episode of variceal hemorrhage.  It is estimated that the median bleeding risk is 70% within 2 years.  It is therefore recommended that secondary prophylaxis begin once the initial hemorrhage has been controlled.  Medicinal prophylaxis includes nonselective beta-blockers, which includes nadolol and propranolol.  Endoscopic variceal band ligation can also further reduce the risk of a rebleed.  If the patient suffers from refractory variceal hemorrhage despite these prophylactic efforts, surgical shunting as well as TIPS can be appropriate.

An emergent **esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)**is crucial in the diagnosis and therapy for a suspected acute variceal bleed. Its usefulness is in the identification of the presence of varices as well as an exclusion for other sources of bleeding, for example, gastritis, ulcers, portal hypertensive gastropathy. Endoscopic interventions are effective in controlling hemorrhage and almost 90% of patients including sclerotherapy or variceal band ligation. If this fails, luminal tamponade with Sengstaken-Blakemore or Minnesota tubes can be utilized, both of which have large round gastric balloons that can be used to compress the GE junction and decrease blood flow to esophageal varices when placed on traction with a distal port to allow for the evacuation of luminal contents within the stomach. You wary of aspiration pneumonia as it is the most common complication of luminal tamponade, but elective endotracheal intubation is recommended as it can prevent aspiration especially in patients who have encephalopathy.

In an actively bleeding patient, the acute phase of hemorrhage from the gastro-intestinal tract prompts sclerotherapy or an intraesophageal pressure balloon to control the hemorrhage. A continuous IV infusion of vasopressin at approximately 20 to 40 units/h or a selective intra-arterial infusion via the superior mesenteric artery at 0.1 to 0.4 units/min may be administered. Of note, vasopressin efficiently reduces portal pressure aids in the evacuation of blood and any fecal residue lying in the alimentary tract.

It is essential to remove any old blood even if vasopressin is not administered. This can be accomplished via colonic irrigation. This will allow for simplification during exposure and will reduce the risk of ammonia intoxication in the patient. In the circumstances, nonabsorbable antibacterial agents are used to control the nitrogen splitting bacteria located within the gastrointestinal tract. Restoration of blood volume should be performed preoperatively by the judicious use of blood, albumin, and lactated Ringer solution. Dependent on the results of coagulation studies, fresh whole blood products, vitamin K, and platelet transfusions may be indicated

A **transjugular intrahepatic portacaval shunt (TIPS)**the procedure is in interventional radiologic one where a tract is created between the portal vein and hepatic vein and is kept patent via the deployment of an expandable metallic stent, covered with polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE. This creates a shunt within the liver and reduces his portal pressure. Interestingly, in adults, the portal vein as well as its tributaries are valveless as the valves that existed during fetal circulation have been resorbed. This means the portal system can be decompressed by the creation of a connection to the systemic venous system. The portal vein provides approximately 75% of hepatic blood flow and about 50% of oxygen delivery as well.

**Indications for side to side portocaval shunts:**Bleeding gastric or esophageal varices caused by portal hypertension due to a cirrhotic liver or by hepatic diseases like schistosomiasis, bleeding due to portal hypertensive gastropathy that is unresponsive to pharmacological therapies, occluded hepatic veins, and patent inferior vena cava with Budd-Chiari syndrome, intractable ascites that is unresponsive to nonsurgical interventions/therapies, or a failed transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt.

No surgical decompressive procedure performed on the portal system has a beneficial effect on liver function. Thus, the end results of such an operation depend largely on the progress of liver disease. In patients who have had a prior splenectomy, thrombosis of a splenorenal shunt, splenic vein thrombosis, or those who have reversed flow in the portal vein, and end-to-side portacaval shunt is the procedure of choice. An end-to-side anastomosis procedure involves the portal vein being ligated into the hilum of the liver and the distal portion of the portal vein anastomosis to the IVC.

Indications for the shunt are when there is no evidence of ascites and when the portal blood flow is reversed into the hepatoportal direction. This can be determined due to rising pressure in the hepatic end of the temporarily occluded portal vein. In an end-to-side portocaval anastomosis, portal venous blood flow is shunted away from the liver, but hepatic artery flow is preserved.