**Ethics**

Many medical ethicists have argued that the principle of patient autonomy is paramount for patient care. However, if a patient is incapacitated, providers may be placed in a situation where decisions are necessary with implied or emergency consent, which assumes that interventions are in the best interest of the patient. In the absence of a pre-existing Do-Not-Resuscitate (DNR) order or Physician/Medical Order for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST/MOLST), the decision of whether to initiate or terminate CPR care is based on the ethical principle of beneficence towards the patient as well as non-maleficence towards the patient, EMS personnel, and the general public. Utilizing resources to initiate care is not without drawbacks and potential harm. One goal of resuscitation protocols is to identify futile care where the patient is unlikely to survive or benefit. In general, since 1990, if the benefits of survival due to an intervention or drug treatment are under 1%, it is considered medically futile.

**Pediatrics**

Pediatric out of hospital deaths represent nearly one-third of all pediatric deaths in the United States, and approximately 2% of all pediatric EMS calls result from OHCA.

- 0 to 1-year-old: 3.3%

- 1 to 11 years old: 10.5%

- 12 to -19 years old: 15.8%

Given the poor prognosis associated with OHCA, especially with presenting signs that suggest poor outcomes, there has been increased interest in guidelines to assist in the termination of resuscitation after various CPR periods before transport to the hospital. However, there remains a profound reluctance to stop resuscitative measures in pediatric populations by healthcare providers.