**Standard MBSR Programs**

Standard MBSR programs have demonstrated potential to ameliorate physiological dysregulation, including attenuated hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activation, autonomic activation, and inflammation.

Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction

Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) was initially designed to relieve suffering among chronic pain patients by teaching skills that cultivate present moment-focused, non-judgmental awareness.

**Traditional MBSR Interventions**

Traditional MBSR interventions can easily be performed without the use of specialized equipment. Many group administrators and practitioners prefer to have materials handy to help modify movement-based exercises and yoga poses for those with physical limitations. Typically a yoga mat, blocks, and strap are sufficient. Studies of MBSR group interventions have suggested that limiting group size to less than 20 individuals is preferable to build a cohesive dynamic between practitioners (see Lehrer, Woolfolk, and Sime, Principles and practice of stress management. New York: Guilford).

Mindfulness-based interventions may be optimized to enhance pre-existing practitioner strengths and address specific stress-management needs. Among cancer patients, a benefit was observed after an MBSR program incorporated a shortened length of meditation assignments, reduced frequency of group meetings, and adjustments of the physical movements taught (e.g., yoga poses). Similar modifications have been considered for other cancer patient samples, including changing the usual mindful (raisin) eating exercise to utilize a liquid for those who have trouble eating or swallowing, omitting the day-long silent retreat if thought to be too taxing or inappropriate for the population, adjusting physical movements to account for any injury or pain that may be present, and employing an individual (versus group) format to better incorporate session scheduling with medical appointments.