Most of the current literature regarding the treatment of Malassezia includes diseases with which it is most closely associated, that is, SD, PV, and Malassezia folliculitis. In general, Malassezia spp. are susceptible to topical and oral agents with keratolytic and anti-inflammatory properties, as well as antifungal activity. Shampoos and creams with selenium and zinc salts, propylene glycol, and compounds with sulfur were among the first treatments introduced and are often effective. Topical treatment can also employ specific antifungals, including azoles and terbinafine. More severe, diffuse, or recalcitrant disease may require oral antifungal therapy. Oral terbinafine is less effective than topical for PV. Historically, topical and oral corticosteroids were therapeutic choices for SD, but antifungals and even topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus have demonstrated promising results.

The main goal in the treatment of SD is to reduce Malassezia proliferation and the resultant inflammatory response. First-line therapy includes topicals with fungistatic and fungicidal properties, topical antifungals, or corticosteroids. Zinc pyrithione, selenium sulfide, and ciclopirox olamine 1%, available in shampoos, cream, and gel, are commonly implemented due to their antifungal, keratolytic, and anti-inflammatory properties. Topic azoles, such as ketoconazole 2% and fluconazole 2% shampoos, are effective and well-tolerated. They are useable in conjunction with topical corticosteroids for additional anti-inflammatory effects. For extensive or recalcitrant SD, oral ketoconazole, 200 mg for four weeks or itraconazole, 200 mg daily for one week have proven effective. Similarly, topical antifungals are first-line against PV, including imidazoles, ciclopirox olamine, selenium sulfide, and zinc pyrithione shampoos, salicylic acid preparations, and benzoyl peroxide. Systemic antifungal therapy is an option in conjunction with topicals or alone in cases of more extensive involvement or resistant disease. Similar therapy may work for Malassezia folliculitis.

Invasive Malassezia infection warrants prompt removal of central venous catheters due to the yeast's ability to produce biofilms. This rare occurrence lacks effective evidence-based practices, but studies have demonstrated Malassezia susceptibility to antifungal triazoles, and amphotericin B. Intravenous therapy may transition to oral after a two-week course.