Clinical trials are lacking for the treatment of Menetrier disease, and pharmacological therapies have shown inconsistent benefits.

The supportive treatments prescribed include a high-protein diet, proton pump inhibitors, and the replacement of micronutrients.

Treatment of H. pylori and CMV is recommended if the tests for respective infections are positive. Eradication of H.pylori has been shown to improve disease conditions in a few patients. Similarly, treatment with ganciclovir is effective in some CMV-related cases.

Octreotide, a somatostatin analog, has shown to be beneficial in case reports. It acts by modulating the TGF-alpha - EGFR pathway, which is the underlying pathogenic mechanism. A dose of 100 to 600 micrograms daily subcutaneously or intravenously or octreotide depot formulation 10 to 60 mg intramuscularly every four weeks has been used.

In a small case series, patients with severe Ménétrier disease who were treated for one month with cetuximab showed significant improvement in the quality of life as well as biochemical measures. Cetuximab is a recombinant IgG1 monoclonal antibody. Cetuximab binds to the extracellular portion of the EGF receptor, which inhibits the binding of TGF-alpha.

Surgery is recommended in some cases of disease progression with severe, intractable abdominal pain, oral intolerance, weight loss, bleeding, or pyloric obstruction. Partial and total gastrectomy remains an acceptable means of treatment for cases with persistent and debilitating symptoms or growing concern for gastric cancer development. Total gastrectomy is preferred over partial gastrectomy due to better surgical outcomes.