Management for systemic mastocytosis has its basis in symptoms and subtypes.

**Symptom Specific Management**

The following therapies may be necessary for symptomatic patients with any subtype of systemic mastocytosis (SM).

**Antihistamines**— Initial pharmacologic treatment includes the use of H1 and H2 antihistamines. H1 antihistamines are administered to prevent flushing and itching. H2 antihistamines may help with abdominal pain, heartburn, cramping, and/or diarrhea.

**Antileukotriene drugs**— Antileukotriene agents may be an option in patients with flushing, itching, or abdominal cramping unresponsive to H1 and H2 antihistamines.

**Recurrent anaphylaxis**— For patients with systemic mastocytosis who experience recurrent anaphylaxis or mast cell activation symptoms with hemodynamic instability despite trigger avoidance, maximized doses of anti-mediator agents (H1 and H2 antihistamines and anti-leukotriene drugs) may provide benefit. These patients should also have injectable epinephrine with them at all times.

**Omalizumab**— Omalizumab (anti-IgE), a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits the binding of IgE to mast cells, reduced the frequency of anaphylaxis in a few patients with SM or monoclonal mast cell activation syndrome.

**Flushing**— In patients with prominent flushing not responsive to antihistamines, aspirin may be helpful, provided the patient is known to tolerate NSAIDs.

**Gastrointestinal symptoms**— Gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with systemic mastocytosis may respond to oral cromolyn sodium, H2 antihistamines, and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). Orally administered glucocorticoids are helpful for patients with aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM) and severe malabsorption or ascites.

**Osteoporosis and fractures**— Appropriate daily intake of calcium and vitamin D should be maintained. For patients with osteoporosis-related fractures, treatment with the combination of pamidronate and low-dose interferon-alfa has been reported to be helpful.

**Refractory symptoms -**In patients who are unresponsive to anti-mediator therapies and omalizumab, low-dose maintenance glucocorticoids or cytoreductive measures (such as interferon-alfa, cladribine, or a tyrosine kinase inhibitor [TKI] depending on KIT mutational status) can be considered as second-line approaches.

**Subtype-specific Management**

**Indolent****Systemic Mastocytosis or Smoldering S****ystemic Mastocytosis:**Treatment with cytoreductive therapy is also appropriate for select patients with ISM or smoldering systemic mastocytosis (SSM) who suffer from recurrent anaphylaxis that remains uncontrolled with anti-mediator treatments, although this is only appropriate when all other options have been exhausted.

**Aggressive SM:**Management of aggressive forms of systemic mastocytosis is with cladribine, midostaurin, interferon-alpha, or TKI inhibitors (imatinib) based on mutation status along with bone marrow transplant. Treatment of advanced systemic mastocytosis is indicated to mitigate organ dysfunction and improve the quality of life. For those patients eligible for hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), the goal is to control symptoms and prevent progression until a donor can be found.

**SM-AHN:**Treatment in this subtype focuses on the associated hematopoietic disorder. After the initial salvage therapy, HCT should be a consideration for maintenance.

**Mast cell Leukemia:**There is no standard treatment to treat mast cell leukemia. It has a poor prognosis overall.

In patients with venom allergy, treatment with venom immunotherapy is helpful to reduce further episodes of anaphylaxis.