Organophosphates stimulate both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. A typical clinical scenario will involve symptoms of overstimulation of the parasympathetic system. An exception is in children, as they typically have a predominance of symptoms mediated by nicotinic receptors.

There are a couple of mnemonics that are helpful to remember the symptoms of organophosphate poisonings and the receptor that is responsible.

For nicotinic signs of acetylcholinesterase inhibitor toxicity, think of the days of the week:

- Monday = Mydriasis

- Tuesday = Tachycardia

- Wednesday = Weakness

- Thursday = Hypertension

- Friday = Fasciculations.

The more common mnemonic that captures the muscarinic effects of organophosphate poisonings is DUMBELS:

- D = Defecation/diaphoresis

- U = Urination

- M = Miosis

- B = Bronchospasm/bronchorrhea

- E = Emesis

- L = Lacrimation

- S = Salivation.

Additional symptoms can include anxiety, confusion, drowsiness, emotional lability, seizures, hallucinations, headaches, insomnia, memory loss, and circulatory or respiratory depression. When death occurs, the most common reason is respiratory failure stemming from bronchoconstriction, bronchorrhea, central respiratory depression or weakness/paralysis of the respiratory muscles. If the patient survives the acute poisoning, there are other long-term complications.

Intermediate neurologic symptoms typically occur 24 to 96 hours after exposure. Symptoms include neck flexions, weakness, decreased deep tendon reflexes, cranial nerve abnormalities, proximal muscle weakness, and respiratory insufficiency. With supportive care, these patients can have a complete return to normal neurologic function within 2 to 3 weeks. Another later complication is neuropathy. This is linked to very specific organophosphate compounds that contain chlorpyrifos. Most commonly this starts as stocking-glove paresthesia and progresses to symmetric polyneuropathy with flaccid weakness that starts in the lower extremities and progresses to include the upper extremities.

Those who survive may also develop the following neuropsychiatric deficits:

- Confusion

- Impairment in memory

- Lethargy

- Psychosis

- Irritability

- Parkinson like symptoms