**Blood Supply****:**

Anterior abdominal wall arteries and veins are responsible for the blood circulation of the linea semilunaris. The superior epigastric and musculophrenic arteries, both branches of the internal thoracic artery, supply the superior portion of the anterior abdominal wall. The inferior epigastric and deep circumflex iliac arteries, both branches of the external iliac artery, supply the inferior portion of the anterior abdominal wall.

The superior epigastric artery descends within the rectus sheath behind the rectus abdominis muscle. It is responsible for arterial blood supply to the upper portion of the muscle and the linea semilunaris. The inferior epigastric artery runs superiorly on the posterior surface of the rectus abdominis muscle and supplies the lower part of the muscle and the linea semilunaris. Additionally, small segmental branches that originate from the lower six intercostal arteries supply a portion of the rectus abdominis muscle and the linea semilunaris.

Deep veins of the anterior abdominal wall superior to the umbilicus drain into the superior epigastric (medial) and musculophrenic (lateral) veins. These veins ultimately drain into the superior vena cava. Deep veins that are inferior to the umbilicus drain into the inferior epigastric and deep circumflex iliac veins. These veins ultimately drain into the inferior vena cava.

**Lymphatics****:**

Lymphatic vessels superior to the umbilicus drain into the axillary lymph nodes, whereas lymphatic vessels inferior to the umbilicus drain into the superficial inguinal lymph nodes.