Patients with leukemia should be referred to a hematologist-oncologist to initiate treatment. Therapy varies significantly based on the leukemia subtype and patient factors (e.g., age, comorbid conditions). Acute leukemias are treated predominantly as an in-patient needing significant support, frequent monitoring of vitals, and assessment for opportunistic infections and electrolyte imbalances. The predominant challenge at the time of diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia is to identify the possibility of APL, which has a significantly different treatment compared to the rest of AML.

**APL:**APL patients typically present with bleeding diathesis with increased coagulation parameters (elevated PT, aPTT) and low fibrinogen. Peripheral smear shows a predominance of myeloid blasts with Auer rods. It is important to start the treatment with ATRA (all-trans-retinoic acid) when APL is suspected rather than awaiting confirmatory tests with FISH. ATRA advances arrested promyeloblasts into becoming mature granulocytes which can result in differentiation syndrome.

Specific treatment for APL depends on whether the patient is at low or intermediate risk (also known as standard risk) with a WBC count <10,000/ mcL or high risk with a WBC count >10,000/ mcL. Low or intermediate-risk APL is further differentiated by platelets above or below 40,000/mcL.

- Standard-risk APL: Patients respond well to ATRA and arsenic trioxide (ATO) with lesser complications during induction and recovery without needing an allogeneic stem cell transplant (SCT). During the utilization of ATO, patients need to be monitored for electrolyte changes closely and electrocardiogram for QTc prolongation changes(Framingham formula).

- High-risk APL: Along with ATRA + ATO, high-risk patients achieve better responses with the addition of idarubicin.

APL patients have better overall survival and prognosis than other types of AML without needing a transplant.

**AML:**Standard therapy for AML is well known as the '7+3' regimen, which includes a 7-day course of cytarabine continuous infusion with a 3-day course of an anthracycline (either daunorubicin or idarubicin). With the advent of cytogenetics and NGS testing, patients are now being risk-stratified based on the molecular markers resulting in prognostic and therapeutic implications.

Standard 7+3 regimen with/without GO.

This chemo regimen can be attempted in patients > 60 years old if they have good tolerability as determined by performance status.

Patients who achieve complete response can complete consolidation without the obvious need for SCT unless patients relapse.

Standard 7 + 3 with FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitor (midostaurin) during induction and consolidation.

Strongly consider SCT among this risk group.



**For patients above 60 years or with intermediate performance status**

Hypomethylating agents (HMA) with/without B-cell lymphoma-2 (BCL-2) inhibitor - venetoclax.



**Therapy-related AML or AML arising from antecedent myelodysplastic syndrome or Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia**

Patients respond better with liposomal cytarabine and daunorubicin, which is a category 1 indication in NCCN guidelines.

**ALL**

ALL is divided into B or T lymphocyte variants based on the lymphoblast origin and the presence of >20% lymphoblasts in peripheral smear or BM. The presence or absence of the Ph chromosome is the most important molecular marker leading to therapeutic implications in treating ALL.

Combination of chemotherapy with oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) favorably 2nd generation and beyond such as dasatinib, ponatinib, bosutinib, nilotinib, and imatinib. Not all the TKI combinations have data with chemotherapy agents, and the availability of the drug and provider practices generally dictate the regimen.

For patients in adolescent and young adult (AYA) age groups (around 15 to 40 years), pediatric-inspired chemotherapy regimens with peg-asparaginase (Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster regimen) are favored when patients can tolerate treatment.

Other chemotherapy options for patients <65 years old include hyper-fractionated CVAD( cyclophosphamide, vincristine sulfate, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone), alternating with high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine, and newer therapy with bispecific CD19-directed CD3 T-cell engager blinatumomab.

For patients >65 years old, TKI backbone combined with corticosteroids with/without vincristine or lower dose hyperCVAD in robust patients can be tried.

Recently a chemotherapy-free induction and consolidation regimen using dasatinib with blinatumomab yielded good responses and improved survival outcomes.

Chemotherapy forms the predominant backbone in Ph-negative patients without any role for TKIs. Multiple chemotherapy regimens are adapted based on the age of the patient.

In AYA age groups, predominant use of peg-asparaginase-based regimens such as CALGB 10403, COG AALL0434, DCFI ALL regimen, etc.

For patients less than 65 years old, rituximab-based regimens in CD20-positive patients, such as GRAALL-2005

For older patients, based on their performance status, corticosteroids with/without vincristine, POMP regimen (prednisolone, vincristine, methotrexate, and 6-mercaptopurine), and lower dose hyperCVAD therapy are options.

The overall outcome depends upon the patient's response to induction therapy and the presence or absence of MRD (minimal residual disease) needing further therapies and BMT.

**CML:**CML is one of the first cancers revolutionized by utilizing targeted therapy with Ph chromosome targeting TKIs. Patients have a significant response to TKIs, negating the need for acute chemotherapy unless they are in an accelerated phase/blast crisis. A patient's risk can be assessed based on multiple available calculators such as the Sokal score, EUTOS Score, and EUTOS long-term survival score (ELTS).

Major milestones after initiation of TKI include:

- At 3 months: BCR-ABL1 [International Scale (IS)] at ≤10 percent and/or ≤35% Ph-positive metaphase cells

- At 6 months: BCR-ABL1 (IS) at ≤1 percent or/and 0 % Ph-positive metaphase cells

- At 1 year    : BCR-ABL1 (IS) ≤0.1 percent

Patients need to be monitored for resistance mutations, predominantly T315I mutation, for which ponatinib, asciminib, and omacetaxine are approved.

**CLL:**CLL runs its course in a more indolent fashion than all the other leukemic subtypes, with the patient's lifespan minimally impacted by the disease. Patients do not benefit from early treatment unless they meet the criteria for therapy. Patients with a rapid doubling time of lymphocytes, worsening cytopenias, increasing spleen size causing abdominal discomfort, and significant B symptoms (fatigue, night sweats, and weight loss) benefit from treatment. The most important determinant in treating CLL is knowing the IGVH mutation status and the presence of del17p and TP53 mutation. t(11:14) is often obtained to rule out mantle cell lymphoma.

For patients with IGVH mutation who have a relatively good prognosis, chemotherapy with FCR (fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab)

Rarely do patients with CLL/SLL who have a dormant course present with acute aggressive lymphadenopathy. They need an urgent lymph node or bone marrow biopsy to rule out Richter transformation into aggressive diffuse large B cell lymphoma and rarely Hodgkin lymphoma or T cell lymphomas.