As the world's population continues to age, the amount of surgery being performed continues to rise. Cardiothoracic surgery is no exception. This increased surgical demand directly correlates to a need for continued advancement in pain management, as open cardiothoracic surgery is directly linked to poorly controlled postoperative pain and the development of chronic poststernotomy pain syndromes (PSPS).

Poststernotomy pain syndromes are complex pain syndromes that can not only include sternal pain but encompass musculoskeletal pain of the trunk, head, neck, and upper extremities.

In the past, it had been commonplace to liberally use opioids to treat such postsurgical pain and blunt the hemodynamic response that comes with it. However, this presents its problems, as the administration of excessive opioids may lead to delayed extubation and the development of pain syndromes such as opioid-induced hyperalgesia. This is ironic because inadequately treated pain may lead to the same complications, as previously mentioned.

In general, the TTMPB and chest wall fascial plane blocks have been increasingly employed to mitigate these sequelae and have been utilized in ERAS protocols following cardiothoracic surgery. In addition, utilization of the TTMPB has allowed certain minimally invasive procedures to be performed with minimal-to-no sedation in patients who would otherwise poorly tolerate the hemodynamic swings that occur with general anesthesia.

There are several studies in which the TTPMB has been shown to decrease perioperative opioid use. Aydin et al. reported that in patients who underwent a median sternotomy and received a preoperative TTMPB with 0.25% bupivacaine, there was a significant reduction in postoperative opioid use 12 hours after surgery, as well as a significantly less incidence of postoperative nausea.

Regarding postoperative ventilation, it has been reported that incorporating the TTMPB into cardiothoracic ERAS pathways bodes well regarding patient outcomes. In the study by Shokri et al., ventilation time and ICU stay were reported to be significantly shorter in the group that received a TTMPB.

Evidence of the TTMPB's efficacy in the pediatric population is also robust. In the pediatric population, multiple studies have reported significantly decreased ventilation time and significantly reduced pain scores and perioperative opioid consumption in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery who received a TTPMB.

Finally, the TTMPB reduces the incidence of chronic PSPS by decreasing the pain sensitization induced by open cardiothoracic surgery. It has also been used as a treatment for patients who have developed chronic pain from these surgical incisions.

The TTMPB shows great promise as an integral component of multimodal analgesia following cardiothoracic surgery, as it has been shown to facilitate faster extubation times, decrease and prevent acute and chronic pain, and is a variable alternative to neuraxial anesthesia when neuraxial approaches to pain management are contraindicated.