Many signaling molecules expressed in the endoderm contribute to pharyngeal pouch formation. An assortment of transcription factors discussed below contributes to the development of pharyngeal pouches and respective tissue derivatives.

Endodermal out pocketing is widely regulated by the expression of fibroblast growth factor (FGF), T-box transcription factor (TBX1), retinoic acid, and Wingless related integration site (Wnt) protein.

The first pharyngeal pouch is highly dominated by the expression of the TBX1 and eyes absent 1 (EYA1) and 4 (EYA4) genes. The TBX1 gene induces the development of the first pharyngeal pouch, forming the tympanic membrane. Mutations in the EYA4 and EYA1 genes cause partial conductive hearing loss. Mutations in EYA4 lead to an undersized eustachian tube. branchio-oto-renal syndrome, characterized by branchiogenic malformation resulting in cyst formation, hearing loss, and various renal anomalies, is a result of a mutation in the EYA1 gene.

The function of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches is modulated by the roles of Homeobox A3 (HOXA3), Glial cell missing 2 (GCM2), Forkhead box protein N1 (FOXN1), EYA1, TBX1, and Paired box 9 (PAX9) genes. HOXA3 genes organize the spatial identity of the developing embryo along the anterior-posterior axis. Mutations in this gene result in partial parathyroid and thymus agenesis. GCM 2 is the earliest marker of the parathyroid and a derivative of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches. The FOXN1 gene is necessary for thymic epithelial cell differentiation into the cortical and medullary epithelium. EYA1 also influences thymus and parathyroid development. TBX1 and PAX9 are involved in the successful development of the thymus and parathyroid from the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches.