A detailed history of the medical health is essential both, for the assessment of the safety of undertaking blepharoplasty as well as choosing the level of anesthesia for the patient. To that end, the medical history should review illnesses such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, thyroid disease, respiratory diseases, dermatologic diseases, kidney disease, recurrent edema, and any bleeding disorders. Medications and supplements need to be reviewed as many drugs can increase the risk of bleeding. The list of drugs that can result in excessive bleeding is long. Smoking and alcohol use are evaluated as even in a relatively simple procedure like an upper blepharoplasty smoking can affect the healing of tissues. A review of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medication is vital with a discussion with the patient's primary physician who monitors these to ensure that it is safe to withhold these for 1 week before surgery and for up to a week following surgery.

A review of the psychiatric history and any evidence of a narcissistic personality disorder, body dysmorphic disorder or tendency to histrionic behavior should be noted. Where necessary, the patient should be referred to a psychologist or psychiatrist.

**Ophthalmic History**

Previous ocular surgery, including any refractive surgical procedures, need to be reviewed as many such patients will be predisposed to an increased need for lubrication. Blepharitis and meibomian gland dysfunction increase with age and especially in patients of Northern European origins: any current problems and how they are managed should be considered. Patients will often seek a repeat blepharoplasty but may not remember having had it done before, so an accurate history and examination are essential. Any current or history of dryness is obtained: specifically, patients should be asked if they use artificial tear drops and if so how many times a day they need drops.

**Examination**

Examination of upper eyelids should always include a review of the forehead, brows and upper eyelids. Underlying ptosis also needs to be assessed. It is well-recognized that when upper eyelid surgery is performed with or without ptosis repair, the position of the brows will drop, unmasking the brow ptosis, especially in men.

A formal Schirmer's test with topical anesthetic may be performed. However, it is no longer considered to be necessary because the results have not been found to be entirely reliable.

Tarsal platform and eyelid crease: central to any blepharoplasty is the creation of an eyelid skin crease, below which is the tarsal show or tarsal platform. The skin crease is defined by the insertion of the anterior fibers of the levator aponeurosis into the dermis through the orbicularis oculi muscle. The skin crease height varies depending upon ethnicity, age, and gender. Men's upper eyelid crease is generally lower than that in women. However, even within a particular ethnic group, the skin crease height varies. We assess younger photographs of patients to get an idea of where the skin crease looked suitable for the patient. In Asian races, the skin crease will be very low (1 to 3 mm) because of the much lower insertion of the orbital septum on the levator aponeurosis and weaker dermal attachments by the levator aponeurosis. Aging causes a decrease in skin elasticity, weakening of the aponeurotic attachments to the tarsal as well as the dermis, and an overall reduction in the periorbital fat, which should all be assessed. Hollowing of the periorbital tissues together with the elevation of the skin crease and “skeletonization” of the orbit in advanced age can occur.

Corneal reflex-lid margin distance in Caucasians measures 3.5 to 4 mm. If it is below 3 mm or there is asymmetry, ptosis should be measured and corrected. Levator function should always be measured; normal is more than 12 mm.

The upper eyelid has a medial and central fat pad. These fat pads can be accentuated by pushing gently on the globe with the eyelids closed or on the lower eyelid. The central fat pad often spreads laterally, but any lateral “bulge” should be assumed to be that of the lacrimal gland which may prolapse forwards with age. The medial fat pad which is a lighter color than the central fat pad is more rounded and medial to the levator aponeurosis separated by a weak septum from the central fat pad. The central fat pad sits on the levator aponeurosis. The lacrimal gland is in the lacrimal sac fossa in the superolateral orbit. There is also preseptal retro-orbicularis fat present which can contribute to upper eyelid fullness. Any lateral upper eyelid bulge should be noted as it may be a prolapsed lacrimal gland. Understanding these anatomical details allows one to examine the various bulges on the upper eyelid accurately.

Brow position and assessment of the brow fat pad is essential. A full brow gives a youthful look. Rarely is it necessary to remove the brow fat pad. Secondary laxity causing some degree of droop of the brow fat (retro-orbicularis oculi fat) can occur, necessitating a surgical repositioning rather than removal.

At a minimum, the following measurements and assessments are made:

- Brow ptosis: Absent or present, mild, moderate or severe. Presence or absence of lateral brow ptosis (leading to secondary dermatochalasis)

- Brow shape

- Corneal reflex-lid margin distance (MRD-1). Normal measurement is 3.5 mm to 4 mm

- Levator function (more than 12 mm)

- Eyelid curve and height

- Pupils (any anisocoria)

- Ocular movements

- Examine the corneal surface (pterygia, scars, evidence of LASIK or radial keratotomy, conjunctival blebs, corneal dystrophies)

- Tear breakup time (BUT) and Schirmer’s test are often performed but the exact reliability is unknown.

- Bell's phenomenon. If the patient has a neutral Bell’s phenomenon or a negative one, conservative blepharoplasty is indicated.

- Lagophthalmos: May indicate underlying thyroid disease or prior eyelid surgery.

- Proptosis or enophthalmos. These can give rise to pseudo ptosis or eyelid retraction

- Hypertrophic or redundant orbicularis muscle

- Scleral show

- Examine the lower eyelid for laxity, position and canthal laxity.

- Beware of underlying blepharospasm which can give rise to orbicularis hypertrophy and redundancy and associated dermatochalasis and also an appearance of ptosis because of the tonic squeezing of the eyelids.

- Look for tarsal laxity (floppy eyelid syndrome). Patients will have a rubbery tarsal plate which may need horizontal shortening before being elevated.

- Consider blepharochalasis when the patient presents with recurrent eyelid swelling, often unilateral. There will be associated eyelid atrophy. Patients will eventually develop ptosis, steatoblepharon and excessively thin eyelid skin. This condition shows lymphedema with epithelial atrophy and loss of elastic fibers, but there is no pathognomonic histopathological finding.

- Fluid retention in the upper and lower eyelids (and festoons) are often seen in patients with kidney failure and in patients on CPAP machines.

- Hereditary angioedema should be suspected if there is intermittent swelling of the eyelids: C1-esterase inhibitor levels are assessed.