The primary muscle group that supports the shoulder joint is the rotator cuff muscles.  The four rotator cuff muscles are the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis.  Together the rotator cuff muscles form a musculotendinous cuff as they insert on the proximal humerus.

The rotator cuff muscles attach to the proximal humerus anteriorly at the greater tuberosity. The rotator cuff muscles provide considerable structural support to the glenohumeral joint and keep the humeral head in a firm position by articulating with the scapula within the glenoid cavity.  The muscles of the chest also provide structural support to the shoulder joint.

The origin of the supraspinatus is from the supraspinatus fossa above the spine of the scapula crossing the shoulder joint, passing under the coracoacromial arch, and above the glenohumeral joint where it inserts at the greater tubercle of the humerus. The supraspinatus muscle functions by abduction of the humerus up to 30 degrees and stabilizing the glenohumeral joint.

The infraspinatus muscle originates from the infraspinatus fossa below the spine of the scapula and inserts on the greater tubercle of the proximal humerus below the supraspinatus tendon. The infraspinatus muscle functions by externally rotating the humerus.

The teres minor muscle is positioned immediately inferior to infraspinatus, originating at the inferior aspect of the dorsal scapula at the lateral border of the scapula. The teres minor inserts on the greater tubercle of the humerus below the infraspinatus.  The Teres minor acts to externally rotate the humerus and assists with abduction of the humerus.

The subscapularis originates from the subscapular fossa of the scapula and inserts on the lesser tubercle of the humerus as well as a portion of the anterior capsule of the shoulder joint. A large bursa separates the muscle from the neck of the scapula—the subscapularis functions by internally rotating and abducting the humerus.

The rhomboid minor originates from the nuchal ligament and spinous processes of C7-T1. The rhomboid major originates from the spinous processes of T2-T5. The rhomboid muscles insert on the medial border of the scapula and work in combination with the levator scapulae muscles to elevate the medial border of the scapula. The only muscle which acts to depress the shoulder is the lower trapezius, which is assisted by gravity in the upright position.

The trapezius is a large triangular-shaped muscle that overlies the shoulder posteriorly. The trapezius originates from the superior aspect of the nuchal line in the occipital, cervical, and upper thoracic region and inserts at the lateral aspect of the clavicle, the acromion, and spine of the scapula. The function of the trapezius muscle is both elevation and depression of the shoulder depending on whether the upper or lower muscle fibers are activated.  When the entire trapezius muscle contracts, the fibers are geometrically opposed, and the forces are balanced, resulting in no shoulder movement.

The deltoid muscle overlies the shoulder superficially and functions to abduct the humerus. The deltoid muscle has three origins; the body of the clavicle, the spine of the scapula, and the acromion. The deltoid muscle has its insertion on the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus.  The function of the deltoid muscle is variable depending on which muscle fibers are activated.  The anterior deltoid flexes and medially rotations the humerus, the middle deltoid abducts the humerus, and the posterior deltoid performs the actions of extension and external rotation of the humerus.

The short head of the biceps brachii originates from the coracoid process, and the long head originates from the supraglenoid tubercle, passing through the intertubercular groove of the proximal humerus. The biceps brachii is not actually considered a shoulder muscle, but the tendon of its long head originates on the superior lip of the glenoid labrum.