The neurohypophysis secretes two neurohormones, oxytocin, which increases uterine contractions, and vasopressin, which increases the reabsorption of water by the distal tubules of the kidney. These hormones are packed in secretory vesicles and granules at the magnocellular neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus. They are released from the paraventricular nuclei and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus, where they travel down to the neurohypophysis by the axons of the magnocellular cells which project from the hypothalamus to the neurohypophysis.

The hormones are then stored at the herring bodies of the neurohypophysis, which are the terminal end of the axons. For their release from the herring bodies, action potentials are produced, which activates voltage-gated channels allowing calcium to enter and trigger the release of the hormone into the neurohypophyseal capillaries, which then transport the hormones into the systemic circulation. Predominantly, the paraventricular nucleus is related to oxytocin secretion, while the supraoptic nucleus is concerned with vasopressin secretion. Small amounts of each hormone are also produced at the other nuclei. The release of these hormones is triggered in response to afferent stimuli coming from outside neurons projecting to the magnocellular neurons of the hypothalamus.

The neurohypophysis receives its blood supply from the inferior hypophyseal artery, which is a branch from the cavernous internal carotid (ICA) artery. The cavernous ICA has a dorsal trunk called the meningohypophyseal trunk, which gives three terminal branches; inferior hypophyseal artery, tentorial artery (artery of Bernasconi and Cassinari), and dorsal meningeal artery. Venous drainage of the posterior pituitary gland is by the short portal and hypophyseal veins into the cavernous sinus.

Sheehan syndrome can develop DI and hypernatremia due to ischemic necrosis damage to the posterior gland causing impaired vasopressin secretion. Hyponatremia can also occur due to an increased ADH secretion as a response to hypotension and reduced cardiac output owing to glucocorticoid deficiency. Also, the cortisol deficit stimulated the secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone, which further stimulates the ADH secretion.

During septic shock, vasopressin secretion undergoes a biphasic pattern. Initially, there is an increased secretion to maintain homeostasis, but later, when hypotension is pronounced, there is an unexpected significant decrease in the secretion. This decrease is thought to occur due to depletion of the vasopressin stores in the neurohypophysis, from autonomic dysfunction, and from nitric oxide inhibition of secretion at the hypothalamus.

In TBI, DI is caused by direct damage to the neurohypophysis, pituitary stalk, hypothalamic nuclei, the vascular supply, traumatic edema in the neurohypophysis, or hypothalamus. These changes are usually reversible, but irreversible changes with gliosis can cause permanent DI.