Tirzepatide is a novel medication approved for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus with the additional benefit of weight loss. Clinicians are likely to be prescribing it in the setting of uncontrolled diabetes after first-line treatment. Current clinical data has shown tirzepatide to be highly efficacious in improving hemoglobin A1C levels and reducing body weight in a dose-dependent manner.

According to The American Diabetes Association (ADA) 2021 guidelines, an HbA1c goal for many nonpregnant adults of <7% is appropriate.

After initiating therapy with tirzepatide, clinicians are likely to follow up with patients in set intervals as early as four weeks or as late as 12 weeks, depending on the dosage and the local standard of care for diabetes management. Pharmacists are likely to play a key role for patients on tirzepatide. Their roles would include dispensing the medication, further counseling patients on adverse effects, and in some cases, they may be monitoring the patients' hemoglobin A1Cs.

Certain care teams incorporate clinical pharmacists into their diabetes management. Given that tirzepatide can potentially lead to a few adverse effects, it is likely that nurses will have first-line contact with patients regarding these side effects. Knowledge and understanding of the medication's adverse effects can be beneficial in counseling patients on when to seek further help.  Clinicians should also educate patients about warning symptoms of hypoglycemia, such as irritability, tremors, and confusion.

Tirzepatide is also likely to be prescribed in weight loss clinics, similar to GLP-1 medications. Obesity management clinics often incorporate multidisciplinary care that includes dietitians or social workers to help maximize patient outcomes. Given the popularity of semaglutide in weight loss clinics, it is likely that tirzepatide will gain similar popularity among physicians and patients, given the high levels of reported efficacy. However, as the clinical data has shown that weight reduction appears to be dose-dependent, Weight loss management may likely be limited by the ability of the patient to tolerate higher doses of tirzepatide.

A recent systematic review and meta-analysis reported that interprofessional collaboration between specialists, clinicians, nurses, and other healthcare providers could significantly improve Patient-Reported Outcomes (PROs) in patients with type-2 diabetes mellitus.