The concept of hypersensitivity is commonly encountered in the context of immunology, where a disproportionated reaction can occur between the effector mechanisms and the control mechanism of the immune system. This produces an exaggerated and often pathologic response by the immune system to an antigen. This response is often linked to the inheritance of predisposing human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes.

Suture hypersensitivity refers to several clinical entities resulting from an exaggerated immunologic response triggered by the presence of suture material, which serves as an external antigen. While most commonly thought of as a dermatologic phenomenon, this hypersensitivity can arise in deep tissues as well, and its clinical relevance is concerning for wound healing management. Differentiating postoperative infections from hypersensitivity reactions is essential.

Consultation with allergists and dermatologists may be appropriate for the diagnosis of the nature of the surgical site complication and proper management. Suture hypersensitivity reaction complications can increase hospitalization days and health care costs. The interprofessional team, which includes dermatologists, allergists/immunologists, and enterostomal therapy nurse are necessary for the early recognition, diagnosis, and treatment to decrease such complications. The recommended management of hypersensitivity-type reactions is prompt recognition of physical findings and further patch testing. Avoidance of the offending allergen and a combination of topical steroids are started as soon as possible, to prevent any further complications.

Screening panels for surgery-related allergens have not been well established. Some studies have proposed testing for specific allergens in patients with suspected suture hypersensitivity in an attempt to reveal pertinent allergens and prevent future exposure complications.