A comprehensive history should be obtained by clinicians evaluating patients with acute or chronic shoulder pain. Characteristics of a history of potential rotator cuff injury include:

- Acute rotator cuff tendonitis: history of trauma and/or acute on chronic exacerbation

- Chronic rotator cuff tendinopathy: either acute on chronic history/mechanism or an atraumatic, insidious onset presentation

- Symptom exacerbation with overhead activity

- Pain at night

A thorough history includes current or history of sports participation (as well as specific positions played in each sport), occupational history and current status of employment, hand dominance, any history of injury/trauma to the shoulder(s) and/or neck, and any relevant surgical history.

**Physical Examination Pearls**

**C-spine/neck exam:**

Coexisting cervical radiculopathy should be ruled out in any situation where neck and/or shoulder pathology is in consideration. Observation of neck posturing, muscular symmetry, palpable tenderness, and active/passive range of motion (ROM) should be evaluated. Special tests that are helpful in this regard include the Spurling maneuver, myelopathic testing, reflex testing, and a comprehensive neurovascular exam.

**Shoulder exam:**

Clinicians must observe the overall shoulder girdle for assessment of symmetry, shoulder posturing, and overall muscle bulk and symmetry. Scapular winging should also be ruled out. The skin should be observed for the presence of any previous surgical incisions, lacerations, scars, erythema, or induration.

After the observational component of the physical examination, the shoulder should be palpated for any areas of tenderness. Classically, rotator cuff tendonitis correlates with anterolateral tenderness to palpation. Next, the active and passive ROM of both shoulders is documented. In cases of rotator cuff tendonitis, patients may demonstrate compromised active ROM but should exhibit full passive ROM. In the absence of advanced degenerative changes affecting the glenohumeral joint, limited passive ROM is considered diagnostic for adhesive capsulitis and involves a separate treatment algorithm from rotator cuff tendinopathy/impingement.

The clinician can assess motor strength grading for C5 to T1 nerve roots in addition to specific rotator cuff muscle strength testing. Specifically, rotator cuff strength and/or pathology can be determined via the following examinations:

1. Supraspinatus (SS)

- **Jobe’s test**: a positive test is pain/weakness with resisted downward pressure while the patient’s shoulder is at 90 degrees of forward flexion and abduction in the scapular plane with the thumb pointing toward the floor.

- **Drop arm test**: the patient’s shoulder is brought into a position of 90 degrees of shoulder abduction in the scapular plane. The examiner initially supports the limb and then instructs the patient to adduct the arm to the side of the body slowly. A positive test includes the patient’s inability to maintain the abducted position of the shoulder and/or an inability to adduct the arm to the side of the trunk in a controlled manner.

2. Infraspinatus (IS)

- **Strength testing**is performed while the shoulder is positioned against the side of the trunk, the elbow is flexed to 90 degrees, and the patient is asked to externally rotate (ER) the arm while the examiner resists this movement.

- **External rotation lag sign**: the examiner positions the patient’s shoulder in the same position, and while holding the wrist, the arm is brought into maximum ER. The test is positive if the patient’s shoulder drifts into internal rotation (IR) once the examiner removes the supportive ER force at the wrist.

3. Teres Minor (TM)

- **Strength testing**is performed while the shoulder positioned at 90 degrees of abduction, and the elbow is also flexed to 90 degrees. Teres minor (TM) is best isolated for strength testing in this position while ER is resisted by the examiner.

- **Hornblower’s sign**: the examiner positions the shoulder in the same position and maximally ERs the shoulder under support. A positive test occurs when the patient is unable to hold this position, and the arm drifts into IR once the examiner removes the supportive ER force.

4. Subscapularis (SubSc)

- **IR lag sign**: the examiner passively brings the patient’s shoulder behind the trunk (about 20 degrees of extension) with the elbow flexed to 90 degrees. The examiner passively internally rotates (IR) the shoulder by lifting the dorsum of the hand off of the patient’s back while supporting the elbow and wrist. A positive test occurs when the patient is unable to maintain this position once the examiner releases support at the wrist (i.e., the arm is not maintained in IR, and the dorsum of the hand drifts toward the back).

- **Passive ER ROM**: a partial or complete tear of the subscapularis can manifest as an increase in passive external rotation (ER) compared to the contralateral shoulder.

- **Lift-off test**: more sensitive/specific for lower subscapularis pathology. In the same position as the IR lag sign position, the examiner places the patient’s dorsum of the hand against the lower back and then resists the patient’s ability to lift the dorsum of the hand away from the lower back.

- **Belly press**: more sensitive/specific for upper subscapularis pathology. The examiner has the patient’s arm at 90 degrees of elbow flexion, and IR testing is performed by the patient pressing the palm of his/her hand against the belly, bringing the elbow in front of the plane of the trunk. The examiner initially supports the elbow, and a positive test occurs if the elbow is not maintained in this position upon the examiner removing the supportive force.

5. External impingement/Subacromial impingement

- **Neer impingement sign**: positive if the patient reports pain with passive shoulder forward flexion beyond 90 degrees.

- **Neer impingement test**: positive test occurs after the examiner gives a subacromial injection, and the patient reports improved symptoms upon repeating the forced passive forward flexion beyond 90 degrees.

- **Hawkins test**: positive test occurs with the examiner passively positioning the shoulder and elbow at 90 degrees of flexion in front of the body; the patient will report pain when the examiner passively IR’s the shoulder.

6. Internal impingement

-  **Internal impingement test**: the patient is placed in a supine position, and the shoulder is brought into terminal abduction and external rotation; a positive test consists of the reproduction of the patient’s pain.