Acute arthritis usually lasts from hours to two weeks. Chronic arthritis is an inflammation of over two weeks. Chronic symptoms can be intermittent or constant. Symmetry and the number of joints involved are important factors. Pauciarticular is two to four involved joints whereas polyarticular is over five involved joints. Size and kind of the joints matter. Inflammatory pattern versus the non-inflammatory pattern, as mentioned, is a huge dividing factor.

Rheumatoid arthritis is usually polyarticular and in hands/wrists (small joints) in a symmetric distribution. It starts slow and lasts weeks to months before we make the diagnosis. Seronegative spondyloarthropathies are usually pauciarticular with axial involvement and large joint inflammation.

An acute presentation with a migratory pattern can be viral arthritis, rheumatic fever or disseminated gonococcal infection; although viral arthritis is much more common than either of them.

The pain of osteoarthritis gets worse with movement and less with rest which is the opposite of rheumatoid arthritis that is worse with inactivity (morning stiffness) and better with movement. Short periods of synovitis (4-6 weeks) are usually from viral infections as opposed to longer periods that show an underlying persistent problem. Sensory problems like paresthesia, allodynia, anesthesia indicate a neuropathy or radiculopathy. Finally, the extra-articular symptoms can be hugely helpful and make or break the diagnosis — rashes (psoriatic arthritis), oral and genital lesions (Behcet syndrome), heart murmur (endocarditis), dry mouth and eye (Sjogren syndrome) and polyserositis (lupus).

Physical examination proves or disproves synovitis and sometimes shows the chronic changes of long-standing arthritis. The clinician should examine muscles, joints, tendons, bursas, and soft tissue. One should test both passive and active range of motion (ROM). Non-articular diseases present with normal passive ROM but reduced active ROM. Tendinitis or bursitis are good examples. Palpation can further differentiate these two. Bursitis has a very localized tender area that does not change much with movement, but the tender area in tendinitis is worse with movement. Articular diseases cause both reduced active and passive ROM.

Warmth, redness, swelling, tenderness are the cardinal signs of inflammation and make the diagnosis of inflammatory arthritis easy to make. Septic arthritis has all these in a more pronounced form. Crepitation of the joint shows possible osteoarthritis and laxity prove a damaged and unstable joint. Again, extra-articular findings in the physical exam are sometimes even more crucial than the findings of the joints.