When the disease-causing mutation affects a gene on the X chromosome, one copy of the mutant gene is sufficient to cause the condition. In theory, this means that XLA will affect 50% of males born to mothers who are carriers. When the disease-causing mutations occur on genes within autosomes, either gender may be affected, e.g., females with autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia.

Individuals with XLA have one of several inherited defects in the Btk gene that interferes with the production of mature B-lymphocytes in circulation. T lymphocytes are unaffected.

B cell development is a process that occurs in the bone marrow, where pro-B cells develop into pre-B cells before fully mature B cells enter the peripheral circulation. Normally, pre-B cells express the pre-BCR complex, which undergoes activation by BTK to initiate downstream signaling events involved in the maturation process. This process becomes blocked at the pre-B cell stage in individuals with inherited mutations that prevent BTK expression (figure 1). Western blotting or flow cytometry analysis of BTK protein expression in the monocytes or platelets of individuals with XLA demonstrates that it cannot be detected.

Figure 1. **Precursor B Cell  ->  Pro-B Cell -l X l-  Pre-B Cell -> Immature B Cell**

B cell differentiation becomes arrested at the Pre-B cell stage with an associated failure of immunoglobulin heavy chain rearrangement; this abrogates the production of immunoglobulins and prevents secondary lymphoid organs from developing fully.