The principal two causes of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency are chronic pancreatitis in adults and cystic fibrosis in children. Other causes include- acute pancreatitis, pancreatic tumors, diabetes mellitus, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, bariatric surgery, HIV/AIDS, and genetic and congenital causes.

The Toxic-Metabolic, Idiopathic, Genetic, Autoimmune, Recurrent, and Severe Acute Pancreatitis, Obstructive (TIGAR-O) classification system was developed to categorize causes and risk factors of chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.

- The toxic-metabolic causes include alcohol, tobacco smoking, hypercalcemia, hyperlipidemia, and chronic renal failure.

- The idiopathic causes are responsible for approximately 25% of causes, and recently it is related to genetic defects.

- The genetic defects may include CFTR mutations, SPINK1 mutations, and hereditary pancreatitis.

- The autoimmune causes include pancreatitis associated with Sjogren syndrome, primary biliary cirrhosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.

- There is recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis, including recurrent acute pancreatitis, post-necrotic, vascular diseases, and post-radiation.

- Obstructive causes include congenital anomalies of pancreatic ducts (large or small duct), sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, obstruction of the duct by a tumor, and post-traumatic pancreatic duct fibrosis.

Alcohol excess is a well-recognized cause of chronic pancreatitis. In the United States, heavy drinkers have a triple risk of developing chronic pancreatitis, and the risk was further increased in drinkers who are also heavy smokers.

The pancreas is one of the primary organs affected by cystic fibrosis. About 85% of cystic fibrosis patients have EPI, usually acquired soon after birth. All patients, regardless of age, need to be tested for EPI.

EPI could present in a small number of patients with celiac disease; however, it usually resolves after dietetic control. EPI should be excluded in patients with celiac disease who remain symptomatic despite a gluten-free diet.

EPI is not uncommon in inflammatory bowel disease. It could result from disease activity (autoimmune changes) or secondary to medications used in the treatment. Both acute and chronic pancreatitis has increased incidence among inflammatory bowel disease patients.

EPI is a well-known complication after bariatric surgery and could impose an important entity due to the increasing number of such surgeries worldwide. Altered anatomy and intersecting symptoms with the surgery itself make distinction difficult. Bariatric surgery includes bypassing a portion of the gastrointestinal tract; the extent of malabsorption depends on the length of the part removed.

EPI has been associated with HIV infection and is considered an important cause of chronic diarrhea in patients with HIV. Screening for EPI should be performed in patients with HIV presenting with chronic diarrhea.