There are several reasons to be culturally and spiritually sensitive to every culture and religion, including the Muslim population. There is an obvious ethical and moral duty of every healthcare provider to offer the best possible care to every patient. The Joint Commission, an independent, nonprofit organization that seeks to improve healthcare among its accredited healthcare members, holds hospitals accountable for addressing and maintaining patient rights. Joint Commission accreditation must have expertise in administrative affairs, clinical practice, policy, research, risk management, patient advocacy, cultural competence, and language access.

Some of the Joint Commission's rights include the accommodation of cultural, personal, religious, and spiritual values. To accommodate compliance, healthcare professionals should care for patients as whole persons. This "wholeness" includes their body, mind, and spirit. The best healthcare approach is interprofessional. This interprofessional approach needs to be both culturally and spiritually sensitive as a positive spirit increases the patient's ability to fight off illness and survive. The goals of learning to treat a Muslim patient should be for all healthcare professionals to be empowered with the capacity, knowledge, and skills to respond to the special needs of each patient, and as importantly, a patient's family. Institutions seeking Joint Commission accreditation must have expertise in administrative affairs, clinical practice, policy, research, risk management, patient advocacy, cultural competence, and language access.