An abscess usually forms following a severe inflammatory reaction to an infectious process. It is a collection of purulent material, including cellular debris, liquified tissue from infective agents, bacteria, leukocytes, and enzymes. A prostatic abscess is a localized collection of purulent fluid within the prostate, often forming as a complication of acute bacterial prostatitis. The first reported case was described by Allison in 1842 and resulted in the patient's death.

Acute bacterial prostatitis typically affects men aged 20 to 40 years and over 60. Symptoms are generally acute and include urinary frequency, perineal pain, and dysuria. The urine will be infected, and there will usually be systemic symptoms such as fever, malaise, chills, and muscle aches. Many patients will have difficulty in urination or even urinary retention. Patients doing intermittent catheterization are at increased risk with a lifetime probability of up to 33%.

In modern medicine, the number of prostatic abscess patients has considerably declined due to the judicious use of antibiotics. However, prostatic abscesses are still relatively common in developing countries and in high-risk patients like those men who have undergone urological procedures such as prostate biopsies. Other men at high risk include those with significant chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients on hemodialysis, liver cirrhosis, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy, transplant recipients, HIV/AIDS patients, men with inadequately treated benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and others with immunodeficiency.