PET/CT is a safe procedure. The radiation dose from a routine diagnostic F-18 FDG at 350 MBq is 6-7 mSv. The CT component of the study is a reasonably low dose ranging from 2 to 4 mSV If used only for attenuation correction to 3-10 mSV if used for both attenuation correction and localization. These values are lower than the contrast-enhanced diagnostic CT scan with a dose of 15 to 25 mSV.

It is imperative to be aware of various false negative and false positive findings that can cause misinterpretation. Some of the examples are as follows:

**False-positive PET CT**

Respiration or patient movement can mismatch the CT and PET data in the fused images and lead to misinterpretation. This is especially problematic in abdominal imaging, where bowel movement can give the false impression of peritoneal disease due to misregistration of physiological bowel activity outside the bowel lumen. This can be prevented by looking at the non-attenuation correction (NAC) imaging in a tricky situation.

The brown fat uptake in cold ambiance, particularly in the supraclavicular regions, can be misinterpreted as lymph nodes. Correlation of all areas of uptake with CT images is helpful to differentiate solid lesions from low Hounsfield unit fatty tissue.

Radiotracer extravasation and post-vaccination status can produce reactive lymph node uptake in the ipsilateral axilla. Such events should be documented in the patient questionnaire to be reference ready at reporting.

Inflammatory uptake at the site of radiotherapy, surgery, or biopsy can produce false-positive interpretation; therefore, the timing of scan post-intervention is crucial to differentiate malignant disease from inflammation. Chemotherapy can cause reactive marrow hyperplasia with diffuse increased radiotracer uptake in the skeleton.

**False-negative PET CT**

The tumors with mucinous components might not show an affinity for FGD due to low cellularity, lack of GLUT-1 transporters, and poor glucose metabolism.

The artifacts from metallic and vascular stents and high activity from the distended urinary bladder can mask the adjacent small tumors. Similarly, metformin causes diffusely increased bowel activity, complicating the assessment of colon pathologies.