Precise knowledge and understanding of the lower eyelid anatomy are prerequisites for safe and successful cosmetic or reconstructive surgery. However, it has fewer dynamic features. The lower eyelid is divided into two lamellae: anterior and posterior. The anterior lamella is composed of skin and orbicularis oculi muscle. At the same time, the posterior lamella is formed of lid retractors, tarsal plate, and conjunctiva. The septum and the post septal fat lie between these two lamellae and are often referred to as the middle lamella.

The lower eyelid is well apposed to the globe with the lower lid margin at the level of the inferior limbus. The palpebral fissure, the distance between the upper and lower eyelid margins, is around 10mm in the vertical plane and 30 mm in the horizontal plane. It usually slants obliquely from the medial to the lateral canthal angle (lateral canthal tilt) as the lateral canthus is located 2 mm superior to the medial canthus. The lower eyelid crease is identified within 5 to 6 mm from the lower lid margin. It roughly delineates the inferior border of the tarsus and the junction between the pretarsal and preseptal orbicularis oculi muscle.

The skin of the lower eyelid measures less than 1mm in thickness, and it gradually becomes thicker as it comes to the lateral orbital margin. It is devoid of any subcutaneous fatty layer and is anchored to the underlying orbicularis oculi by fine connective tissue attachments.

The orbicularis oculi muscle can be divided into a thick orbital part (voluntary) and a thin palpebral part (voluntary and involuntary). The palpebral part can then be subdivided into pretarsal and preseptal portions. The superficial head of the preseptal orbicularis oculi joins together medially to form the medial canthal tendon, which inserts in the anterior lacrimal crest. In contrast, the deeper head inserts in the posterior lacrimal crest. This posterior limb of the medial canthal tendon is mainly responsible for the snug position of the lower eyelid medially. Laterally, the muscle fibers condense and attach firmly to Whitnall’s tubercle, 3 to 4 mm posterior to the lateral orbital rim, as they form the posterior limb of the lateral canthal tendon.

Although the preseptal muscle has a fixed attachment to the medial and lateral canthi, the orbital orbicularis muscle does not. Instead, it directly inserts into the subcutaneous tissue of the lateral orbital region (site of crow’s feet wrinkles). It also gets an attachment from the inferior orbital rim.

The orbital septum lies immediately beneath the submuscular fascia, and it separates between the outer and the inner lamellae. It attaches to the orbital rim except in the inferolateral border, where it forms the recess of Eisler. The orbital septum fuses with the capsulopalpebral fascia posteriorly at 5mm below the inferior border of the tarsus to create a single layer that inserts near the tarsal base. This attachment allows the capsulopalpebral fascia to slightly retract the lower eyelid during downward gaze. The medial part is the thinnest part of the orbital septum. The lateral part shows inferior-lateral thickening, called arcuate expansion, which separates the lateral fat compartment from the central and medial fat compartments.

Orbital fat is contained behind the orbital septum within the orbital cavity, and it is allocated in three compartments (lateral, central, and medial). The lateral fat compartment is smaller, cranially situated, and separated from the central and medial fat compartments by the arcuate expansion. The larger nasal fat compartment is divided by the inferior oblique muscle into central and medial fat pads. Nonetheless, there is an isthmus of fat on top of the inferior oblique muscle that connects these two compartments anteriorly. If a surgeon wants to expose the inferior oblique muscle, he must tease this anterior fat of the muscle.

The sensory nerve supply of the lower eyelid is mainly obtained from the infraorbital nerve with a small contribution from the infratrochlear and zygomaticofacial nerve branches. The main arterial blood supply is derived from angular, infraorbital, and transverse facial arteries. The marginal arcade is situated 2 mm from the lower eyelid ciliary margin, and care should be taken to avoid injuring it during the subciliary approach.

**Aging Process**

Surgeons must have a thorough understanding of the anatomic changes that occur with aging. Although these changes can vary between different individuals, they mainly occur as a combination of facial soft tissue deflation and descent. This descent is limited by the retaining ligaments in the periorbital area, which are fixed osteocutaneous structures. This creates a concavity that is usually perceived by the patient as a dark circle under the eyelids.

The aging process can affect all layers of the lower eyelid. This can manifest with many clinical features, including dermatochalasis, fat prolapse, laxity of the canthal tendons, and a change in orbicularis oculi muscle tone. Dermatochalasis is excess skin of the lower eyelid that can become aggravated by repeated swelling and inflammation. Loss of the orbital septum integrity causes the orbital fat to protrude. This is also affected by the familial tendency and the history of repeated edema and inflammation. The inevitable loss of strength and laxity of the lower eyelid skeletal support significantly affects the position of the lower eyelid. The tendons usually lengthen, but there is very little lengthening of the tarsal plate (normally 56 mm high and 1 mm thick). This, in turn, can affect the lower eyelid position against the globe and the shape of the palpebral fissure.

The tarsoligamentous laxity can also ameliorate the tone of the orbicularis oculi muscle with subsequent interference with the eye closure mechanism. Moreover, some of these patients can develop ectropion and frequent tearing due to the decrease in the negative pressure usually exerted by the orbicularis oculi on the lacrimal sac with blinking. Some patients, instead, may develop hypertrophy in the orbicularis oculi, which may lead to entropion. The palpebral fissure may also change with aging. As a deep-seated eye patient ages, the lower eyelid moves upward, producing a small horizontal-looking eye fissure. In contrast, patients with prominent eyes are more prone to downward migration of the lateral canthus, which will give the shape of a bigger, rounded eye with a possible scleral show.

Midface aging is another entity that surgeons should examine before any slower eyelid surgery as they interchangeably affect each other. Signs of midface aging may include tear trough deformity, midfacial folds, and malar festoons.