Initial management of Bertolotti syndrome should consist of conservative measures. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may provide significant relief and are low in cost and generally well tolerated.

Physical therapy (PT) may also be concomitantly recommended at the time of diagnosis, with treatments aimed to strengthen core musculature, improve spinal mobility, and provide other pain-minimizing modalities. If NSAIDs and PT fail to provide adequate relief, the patient may be recommended for injection therapy.  Directed corticosteroid injections under fluoroscopic guidance into the abnormal articulation are highly effective in providing pain relief and may last temporarily, if not indefinitely.

Injection therapy has the added benefit of not only potentially providing therapeutic effects but can also aid in diagnosing a patient's pain generator and help guide definitive management.

Surgery is reserved for individuals who have failed these aforementioned conservative approaches.  Resection of the enlarged transverse process involved in the LSTV, either unilateral or bilateral, can be an initial surgical option if the pseudo articulation has been determined to be the definitive etiology of pain.

If instability is present at the L5-S1 segment, spinal fusion may be indicated.  While fusion may provide long-lasting relief, this may also hasten adjacent segment degeneration. A decompressive operation may also be indicated if there is a symptomatic central canal or foraminal stenosis present.  The pseudo articulation may facilitate osteophyte formation, which can also potentially be a source of extraforaminal stenosis as well.

The precise surgical procedure offered to specific patients should be individualized to their symptomatology and unique radiographic findings.