Several issues contribute to disordered sleep and work schedules for emergency management service providers. Some of these issues are controllable, and some are not. If an emergency management service provider does not have proper money management skills in their personal life, it will create an additional burden on work and sleep schedules. The provider will feel obligated to work massive amounts of overtime to make ends meet. Spending habits play a significant factor in money management. The desire for lavish material items often takes control of better judgment when making budgeting decisions. Impulse buying is also hurtful to budgeting and creates a need for additional overtime hours. This issue is controllable through better money management techniques. Courses like Dave Ramsey are available to learn more about controlling expenses.

Dynamic staffing and scheduling issues are not always within the control of emergency management service, and agencies complain of having only a few qualified applicants to fill the roles.

Pay scales are a direct attribute for an emergency management service provider to sacrifice sleep and work more. Pay plays a large factor when making educational choices for a career field of study. Stagnant wages in the EMS field have caused many "would be" EMS students to pursue other fields of study. Additionally, several emergency management service career professionals have left the field recently to pursue a nursing degree. State emergency management service-controlling agencies have taken notice of staffing issues and are currently conducting surveys regarding pay scale and consequences for emergency management service professionals.

EMS management style and method of delivery are often anemic in substance. Some great personalities are present, while some others lack the basic understanding of what it means to be a leader. The scheduling and sleep disorder takes place when a manager does not properly delegate the workload to emergency management service providers. Proper scheduling technique is a tool, similar to uniforms and oxygen tank brought into a patient's home. A strong leader understands that their role is to provide their team with tools needed for completing the job at hand. A leader understands that the measure of success is how well the organization runs when they are not present. Providing the team with needed tools helps to create a successful emergency management service organization.

Home and life responsibilities play a role in sleep and work disorders. Many times, an emergency management service provider gets little to no sleep during a 24-hour shift. The provider makes their way home looking to pay back their sleep deficit by napping. Noise at home or a room not being dark enough can prevent sleep. Marital and financial stresses are two major issues experienced by emergency management service professionals. Personal and financial responsibilities do not end despite a dynamic work schedule. Many times, a sleep-deprived emergency management service provider will have to run errands after being up most of the night before.

In most states, educational requirements to maintain licensure status have increased. This additional requirement adds training during off-duty hours. There are more college-level courses, additional hours, and requirements to participate in emergency management service-related programs. These requirements furthermore add to the cycle of extra work and disordered sleeping schedules.