The liver transaminases, mainly alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), are aggregated in the cytosol of hepatocytes. These enzymes are normally detectable in the serum at low concentrations, typically <30 IU/L.

Increases in alanine transaminase (ALT) alone affects 8.9% of the U.S. population.

**Physiological Factors**

- Extreme physical exertion can induce a reversible elevation in serum ALT, approximately 2 to 2.2-fold higher than the normal limit.

- ALT activity has a diurnal variation; the nadir value is at 4:00 hr, and the peak value is at 16:00 hr.

- ALT is higher in males compared to females. These gender-based differences in ALT levels are possibly related to hormonal differences between males and females.

- Ethnicity affects ALT levels. Research shows that Mexican Americans have a higher ALT elevation prevalence than other ethnicities.

- Research has found no overall association between the hypoxia-inducible factor 3 alpha subunit (HIF3A) rs3826795 polymorphism and ALT. However, a significant interaction between obesity and rs3826795 concerning ALT was found - rs382695 G-allele number elevation of ALT significantly only in obese children but not in non-obese children.

- In another study, Bekkelund, and Jorde, found that serum ALT was associated with body fat mass index in men. ALT was associated with lean mass index in men and women in the overweight and obese population.

**Pathological Causes**

- Depending on the region, alcoholic hepatitis and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are considered the most common cause of abnormally high****ALT levels.

- Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)

- Chronic hepatitis B or C

- Autoimmune hepatitis

- Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency

- Drug-associated, occupational exposure, or herbal supplement-induced liver injury

- Hemochromatosis

- Wilson disease

- Celiac disease

- Ischemic hepatitis,

- Budd-Chiari syndrome,

- Vascular disease

- Genetically-related conditions affecting the liver