Many cases of norovirus go undiagnosed, as many patients do not seek medical attention for treatment. For patients seeking evaluation by a healthcare provider, the diagnostic evaluation will be similar to most patients with gastroenteritis. Usually, diagnostic testing is not indicated. For certain patients, a metabolic panel may be warranted to assess for electrolyte abnormalities and hydration status. Stool studies such as stool culture, Clostridium difficile toxin, and ova and parasite testing are not usually indicated unless symptoms are prolonged or an alternative pathogen is suspected. In cases where norovirus is suspected, a number of enzyme immunoassays and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) are available for the detection of norovirus. Although not usually indicated for individual cases of gastroenteritis, these assays may be useful in detecting norovirus outbreaks. While enzyme immunoassays are the most readily available test, RT-PCR remains the gold standard for detection of norovirus. Both types of tests use stool or emesis samples to detect GI and GII noroviruses. However, limitations do exist for norovirus testing. Many healthcare facilities do not have access to enzyme immunoassays or RT-PCR, and sensitivity and specificity of testing are variable. The accuracy of results is dependent upon the number of samples tested as well as the timing of stool collection and proper handling of the sample. Because laboratory testing for norovirus is not uniformly available, clinical evaluation can be useful in detecting norovirus outbreaks. The Kaplan clinical and epidemiological criteria for norovirus were developed before the development of laboratory testing and are still considered useful when definitive testing is unavailable.

**The Kaplan Criteria**

- Vomiting in more than half of symptomatic cases

- Mean (or median) incubation period of 24 to 48 hours

- Mean (or median) duration of illness of 12 to 60 hours

- No bacterial pathogen isolated on stool culture

If all of the Kaplan criteria are positive, there is a high probability of a norovirus outbreak.