There is no consensus about the optimal treatment for CRAO, although early administration of intravenous thrombolytics shows promise.

- Immediate digital ocular massage to induce oscillations of intraocular pressure and dislodge the offending thrombus.

- Intraocular pressure reduction with acetazolamide, mannitol, topical timolol, or anterior chamber paracentesis (often recommended in conjunction with digital ocular massage).

- Hyperventilation into a paper bag or inhaled 10% carbon dioxide to induce respiratory acidosis and vasodilation.

- Supplemental oxygen.

A literature review by Murphy-Lavoie H et al. in 2012 recommended supplemental oxygen for any patient presenting within 24 hours of vision loss with signs and symptoms that cause concern for CRAO. They report minimal risk associated with oxygen therapy and suggest that early therapy may prevent retinal damage. Oxygen should be initiated at the highest tolerable fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2). If available, hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be considered.

A meta-analysis by Schrag et al. in 2015 found that fibrinolysis was beneficial within 4.5 hours of symptom onset (with a number needed to treat of 4.0). Additionally, they found that the addition of aggressive non-fibrinolytic therapies such as ocular massage, anterior chamber paracentesis, and hemodilution worsened visual outcomes (with a number needed to harm of 10). A randomized control trial is warranted to better elucidate the role of early systemic thrombolytic therapy for CRAO.