High suspicion for Charcot needs to be present to diagnose the condition accurately. Charcot presents as an erythematous foot with edema and calor. Often, it is unilateral with a sudden onset of symptoms that may be precipitated by macro-trauma (ankle sprain) or repetitive micro-trauma (walking). Charcot may be initially misdiagnosed as a deep venous thrombosis or cellulitis. Charcot can also be confused with osteomyelitis due to the similar clinical appearance of a red, hot swollen foot with skeletal lysis on radiographs and often unilateral presentation.  Although distinct and separate processes, these entities can occur simultaneously. Additionally, there is evidence that osteomyelitis can cause Charcot. This is due to the inflammatory cascade of cytokine release osteomyelitis triggers in the body.  This risk of osteomyelitis evolving into Charcot is further escalated if surgical intervention was performed to remove the infected bone.  This is because both osteomyelitis and surgery are forms of trauma that promote an inflammatory response which triggers the opportunity for Charcot to manifest.

In addition to the trauma caused by surgery, the changes to the bony architecture of the foot post-surgery can also lead to inflammatory triggering events due to biomechanical and gait alterations in plantar pressures. For example, amputations and other surgical interventions of the foot can lead to altered pressure points for which the foot is unable to compensate. These changes in plantar pressure, even if mild, can cause microtrauma which initiates the inflammatory events that lead to an acute Charcot.