Atrial fibrillation is a chronic disorder that can seriously affect the quality of life and costs the healthcare billions of dollars each year. While cardiologists treat the disorder, the role of the pharmacist is critical. Many of these patients are on multiple medications including antiarrhythmic agents and anticoagulants. In addition, there is some evidence indicating that use of Angiotensin receptor blockers and statins may lower the frequency of atrial fibrillation and increase the probability of successful cardioversion. Thus, the pharmacist has to make sure that the patient' medication doses are therapeutic, there are no drug interactions and that the patient has therapeutic anticoagulation to prevent a stroke. The nurse has to educate the patient on medication compliance for hypertension, coronary disease and ensure follow-up at regular intervals. Finally, the patient should be educated about the symptoms of a stroke and when to return to the emergency department.

**Outcomes**

Atrial fibrillation prevalence has been on the rise. The risk of stroke is 5-times higher in a patient with known atrial fibrillation compared to the general public. It is estimated that 19.6% of patients over the age of 65, will have apparent atrial fibrillation by 2030. The most feared side effect of atrial fibrillation is acute stroke which can lead to severe morbidity and mortality. It has been shown though that 60% of strokes secondary to atrial fibrillation can be avoided with the use of anticoagulants. Using the CHADs-2-VASc score to evaluate patients with atrial fibrillation is a helpful guide for management of these patients with the ultimate goal of preventing stroke. Proper risk factor stratification and medical/surgical therapy can decrease the risk of stroke and heart failure significantly.