An interprofessional team approach to care will help a patient feel more comfortable and understand the need for catheterization. A Foley catheter can be a new and intimidating device for a patient. If the patient is required to maintain the catheter for longer than their hospital stay, it can be distressing and embarrassing for the patient. With the help of nursing education, patients can fully understand their limitations while the Foley catheter is in place and can safely care for their catheter on their own while still living a normal life. Education for catheter care is important for patients who may be overwhelmed by this new piece of equipment, especially if they have to manage the Foley and bag at home. The important points should be emphasized by all members of the care team and include the need to maintain a tension-free suspension with the use of a leg strap and keeping the bag below the bladder level, washing hands before handling or exchanging the catheter, and exchanging the catheter every month if it is to be in place chronically. Consideration should be given to replacing the urethral Foley catheter with a suprapubic tube in situations where long-term catheterization is likely to be needed.

To achieve the best care for the patient, every team member must be aware of and invested in the care plan. Communication throughout the catheterization process and in the post-catheterization period will help the patient recover with confidence. The ordering provider should relay both for Foley catheter placement and clearly define the anticipated duration of urinary catheterization. Once the decision has been made, there should be no delay in removing a urinary catheter.

Many members of the care team possess the basic skills required to place a Foley catheter. When a problematic Foley catheterization is encountered, the team should debrief and take the opportunity to teach team members assessment and better catheterization techniques. If members of the care team desire to practice this skill, it should be offered and overseen by more experienced healthcare professionals to improve skills that will ultimately improve patient outcomes.

Healthcare professionals may feel negatively toward themselves after a failed urinary catheterization, as urinary catheterization is generally seen as a simple procedure. The truth is that many situations can significantly complicate catheterization. It is everyone's responsibility on the healthcare team to understand their limitations when it comes to Foley catheterization. If a failed attempt occurs, it is best to step back and figure out why or ask for help before attempting another passage.

**Prevention of Inappropriate Foley Catheter Self-Extractions by Patients**

Some patients with dementia, brain injury, or confusion may seek to pull out their Foley catheters. They are remarkably successful in doing this despite not deflating the balloon first. Besides being painful, this risks permanent scarring and damage to the lower urinary tract. Often, the catheter has to be replaced. Use of patient restraints, a sitter, or sedation have been the traditional means of managing this, but they are costly, use valuable resources, pose some risk to the patient, and are generally not very effective.

A safe and effective nursing-based protocol has been developed and used with excellent outcomes. By making the protocol a nursing procedure, it avoids the delays in seeking a physician's order to implement safe and practical precautions in patients at risk of inadvertent self-harm. The protocol was developed in consultation with several nursing staff and was found to be very helpful and effective. While initially designed primarily for Intensive Care Units (ICU), rehab units, and recovery rooms, they can be applied to any inpatient location where patients with Foley catheters are assigned.

- On arrival to the floor or nursing unit, nurses identify every patient with a Foley catheter that is not being removed immediately.

- The initial nursing assessment should include a relative risk of potential inappropriate patient self-extraction of the Foley catheter.

- Any increased risk should be passed on to the next nursing shift when giving a report.

- Patients awakening from anesthesia, those with pre-existing dementia or confusion, and individuals with brain injuries or strokes are most at risk, especially if they have pulled out their Foley catheters previously.

- Patients who are alert and awake are at minimal risk but may still need to be reminded to take their catheters with them if they get out of bed!

- If it is determined that a patient is at risk of inappropriate catheter self-extraction or even might just potentially be at risk, the following interventions may be immediately implemented by nursing:

- Place the catheter and catheter bag tubing under the patient's thigh, making it harder for a confused patient to find and grab. 
- Tape the catheter and catheter bag tubing directly to the patient's skin after leaving some slack for mobility. (This makes it harder for a confused patient to fully grasp the catheter or tubing.)
- Use diapers, shorts, mesh pants, wide ace wraps, pajamas, pads, and/or thigh-high hose around the leg used to secure the catheter. (This adds more layers between the catheter and the confused patient's grasping hands.)
- Tape a small straight catheter in front, right on top of the pads, shorts, and pads. This will give a confused patient a tube to pull on that will not cause any real harm. Essentially, a harmless decoy!