Tiotropium may be prescribed as either an inhalation spray or inhalation powder administered by an inhaler device. Before using tiotropium inhalers, the inhaler device requires assembly and loading the medication cartilage into the inhaler device, followed by priming. Proper priming of the tiotropium inhaler allows adequate medication dose delivery for oral inhalation use. The inhaler device designed to deliver tiotropium medication consists of a cap, mouthpiece, air vent, a dose indicator, and a dose release button. The dose indicator located on the side of the device estimates the remaining amount of puffs in the medication cartilage available for use.

**Available Tiotropium Preparations**

**Inhalation Spray**

- 2.5 mcg of tiotropium bromide****for the treatment of COPD.

- 1.25 mcg of tiotropium bromide for treating asthma patients six years of age and older.

**Inhalation Powder**

- 18 mcg of tiotropium bromide powder capsules are used with the inhaler device as maintenance therapy of COPD and reduce associated COPD exacerbations and bronchospasms.

**Tiotropium Bromide and Olodaterol Inhalation Spray**

- Dual bronchodilator mixture of 3.124 mcg tiotropium bromide monohydrate and 2.736 mcg olodaterol hydrochloride for maintenance therapy of COPD.

**Tiotropium Inhaler**

The daily use of the inhaler consists of the following steps:

- First, remove the cap from the inhaler device, exposing the mouthpiece and the air vent.

- Exhale the maximum volume of air from the lungs without inhaling air back into the lungs.

- Place the inhaler's mouthpiece in the mouth, creating a tight seal with the lips around the mouthpiece without covering the air vents on the side of the inhaler device. The mouthpiece should be aimed at the back of the throat, avoiding the front of the teeth and tongue.

- While holding the inhaler to the mouth, slowly inhale air through the mouthpiece of the inhaler device while simultaneously pressing the dose release button and continuing to inhale air slowly into the lung, as tolerable.

- Upon reaching the tolerable maximum volume of air inhalation, remove the inhaler's mouthpiece from the mouth.

- Hold the breath for 10 seconds, followed by exhaling and breathing normally.

- Repeat this process as prescribed by your health care provider.

- Close the cap on the inhaler device when completed.

**Adult Dosing**

**Asthma**

- Tiotropium oral mist inhaler (1.25 mcg/actuation) 2 inhalations once daily.

**Chronic****Obstructive Pulmonary Disease**

- Dry powder oral inhaler (18 mcg/capsule) inhale the contents of 1 capsule once daily using HandiHaler device. The contents of each capsule dose should be inhaled twice to ensure complete delivery of dosage.

- Tiotropium mist inhaler (2.5 mcg/actuation) 2 inhalations once daily.****

**Specific Patient Population**

- No dose adjustment is required for geriatric patients, patients with hepatic impairment, and/or patients with renal impairment. However, patients with moderate to severe renal impairment might experience anticholinergic adverse effects and should be closely monitored for potential toxicity.

**Drug Interactions**

- Tiotropium has anticholinergic effects, and significant drug interactions are reported, so tiotropium dose or frequency might need adjustment based on concomitant medicine usage.