**Laser Housing**- The utility of lasers lies in their organization and manipulation of electron excitation through a powerful and constant energy source. This energy source is located external to a chamber, within which photons of energy are reflected off of mirrors, stimulating further emissions that occur in a uniform wavelength along an axis. The mirrors within the chamber are constructed so that one of them is partially reflective. This allows for the escape of an organized, monochromatic column of energy, known as the laser beam. A laser beam is collimated, which means that it has a low tendency to diverge, despite traveling long distances. Collimation helps with focusing and aiming the laser beam towards a specific target. Not only can a laser's energy be aimed with specificity, but its delivery can also be manipulated as either a continuous beam or a beam with multiple, successive bursts, called pulses.

**Laser Accessories**- Several tools have been invented which assist in the delivery of the laser energy. Lasers that are not within the visible spectrum are termed aiming beams. When shone on tissues, these beams guide the laser operator to the laser's location. The beam can also be manipulated by directing it through a fiber optic cable. These fiber optic cables allow for localized laser therapy in hard-to-reach areas.

**Cryogen/Coolant**– Cooling devices have been shown to protect the epidermis during laser treatments by reducing pain and erythema and helping to prevent blistering, scarring, and pigment changes.