Unfortunately, few studies of the composition and the internal environment of b lymphocytes exist; consequently, this section will focus on b lymphocyte external surface and associated structures. B cells have a plasma membrane composed of equal parts of the weight of protein glycosphingolipids and carbohydrates. The upcoming paragraphs will describe the most critical external structures of B-cell responsible for cell activation, antigen recognition, and signal transduction.

**Stage-specific Markers**

Different molecules are presented on B cells in various stages of development/maturation and activation. For example, CD10 is expressed on first-stage cells on B cell lineage like pro-B, pre-B cell, and germinal centers cells. CD19 and C20 are expressed on all cells of b cell lineage except plasma cells. However, CD27 is exclusively expressed on memory and plasma cells. Also, B-1 cells are characterized by the CD5 molecule.

**Antigen-binding Molecules (membrane immunoglobulin):**

B cells antigen receptor is functionally part of multimolecular protein complexes at the cell surface. The b-cell antigen receptor is a transmembrane receptor that extends to the cytoplasm. However, it has very short cytoplasmic sequences (tails). These tails are ineffective in transmitting the signals and activating B cells. Consequently, another protein is involved in the process of signal transmission and lymphocyte activation. B cell receptor(BCR) is a multimolecular protein complex bounded noncovalently with other proteins. BCR is functionally involve: (1) membrane-bound immunoglobulin receptor (mIg), Ig-alpha (CD79a) and Ig-beta (CD79b). Ig-alpha and Ig-beta are signal transduction molecules that link to mIg as a disulfide-linked heterodimeric complex. Ig-alpha and Ig-beta contain a sequence called immune receptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) essential for signal transduction in both B and T lymphocytes. ITAM is responsible for passing the activation signals from the cell surface to the cytoplasm through tyrosine amino acid, which becomes phosphorylated by protein tyrosine kinases(PTKs) during cellular activation to interact with cytoplasmic signaling proteins. The thinking is that there is enough B cell receptor antigen for every microbe because of genetic arrangement and diversity. B cells receptors are inherited as gene fragments; these fragments are joined differently in each developing cell to create a diverse array of receptors. Theoretically, b lymphocyte can make up to 10^11 different antibodies in an individual. Besides, B cells receptors undergo somatic hypermutation create unique receptors.

**Co-receptor Molecules of B Cells**

Optimal signaling in B-cell activation requires more than BCR, so co-receptors appear on the cell membrane. B cells co-receptors are clusters of molecules that increase the efficacy of signaling up to a thousand folds. B cells co-receptors are proteins known as CD21(also known as complement receptor 2); CD19 CD81 and CD225. These proteins are close to BCR but are not part of it. Phosphorylation of co-receptors proteins along with Ig-alpha and beta will amplify the activation singles from the cell surface to the cytoplasm as shown in (figure 1)Moreover, co-receptors reduce the BCR stimulation threshold, which means fewer antigens are necessary for BCR stimulation. Co receptor function is best demonstrated when microbial pathogens activate complement and then binds to B-cell. When antigen binds to complement protein C3d, this process will allow the antigen to bind to CD21 and BCR simultaneously to unable co-receptors complex to cluster and cross-link with BCR and phosphorylate CD19 tail (figure 2). This process will increase signals concentration around BCR.

**Signal Transduction Molecules (Molecule involved in T-B cells interaction)**

In Thyms dependent B cells activation, T-B cells interaction occur that requires surface molecules; these molecules are:

- Major histocompatibility complex class II molecule: these present molecules peptides drove from T dependent protein antigens to T helper cells (CD4+). All B cell linage cells express MHC II except pro-B cells.

- Co-stimulator molecules:These molecules are required as a second signal to accompany the first signal after antigen binding. Co-stimulators are expressed in high quantity in the activated cells rather than naïve B-cells. Several co-stimulatory have been studied; the most well know are B7 and CD40. B7 is a family of different molecules that interact with CD28 on T-cells surface. CD40 on B-cell interact with CD40 ligand (CD40L or CD154) on activated T-cells. This interaction is crucial in somatic hypermutation and class switch. Moreover, inducible co-stimulatory ligand on B cells interacts with ICOS on activated T-cells, which is critical and necessary for germinal center formation. Therefore, People who lack functional ICOSL or ICOS make deficient levels of IgG, IgA, IgE.

- Cytokines receptors: cytokines produced by activated T lymphocytes (CD4+) mediate B cell response to protein antigens. CD40 ligand on the surface of TH lymphocytes interacts with CD40 molecule and functions to allow B lymphocyte development into antibody-secreting plasma cells.