McCune-Albright syndrome is largely a clinical diagnosis. Genetic testing for GNAS mutation is commercially available, however, due to the mosaicism, false negatives do occur, and a positive result contributes little to the clinical management.

Evaluation includes radiographs or computed tomography (CT) to identify and characterize fibrodysplastic lesions. In early childhood, patients with McCune-Albright syndrome are more likely to experience stress fractures that may lead to permanent deformity if not stabilized. CT scan of the skull helps in the diagnosis of craniofacial bone lesions and pituitary lesions. Regular vision and hearing tests can monitor lesions affecting those systems.  Baseline bone scan with 99Tc-methyl diphosphate is indicated in endocrinopathies that affect bone development.

Precocious puberty in McCune-Albright syndrome is typically peripheral and due to activation of ovarian or testicular tissue. Evaluation includes serum estradiol and testosterone levels. Boys should have a testicular ultrasound to assess for hormonally active tumors.  High levels of estradiol in girls may cause activation of hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, triggering evaluation for central precocious puberty. Additionally, GnRH stimulation testing and serum measurements of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone may be warranted.

Evaluation for growth hormone excess includes oral glucose tolerance test and serum growth hormone and prolactin measurements.  Evaluation of hyperthyroidism includes measurement of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free and bound thyroxine, and T3. Periodic ultrasound is recommended with an appropriate follow-up of any abnormal findings. Monitoring levels of serum phosphate and renal reabsorption of phosphate is also a recommendation.