****Preparation for ART procedures largely involves the evaluation and workup for etiologies of infertility. Infertility is defined as failure to achieve pregnancy after at least one year of unprotected intercourse. Infertility evaluation can also be initiated at six months of failure to achieve pregnancy in women over 35 or in cases where there are known possible barriers, such as known uterine or tubal disease or male infertility.

For the female evaluation, day 3 follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), estradiol (E2), antral follicle count, and Anti Mullerian Hormone (AMH) are determined via bloodwork and baseline transvaginal ultrasound to evaluate ovarian reserve. Further medical evaluation in patients with ovulatory dysfunction includes collections of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), prolactin, DHEAS, testosterone, and 17 hydroxy-progesterone.  The above hormonal assessment helps determine the etiology of anovulation. In addition, the uterine and pelvic cavity is also typically evaluated with a baseline transvaginal ultrasound, often in conjunction with a hysterosalpingogram or sonohysterogram. The ultrasound evaluation helps to identify any uterine factors affecting fertility and pregnancy maintenance, such as the presence of polyps, submucosal fibroids, and/or uterine malformations such as uterine septums.

Ultrasound evaluation can also determine other causes of subfertility, such as hydrosalpinx or endometriosis. Male infertility workup includes a semen analysis. Both male and female evaluation usually involves a basic infectious disease workup, including syphilis, a hepatitis panel, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).