**Pediatric Population**

In the pediatric population, the clinical signs and symptoms of anesthetic neurotoxicity include negative behavioral changes such as temper tantrums, bed-wetting and learning challenges, and memory deficits. Despite multiple studies showing no statistically significant difference in IQ in children exposed to anesthetics early in life, negative behavioral impacts have been observed. Risk factors for these negative behavioral changes include young age, postoperative pain severity, and pre-existing parental and/or patient anxiety. The studies conducted to determine these negative impacts of anesthetics have the limitations of being based on parental recall and reporting rather than objective outcomes that clinicians could measure.

One retrospective study looked at the incidence of developmental or behavioral disorder diagnoses in patients who had undergone surgical repair of inguinal hernia compared to children without a history of hernia repair. This study found that children who had undergone surgical intervention were twice as likely to be diagnosed with a development/behavioral disorder.

A subsequent study by the same research group was then conducted to control for environmental factors, so children who underwent surgical interventions before age three were compared to the sibling cohort. It was found that single exposure did not increase the incidence of developmental/behavioral disorder diagnosis. Still, two and three exposures did increase the risk.

Methods to decrease the risk of anesthetic neurotoxicity are currently under investigation. It has been shown that in rats, Xenon did not cause neural cell apoptosis and limited the apoptotic activity of isoflurane.

**Elderly Population**

When diagnosing and treating POD and POCD, it is important first to rule out other causes of cognitive dysfunction. These include common causes of cognitive dysfunction in the elderly such as infection, hypoglycemia, Wernicke encephalopathy due to thiamine deficiency, electrolyte abnormalities, kidney disease, polypharmacy, and myocardial ischemia.

Given the lack of definitive treatment or therapy, preventing the development of POD and POCD is especially important. A 2010 meta-analysis including 75 clinical studies evaluated the incidence of development of POD and POCD in relation to methods of anesthetic administration. It was found that incidence of POD was unchanged with any route of anesthesia, including general anesthesia (GA), regional anesthesia (RA), or a combination of both regional and general techniques. General anesthesia was found to be associated with slightly higher rates of POCD compared to regional anesthesia, but the results were not significant. Likely the route of anesthesia administration has little impact on the development of postoperative cognitive deficits.

The Fifth International Perioperative Neurotoxicity Working Group met in May 2016 and comprised a document outlining the best perioperative management for the elderly to optimize brain health. Intraoperative management for the elderly should include using age-adjusted minimal alveolar concentration (MAC), maintenance of cerebral perfusion, and use of intraoperative EEG monitoring. MAC decreases approximately 6% per decade over 40, and to reduce anesthetic overdose, and volatile anesthetics should be titrated using age-adjusted MAC as this has been shown to increase the incidence of POD and POCD. Several studies have examined the risk of POD and POCD when anesthetics are titrated using intraoperative EEG monitoring. While the results are mixed overall, there is strong support for the use of such monitoring to prevent burst suppression.