Insulin aspart is a rapid-acting, human insulin analog that is FDA approved for the treatment of type-1 and type-2 diabetes mellitus to improve glycemic control in adults and children. Insulin aspart may also be used to treat diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), though this is not an FDA-approved indication.

Insulin aspart, or any rapid or short-acting insulin, is a mainstay of therapy in type-1 diabetes mellitus. Total daily insulin doses are usually between 0.4 to 1 units/kg per day, divided into long-acting insulin and rapid-acting insulin, such as insulin aspart. An initial breakdown of 50% basal insulin, 50% rapid-acting insulin is a starting place for most patients with type-1 diabetes mellitus and adjusted based on blood glucose. Doses are highly patient-specific. Type-2 diabetes mellitus patients often use more basal insulin than bolus insulin compared to type-1 diabetes mellitus patients.

In type-2 diabetes mellitus, insulin aspart may be added for further glycemic control in addition to oral medications or long-acting insulin. Recommended starting doses for type-2 diabetes mellitus patients may be any of the following options: 4 units per meal, 0.1 units/kg per meal, or 10% of the basal dose. If hemoglobin A1c is less than 8%, consider reducing basal insulin dose when adding insulin aspart with meals.

Insulin aspart is also available commercially in a combination product with insulin degludec (long-acting insulin) or insulin aspart protamine (intermediate action insulin). Insulin degludec plus insulin aspart is dosed once or twice a day with the main meal. Insulin-naive patients should start insulin degludec/insulin aspart at 0.2 to 0.4 units/kg per day. Insulin aspart/insulin aspart protamine is 30% insulin aspart, 70% insulin aspart protamine. Dosing for the protamine product starts at 0.5 units/kg per day, divided into two doses before meals with 70% of the total daily dose before breakfast and 30% of the total daily dose before dinner.