A comprehensive assessment of tricuspid stenosis includes all the following:

**Biochemistry:**may reveal mildly elevated unconjugated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, or aminotransferases.

**Chest radiograph:**In isolated tricuspid stenosis, there is right atrial enlargement and clear lung fields. When accompanying MS, interstitial edema or straightening of the left heart border can be seen.

**ECG:**may show right atrial enlargement, which is known as 'P-pulmonale.' The tall and peaked T waves are particularly observed in leads II, III, and aVF. At least 50% of patients can have atrial fibrillation.

**Transthoracic echocardiogram:**is performed to assess the valve area and gradients across the valve. It helps to determine the severity of tricuspid stenosis and guides management strategy. Following echocardiographic parameters help establish the severity of the disease.

- Thickening and distortion of the tricuspid valve, with or without calcification.

- Commissural fusion, with doming of the valve.

- Valve area < 1 cm-sq signifies severe TS. This is calculated by dividing 190 with pressure half-time. The normal area of the tricuspid valve is 4.0 cm-sq.

- A transvalvular gradient across the tricuspid valve of more than 5-10 mmHg at a heart rate of 70 beats per minute suggests severe stenosis. Gradients are affected by the patient's current hemodynamic status.

- The presence of significant tricuspid regurgitation can potentially alter the management strategy. Surgical correction may be needed instead of percutaneous intervention.

- Pressure half-time of more than 190 msec suggests severe TS.

- Inflow-time velocity integral of more than 60 cm suggests severe stenosis.

- Right atrial enlargement.

- Plethoric inferior vena cava.

**Cardiac Catheterization:**In tricuspid stenosis, there is a large right atrial "a" wave of 12 to 20 mm Hg and a mean diastolic gradient of 4 to 8 mm Hg across the tricuspid valve. The mean gradient across the tricuspid valve is more significant in TS because an end-diastolic gradient may be absent with significant obstruction. This is because of the lower filling pressures on the right side of the heart.