Drug-eluting stents (DES) are vascular prostheses used by interventional cardiologists to reopen and maintain patent coronary arteries narrowed by arteriosclerosis. The history of interventional cardiology began with balloon angioplasty in 1977. Sigwart et al. introduced the first bare metal stent (BMS) in 1986.

Facing the variety of DES, one can classify them according to three characteristics:

- Scaffold

- Drug-delivery mechanism (i.e., polymer)

- Therapeutic agent

The development of DES evolved through different generations. First-generation DES had a stainless steel scaffolding coated with either sirolimus or paclitaxel. The RAVEL, SIRIUS, and TAXUS trials evaluated first-generation DES.

Stents prevent the vascular recoil cardiologists observed with balloon angioplasty (PTCA). Bare metal stents (BMS) are superior to PTCA alone as was shown in the BENESTENT and STRESS trials.

Problems with hypersensitivity to stents have been proposed and subsequently, the concept of polymer-free or biodegradable polymers was introduced. Recently reestablishment of healthy long-term vasomotion with biodegradable stents have gained significance.

Different characteristics make each drug-eluting stent unique. Each of them has advantages and disadvantages which derive from differences in drug-loading capacity, drug-release pharmacokinetics, polymer durability, biocompatibility, influence on vascular wall thinning, aneurysm formation, and delayed restenosis.

The FDA MAUDE database showed that most stent fractures do not trigger symptoms, are difficult to assess and thus, are probably under-recognized.