While considering the differentials for an abnormal neurological evaluation in an immunosuppressed patient, the possibilities include toxoplasma encephalitis, primary CNS lymphoma, PML, HIV encephalopathy, and CMV encephalitis. From a clinical perspective, PML can present as focal neurological deficits in sensory, motor, or visual parameters. Hence this presentation is similar to that of Toxoplasma and primary CNS lymphoma and requires differentiation by radiological means.

Noncontrast-enhancing lesions are seen in PML, CMV encephalitis, and HIV encephalopathy. Therefore, these conditions need to be differentiated from one another.

HIV encephalopathy commonly presents as cognitive deficits and does not show signs of focal neurological deficits. Furthermore, the radiological assessment would reveal symmetric, poorly demarcated lesions. HIV encephalopathy would also show evidence of positive HIV viral load on the CSF examination.

CMV encephalitis is a differential to be considered. Its presentation mimics that of PML, and non-contrast enhancing lesions are noted on the MRI. However, the radiological appearance differs from PML. MRI imaging reveals multifocal diffuse micronodules in the cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum.

Recurrence of multiple sclerosis in patients on natalizumab therapy for MS requires differentiation from PML. As both diseases are demyelinating processes, clinical signs and symptoms can overlap, and it may prove to be difficult to distinguish between the two disease entities. However, radio imaging is distinctly different and can be useful in identifying natalizumab-induced PML. PML lesions are larger, hyperintense, and unifocal as compared to the multifocal, hypointense nature of typical MS lesions.