**IF insufficiency:**

1) Autoimmune atrophic gastritis:

Autoimmune gastritis (type A gastritis) counts for 10% of chronic gastritis cases (in compare H.pylori gastritis). Type A gastritis is associated with loss of the gastric body and fundal parietal cells (which secretes acids and IF) caused by a cell-mediated autoimmune reaction, characterized by the followings:

- Achlorhydria: defective gastric acid secretion.

- Low pepsinogen I

- Hypergastrenemia: the defective acid secretion forces antral G cells to secrete the hormone gastrin, which is responsible for parietal cells stimulation. Prolonged stimulation to antral G cells forces it to undergo hyperplasia.

- IF insufficiency: will lead to Cbl deficiency and pernicious anemia.

- Autoantibody against parietal cells and IF:

Parietal cell antibody (PCA) is IgA or IgG immunoglobulin targets H/K ATPase, the gastric proton pump for acid secretion. Studies show that high homology exists between the beta subunit of PCA and that of H.pylori urease, suggesting that the autoimmune trigger mediated by the molecular mimicry due to long-standing H.pylori infection.

Intrinsic factor antibody (IFA) less predominant than PCA, yet it is the specific marker for pernicious anemia. IFA is an IgG immunoglobulin classified into two types. Type 1 IFA operates against the Cbl binding site, while type 2 IFA targets the ileal receptor-binding site.

2) Medical interventions:

Some drugs like proton pump inhibitors induce gastric atrophy and impair the gastric function causing IF deficiency. Also, the diminished secretion of acids impairs Cbl absorption. Because acid is needed to liberate Cbl from the food component. Some bariatric procedures such as sleeve gastrectomy decrease the mucosal surface area leading to IF deficiency.

**Impaired Cbl transfer to IF**:

The pancreatic proteases are needed to liberate Cbl from HC. In a disease like pancreatic insufficiency, Cbl trapped in Cbl-HC form therefore not ready to bind intrinsic factor.

**Impaired attachment to ileal receptors:**

Imerslund–Grasbeck syndrome (IGS), a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by a mutation in one of the two subunits of cubam receptor preventing the IF-Cbl complex endocytosis. Cubilin encoded by CUBN  gene located on chromosome 10 and amnionless encoded by AMN gene on chromosome 14.

Certain conditions (e.g., celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease) affect the distal ileum and harm its ability to bind intrinsic factor. Especially patients with Crohn disease undergoing ileal resection are at higher risk.