Before the invention of the intraocular lens, aphakia due to the removal of the crystalline lens was corrected by spectacles or by contact lens. The high hyperopia needed thick convex lenses, which were heavy, cosmetically unsightly,  and caused distortion in vision due to spherical aberrations, coma, and prismatic effect. More than 100 million intraocular lenses have been implanted since 1973 when IOLs gained acceptance.

The materials and designs are constantly undergoing modifications. The original Ridley lens was made of polymethylmethacrylate. Even today, rigid intraocular lenses are implanted after extracapsular cataract surgery and manual small incision cataract surgery. The cost of manufacturing these lenses is minimal, and smaller lenses can be implanted in the capsular bag. The disadvantage of the rigid lens is the need for a large incision size which may be sutured in case of extracapsular surgery and may not need sutures in manual small incision surgery.

Most cataract surgeries are now being performed by phacoemulsification through a 2.2 or 2.8 mm incision, which may be clear corneal or through a scleral tunnel. The lens materials are amenable to being folded and inserted through these incisions. The lenses may be single-piece with the optics and haptics made of the same material. The optics may be made of modified acrylic material, and the haptics may be polypropylene.

Intraocular lenses have undergone many changes over the years. The design of lens optics has changed from the original Ridley lens, which was biconvex. The optics are either spherical or aspheric.

The modifications that monofocal lenses have undergone over the years have been to ensure better centration in the capsular bag, reduce posterior capsular opacification, reduce spherical and chromatic aberrations, improve ease of implantation, ensure protection from UV light, and prevent bacterial adherence to the lens material.