Toxicity is rare, and there is no antidote for linezolid. Symptomatic and supportive treatment is recommended for managing mild to severe toxicity.

For severe neutropenia, administer colony-stimulating factors such as filgrastim or sargramostim. Filgrastim 5 mcg/kg/day SQ or IV over 15 to 30 minutes, or sargramostim 250 mcg/m2/day IV over 4 hours. Transfusion of platelets, packed red cells, or both may be necessary for patients with severe thrombocytopenia, anemia, or hemorrhage.

For seizures, administer IV benzodiazepines; barbiturates or propofol may be an option if seizures persist or recur. Airway management may be necessary for patients with severe seizures. The primary treatment for serotonin syndrome is sedation with IV benzodiazepines and cooling measures (cyproheptadine is an option for milder cases). Activated charcoal is a consideration in patients with a recent overdose of linezolid tablets and co-ingested potentially dangerous medications, e.g., tricyclic antidepressants (must be alert and have a protected airway).

Monitoring is necessary for vital signs and liver enzymes in symptomatic patients. Additionally, monitor serial CBC with differential and platelet count. Reports exist of myelosuppression, including anemia, pancytopenia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving linezolid. Monitoring of serum electrolyte status is indicated for patients with significant diarrhea and/or vomiting. Also, monitor patients for clinical evidence of serotonin syndrome.