Tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN) is a group of immune-mediated inflammatory diseases that involves the interstitium and tubules. Inflammation of the kidney consists of the collection of inflammatory cells, fluid, and extracellular matrix surrounding the interstitium, along with the infiltration of tubular cells by inflammatory cells that define both tubules and interstitium pathology. It is one of the most important and significant causes of acute kidney injury that subsequently leads to renal failure. There are multiple causative factors of tubulointerstitial nephritides, including drug-induced, idiopathic, genetic, immune-mediated, and infectious (viral, bacterial, parasitic, or fungal). In addition, there is an association of systemic inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren disease, immunoglobulin G4 associated autoimmune disease (interstitial infiltration of IG4 positive plasma cell and C3 deposition), tubulointerstitial nephritis, and uveitis syndrome. This activity highlights the role of interprofessional team members in managing patients with tubulointerstitial nephritis for best patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of tubulointerstitial nephritis.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of tubulointerstitial nephritis.
- Summarize the management options available for tubulointerstitial nephritis.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance tubulointerstitial nephritis and improve outcomes.