Most cases of CS are seen in women without proper prenatal care or in those who receive improper treatment. Syphilis screening is part of routine standard of care in all pregnant women in the United States, and it has shown to decrease rates of CS.

- Hepatomegaly: This is the most common finding and may occur with splenomegaly. Biopsy of the liver followed by darkfield microscopy may reveal the spirochete. Liver function tests may be abnormal.

- Jaundice: Jaundice may or may not be present depending on the extent of liver injury.

- Rhinitis: One of the first clinical presentations, usually in the first week of life. Copious, persistent white discharge is noted, which contains spirochetes that can be visualized under darkfield microscopy.

- Generalized Lymphadenopathy: Generalized, non-tender lymphadenopathy is also a common finding.

- Rash: Rash usually appears one to two weeks after rhinitis. Small red or pink colored maculopapular lesions may be commonly seen on the back, buttocks, posterior thigh and soles of the feet. The rash progresses to desquamation and crusting.

If there is a failure to diagnose congenital syphilis early, persistent inflammation may lead to scarring and gumma formation.

- Skin and mucous membrane gummas and perioral fissures/scarring

- Facial changes including frontal bossing, saddle nose, prominent maxilla

- Anterior bowing of the shin called saber shins.

- Hutchinson teeth which are hypoplastic notched permanent teeth, most commonly of the upper central incisors

- Intellectual disability and cranial nerve palsies

- Sensorineural hearing loss and changes in vision

- Eye involvement may lead to interstitial keratitis, secondary glaucoma, and corneal scarring

Hutchinson triad (Hutchinson teeth, interstitial keratitis, and sensorineural hearing loss) is relatively specific for congenital syphilis.