Domestic violence is a serious and challenging public health problem. Approximate one in three women and one in ten men 18 years of age or older experience domestic violence. Annually, domestic violence is responsible for over 1,500 deaths in the United States and as many as 200 deaths in Florida. In Florida, more than one in three women and one in four men experience physical violence, stalking, or rape.

Domestic violence victims typically experience severe physical injuries requiring care at a hospital or clinic. The cost to individuals and society is significant. The national annual cost of medical and mental health care services related to acute domestic violence is estimated at over $8 billion. If the injury results in a long-term or chronic condition, the cost is considerably higher.

Financial hardship and unemployment are contributors to domestic violence. An economic downturn is associated with increased calls to the National Domestic Violence Hotline.

Fortunately, the national rate of nonfatal domestic violence is declining. This is thought to be due to a decline in the marriage rate, decreased domesticity, better access to domestic violence shelters, improvements in female economic status, and an increase in the average age of the population.

**National Trends**

- Most perpetrators and victims do not seek help.

- Healthcare professionals are usually the first individuals with an opportunity to identify domestic violence.

- Nurses are usually the first healthcare providers that victims encounter.

- Domestic violence may be perpetrated on women, men, parents, and children.

- Fifty percent of women seen in emergency departments report a history of abuse, and approximately 40% of those killed by their abuser sought help in the two years before death.

- Only one-third of police-identified victims of domestic violence are identified in the emergency department.

- Healthcare professionals who work in acute care need to maintain a high index of suspicion for domestic violence as supportive family members may, in fact, be abusers.

**State Statutes**

In Florida, a state task force has recommended standards to accurately measure the extent of domestic violence and develop strategies for education and increasing public awareness. The results include:

- Legislation requiring all physicians, osteopaths, nurses, dentists, dental hygienists, midwives, psychologists, and psychotherapists are required to obtain two hours of domestic violence education every third renewal period.

- Domestic Violence Data Resource Center (DVDRC) Domestic Violence Fatality Review Teams have been established to examine cases of domestic violence that result in a fatality and to identify potential changes in policy that might prevent future deaths.

- The "Family Protection Act" requires a five-day jail term for any domestic battery crime in which the perpetrator deliberately injures the victim. The law makes a second battery crime a felony offense.

- A statute includes dating relationships of six months or more.

- A statute requires judges to inform victims of their rights, such as the right to appear, be notified, seek restitution, and make a victim-impact statement.

- The Domestic Violence Leave Act requires employers with 50 or more employees to provide guaranteed leave for domestic violence issues.

In Florida, domestic violence offenses result in approximately 200 deaths each year. Domestic violence accounts for approximately 20% of murders annually. The perpetrators are usually male and the victims usually female. One-third of the perpetrators of domestic violence in Florida have a known "do not contact" order filed against them; one-fifth had a permanent injunction for protection against them that was filed by someone other than the victim; one-third were diagnosed with mental health disorders; one-half have a substance abuse history.

**Epidemiology of Child Abuse**

Age, family income, and ethnicity are all risk factors for both sexual abuse and physical abuse. Gender is a risk factor for sexual abuse but not for physical abuse.****

Each year there are over three million referrals to child protective authorities. Despite often being the first to examine the victims, only about 10% of the referrals were from medical personnel. The fatality rate is approximately two deaths per 100,000 children. Women account for a little over half of the perpetrators.

**Race**

Maltreatment of children is found in every race, culture, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status.

**Gender**

Males and females are equally affected, but homicide rates are slightly higher in males.

**Morbidity and Mortality**

Children may experience pain, humiliation, fear, loss of self esteem, and injury. Physical injury may range from minor trauma to disfigurement, brain trauma and even death. Long-term health consequences and adverse experiences may result in increased anxiety, depression, substance abuse, self-mutilation, suicides, criminal behavior, cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, premature mortality, low self esteem, obesity and chronic mental health problems.

Mortality increases with multiple episodes of trauma. Homicide is a leading cause of death in aged children one to four years, and over 80% of fatalities from child abuse are in children younger than four.

**Epidemiology of Intimate Partner Violence**

According to the CDC, one in four women and one in seven men will experience physical violence by their intimate partner at some point during their lifetimes. About one in three women and nearly one in six men experience some form of sexual violence during their lifetimes. Intimate partner violence, sexual violence, and stalking are high, with intimate partner violence occurring in over ten million people each year.

One in six women and one in nineteen men have experienced stalking during their lifetimes. The majority are stalked by someone they know. An intimate partner stalks about six in ten female victims and four in ten male victims.

At least five million acts of domestic violence to women aged 18 years and older occur annually; over three million of these acts involve men. While most events are minor (these include grabbing, shoving, pushing, slapping, and hitting), serious and sometimes fatal injuries do occur. Approximately 1.5 million intimate partner female rapes and physical assaults are perpetrated annually, and approximately 800,000 male assaults occur. About 1 in 5 women have experienced completed or attempted rape at some point in their lives. About 1% to 2% of men have experienced completed or attempted rape.

The incidence of intimate partner violence has declined by over 60%, from about ten victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older to approximately four per 1,000.

**Race**

African American, American Indian, Alaskan Native women and men, and Hispanic women report higher rates of domestic violence. Asian and Pacific Island women and men report lower rates of intimate partner violence. However, differences among groups tend to diminish when sociodemographic and relationship variables are controlled.

The spousal homicide rate among African Americans is significantly higher than for whites. The incidence of homicide between partners is higher in interracial marriages when compared with intraracial marriages.

**Gender**

Women are more likely to be attacked, injured, or raped by their partners than by any other person. According to the United States Department of Justice, women are six times more likely than men to experience violence committed by a spouse or ex-spouse, boyfriend or girlfriend, or ex-boyfriend or ex-girlfriend. Of all violence against women that is committed by a single offender, an intimate partner is a perpetrator in approximately one-third of cases.

Lesbians report higher levels of sexual violence, in the range of 30% to 40%. There is some evidence that homosexual males also experience higher levels of sexual violence.

Approximately 10% of women who live with intimate female partners report being raped, physically assaulted, or stalked by their cohabitant. One-third of women living with a male partner reported victimization by their male cohabitant.

Approximately 15% of men living with a male intimate partner report being raped, physically assaulted, or stalked by their cohabitant. In comparison, less than 10% of men who have lived with a female partner experience similar problems.

More than half of all homeless women and families report that they are fleeing domestic violence.

**Age**

Women aged 16 to 24 years are more likely to be victims of violence at the hands of an intimate partner. Twenty to 30% of women who attend college report violence during a date.

Rates of spousal homicide peak in the 15 to 24 year old age category. Rates decline with age in African Americans but not in whites.

As the age difference between males and females increases, so does the risk of spouse homicide.

**Mortality and Morbidity**

Approximately two million injuries and deaths occur each year as a result of domestic violence. About one third of domestic violence patients will seek care in an emergency department.  Each year, approximately 400,000 report soft tissue trauma.  50,000 report injury related intimate partner sexual assault, and 40,000 report more severe injuries such as gunshot wounds, stab wounds, fractures, internal injuries, and loss of consciousness.  Additional facts include the following:

- Most intimate partner murders are committed with firearms.

- The number of intimate partner homicides has decreased by about 15%.

- Almost half of the females murdered visited an emergency department within two years of the homicide.

- About 10% of females are abused at least once during pregnancy.

- Women are more commonly victims of intimate partner murder.

- A home in which anyone has been hurt in a family fight is approximately five times more likely to be the scene of a homicide.

- Females are the victims in 85% of intimate nonlethal violence.

- While it is commonly reported that women are more likely to be injured than men, some studies suggest male and female victims are equally affected by domestic violence.

- While males are less likely than females to be victims of gunshot wounds or be injured in an assault, they are more likely to be stabbed.

**Epidemiology of Elder Abuse**

Due to under-reporting and difficulty sampling, obtaining accurate incidence information on elder abuse and neglect is difficult. Elder abuse is thought to occur in 3 to 10% of the population over 65.

Elderly patients may not report due to fear, guilt, ignorance, or shame. Clinicians underreport elder abuse due to poor recognition of the problem, lack of understanding reporting methods and requirements, and concerns about physician-patient confidentiality.

The elderly may be unable to respond to a survey, not speak English, or have dementia, leading to inaccurate reports on the number of older persons who are abused. While obtaining the exact frequency of elder abuse is difficult, it will be encountered commonly in clinical practice. All healthcare providers must maintain a high index of suspicion.

**Gender**

Women are more commonly victims of intimate partner elder abuse. It is thought they report abuse at higher rates or because the severity of injuries is usually greater than in males. Some studies have found little or no differences based on gender.

**Age**

There is no universally accepted definition of when old age begins. As a result, statistics on elder abuse are highly variable. Typically, 60 or 65 years of age is considered elderly.

**Race**

All racial, socioeconomic, and religious backgrounds are affected by elder abuse.

The estimated racial and ethnic distribution in older persons abused is on average:

- White: 60%

- Black: 20%

- Hispanic: 10%

- Other: 5%

**Mortality and Morbidity**

In the elderly population, victims of physical abuse and neglect have a much higher mortality rate than those never reported as abused. Early detection of elder abuse cases results in decreased morbidity and mortality. Healthcare provider involvement is important as only one in six victims will self-report mistreatment to the appropriate legal authorities.