Healthcare providers from different specialties, along with collaboration from the patient, constitute an interprofessional team that works in harmony and improves patient outcomes. It is a complex process, and it requires working together and sharing expertise, skills, and knowledge, all impacting patient care. Improvement in interprofessional teamwork tends to focus on specific activities like sharing of patient case files, meeting style, frequency, or case-conferencing approach. Collaboration among health care professionals is a crucial component with trust and respect for oneself and others.

- A general physician or family physician is usually the first one to receive patients with complaints of palpitations. His role in thorough assessment and evaluation, along with a referral to a cardiologist, is of great importance.

- A cardiologist's role in patient care involves cardiovascular risk assessment and evaluation of patients with VPCs. He must ensure and educate the patient about regular follow-up and compliance with medical therapy.

- An interventional cardiologist is involved in helping to diagnose underlying ischemic heart disease and decision making that encompasses revascularization therapy and catheter ablation intervention.

- A radiologist helps in the diagnosis of the VPCs by carrying out various imaging modalities.

- A cardiac electrophysiologist aids in mapping the VPCs origin before proceeding for catheter ablation therapy.

- A cardiac nurse plays a pivotal role in the monitoring of the patients as first-care responders and providing immediate care with the guidance of the physician.

- A clinical pharmacist specializing in cardiology offers suggestions for individual patient care through prospective or retrospective review based on pharmacological principles, and provide medication education for patients and health care providers at all levels.

Close communication between the interprofessional team members is vital for improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]