Present symptoms, past medical history of allergic manifestations, home environment, and circumstances prompt the clinician to carry out further tests for the diagnosis of dust mite allergy.

In vivo techniques

- Skin prick test. It has high sensitivity and is preferred as the first-line test for the detection of sensitization of dust mite allergy. It is a convenient, inexpensive test that yields results within 20 minutes. However, it may produce a high number of false-positive results owing to cross-reactivity. It is not indicated in people with dermatitis or those using antihistamines.

- Atopic patch tests. It detects the T cell-mediated reaction in the allergy.

- Basophil activation test (BAT). It is a quantitative test that detects the activation markers on the basophil surface in whole blood. This test can be performed in patients who are already taking antihistamines. It also demonstrates a functional response. However, inconsistent results may be present because of the different varieties of commercial testing kits and varied protocols used.

- Nasal provocation test. It identifies and quantifies the clinical relevance of dust mite allergen. The respiratory mucosa is exposed to the dust mite allergen, and the consequent clinical reactions are monitored. Anterior rhinomanometry and acoustic rhinometry are then used for the graphical display of the changes in nasal airflow and patency.

- IgE blood test

In vitro techniques

- Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). It can detect both total and selective IgE levels. Taking cross-reactivity of IgE into consideration, competitive ELISA can be used. The disadvantage is that ELISA cannot be used for a thorough analysis of multiple allergens.

- Radio allergen sorbent test (RAST). It is an in vitro test for the detection of IgE levels. The serum IgE of the patient bound to the allergen is immobilized on a solid substrate, and then these are detected using radiolabelled anti-IgE antibodies. Its use has become limited due to the availability of better techniques like ELISA.

- Microarrays. It can be used to detect multiple antigens on a single slide. It includes single-plex (ImmunoCAP) and multiplex (ImmunoCAP ISAC) assays. One commercially available microarray is ImmunoCAP immunosorbent allergen chip (ISAC) that is used to define an individual's complete allergen sensitivity profile. A better available microarray is a MeDALL chip that can be used to monitor IgE and IgG reactivity profiles toward more than 170 allergens, but this is still under evaluation. These assays are expensive and available in large hospitals, thus cannot be used to detect dust mite allergy sensitization at the primary point of care.

- Fluoroenzyme immunoassays

Diagnosis of asthma. Over time dust mite allergy culminates into asthma or may lead to exacerbation of asthma.

- Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR). In mild asthma, PEFR is more than or equal to 200 L per minute, with moderate asthma, PEFR is 80 to 200 L per minute, in severe asthma PEFR is less than 80 L per minute.

- Spirometry. The methacholine challenge test is used when there is no acute asthma. A fall of FEV1 of less than 20 percent after administering methacholine is diagnostic for asthma. During acute asthma, inhaled beta-agonists like salbutamol can be administered. A rise of FEV1 by 12 percent or more is diagnostic of asthma. Asthmatics sensitized to house dust mites have lower FEV1/FVC ratio as compared to asthmatics without the sensitization.

The quantification of dust mite allergens from the house can be done through immunochemical assays, namely, RAST inhibition technique, sandwich radio or enzyme immunoassays, or MAb assays. However, their use is limited due to the requirement of trained laboratory personal and sophisticated equipment.