The variety and versatility of chloride channels play a crucial function in maintaining cellular homeostasis, and implications exist of their dysfunction in multiple human disorders. Chloride channels alter the ionic composition of the cytoplasm and volume of cells by working closely with other ion transporters, such as pumps and cotransporters. One example is the strict fine-tuning of cellular pH, and the need to maintain electrochemical equilibrium when most cells are more alkaline than expected. This equilibrium mostly occurs via Na+/H+ exchangers and Na+/HCO3-/H+/Cl- exchangers that require a parallel Cl- shunt for recycling chloride. Additionally, similarly to the mechanism used for the acidification of some cellular organelles, some cells that have proton ATPases use Cl- channel to achieve electroneutrality.

Conversely, some cells are acid-loaded by Cl-/HCO3- exchangers and also need a separate pathway for chloride recycling. As well, chloride channels play a pivotal role in correcting cell volume when the opening of swelling-activated K+ and Cl- channels result in a net efflux of salts. Other cells, such as airway epithelia, acinar cells of multiple glands and intestinal cells take advantage of the polarized expression of Cl- channels and secondary active Cl- uptake mechanisms to transport water and salts in a particular direction across their apical membrane. This transport occurs by increasing the intracellular Cl- concertation above equilibrium by Na+/K+/2Cl- cotransporters, allowing for the passive diffusion of Cl- through apical Cl- channels. In the thick ascending loop of Henle, an apical cotransporter rises intracellular Cl- levels which then can leave via basolateral Cl- channels that are identical to the previously mentioned ClC-Kb/barttin. To contrast, intestinal crypt cells use the Na+/K+/2Cl- cotransporter, located in the basolateral membrane, and the CFTR Cl- channels, to secrete Cl- apically, a process that is stimulated by cAMP. In acinar cells, intracellular Ca+ concentration regulates Cl- secretion by direct activation of apical Cl- channels.

CFTR needs the presence of phosphate donating nucleosides to function efficiently. Thus it is tightly regulated by protein kinase C (PKC), protein kinase A (PKA), and a high ATP/ADP ratio. Opening of the channel requires phosphorylation by PKA, Mg+ and hydrolysis of ATP at the Nucleoside binding fold 1 (NFB1). Binding of ATP and NBF2 stabilized that opened channel and hydrolysis closes it. Also, cAMP can modulate the number of channels present in the plasma membrane by regulating exocytosis. Another significant function of chloride channels in the regulation of membrane electrical excitability. Voltage-gated Cl- channels open in response to depolarization with an inward flow at positive potentials, such as CIC-1 used in skeletal muscle, to maintain resting membrane potential. In smooth muscle, chloride channels activated by Ca+ or cellular swelling lead to depolarization that open voltage-gated Ca+ channels leading to an influx of calcium. GABA and glycine receptors are ligand-gated chloride channels that when activated cause influx or efflux of Cl-, depending on the electrochemical potential of Cl- for the cell, which leads to an inhibitory and sometimes excitatory response. These receptors hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane or stabilize its potential close to its resting levels (shunting inhibition), thus suppressing both the spatial and temporal summation of excitatory postsynaptic potentials.

When the endogenous ligand binds GABA, it promotes the channel’s pore opening, allowing Cl- and HCO3- to flow down their electrochemical gradients. Within organelles, Cl- is used for volume regulation, transport of anionic substrates, and to maintain electroneutrality. Mitochondria undergo volume changes, depending on the metabolic state of the cells, which is mediated by the transport of K+ and Cl- across its inner membrane. Lysosomes and the Golgi apparatus use chloride channels to help get rid of sulfate and phosphate. The import of chloride neutralizes the excess positive charge of organelles that must have a high calcium or proton gradient (endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic reticulum, endosomal and synaptic vesicles, etc.).