The optimal flexor tendon repair timing depends on the findings of a thorough history and physical exam. Preoperative planning should account for the possible need for microsurgical nerve and arterial repair. Only in the setting of compromised digital artery perfusion is an emergent repair of the lacerated tendon(s) indicated. If the mechanism suggests arterial injury or digital perfusion is altered, urgent exploration and tendon repair with concomitant microvascular digital artery and nerve repair is warranted.

Primary repair done within the first few days following injury, on a non-emergent basis, allows for adequate patient preparation, education on postoperative therapy regimens, postoperative protocols, and optimal operative conditions. In addition, the wound is easier to manage, and the tendon ends are fresh for repair.

When the interval between injury and diagnosis is unknown, the patient provides an unreliable history, or otherwise, a delayed presentation, preoperative consideration should be given to the potential indication for tendon reconstruction and repair. More complicated cases may warrant primary tendon graft or tendon spacer, with secondary reconstruction.

Although repair of both tendons is preferable for optimal gliding and strength, in cases of severely injures, unclean/jagged tendon ends, or evidence of insufficient tendon volume for repair, repair of both tendons may be unfeasible; rather, FDS tendon excision and isolated FDP repair may be the best alternative. Simpler fingers subsequent to isolated FDP repair in a severely traumatized digit may result in decreased adhesion formation.