Historically, TOAs were treated with a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.

Any woman found to have a TOA should have a gynecological consultation and be hospitalized for further care. If the TOA is discovered before it has ruptured, treatment can begin with a course of intravenous antibiotics. In an analysis by Landers and Sweet, only 31% of patients treated with antibiotics alone later required surgical intervention.

Typically, management consists of antimicrobial therapy, with surgery reserved for cases of suspected TOA rupture or cases with a poor response to antibiotics.

The CDC recommendations for parenteral treatment of PID provide excellent TOA coverage as well. Often, metronidazole or clindamycin is added due to their excellent anaerobic coverage and success in abscess wall penetration.

**CDC Guidelines for the Treatment of PID**

- Cefotetan 2 g (intravenously) IV every 12 hours and doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours

- Cefoxitin 2 g IV every 6 hours and Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours

- Clindamycin 900 mg orally or IV every 12 hours and Gentamicin loading dose IV or intramuscularly (IM) (2 mg/kg) followed by 1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours

Women with a TOA should be given parenteral antibiotics until significant resolution of pain and tenderness, defervescence of fever, normalization of leukocytosis, and stability or decrease in the size of the mass is noted on imaging studies. At this point, antibiotics can be transitioned to an oral regimen until there is complete resolution of the TOA upon repeat imaging studies.

**Effective Antibiotic Treatment Regimens for TOA**

- Cefotetan 2 g IV every 12 hours or Cefoxitin 2 grams IV every 6 hours and Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours

- Ampicillin 2 grams IV every 6 hours and Gentamicin 2 mg/kg loading dose IV, then 1.5 mg/kg IV every 8 hours and Clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours

- Ampicillin/sulbactam 3 gm IV every 6 hours and doxycycline 100 mg IV or oral every 12 hours

Repeat imaging should be obtained if the patient has worsening symptoms, a deteriorating clinical exam, or at two weeks of therapy.

Gjelland et al. (2005) evaluated the role of transvaginal ultrasound-guided aspiration combined with antibiotics in the treatment of a TOA.

Surgical options to control the infection include laparoscopy/laparotomy, drainage of the abscess and salpingectomy. However, today percutaneous drainage under radiological guidance can be used to manage most patients.

To date, no large-scale randomized controlled trials have been performed to help clarify the precise role of imaging-guided drainage procedures in the management of TOAs; therefore, at this time, the choice of surgery versus imaging-guided drainage should remain individualized and based on local expertise.