The etiology of chronic interstitial nephritis in agricultural communities remains unknown. A disease with unusual clinical behavior would also be expected to have unusual risk factors, etiologies, and pathophysiologic mechanisms. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is traditionally etiologically associated with diabetes mellitus and hypertension in most cases and, to a lesser degree, with primary or secondary kidney diseases.

However, a form of CKD affects agricultural communities in endemic and epidemic proportions. It is found particularly among male farmers, presents at a young age, and affects a proportionately lower number of non-farming women and adolescents. In addition, this form is associated with functional changes and biomarkers of kidney damage among children in these communities. These characteristics suggest risk factors associated with the environment in these communities and the occupations of their residents, implying several etiologic factors working in conjunction with a predominant one.

Residents in these agricultural communities are exposed to the same risk factors as the world’s general population. Additionally, their occupations expose them to multiple toxic substances, many of which have been outlawed in other countries.

One hypothesis might be that disease is associated with toxic agents (heavy metals ab, chemicals, or microbial substances) in the environment from either natural or artificial sources.

It is hypothesized that the toxins cause direct tubular cell toxicity. Secondary tubular damage occurs due to alterations of the renal blood flow due to environmental conditions.

Additional factors that make the farmworkers and surrounding communities vulnerable to kidney damage are low birth weight, infectious diseases such as malaria, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, dehydration, and nephrotoxic medicinal plants.

Another hypothesis for the etiology of CINAC is recurrent dehydration.

More studies need to be done; nonetheless, it appears from indirect observations that CINAC is the pathologic expression of a toxic insult.