- Fournier gangrene is a rapid, life-threatening infection of the genitals and perineum with a very high mortality rate even with optimal modern medical treatment.

- Special care and attention should be given to patients with unexplained groin or scrotal pain, cellulitis, or localized infection, as a misdiagnosis can prove fatal.

- Particular attention is necessary for patients who have diabetes, have a history of hypertension, alcohol abuse, spinal cord injury with paraplegia or quadriplegia, morbid obesity, or are immunocompromised as these factors predispose patients to the development of Fournier gangrene or unduly delay the diagnosis.

- On physical examination, the patient may have pain out of proportion to physical findings as there may not be any significant cutaneous manifestations of the disease. Be very suspicious in such situations.

- Multiple medical and surgical specialties may need to be involved in these complex cases, including colorectal surgery, critical care, emergency medicine, endocrinology, general surgery, infectious disease, internal medicine, nephrology, OB-GYN, plastic surgery, wound care, and urology.

- Medical treatment revolves around medical resuscitation with intravenous fluids and antibiotics, but priority must be given to emergent surgical exploration and aggressive debridement.

- Medical resuscitation measures, laboratory studies, and diagnostic imaging should not be permitted to delay surgical exploration in obvious or clearcut cases.

- Rapid surgical treatment is the single most important factor in overall patient survival in this disease.

- Using suprapubic tubes and diverting colostomies should be minimized as much as possible as they do not appear to improve mortality and may increase morbidity.

- The testicles are usually preserved as their blood supply derives from the spermatic cord. They may be best placed by relocating them in pudendal thigh pouches.

- Despite the devastating complications, many patients are ultimately pleased with their quality of life.