Erythema marginatum is a clinical diagnosis. The presence of this lesion can aid in the diagnosis. In fact, it is one of the major criteria in the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever.

Jones criteria, used in the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever include major and minor criteria.

**Major Criteria**

- Polyarthritis

- Sydenham's chorea

- Clinical and subclinical carditis

- Erythema marginatum

- Subcutaneous nodules

**Minor Criteria**

- Fever higher than 38 C

- Polyarthralgia

- Increased ESR >=60mm in 1 hour and CRP greater than or equal to 3 mg/dl

- Prolonged PR interval

For diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever: 2 major or 1 major+2 minor criteria along with raised anti-Streptolysin O titer or throat swab culture positive for group A streptococcus.

Laboratory investigations such as complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, anti-streptolysin o titer, throat swab, blood culture, EKG and echocardiography, and skin biopsy have a corroborative value in the diagnosis.

For erythema marginatum associated with hereditary angioedema serum levels of complement C4, C1 esterase inhibitor, and C1q are performed.

For the diagnosis of psittacosis a history of avian contact in presence of clinical suspicion, isolation of chlamydia psittaci from respiratory secretions or detection by a polymerase chain reaction, four-fold or more increase of antibody titer between paired sera, and detection of IgM antibodies against C. psittaci by microimmunofluorescence may be performed.

The skin biopsy findings of erythema marginatum are nonspecific and comprise of a dermal and perivascular mixed inflammatory infiltrate with neutrophilic predominance. Later stages are characterized by erythrocyte extravasation. There is an absence of vasculitis. There is a clinical and histological overlap observed with neutrophilic figurate erythema of infancy.