According to FDA labeled drug guidelines, contraindications include patients with evidence of hypersensitivity to tretinoin or any of its components.

Pregnancy category: C (US FDA), D (AU TGA)

If administered during pregnancy, there is a significantly high risk of fetal loss and malformations, including the musculoskeletal system, thymus, central nervous system, external ear, eye, great vessel abnormalities, a cleft palate, facial dysmorphia, and parathyroid hormone deficiency.

In all females undergoing tretinoin therapy, effective contraception must be used throughout treatment then continued for one month following discontinuation. Even if the patient has a history of infertility or menopause, contraception must be used, the patient has undergone a hysterectomy. Two (2) reliable forms of contraception are the recommendation to be used simultaneously, even in patients who have a history of infertility or menopause. Abstinence may also be a chosen method of contraception. Patients who have undergone hysterectomy do not need a form of contraception. Discussion of continuing or terminating the pregnancy should occur between patient and physician if there is contraception during treatment.

In patients who lack genetic markers t(15;17) translocation, alternative treatment options should be considered.

Oral tretinoin is also contraindicated during breastfeeding, pregnancy during the first trimester (caution if pregnancy in the second or third trimester), caution in females of reproductive potential, caution in pediatric patients.

Topical tretinoin contraindications:

- Hypersensitivity to the drug, drug class, or drug formulation components

- Caution if hypersensitivity to fish products (0.05% gel, 0.05% lotion forms)

- Caution if sunburn

- Caution if photosensitivity

- Caution if eczema

- Caution if pregnancy 1st trimester