**Managing the Underlying Cause**

Erectile dysfunction can be due to multiple reasons – psychogenic, neurogenic, vascular, or hormonal. Therefore, therapy with symptomatic management with PDE5 inhibitors should be accompanied by simultaneous removal of the etiology causing ED. Hence it is crucial to obtain a relevant history and perform an appropriate physical examination.

Patients with psychogenic causes of ED usually have typical early morning and nocturnal erections but cannot achieve or maintain an erection during a sexual encounter with a specific partner. These patients will benefit from counseling and a referral to a psychiatrist if unremitting symptoms are present.

It is essential to identify atherosclerotic risk factors like smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia in patients presenting with a vascular cause of ED. In addition to the absence of nocturnal and early morning erections, these patients may present with symptoms of atherosclerosis of major blood vessels, particularly angina, claudication, or a history of a significant cardiovascular event. Therefore, it is recommended to monitor blood pressure, blood glucose, HbA1C, and lipid levels and initiate treatment for the underlying cause. In addition, patients should be counseled on the importance of smoking cessation and maintaining appropriate dietary and lifestyle habits. ED patients with concomitant history of long-standing diabetes should be monitored for their diabetic status and frequent neurological examinations to check for autonomic neuropathy. Patients with hormonal causes of ED present with reduced libido, suggesting hypogonadism as the cause of ED, which is manageable accordingly.

Treating the underlying cause of ED can have a tremendous impact on the resolution of symptoms without the need to administer PDE5 inhibitors. Concomitant administration of statins, anti-oxidants, and testosterone supplements may alleviate the condition. Careful attention should be given to ED patients with comorbidities like hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia because it has been observed that strict control of blood pressure, glucose, and lipid profile accentuates the sensitivity of ED to PDE5 inhibitors.

As the above exemplifies, covering all aspects of ED and using PDE5  inhibitors requires an interprofessional team approach. All the clinicians listed above are candidates for starting therapy for their patients, but they need to work collaboratively across disciplines to ensure safe treatment and minimal adverse effects. The pharmacist should also have significant involvement, checking for drug-drug interactions, verifying dosing based on the issue (ED vs. pulmonary HTN), and counseling the patients on proper dosing and administration. Nursing can also help assess treatment effectiveness and patient compliance. Both pharmacists and nurses need to be able to contact the prescriber with any concerns they may encounter. As clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists all take an active, collaborative role, PDE5 inhibitor therapy can be most effective for patients with minimal adverse effects. [Level 5]

**Expansion of Utilities for PDE5 Inhibitors**

**Heart Diseases**

There appear to be new emerging benefits of PDE5 inhibitors in managing heart failure and preventing myocardial remodeling post-infarction. The advantages of using PDE5 inhibitors in these diseases need to be studied extensively for inclusion in the treatment plans for these conditions.

**Oncology**

Due to the increased expression of PDE5 receptors on tumor cells, including colon, breast, lung, bladder, and prostate, these drugs have shown a positive response through increasing apoptosis of cancerous cells and blocking one or more Multidrug-resistant transporters such as P-glycoproteins.

**Diabetes Mellitus**

One study through the chronic administration of PDE5 inhibitors, particularly tadalafil, produced a promising result in reducing pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in patients with type 2 diabetes.

**Angina**

For patients with co-existent angina, a new drug is available in the market known as ranolazine, which is indicated for prophylactic treatment in chronic angina in patients refractory to first-line antianginal drugs like nitrate and beta-blockers with an added advantage of being safely co-administered with PDE5 inhibitors.

**Improving Drug Administration**

The most vital modality to enhancing efficacy and compliance of PDE5 inhibitors involves providing instructions to the patients regarding appropriate administration and the possible adverse effects associated with taking PDE5 inhibitors. Since about 30 to 35% of patients do not respond to on-demand administration of PDE5 inhibitors, chronic daily administration of these medications can be considered a reasonable alternative to induce normal sexual functioning with the added advantage of not exhibiting tachyphylaxis.

A new type of oro-dispensable sildenafil formulation is on the market, which disintegrates within seconds of ingestion and is absorbed quickly in the mouth. This formulation offers an advantage in patients with dysphagia and improves adherence due to rapid effects.

As an epilogue, the role of PDE5 inhibitors, especially sildenafil and tadalafil, has been well established clinically in erectile dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension. Nevertheless, these drugs offer tremendous potential in other areas of medicine like heart failure, peripheral neuropathy, and peripheral arterial disease, which requires extensive research before entering the market for the treatment of these disorders.