The rapid depolarization or the upstroke of the neuronal action potential occurs as a result of the opening of the voltage-gated sodium channels. These channels are large transmembrane proteins with different subunits encoded by ten mammalian genes. Problems with these channels are collectively called channelopathies. The channelopathies may affect any excitable tissues, including neurons, skeletal, and cardiac muscles resulting in multiple different diseases. The neurological channelopathies present more commonly in different muscle diseases and the brain. Paramyotonia congenita results from mutations in the gene coding for the alpha-1 subunit of the sodium channel. Sodium channelopathies in the brain result in various forms of refractory epilepsy disorders.

There is a variety of neurotoxins that can block the action potential. One such deadly toxin is tetrodotoxin (TTX), which inhibits sodium channels.

Ciguatoxin is a potent sodium channel blocker that causes a rapid onset of numbness, paraesthesia, dysaesthesia, and muscle paralysis. Ciguatoxins (CTX) are marine neurotoxins that are produced by the dinoflagellates. CTX works by blocking the voltage-gated sodium channels. Humans are exposed to CTX by ingestion of carnivore coral reef fishes, including grouper, red snapper, and barracuda, which feed on fish that have consumed the dinoflagellates.

Saxitoxin and its derivatives are known as paralytic shellfish toxins (PSTs). Found in marine and freshwater environments among dinoflagellates, PSTs act similarly to TTX and CTX, i.e., binding to voltage-gated sodium channels and blocking the movement of nerve impulses, as well as some degree of targeting the potassium and calcium channels. As such, just like TTX, sodium cannot enter through the inactivated sodium channels, preventing membrane depolarization. Because of the similarity of its mechanism of action to TTX, PSTs share similar consequences. Severe exposure can cause severe hypotension and general paralysis, and death can occur from respiratory failure/hypotension.

To illustrate the importance of myelin for saltatory conduction, different demyelinating diseases that destroy myelin can have varying degrees of severity because they reduce the conduction velocity of action potentials.