There are no diagnostic algorithms for achondroplasia; the diagnosis can usually be made with certain characteristics and specific radiologic features.

- Diagnosis can be confirmed by molecular genetic testing for the FGFR3 mutation. FGFR3 testing is indicated in children with an atypical presentation or to differentiate from similar disorders. A multigene panel, including FGFR3 and other genes of interest, can be performed to help ascertain the specific form of dysplasia.

- **Prenatal diagnosis**can occur incidentally during a routine second or third-trimester ultrasound if shortened long bones are appreciated in the developing fetus. Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis using cell-free fetal DNA found in the mother’s serum is now available, with reported high sensitivity and specificity.

- **Preimplantation genetic diagnosis**is also now possible for parents pursuing in-vitro fertilization and embryo implantation procedures. The prenatal detection rate is significantly higher in recent years; 71% during 2011-2015 compared to 36% during 1991-1995.

- **Skeletal surveys**of achondroplastic children may demonstrate a contracted skull base, rhizomelic shortening of long bones, proximal femoral radiolucency, generalized metaphyseal “flaring” irregularities, inverted “V-shaped or chevron-shaped” distal femoral epiphyses, a “champagne-glass” shaped pelvis (wider than deep pelvic outlet with small sacrosciatic notch). The radiographic appearance of the spine also differs in those with achondroplasia, including narrowed interpedicular distances (short pedicles usually found from L1-S1), vertebral body wedging (usually found at T12 or L1) and generalized posterior vertebral scalloping.

- If there is evidence of sleep apnea in the affected individual, or development of apparent signs and symptoms of cervicomedullary myelopathy, a sleep study and advanced imaging of the cervicomedullary junction may be indicated such as a computed tomographic (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).