Diffusion tensor tractography (DTT) shows a 3-dimensional view and estimation of the function of the spinothalamic tract. Any lesion on the spinothalamic tract, anywhere throughout its course in the central nervous system (CNS), can cause central post-stroke pain.

There are several etiologic theories proposed, which include central imbalance, central disinhibition, central sensitization, the grill illusion theory or thalamic changes, and the inflammatory response of the neural pathway involved.

**Central Imbalance**

Central imbalance (abnormal nociception and thermal sensation) might occur due to abnormal integration between normally functioning dorsal-medial lemniscus pathway and the damaged spinothalamic tract within the multisynaptic paleo-spinothalamic pathway. Another proposed pathway of central imbalance is at the level of third level neurons of the spinothalamic pathway. Those project from the thalamus to the insular cortex or anterior cingulate region, although the mechanism is undefined.

**Central Disinhibition**

The ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus has an intrinsic network of GABAergic neurons, which causes the intrinsic inhibition of ventral posterolateral nucleus. Stroke affecting the lateral thalamus causes central disinhibition by the deafferentation of the thalamic nucleus, which causes the activation of cortical areas resulting in pain. The slow return of neuronal function after stroke or trauma explains the timing of the pain. The disinhibition of temperature-sensing fibers (primarily those that sense cold) might be the cause of cold allodynia.

**Central Sensitization**

Central sensitization is the increased synaptic efficacy of the central afferent neurons leads to spontaneous pain or nociception on suboptimal stimulus. A spontaneous bursting pattern of multifocal asynchronous electrical activity has been recorded in the deafferented thalamic nuclei, with the help of microelectrodes, in patients of central post-stroke pain. The N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists (ketamine) has helped the central pain in animal models. This provides indirect evidence for the damage of central neurons from N-methyl-D-aspartate-receptor activation in central sensitization.