Major therapeutic goals of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) include controlling risk factors, controlling blood pressure, and preventing ischemic events.

**Acute Symptoms**

If the disorder presents with a transient ischemic attack (TIA), then one may attempt treatment with thrombolytics or percutaneous thrombectomy. One should always consider a diagnosis of FMD if the individual is young and develops a stroke. IF FMD is diagnosed on routine imaging without symptoms, then antiplatelet agents should be started.

Arterial dissection is usually managed with anticoagulation as long as hemorrhage has been ruled out. Treatment is for 3-6 months with warfarin.

**Medical Management**

Controlling hypertension is the cornerstone in the treatment of renal FMD. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is the drug of choice, given activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in renal FMD. Renal function should be monitored, as acute kidney injury may complicate the treatment, especially in bilateral renal artery stenosis or solitary kidney. Other antihypertensive agents like diuretics, calcium channel blockers, and beta-blockers are added as needed to control the blood pressure.

Smoking cessation should be advocated as smokers tend to have a more aggressive course than non-smokers. Role of statins is uncertain; Davies et al. demonstrated no benefit of statins on restenosis rates following angioplasty.

Anti-platelet therapy with aspirin is reasonable for all FMD patients with an ischemic insult like stroke or renal infarct. Anticoagulation is reserved for patients with renal or extracranial dissection.

**Revascularization**

Revascularization is indicated in young adults with resistant hypertension, to prevent ischemic nephropathy in severe stenosis with the goal of curing hypertension. Revascularization also may be indicated in an aneurysm or dissection of the involved artery. Revascularization of carotid artery FMD is reserved for patients with recurrent cerebral ischemia, pseudoaneurysm, and intolerance to medical therapy.

Endarterectomy is not possible in FMD because the lesions are extremely fibrotic.

Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) is the first-line modality for revascularization, with cure rates reaching 60% to 80% and technical success rate up to 100%. There is no indication for stent placement in FMD under most circumstances per the American Heart Association. Angioplasty with stent placement is considered for dissection or perforation of the involved artery. The hypertensive cure is achieved in 50% of the cases. The meta-analysis by Trinquart and his colleagues revealed a 45.7% cure rate for blood pressure; however, when adjusted for patients not on antihypertensives, it was only 35.8%. Negative prognostic factors include age greater than 50 years, longer duration of hypertension and co-morbid factors like diabetes, hyperlipidemia, smoking, and atherosclerosis. Hematoma, hemorrhage, dissection, and thromboembolic complications can complicate PTA in 6% of the patients.

There are no randomized control trials comparing PTA with surgical revascularization. PTA is the preferred choice over surgery because it is less invasive, lower cost, and has fewer complications. Surgical revascularization is recommended for patients with smaller renal arteries (less than 4 mm), branch renal artery, severe intimal fibroplasia, associated aneurysms, and failure of the PTA. Surveillance with Duplex ultrasonography is recommended post-revascularization at the first post-operative visit, bi-annually for two years, and then yearly.