One can argue that virtually every cardiovascular pathology augments normal hemodynamics in some form or another. However, some examples very clearly illustrate the physiologic principles explained above. One such example is age-related vascular disease. While researchers still debate the exact mechanism for this disease, the result is a loss of normal endothelial compliance in the blood vessels. This change causes blood vessels to act stiffer and less distensible with the pressures of systole (where the heart pushes the blood into the blood vessels creating pressure). The main result of this seemingly minor change is an increase in blood pressure. By increasing the blood pressure, more load is placed on the heart, predisposing it to further compromise in the form of hypertrophy (i.e., the heart gets thicker in an attempted push against this greater vascular resistance) or direct vascular damage from the increased pressure (e.g., hemorrhagic stroke).

While age is one common cause of hypertension, several others bear mentioning. Many endogenous substances act as vasoconstrictors and exert their effects to modify blood pressure. Angiotensin (I and II) and aldosterone are such components. Along with renin, these form the primary constituents of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Aberrations in this pathway lead to elevated levels of these substances, especially angiotensin II and aldosterone, in the blood, which raises the blood pressure through increased vascular resistance (i.e., blood vessel constriction). Aldosterone is the end effector of this pathway, and in addition to vasoconstriction, causes reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubule of the kidney, which increases blood volume and blood pressure. This system exists to maintain normal pressure in times of fluid loss or hemorrhage, but pathological alterations are possible. Renal artery stenosis is one such case. Stenosis results in decreased blood flow to the kidney, subsequently increasing renin release. Increased renin leads to a cascade, resulting in elevated aldosterone (and angiotensin II). The vasoconstriction and salt retention that follows result in hypertension, which is resistant to typical modes of treatment.

Stress and anxiety also can contribute to elevated blood pressure. This effect takes place in the form of excess catecholamines (e.g., norepinephrine and epinephrine), which increase cardiac contractility, which increases flow and selectively constricts blood vessels, which increases vascular resistance. Essential hypertension is one example where hypertension seems to exist without any easily identifiable cause. These patients may have a family history of similar early elevations in blood pressure, but ultimately, this is a diagnosis of exclusion after ruling out other causes.

Regardless of the source, hypertension has important consequences for the body. In addition to cardiac remodeling, there are reflex changes to the blood vessels from the greater pressure. The arterioles, which are the smallest arterial blood vessels before the capillary beds, reflexively constrict to protect the relatively delicate capillary beds from these damaging forces. This reflex constriction increases resistance, which spares the capillaries, but also further increases pressure (remembering that P = RQ, so an increase in resistance will increase pressure for a given flow).

Another example of aberrant hemodynamics is pulmonary hypertension.

- Class 1 - Idiopathic/heritable

- Class 2 - Secondary to left heart failure

- Class 3 - Secondary to lung disease and hypoxia

- Class 4 - Thromboembolic (pulmonary embolisms)

- Class 5 - Unclear etiology

The first four classes each illustrate a significant mechanism for increased resistance of a vascular system and an especially dangerous one in this particular pathology. The idiopathic or heritable disease can result in fibrosis or constriction of the blood vessels, but this category is very broad and includes toxins or defects in the body's ability to produce vasodilatory substances. These factors can result in the narrowing of the blood vessels and increased vascular resistance. Left heart failure results in a decrease in the forward blood flow and marked vascular congestion. Intuitively, this increases resistance in a similar way a large blockage in a blood vessel might. Lung disease and hypoxia illustrate an important physiologic point; the pulmonary arterioles are responsive to oxygen (resulting in vasodilation). Without oxygen, there is marked vasoconstriction, which increases vascular resistance and increases pressure (velocity increases to maintain net flow). The thromboembolic disease results in decreased pathways for pulmonary blood flow. As a result, the net resistance of the system increases. Recall that as parallel pathways are created, the net resistance becomes reduced (the emboli act in opposition to this). The increased pressure from the alveolar damage, among other mechanisms, results in significant morbidity and mortality for patients without a reversible cause of this condition.