# Introduction

Coronary anomalies of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) are very rare, with a frequency of less than 1% in the general population.

# Structure and Function

**Normal Anatomy of the LAD**

The normal origin of the LAD is at the bifurcation of the distal left main coronary artery (LMCA). From there, it travels around the left side of the pulmonary artery (PA) and passes into the epicardial fat obliquely in the direction of the apex of the heart in the anterior interventricular sulcus. The LAD is made up of a proximal segment, middle segment, and distal segment. The proximal segment contains the first branch of the septal perforator. The middle segment is bordered by the first septal branch and represents the halfway point between the septal branch and the ventricular apex. The distal segment is from the halfway point to the apex. The length of the LAD usually measures approximately 10 cm to 13 cm long. Branches of the LAD are called diagonal branches and septal perforator branches. There are usually one or two large diagonal branches that may arise and descend diagonally across the anterior surface of the LV. The septal perforator branches supply the anterior two-thirds of the basal interventricular septum and the entire septum at the mid and apical levels.

**Anomalies of Origin**

The most common coronary artery anomalies of the LAD are congenital abnormalities of the origin. One of the most dangerous anomalies of origin of the LAD is when the LAD originates off the pulmonary artery, which is a very rare anomaly that can lead to myocardial injury and potential death.

**Anomalies of Course**

There are five different possible paths by which the coronary arteries can connect with the opposite coronary cusps. These paths are called pre-pulmonic, petro-aortic, inter-atrial, trans-septal, and retro-cardiac. The LAD is more commonly associated with the transeptal path; however, it can also be involved with all the other paths. The trans-septal path is when the coronary artery has a subpulmonic course as the artery travels anteriorly and inferiorly through the interventricular septum and takes an intramyocardial course, giving off septal branches and finally emerging at its normal epicardial position.

Sometimes arteries are duplicated. The LAD has been noted in the literature to be a duplicate in 0.13% to 1% of the general population. It is noteworthy that sometimes one of the duplicated LAD arteries may arise from the RCA and take a pre-pulmonic, septal or inter-arterial course. Dual LAD is associated with congenital heart disease, most commonly Tetralogy of Fallot and transposition of the great vessels. One case report by Belostotsky et al. depicts a dual LAD from the LMCA and the other from the right aortic sinus of Valsalva.

Angiographic classification of dual LADs was a proposal by Spinaldo-Franco et al. According to Spinaldo-Franco et al. there are four types of dual LADs. Type I dual LAD has a short and long arm, both of which travels in the anterior interventricular sulcus (AIVS). The shorter LAD usually branches into all the major proximal septal perforators. The longer LAD travels on the left-ventricular side of the AIVS and then reenters the distal AIVS to reach the apex. Type II dual LAD has a similar short LAD as seen in Type I. The long arm, however, travels on the right ventricular side before reentering the AIVS to supply the apex. Type III also has a short arm similar to Type I, but the long arm descends intramyocardially into the septum. Type IV the long arm arises from the RCA.

**Anomalies Termination**

Coronary fistulas occur about 0.3% to 0.87% in patients who undergo cardiac catheterization. In 60% of cases, these fistulae drain into the right heart chambers.

# Muscles

The heart muscle, particularly the anterolateral wall, can be affected in the presence of LAD anomalies. Depending on the specific anomaly, the heart muscle may be thin or thick.

# Physiologic Variants

**Normal Origin Variants**

The origin of the LAD is a trifurcation of the LMCA into a LAD, LCx, and ramus intermedius instead of the regular bifurcation consisting of the LCx and LAD.

**Normal Course Variants**

Usually, the coronary arteries travel through the epicardial fat, but in rare cases, a coronary artery may travel into the heart muscle; this is called a myocardial bridge. The mid LAD is the most commonly involved coronary artery. The myocardial bridge usually involves the proximal segment, however other segments can be affected. The length of the myocardial bridging is variable, but it typically ranges from 10 mm to 50 mm. Most patients with myocardial bridging are asymptomatic, and no abnormalities are observable during functional stress testing. However, occasionally when the muscle contracts, the blood vessels that travel underneath become occluded, and symptoms of the acute coronary syndrome can present.

**Normal Termination Variants**

A "wraparound LAD" is a term coined to describe a normal variant course of the LAD when it wraps around the cardiac apex and supplies a part of the inferior apical wall.

# Clinical Significance

Coronary artery anomalies seldom present in clinical practice; however, when present, they can be associated with a very high risk for mortality and morbidity. In a study by Eckart et al. on 126 patients, 61% of sudden cardiac deaths were due to coronary artery anomalies.