As with all imaging, interpretation of a barium esophagram requires a knowledge of anatomy and function.

The esophagus is a roughly 20 to 25 cm portion of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract that lies between the oral cavity and stomach. Its role is to transport both solid and liquid oral intake distally to the rest of the GI tract in a coordinated fashion.

The origin of the esophagus is at the level of the cricoid cartilage. This is where the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle abuts the cricopharyngeus muscle. This area is known as the upper esophageal sphincter (UES). At the distal end, the esophagus terminates at the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), which is an area of muscular thickening that occurs where the esophagus passes through its diaphragmatic hiatus. When normal anatomy of the LES is disrupted, such as with a hiatal hernia, the sphincter is mechanically defective and can lead to common pathologies such as gastroesophageal reflux.

The UES serves to prevent air from entering the GI tract and prevent reflux of distal GI tract contents into the pharynx. It is located around 15 cm from the incisors. It is composed mainly of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor musculature, specifically the cricopharyngeal portion (also sometimes referenced as the cricopharyngeus muscle). This is notable as it is the most common site of iatrogenic perforation during endoscopy.

The LES, similar to the UES, plays a critical role in preventing reflux of gastric contents. It is closed at rest but does undergo periodic relaxations from unclear causes and for unclear reasons. As stated earlier, the incompetence of the LES is related to common pathologies such as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and Barrett metaplasia.

In between the esophageal sphincters is the esophageal body. This serves to propel food to the stomach via peristalsis. Although it is functionally a smooth tube, three anatomic landmarks are clinically important and commonly described in the literature as they cause esophageal narrowing. The first is at the UES at the level of the cricoid cartilage. In the mid-portion, the aortic arch and left mainstem bronchus provide some extrinsic compression. The final narrowing is at the LES, which should denote the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm.

The histologic structure of the esophagus follows the same general schema seen in other muscular GI tract organs. Its wall is composed of several layers including a squamous epithelial mucosa, a muscular layer, and adventitia as its outermost layer. Note that most intraperitoneal portions of the GI tract have serosa as their outermost layer.

Vascular supply of the esophagus is from the inferior thyroid artery in the cervical portion, by the left gastric and inferior phrenic arteries in the abdomen, and via branches from the bronchial arteries and off the aorta otherwise. Venous drainage is via branches to the azygos and hemiazygos veins except distally, where branches drain to the coronary vein. The coronary vein drains into the portal circulation, which is important as these can become varices in the setting of cirrhosis.

Innervation is via the vagus nerve and adjacent sympathetic trunk.