During fetal development, a mesodermal structure called the notochord - the future nucleus pulposus of the vertebral disc - induces the overlying ectoderm (known as neuroectoderm) to thicken and form the neural plate. The primitive neuroectodermal tissue ultimately matures into various components of the nervous system while the surrounding neural plate lengthens and broadens. In the middle of the neural plate, a neural groove forms and is flanked by bands of nervous tissue known as neural folds. By the end of the third week of gestation, these neural folds fuse to form the neural tube, which will further develop into the central nervous system (CNS). Lateral to the neural tube lie regions of the neural crest that produce neural crest cells that migrate to produce the afferent nerves of the peripheral nervous system, including somatic afferents, autonomic ganglia, and postganglionic nerves. As the cells migrate, they pass through the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) on the way to the dorsal portion of the primordial spinal cord known as the alar plate. The cell bodies of the afferent nerves remain in the DRG while their axons continue to travel until they ultimately terminate within the dorsal horn. The ventrally-situated basal plate of the neural tube differentiates into efferent nerves, including the somatic, preganglionic, and autonomic nerves. This migration and differentiation of nervous system primordia provide an opportunity for the crossing of visceral and somatic signaling pathways.

Autonomic motor efferents arise within the ventral ventricular zone, an anteriorly situated region near the central canal of the developing spinal cord. These neurons migrate toward the ventral horn, where they coalesce with somatic motor efferents to form a single primordial motor column. Eventually, autonomic efferents separate from somatic efferents and migrate dorsally into the intermediate spinal cord, the portion of the gray matter that lies between the dorsal and ventral horns. Once in the intermediate spinal cord, the autonomic efferents increase their polarity and change their orientation, establishing their permanent placement within one of the three columns of grey matter in the spinal cord known as the interomediolateral columns (IML).

The IML is found within the gray matter of the spinal cord between vertebral levels T1 to L2 and has projections to the CNS. Collectively, it houses the cell bodies of preganglionic sympathetic general visceral efferents and is responsible for sympathetic output to visceral structures. It is an important autonomic nervous system structure that maintains resting sympathetic tone. The clinical utility of viscerosomatic reflexes as a diagnostic aid has its basis in the relatively unique innervation of visceral structures.