Since its discovery in 1882, tuberculosis (TB) has long been established as a potentially lethal infectious disease with severe complications to its host. While its eradication in developed countries proves to be substantial, TB is still a primary concern of significant morbidity and mortality in many parts of the world.

Caused by bacteria known as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, this bacterium works by damaging the lungs and, hence, affecting the breathing capacities of an individual. Most individuals who acquire infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacteria species responsible for TB, will eliminate or contain the infection causing it to remain latent. Transmission occurs through respiratory droplets of affected individuals suffering from active disease.  Issues arise when reactivation of the latent disease occurs, causing significant symptoms to the patient and allowing the potential to spread.

There are two testing methods currently used for the identification of latent tuberculosis infection: the tuberculin skin test (TST) and interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA). IGRAs diagnose tuberculosis infection by either calculating the concentration of interferon-γ generated ex vivo by the sufferer's immune cells or by counting the total number of interferon-γ secreting lymphocytes. The tuberculin skin test (TST) is performed by injecting a small amount of fluid called tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) into the forearm. A qualified health care professional then measures the induration within 48 to 72 hours of injection and takes into account the patient's background history for indications of a positive or negative test result.

It should be noted that these testing methods are specific for latent tuberculosis infection, as they should not be used for testing active disease. The diagnosis of active TB is primarily based on clinical suspicion with confirmatory testing through sputum culture analysis.