Firstly, facial reconstruction after MMS should not commence until margin status is confirmed.

**Forehead**

- Care is necessary when reconstructing defects of the forehead to avoid distortion of the natural hairline and brow. Small defects can often be closed primarily in a linear horizontal (or sometimes vertical) fashion along a relaxed skin tension line (RSTL). When primary closure is not possible, a variety of local flaps (e.g., O-T flap or bilateral unipedicled advancement flap) can help preserve form and function, particularly along the eyebrow. A rhomboid or bilobed flap can assist with lateral closure of tissue that is less mobile, and skin graft can also be an option in the area of temple concavity. Other options, though less common, include the use of tissue expanders, temporoparietal flap, and microsurgical free tissue transfer for the repair of larger defects.

**Nose**

- The nose is one of the main central features of the face. Respecting the natural ridges and shadows formed by the aesthetic subunits will help in reconstructive planning. If resection of 50% of a convex subunit occurs, it may be beneficial to remove the remaining subunit to situate scars along natural boundaries. Primary closures of small defects can be done at the midline (vertical or horizontal technique) or along the dorsum-sidewall junction. Local flaps may represent the best option for repairing small defects of the dorsum and sidewall, and typically include techniques such as transposition flaps and bilobed flaps, though several options exist. Dorsum defects requiring greater tissue coverage can benefit from a dorsal nasal flap or the interpolated paramedian forehead flap (PMFF). Although the PMFF involves a two (or three-stage procedure), the PMFF is a robust flap that is useful for larger defects of the nose, including defects involving multiple subunits. When more structural support is required, a PMFF or interpolated melolabial flap can also be employed. When these options do not align with patient goals or current health status, skin grafts, or simple granulation can be a consideration while still providing acceptable results. Lastly, there may be cases where additional structural support and/or the internal nasal lining requires reconstruction. In these cases, the surgeon may consider a variety of reconstruction techniques, including autologous cartilage grafting and a variety of nasoseptal flaps, to name a few. In summary, multiple techniques exist for repairing nasal defects after MMS and include primary closure, skin grafts, local flaps, interpolated flaps, autologous cartilage grafts, and nasoseptal flaps, each of which has its specific advantages and disadvantages. The reader is directed to further study to become more familiar with reconstructing this challenging area of the face.

**Cheek**

- The area of most concern in cheek reconstruction is the involvement of the lower eyelid, where inferior retraction should be avoided to prevent lower lid malposition (e.g., ectropion). For this reason, lateral periorbital anchoring sutures can provide support and are useful in conjunction with other suspension techniques such as lateral canthoplasty. Attention must also be given to the lateral lip to prevent sizeable asymmetry. Reconstruction options vary and include primary closure for small to moderate-sized defects of the mid-cheek in patients with excessive skin laxity. Utilization of local flaps (e.g., Romberg flap) oriented within RSTLs can be employed if primary closure is not feasible. For repair of medial cheek defects, advancement flaps (e.g., V-Y flaps) can be designed to hide scars withing the nasolabial fold. For defects adjacent to the medial canthus, full-thickness skin grafts minimize retraction and provide satisfactory tissue match. Finally, for large lesions not amenable to the techniques mentioned above (>3 cm), cervicofacial rotation flaps are helpful. If possible, the incision should be planned at the junction of the cheek/eyelid to minimize lower lid traction. If lower lid resection is required, a cervicofacial rotation flap can still be utilized; however, a full-thickness skin graft should merit consideration for recreating the lid. For anteriorly based cervicofacial flaps, the lateral incision can extend to the hairline, along the preauricular area, and then down the neck (or chest even) where a back-cut is needed to facilitate tissue advancement. The level of dissection can lie either within the deep plane (sub-SMAS/sub-platysmal) or in a subcutaneous plane with attention to facial nerve landmarks. Some authors prefer the deep plane technique for patients at risk for poor healing and/or skin necrosis (e.g., smokers, malnourished, diabetes, vasculopathy, etc.).

**Perioral region**

- The perioral region is at risk of soft tissue contracture due to a lack of underlying fascial or bony support; this limits the use of more basic reconstruction options like skin grafts in this area. For small defects, linear closures can be considered along relaxed skin tension lines, taking care not to disturb the vermilion border. Similar to reconstructing the cheek, the use of V-Y flaps along the nasolabial fold help to camouflage the resulting scar. Similar flaps are also beneficial for repairing defects abutting the chin and labiomental crease. If approaching the vermilion border, the O-T flap can prevent unsightly distortion of the lip. If a  small portion of the lip mucosa is involved in the defect, a vermillion mucosal advancement flap can help recreate a natural vermillion border. For full-thickness defects of the lip, the reconstruction options tend to be based on size and/or oral commissure involvement. In general, defects less than one-third of the lip are closable with a primary wedge closure. Defects less than one-half of the lip can be closed with an Abbe lip-switch flap or bilateral advancement flap if sparing the oral commissure. If the oral commissure is involved, an Estlander lip-switch flap is better suited. Defects greater than two-thirds of the lip can be closed by a variety of local flaps, including the Karapandzic flap or Bernard-Burrow-Webster flap. If the defect involves more than two-thirds of the lip, the surgeon should consider microsurgical free tissue transfer flaps. Whatever the defect and reconstruction option employed, the surgeon must reconstruct all of the layers involved (e.g., cutaneous lip, muscle, mucosa, vermillion) as well as to carefully realign the vermillion border.