**Lung Cancer Staging**

After a lung cancer diagnosis, the most crucial step is to stage the disease because the state dictates treatment options, morbidity, and survival. It is of paramount importance that this is done with utmost vigilance. Staging is primarily done for NSCLC using the TNM classification. SCLC also can be staged in the same way, but a much more straightforward approach is used for limited disease and extensive disease.

**Tumor, node, metastasis staging of non-small cell lung cancer**

Tumor (T), node (N), and metastasis (M) is internationally accepted way of staging NSCLC. It is comprehensive in defining tumor size and extent, location, and distant spread, which helps clinicians draw meaningful conclusions regarding the best treatment, avoid unnecessary surgeries and provide a timely referral to palliative care if the cure is not an option. The most recent TNM classification is the eighth edition, and it is effective in the United States from January 1, 2018. Outside the United States, it was accepted on January 1, 2017, by the Union of International Cancer Control (UICC).

For the eighth edition, Ithe International Association of the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) studied and analyzed data from 16 countries, including approximately 95,000 patients from 1999 to 2010.

Tumor

A primary tumor is divided into five categories, and each category is then further subdivided depending on the size, location, and invasion of surrounding structures by the tumor.

T0

- No primary tumor

- T Carcinoma in situ

T1 (less than 3 cm)

- T1mi: minimally invasive tumor

- T1a: superficial tumor confined to central airways (tracheal or bronchial wall)

- T1a: Less than 1 cm

- T1b: Greater than 1 cm but less than 2cm

- T1C: Greater than 2 cm but less than 3cm

T2

- T2: Greater than 3 cm but less than 5 cm

- T2a: Greater than 3 cm but less than 4cm

- T2b: Greater than 4 cm but less than 5cm

- Also considered a T2 tumor if involving main bronchus but not carina, visceral pleura or causes atelectasis to the hilum.

T3

- T3: Greater than 5 cm but less than 7 cm)

- T3 Inv: invasion of the chest wall, pericardium, or phrenic nerve

- T3 Satell: separate tumor nodules in the same lobe

- Also considered T3 tumor if involving the pericardium, phrenic nerve, chest wall, or separate tumor nodules in the same lobe

T4

- T4: Greater than 7 cm)

- T4inv: Invading the above structures

- T4Ipsi nod: Nodules in an ipsilateral lobe

It is also considered T4 tumor if it involves the heart, esophagus, trachea, carina, mediastinum, great vessels, recurrent laryngeal nerve, spine or tumor nodules in the different ipsilateral lobe. Invasion of the diaphragm is now considered a T4 tumor compared to a T3 tumor in the seventh edition of TNM classification.

**Thoracic Lymph Nodes**

Lung cancer staging also depends upon the extension of cancer to the lymph nodes corresponding to the primary tumor as well as the opposite hemithorax. It is imperative to rule out lymph node metastasis before attempting curative surgery. Lung resection in itself carries high morbidity and mortality. Therefore, it should not be attempted if a cure is not possible.

Historically, thoracic lymph nodes were first classified in the 1960s by Naruke. This map was accepted by North America, Europe, and Japan. Later, in the 1980s and early 90s, further refinements were made to improve imaging and invasive testing improvements. Hence, two lymph node maps gained popularity in North America.

- American thoracic society (ATS-Map)

- American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). This was an adaptation of the Naruke map.

In 1996, the differences in the above two were resolved in the Mountain-Dressler modification, MD-ATS Map. It was accepted in North America but only sporadically in Europe.

The International Association of Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) attempted to resolve the differences between the MD-ATS and the Naruke maps. The IASLC lymph node map is now the most widely accepted lymph node classification system utilized worldwide.

Thoracic lymph nodes can be divided into mediastinal or N2 and hilar or N1 lymph nodes. N2 nodes are more important because they differentiate in cancer stages and, therefore, treatment options.

Much care has been taken in defining the N2 nodes in all the lymph node maps. We will attempt to explain the classification under the broad headings of the mediastinal and hilar groups and then further explain the individual mediastinal stations per the IASLC map.

**Mediastinal Lymph Nodes**

They are subdivided into the following groups or stations:

- Supraclavicular nodes, station 1

- Superior mediastinal nodes, station 2 to 4

- Aortic nodes, station 3

- Inferior mediastinal lymph nodes, station 4

**Supraclavicular Nodes (Station 1)**

It includes lower cervical, supraclavicular and sternal notch nodes. Lymph nodes are further divided into 1R and 1L, corresponding to the right and left sides of the body, respectively. The distinction between 1R and 1L is an imaginary midline of the trachea that serves as the boundary. Below station 1, the left tracheal border is considered the boundary is differentiating between right and left-sided lymph nodes.

**Superior Mediastinal Lymph Nodes (Station 2 to 4)**

These lymph nodes occupy the superior mediastinum, hence, named accordingly. They are further subdivided into the following groups:

Upperparatracheall (station 2R and 2L)

- 2R nodes extend to the left lateral border of the trachea.

This extends from the upper border of the manubrium to the intersection of the caudal margin of the innominate (left brachiocephalic) vein with the trachea.

- 2L nodes extend from the upper border of the manubrium to the superior border of the aortic arch. 2L nodes are located to the left of the left lateral border of the trachea

Pre-vascular (station 3A)

These nodes are not adjacent to the trachea like the nodes in station 2, but they are anterior to the vessels.

Pre-vertebral (station 3P)

Nodes not adjacent to the trachea like the nodes in station 2, but behind the esophagus, which is pre-vertebral

Lower para-tracheal (station 4R and 4L)

- 4R nodes extend from the intersection of the caudal margin of the innominate (left brachiocephalic) vein with the trachea to the lower border of the azygos vein. 4R nodes extend from the right to the left lateral border of the trachea.

- 4L nodes extend from the upper margin of the aortic arch to the upper rim of the left main pulmonary artery

**Aortic Lymph Nodes (5 and 6)**

This group includes:

Sub-aortic nodes (station 5)

These nodes are located lateral to the aorta and pulmonary trunk in the so-called AP window.

Para-aortic node (station 6)

These are ascending aorta or phrenic nodes lying anterior and lateral to the ascending aorta and the aortic arch.

**Inferior Mediastinal Lymph Nodes (Station 7 to 9)**

This group includes sub-carinal and para-esophageal nodes:

Sub-carinal nodes (station 7)

They extend in a triangular fashion from the division of carina superiorly to the lower border of the bronchus intermedius on the right and the upper border of the lower lobe bronchus on the left.

Para-esophageal nodes (station 8)

These nodes are situated adjacent to the right and left sides of the esophageal wall. Both stations 7 and 8 are located below the carina.

Pulmonary Ligament (station 9) They are located within the pulmonary ligaments extending from the inferior pulmonary vein up to the diaphragm.

**Hilar Lymph Nodes (Station 10 to 14)**

These are all N1 nodes. These include nodes adjacent to the main stem bronchus and hilar vessels. On the right, they extend from the lower rim of the azygos vein to the interlobar region. On the left, from the upper rim of the pulmonary artery to the inter-lobar region.

**Lymph Node Classification (N)**

N0: No lymph node involvement

N1: Involvement of ipsilateral hilar nodes

- N1a: single station N1 nodes

- N1b: multiple-station N1 nodes

N2: Involvement of mediastinal nodes

- N2a1: Single station N2 nodes without N1 involvement (skip metastasis)

- N2a2: Single station N2 nodes with N1 involvement

- N2b: Multiple station N2 involvement

N3: Involvement of contralateral mediastinal or hilar lymph nodes

**Metastasis (M)**

- M0: No distant metastasis

- M1a: Malignant pleural / pericardial effusion or nodules

- M1b: Single extra-thoracic metastasis

- M2: Multiple extra-thoracic metastases

**Tumor Node Metastasis Staging of Lung Cancer**

Occult cancer: TX N0 M0

Primary cancer not found; no lymph node or distant metastasis.

Stage 0

- T is N 0 M 0

Stage I

IA1

- T1mi N 0 M 0

- T1a  N 0 M 0

IA2

- T1b N 0 M 0

IA3

- T1c N 0 M 0

IB

- T2a N 0 M 0

Stage II

IIA

- T2b N 0 M 0

IIB

- T1a / T1b / T1c N 1 M 0

- T2a / T2b N 1 M 0

- T3 N 0 M 0

Stage III

IIIA

- T1a / T2b / T2c N 2 M 0

- T2a / T2b N2 M 0

- T3 N 1 M 0

- T4 N 0 / N 1 M0

IIIB

- T1a / T1b / T1c N 3 M 0

- T2a / T2b N 3 M0

- T3 N 2 M 0

- T4 N 2 M 0

IIIC

- T3 N 3 M 0

- T4 N 3 M 0

Stage IV

IVA

- Any T / Any N M1a or M1b

IV B

- Any T / Any N M1c

Staging for all Small Cell Lung Cancer

- SCLC staging can be done using the TNM system, but since SCLC is considered a systemic disease, a more straightforward classification has been used successfully since the 1950s. There is a growing body of evidence that TNM rating may better define SCLC, but there is no consensus on this approach yet.

- SCLC is classified as LS-SCLC and ES-SCLC small cell based on the Veterans Affairs Lung study group (VALSG) classification.

- LS-SCLC is confined to the ipsilateral hemithorax and local lymph nodes, both mediastinal and hilar and supraclavicular nodes can be included in a single tolerable radiotherapy port (corresponding to TNM stages I through IIIB).

- ES-SCLC has tumors beyond the boundaries of limited disease, including distant metastases, malignant pericardial or pleural effusions, and contralateral supraclavicular and contralateral hilar involvement.