All patients with acute thrombosis undergo catheter-directed thrombolysis, after which the endovascular stent is placed. Berger et al. were the first to report the safety and efficacy of vascular stenting in MTS.

Absolute contraindications to catheter-directed pharmacologic thrombolysis include

- Active internal bleeding

- Cerebral infarction

- Neurological and eye procedures

- Head trauma within three months

- Presence of an intracranial tumor, aneurysm, or vascular malformation

Relative contraindications include

- Major trauma, surgery, or obstetrical delivery within 10 days

- Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic greater than 180 mmHg or diastolic greater than 110 mmHg)

- Gastrointestinal bleeding within 3 months

- Pregnancy

- An infected venous thrombus

- Severe renal or liver disease

- Hemorrhagic diabetic retinopathy

- Bleeding diathesis

Open surgical thrombectomy, especially in the setting of MTS, is losing favor. This is shown by the fact that surgical thrombectomy was done for only 4.1% of all patients with MTS related DVT compared to 75% of all patients before 2000.

Anticoagulation forms an important part of the management of patients with MTS who present with iliofemoral DVT. A delay in starting anticoagulation is associated with an increased risk of life-threatening pulmonary embolism (PE). Low molecular weight heparin or fondaparinux is preferred over unfractionated heparin to reduce the risk of bleeding and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Major societies still recommend vitamin-K antagonist (VKA), warfarin for anticoagulation in patients with iliofemoral thrombosis.

Recently, a multicenter randomized trial demonstrated the safety of rivaroxaban in patients with iliofemoral vein thrombosis.p = 0.31).