Rho(D) immune globulin (anti-D immune globulin or RhIG) is a commercial biological antibody derived from human plasma that targets red blood cells (RBCs) positive for the Rh(D) antigen (also referred to as the D antigen). When a blood type is described as positive (A+, B+, AB+, O+), the individual has RBCs that are positive for the D antigen and are thus Rh-positive.

RhIG is known for its use in preventing hemolytic disease of the fetus and neonate, which is the result of transplacental passage of anti-D antibodies due to previous exposure to an incompatible Rh blood type of either a previous pregnancy or received blood products. If the Rh-negative mother forms anti-D antibodies, this is known as Rhesus (Rh) isoimmunization. These maternally-derived anti-D antibodies may cross the placenta and target Rh-positive fetal RBCs for destruction resulting in hemolysis. This hemolytic disease may have devastating effects on the fetus, depending on the severity of the immune response.

Several trademark names for RhIG products exist in the United States. Although Rho(D) immune globulin is a specific brand name, it is the common parlance used to refer to all RhIG products. Careful examination of the product insert is necessary to establish the associated indications and other unique characteristics.

Indications for RhIG vary by manufacturer. An FDA-approved RhIG product exists for each of the following indications:

- Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)

- Rh(D)-positive, non-splenectomized

- Chronic ITP in children and adults
- Acute ITP in children
- Improving platelet counts secondary to HIV infection

- Rh isoimmunization suppression 

- Rh(D)-negative, non-sensitized patient with Rh-incompatible fetus

- Prophylaxis in the following clinical situations: 
- Routine antepartum and postpartum mothers
- Obstetric complications (ectopic pregnancy, threatened abortion, fetal demise in second or third trimesters)
- Spontaneous or induced abortions
- Following invasive obstetric procedures 
- Abdominal trauma involving fetal-maternal hemorrhage 


- Incompatible transfusions of Rh(D)-positive RBCs in Rh(D)-negative individuals

Possible **non-FDA-approved**uses of RhIG:

- Anti-D alloimmunization prophylaxis after platelet transfusion of Rh-positive individuals to Rh-negative patients with acute leukemia due to possible RBC residual in platelet concentrates.