Clinical data alone is often not enough to precisely diagnose and localize focal seizures.

- A comprehensive metabolic profile, complete blood count (CBC), urine analysis, urine toxicology screen is usually checked initially to rule out metabolic causes and infections.

- Electroencephalography (EEG) is an important test for evaluating patients with seizures, although not essential for diagnosis. Some patients may require video EEG or prolonged EEG monitoring.

Interictal EEG: Thirty percent to 40% of the patients may have normal interictal findings on a single routine EEG recording. Temporal intermittent rhythmic delta activity is predictive of temporal lobe epilepsy. Bitemporal sharp wave foci may be noted in 25% to 30% of the patients. Intermittent rhythmic slowing may be the only clue as mesial temporal spikes may not be seen well at the surface. The amplitude of mesial temporal spikes is maximal at the anterior temporal scalp electrodes, and nasopharyngeal and sphenoidal electrodes when used. Sharp wave foci are seen in the mid-temporal and posterior temporal regions less frequently. Extratemporal focus (most commonly frontal lobes) is seen in 10% to 30% of patients with focal seizures with impaired consciousness. The interictal discharge may take the form of a bifrontal spike and wave discharge in some patients with mesial frontal foci.

Ictal EEG: Ictal EEG is abnormal in about 95% of the patients with focal impaired awareness seizures. About two-thirds of the patients with focal seizures with impaired consciousness have an electrodecremental pattern at the onset. A prototype pattern consisting of 5 to 7 Hz rhythmic theta discharge in the temporal regions is seen in about 50% to 70% of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. This pattern has shown high accuracy in localizing the onset to the ipsilateral mesial temporal structures on depth electrode studies. Lateralization from scalp EEG is usually satisfactory however localization within a lobe may sometimes be incorrect. Scalp ictal changes are difficult to appreciate with some frontal lobe seizures because of movement artifacts.

- Neuroimaging is often needed to rule out structural causes.

MRI head is a very sensitive and specific imaging technique for localization-related epilepsy. The use of high-resolution MRI and specific seizure protocols can enhance the detection of abnormalities like hippocampal atrophy. The likelihood of finding an epileptic focus on neuroimaging studies is higher in patients with focal seizures than in generalized seizures. Common MRI findings are mesial temporal sclerosis, congenital anomalies, brain tumors, sequelae of head injury, vascular lesions, neurocysticercosis. Many MRI findings may be nonspecific and should be interpreted in a clinical context.

Sometimes further imaging with PET scan, ictal and interictal SPECT may be utilized to identify the ictal onset zone, especially in patients with refractory seizures.