Endogenous endophthalmitis is an emergency, and prompt diagnosis and meticulous management are required to safeguard vision in these cases. The treatment is governed by the stage of the disease, offending microorganism, mode and route of infection, and systemic status of the patient. A flowchart of how to manage endogenous endophthalmitis is depicted below.

**Management Protocol for Bacterial Endogenous Endophthalmitis**

**Systemic Antibacterials**

Bacterial EE warrants treatment of systemic infection with antibiotics. Once the blood culture results are available, systemic antibiotics can be initiated. Moreover, severe ocular infection warrants the addition of intravitreal injections. Non-resolving cases with rapidly progressive bacteremia will require pars plana vitrectomy.

**Local Therapy**

Once infection EE is suspected, a sample for culture and sensitivity should be obtained, and intravitreal antibiotics should be initiated. Early intravitreal antibiotics should be initiated within 24 hours of presentation as they have been reported to have a better and favorable outcome. Before the etiology is established, broad-spectrum intravitreal antibiotics should be administered. Vancomycin 1mg/0.1 ml and cefazolin 2.25 mg/0.1 ml covers gram-positive bacteria, and 2.25 mg/0.1 ml ceftazidime or 0.4 mg/0.1 ml amikacin are the drug of choice for gram-negative bacteria. Vancomycin is the drug of choice for MRSA. However, there have been recent reports of vancomycin resistance staphylococcus aureus (VRSA) also.  The drugs commonly used for VRSA are daptomycin 200 ug/0.1 ml and quinupristin/dalfopristin 0.4 mg/0.1 ml. Fluoroquinolones are a broad spectrum with gram-positive and negative coverage.

Once the culture results are available, targeted therapy should be started for rapid recovery.  Prompt diagnosis and targeted treatment are essential for a final better outcome. Antibiotics should be used cautiously in pregnant and lactating mothers. Penicillin group of drugs, cephalosporins, and erythromycin can be used safely in these patients. Cartilage abnormalities have been reported secondary to fluoroquinolones; hence they should not be used as the first line in pregnant women.

**Management Protocol for Endogenous Fungal Endophthalmitis**

**Candida Endogenous Endophthalmitis**

The drug of choice for candida EE is intravitreal amphotericin or voriconazole. Amphotericin B (AMB) deoxycholate is given in the dose of 5 to 10 ug/0.1 ml dextrose or sterile saline. The patient should be reassessed after 48 hours, and if needed, the dose can be repeated. AMB has been reported to cause nephrotoxicity, hypotension, and arrhythmia. Hence the patient should be closely monitored for these side effects. Intravitreal voriconazole is administered in a dose of 100-200 ug/0.1 ml sterile saline.

The other alternative recommended by the infectious disease society of America (IDSA) is fluconazole. The recommended dose is 400-800 mg per day. Hamada et al. recommended fluconazole as the first-line therapy because of its better side effect profile than AMB. In severe cases with non-resolving vitritis, pars plana vitrectomy is the treatment of choice. The treatment duration depends on the clinical picture, but a minimum of 6 weeks is recommended.

**Endogenous Endophthalmitis Secondary to Aspergillus, Paecilomyces, and Fusarium**

The drugs implicated are voriconazole, AMB, and fluconazole. Voriconazole has proven high efficacy of approximately 100% in these cases. Pars plana vitrectomy with lensectomy or intraocular lens removal should be performed in non-resolving cases. In bedridden patients, those who are severely immunocompromised or unable to tolerate surgery, systemic antifungal therapy should be initiated.

**Pars Plana Vitrectomy**

Pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) is the treatment of choice for non-resolving vision-threatening bacterial and fungal EE cases. PPV serves both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Pre-surgery or intraoperatively intravitreal drugs can be administered to reduce the microorganism load. Vitrectomy helps to reduce the microorganism load in the posterior segment and assists in rapid recovery. Vitrectomy is based on the vitreoretinal surgeon's discretion.

Early vitrectomy has been reported to cause a reduced incidence of retinal detachment and has a better globe salvage rate. The incidence of enucleation and evisceration is also reduced. Sato et al. suggested early vitrectomy in Candida EE cases. Zhang et al. found better visual outcomes in patients who were subjected to early vitrectomy. Yoon et al. suggested early PPV in Klebsiella endophthalmitis, which may result in better visual effects.

**Corticosteroids**

The role of intravitreal and systemic steroid use in EE is controversial, and there are no set guidelines for the same. Bacterial endotoxins and profound inflammation is known to cause retinal pigment epithelial damage and necrosis. Steroids combat inflammation, alleviate leucocyte migration, reduce cytokine storm and stabilize the blood-retinal barrier. Jackson et al. showed that patients with EE treated with steroids resulted in a better visual outcome. In contrast, Shuwan et al. showed no significant benefit with the use of steroids. Lindstedt et al., in their multicentric randomized trial, showed that intravitreal dexamethasone had no added benefit. Hence, in a nutshell, steroids should be used with caution in EE patients.