# Continuing Education Activity

Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common form of focal epilepsy. This activity outlines the etiopathology, clinical presentation, diagnostic approach, and management of MTLE by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the etiology and histopathological findings of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
- Describe the seizure semiology in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
- Describe the characteristic EEG findings in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
- Review the treatment options available for patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.

# Introduction

The temporal lobes are the most common brain region to develop epileptogenicity.

Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is often discussed as a separate entity because it is quite distinct from its lateral counterpart in terms of etiology, semiology, imaging, and electrophysiologic characteristics. Moreover, the mesial temporal lobes tend to be the site of origin of close to 80% of all TLEs.

# Etiology

Most cases of MTLE are sporadic in occurrence, although familial forms are not uncommon.

Hippocampal sclerosis (HS) is the most common histopathological abnormality found in patients with drug-resistant TLE. In a European series of 9523 patients with epilepsy undergoing surgery, HS was identified in 36.4%,  long-term epilepsy-associated tumors (LEAT) in 23.6%, and focal cortical dysplasias (FCD) in 19.8%.

# Epidemiology

There does not seem to be a specific age or sexual predominance to MTLE. Patients usually have normal perinatal history and have normal development. They generally have a normal neurological examination and are cognitively intact. A childhood history of febrile seizures is an important harbinger for the development of MTLE.

# Histopathology

Hippocampal sclerosis is histopathologically seen as segmental pyramidal cell loss in CA1, CA3, and CA4 regions, whereas CA2 pyramidal and dentate gyrus granule cells are most seizure resistant.

Several classification systems have been proposed for HS. The most widely used is the ILAE classification system, which divides HS into three types based on a semi-quantitative survey of segmental cell loss within hippocampal subfields. International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) type 1 has both CA1 and CA4 loss; ILAE Type 2 has predominant CA1 loss, and ILAE Type 3 has predominant CA4 loss.

Malformations of cortical development represent a wide range of cortical lesions resulting from the derangement of normal developmental processes involving cells implicated in the formation of the cortical mantle.

Gangliogliomas and dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET) is the most frequent long-term epilepsy-associated tumors (LEAT) comprising 65% of brain tumors encountered in patients undergoing epilepsy surgery.

# History and Physical

**Seizure Semiology**

The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) has recently brought out an updated multilevel classification system for epilepsies to highlight the etiologic basis of the patient’s condition.

When there is preserved awareness, the patient can describe the occurrence of unusual sensations known as auras. Auras could be visceral, autonomic, gustatory, or affective symptoms. Patients commonly experience a rising epigastric sensation, nausea, and olfactory and/or gustatory hallucination. Psychic sensations can occur, such as depersonalization (out-of-body feeling), déjà vu (a feeling of familiarity), jamais vu (feeling of unfamiliarity), déjà entendu (hearing familiar sounds), or panoramic visions (a rapid recollection of episodes from the past). Dysphoric or euphoric feelings, fear, terror, anger, and other sensations can also occur. Often, the patients find the aura hard to describe. Autonomic features include piloerection, pallor/flushing, tachycardia, or pupillary dilatation.

# Evaluation

Although the advent of antiepileptic medications has improved the quality of life of patients with epilepsy by reducing seizure frequency, many of the patients with MTLE have a greater tendency to become pharmacoresistant over time. Studies have shown that less than 25% of patients with MTLE remained seizure-free for greater than one year.

The basis of presurgical evaluation for epilepsy is to identify the epileptogenic zone, which is defined as the minimum amount of cortex that needs to be inactivated/resected/disconnected to render the patient seizure-free.

High-resolution 3T/7T MRI of the brain with thin cuts obtained through the temporal lobes is a powerful tool to assess subtle structural abnormalities involving the mesial temporal structures. Additional information regarding hippocampal pathology is obtainable with the use of multiple MR modalities such as volumetry, spectroscopy, and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI).

The goal of presurgical evaluation for epilepsy surgery is to lateralize and localize the seizure focus accurately; this includes phase I and phase II evaluation:

Phase I evaluation includes the use of non-invasive modalities to determine where the seizure starts; this includes techniques such as video-EEG, MEG, MRI, interictal PET, ictal SPECT/ SISCOM, and neuropsychological assessment. Patients with temporal lobe epilepsy involving the dominant temporal lobe also need functional MRI and/or intracarotid amobarbital/methohexital (Wada) test for language and memory lateralization.

Phase II evaluation includes the use of surgically placed electrodes directly over the brain parenchyma to determine where exactly the seizure is originating. This phase involves the use of invasive techniques such as placement of subdural grids/strips and/or depth electrode placement for electrocorticography (ECoG) and stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG).

**Scalp Electroencephalogram******

The EEG background in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy is usually normal. There may be periods of intermittent slowing noted in the anterior temporal EEG derivations that become prominent during sleep and hyperventilation and are suggestive of focal cerebral dysfunction. Sometimes the focal slowing can be more robust and manifests as temporal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (TIRDA).

In addition to slowing, the classic interictal EEG abnormality in MTLE are spikes or sharp waves which phase reverse over the anterior temporal regions. The dipole orientation of these sharp waves seems to have maximum electronegativity and voltage in the basal temporal derivations (T8/T9; FT8/FT9), and electropositivity distributed widely in the contralateral centro-parietal derivations (C3/C4; P3/P4).

Ictal EEG findings in patients with MTLE are unique when compared to neocortical epilepsy because of its gradual, rhythmic build-up and delayed spread to neighboring brain regions. The seizures that arise from the hippocampus usually spread to the basal temporal regions. Therefore, the use of sphenoidal electrodes can be very useful in picking up the ictal onset in many of the cases with this seizure type. The characteristic pattern seen at the onset of an MTL seizure is a rhythmic theta activity starting in the anterior/anterior-inferior temporal or sphenoidal electrode contacts with gradual spread to the lateral temporal, insular, and frontal regions.

In contrast, an ictal onset with unilateral delta slowing and repetitive interictal spiking is less likely to be arising from the mesial temporal region.

**Invasive Electroencephalogram**

The use of invasive intracranial recordings using subdural grids or intracerebral depth electrodes has improved our diagnostic precision in the identification of the seizure focus. Although MTLE primarily involves the temporal lobes, the abnormal network is known to have widespread extra-temporal connectivity. It is essential to rule out other potential nodes in the network that can be independently epileptogenic. Stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG) is an important tool that registers electrical activity from very confined deep-seated brain regions that usually escape detection by usual surface recording modalities.

Unlike in scalp recording, the ictal activity recorded from intracranial electrodes detects a largely focal or regional fast beta or gamma rhythm. The focality of the rhythm on depth recording is directly proportional to the degree of hippocampal pathology.

# Treatment / Management

The first-line therapy for MTLE includes the initiation of appropriately chosen antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment. For patients with MTLE, the most effective AEDs are those used to treat focal epilepsies such as carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, and topiramate.

Surgical approaches for MTLE include open resection and other minimally invasive techniques. Standard open resective surgery is considered to be the most effective and safe treatment option for TLE with superiority to prolonged medical therapy in terms of long-term outcomes.

Advances in our understanding of epileptic networks have improved our ability to define the epileptogenic zone in patients with epilepsy better. The aim of disrupting epileptic networks with the smallest possible surgical lesion has led to the development of minimally invasive surgical techniques for epilepsy.

Neurostimulation for the treatment of epilepsy includes vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) responsive neurostimulation (RNS), and deep brain stimulation (DBS).

Apart from seizure management, patients with MTLE may have cognitive problems, psychiatric comorbidities, and psychosocial issues. A comprehensive approach to manage an individual with MTLE must take into account the cognitive and psychiatric comorbidities that often accompany this condition.

# Differential Diagnosis

The seizures in patients with MTLE share semiological characteristics with other types of epilepsies, such as absence seizures, insular seizures, and occipital lobe seizures. Patients with absence seizures also manifest with a blank stare and may have subtle automatisms which can mimic seizures of MTLE.

Further, other medical conditions may mimic temporal lobe seizures such as panic attacks, tardive dyskinesia, excessive daytime sleepiness, periodic limb movement disorder, transient psychotic episodes, and psychogenic non-epileptic seizures (PNES).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Medial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common type of epilepsy that often becomes drug-resistant, requiring the need for referral to a comprehensive epilepsy center. Management of patients with pharmacoresistant MTLE is considered to be appropriate when carried out at a comprehensive level 3/4 epilepsy centers as recommended by the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) Epilepsy Quality Measurement Set.

Epilepsy centers are still underutilized, resulting in suboptimal management of patients with drug-resistant epilepsy, including MTLE. Any patient with epilepsy who have failed a trial of two antiepileptic medication (appropriately chosen for the seizure type/epilepsy syndrome) is considered to have drug-resistant epilepsy and should receive a referral to a comprehensive epilepsy center.

Neuroscience nurses are often involved in the care of these patients, providing monitoring, family and patient education, and facilitating evaluation and communication. Pharmacists counsel patients and families about the importance of compliance and potential side effects, verify dosing/titration and consult with the prescriber regarding agent selection. These examples of interprofessional interaction can lead to improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]