The 'uterus' is the Latin term for the womb and is located between the bladder and the rectum in the female pelvis. The uterus is a relatively superficial organ and can be imaged on a variety of modalities. Most commonly, ultrasound is the modality used for imaging the uterus. However, MRI comes a close second for evaluating uterine pathology. Other rarer modalities include hysterosonogram, hysterosalpingogram, and PET-CT. Each of these modalities is useful in evaluating different aspects.

**Modalities to Evaluate the Uterus**

- Ultrasound

- CT/X-ray

- MRI

- PET-CT

- Hysterosonogram and hysterosalpingogram

These are the topic of a detailed description in the subsequent paragraphs.

**Imaging in Pregnancy**

Pregnancy is a special physiological state and requires separate consideration. Imaging in pregnancy is usually by ultrasound. Clinicians can assess the uterus, gestational product, and the ovaries are assessable on ultrasound. The fetus can be monitored throughout pregnancy with transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound. The placenta, its variants can also be assessed on ultrasound. MRI imaging of the uterus during pregnancy may be necessary on rare occasions; this is usually to evaluate gestational trophoblastic disease or conditions such as endometriosis. The fetus can also undergo evaluation on MRI. Evaluation of gestational trophoblastic disease (GTN) presents a diagnostic dilemma as gadolinium contrast, which is useful in the assessment of GTN, is usually not administered during pregnancy. Gadolinium-based contrast agents can cross the placenta. Though the deleterious effects to the fetus remain unproven, it is considered to be a class C drug and usually avoided in pregnant patients unless necessary. Hence a non-contrast MRI is the norm in pregnant patients. CT and PET-CT for assessing the uterus or gynecological malignancies are associated with ionizing radiation and are contraindicated in pregnant patients. However, depending on the clinical scenario and in special circumstances where a nonionizing modality is unavailable or not useful, CT may be performed, keeping the radiation levels as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). PET-CT, in particular, uses 18-F-fluorodeoxyglucose, a radiopharmaceutical contraindicated in pregnant patients and crosses the placenta.