Early aggressive fluid resuscitation is the foundation of management for acute pancreatitis. The choice of fluid is Lactated Ringer's solution given with an initial bolus of 15 to 20 mL/kg and followed by administering at a rate of 3 mL/kg per hour (approximately 250 to 500 mL per hour) in the first 24 hours if there are no other contraindications for fluid. The fluid resuscitation monitoring is done with a combination of labs, blood urea nitrogen, hematocrit, and urine output every 4 to 6 hours in the first 24 hours of resuscitation to adjust the fluid rate. No response to initial resuscitation indicates a high likelihood of ensuing MODS and is grounds for upgrading the level of care.

Another critical issue in managing acute pancreatitis is nutrition. The commonly employed practice is to keep nothing by mouth until abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea, loss of appetite, and ileus improve. Many studies support early feeding in mild pancreatitis and consider it safe as it does not exacerbate symptoms. A soft, low-residue, low-fat diet is recommended for initial feeding. Later it is advanced to regular consistency as soon as it is tolerated. In severe pancreatitis or where per-oral intake is not tolerable, nasojejunal feeding is considered superior to parenteral nutrition because it helps minimize bacterial translocation by maintaining the intestinal wall barrier.

Prophylactic antibiotics are usually not needed. With the suspicion of an infection, empiric antibiotics are appropriate until culture results are available. Initiation of antibiotics is limited to the presence of infected necrosis.

Pain management is a critical priority in treating acute pancreatitis.

It was considered in the past that Opioids could trigger the spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Still, a recent Cochrane review of five RCTs with a total of 227 patients shows no difference between opioids and other analgesic options regarding the risk of complications or clinically severe adverse events.

Further management is directed at the etiology of pancreatitis. In gallstone pancreatitis, there is a strong recommendation for early cholecystectomy. Early ERCP is beneficial in cases of concurrent cholangitis and blatant biliary obstruction within 24 hours of presentation. In mild or spontaneously resolving biliary pancreatitis cases, ERCP is reserved for a distal biliary filling defect on intraoperative cholangiogram during cholecystectomy. In hypertriglyceridemia, specific treatment aims to reduce triglyceride levels to less than 500 mg/dL. This goal is achieved by apheresis and insulin drip with or without glucose.

Local complications of acute pancreatitis include early (less than four weeks, peripancreatic fluid collection, and pancreatic/peripancreatic necrosis) and late (more than four weeks, pancreatic pseudocyst, and walled-off necrosis). Usually, acute peripancreatic fluid collection resolves spontaneously in most cases, and only less than 10% results in pancreatic pseudocyst. Most pseudocysts decide with observation alone with periodic follow-up using CT or MRI. Drainage of these pseudocysts is only recommended in case of infection and rapid enlargement. The drainage modalities include endoscopic (transmural or transpupillary) or percutaneous, the endoscopic approach being the preferred modality.

Necrotic collection management remains challenging. The sterile collection is intervened if it causes symptoms such as persistent abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea, gastric outlet or bowel obstruction, and disrupted pancreatic duct. One-third of this necrosis becomes infected. Infection results in clinical deterioration, lengthen recovery, and high mortality. Antibiotics are initiated on the earliest suspicion, and the preferred antibiotic regimen includes a carbapenem alone or a combination of quinolone, cefepime, or ceftazidime with metronidazole. Gas bubbles diagnose infected necrosis on imaging and CT-guided percutaneous aspiration culture. A surgical necrosectomy is performed in patients who continue to deteriorate clinically despite antibiotics. In stable patients, antibiotics are continued for 4 to 6 weeks, and a necrosectomy is performed after the wall matures. The initial approach includes less invasive modalities, which include endoscopic and percutaneous drainage, and surgical debridement is reserved in unsuccessful cases.