# Continuing Education Activity

Lentigo maligna (LM) is a slow-growing subtype of melanoma that often occurs on chronically sun-damaged skin, particularly the head and neck, in the elderly. Due to its clinical and histopathologic mimicry of benign lesions, it is often misdiagnosed for years or even decades, which can lead to increased morbidity and mortality. This activity summarizes the key findings of LM and discusses the unique diagnostic and treatment challenges of this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Describe a clear definition of lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma.
- Review the clinical presentation of LM/LMM, along with tools to aid in diagnosis including dermoscopy and reflectance confocal microscopy.
- Outline various treatment options including wide local excision and Mohs micrographic surgery.
- Explain how an interprofessional team can provide the best care for a patient with lentigo maligna.

# Introduction

Lentigo maligna (LM) is a subtype of melanoma and commonly presents as an irregular brown macule on chronically sun-damaged skin, particularly the head and neck, in the elderly.

# Etiology

The major risk factor for developing LM/LMM is ultraviolet radiation (UVR), particularly cumulative lifetime UVR exposure.

Aside from UVR, x-ray irradiation, estrogen/progesterone, and nonpermanent hair dyes have been suggested risk factors.

# Epidemiology

LM/LMM is the third most common subtype of melanoma (behind SSM and NM), comprising 4 to 15% of all melanomas and 10 to 26% of melanomas on the head and neck.

The incidence of LM/LMM has been rising over the past few decades, with data from Olmstead County, Minnesota showing an increase from 2.2 cases/100,000 person-years between 1970 to 1989 to 13.7 cases/100,000 person-years between 2004 to 2007.

# Pathophysiology

Melanoma has one of the highest mutational loads of all malignancies

# Histopathology

LM is characterized by a proliferation of atypical melanocytes along the dermal-epidermal junction (DEJ). Early LM may be difficult to distinguish from benign changes of chronic solar damage, which also induces melanocytic hyperplasia.

Lymphocytes are usually seen in the superficial dermis, although prominent lymphocytic inflammation may be a sign of tumor invasion and should therefore prompt closer examination. As LM becomes more invasive (i.e., progresses to LMM), junctional nests become larger and more spindled. Invasion is typically superficial, consisting of isolated or small aggregates of spindled cells in the papillary dermis. Desmoplasia and perineural invasion may occur, and the desmoplastic component may be mistaken for a scar. Rarely, a storiform growth pattern may be present, which may be mistaken for dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP).

# History and Physical

LM often presents as an irregular brown macule or patch on chronically sun-damaged skin in the elderly. Lesions are light-brown to black, may display color variegation, may appear asymmetric, and tend to have an ill-defined border. As lesions enlarge, they may develop skip areas with a patchy, non-contiguous pattern. Lesions are usually asymptomatic, although advanced tumors may produce pain, burning, itching, or bleeding. The majority of cases (86%) occur on the head/neck, with a predilection for the cheek.

Due to its in situ nature, LM is typically smooth and non-palpable. If the lesion becomes invasive (LMM), then a papular or dermal component may be felt. LM exhibits slow radial growth and might be misdiagnosed for years or even decades as solar lentigo or other benign lesions (see Differential Diagnosis section).

# Evaluation

The clinical findings on the naked eye exam have been detailed above (see History and Physical section). Clinical diagnosis can be challenging due to overlapping features with benign lesions such as solar lentigo, pigmented actinic keratosis, and others. For this reason, optical imaging tools such as dermoscopy and more newly reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) have been developed to aid in diagnosis.

Dermoscopic findings for LM/LMM reveal a stepwise progression of features based on the degree of infiltration of the follicular ostia. Early lesions exhibit peppering of pigmentation around follicular ostia, known as annular-granular structures or blue-grey dots. As the lesion grows, the dots will coalesce to form short polygonal lines around and between adnexal openings. Further progression of the tumor leads to merging and darkening of the polygonal lines into polyhedral shapes known as rhomboidal structures. Eventually, the tumor obliterates the entire follicular ostia and becomes a homogeneous dark brown to black blotch.

RCM findings specific for LM/LMM are divided into major and minor criteria.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Numerous studies have shown the traditional 0.5 cm surgical margins for MIS to be inadequate for LM, with approximately half of tumors requiring larger margins for clearance and recurrence rates between 8 to 20%.

For patients who wish to avoid surgery or would otherwise be poor surgical candidates, topical imiquimod 5% cream may be a viable alternative, although the data on efficacy is mixed. Clinical and histologic clearance rates for imiquimod range between 46 to 78% and 37 to 76%, respectively.

# Differential Diagnosis

The clinical and dermoscopic differential diagnoses include solar lentigo, early/macular seborrheic keratosis, lichen planus-like keratosis (LPLK), and pigmented actinic keratosis. The histopathologic mimickers include benign melanocytic hyperplasia of sun-damaged skin, and for invasive lesions include desmoplastic melanoma and rarely DFSP.

# Staging

Staging for LM/LMM is the same as it is for all melanomas, using the TNM staging criteria based on the latest American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Edition.

- Stage I – Low-risk primary melanomas (T1a, T1b, T2a) without evidence of regional or distant metastases.

- Stage II – Primary melanomas that are at higher risk of recurrence (T2b, T3a, T3b, T4a, T4b), but without evidence of regional or distant metastases.

- Stage III – Involvement of regional lymph nodes or the presence of in-transit or satellite metastases.

- Stage IV – Distant metastases present.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for LM/LMM excellent. In a study of 270 patients with LM/LMM that were completely excised, there were zero disease-related deaths for LM and only one for LMM.

# Complications

Left untreated, lentigo maligna melanoma can eventually metastasize, so early diagnosis and intervention are crucial. Surgery to remove LMM may carry cosmetic complications because it often occurs on exposed areas such as the face; modern surgical techniques can help minimize scarring.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Due to the causative nature of chronic UVR damage in inducing LM/LMM, diligent sun protection is key to prevention. The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) periodically publishes guidelines on the prevention and treatment of skin cancer.

# Pearls and Other Issues

LM/LMM presents diagnostic and treatment challenges due to its clinical mimicry of benign lesions, its occurrence on background sun-damaged skin, thus confounding histopathologic differentiation between true tumor and benign melanocytic activation its occurrence on the head/neck, a cosmetically and functionally sensitive area. Thus maintaining clinical diligence and having a high index of suspicion is key to early diagnosis to ensure optimal treatment outcomes and minimize patient morbidity and mortality. Surgical excision is the treatment of choice, with MMS emerging as a surgical option that may prove superior to WLE.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Providing optimal care for patients with LM/LMM requires an interprofessional approach. While dermatologists detect most melanomas, primary care physicians still play an important role in aiding in earlier detection, as they often serve as gatekeepers in managed care plans and frequently refer patients to dermatology.