An understanding of basic SCN anatomy is critical for the diagnosis and treatment of CN. The SCN receives a contribution from the dorsal rami of the lower thoracic and lumbar nerve roots by their lateral cutaneous branches. Historically, it was thought the L1-L3 nerve roots were supplying the SCN.

Next, the spinal nerve roots pass through the thoracolumbar fascia as they approach the iliac crest. As the SCN crosses the posterior iliac crest, the nerve may pass through an osteofibrous tunnel, which is formed by the thoracolumbar fascia anteriorly and the iliac crest posteriorly. Although there is some controversy regarding the existence of this structure, there are several anatomical studies validating its existence and its potential as a site of entrapment.

Three SCN are described: medial, intermediate, and lateral. In one cadaveric study, Tubbs et al. described the distance of three superior cluneal nerves (medial, intermediate, and lateral) from the posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS). From the midpoint on the PSIS, these mean distances were measured at 5 cm, 6.5 cm, and 7.3 cm, respectively.

The middle cluneal nerves (MCN) are a possible source of the low back, gluteal, and leg pain. However, most of the literature has focused on SCN entrapment. The MCN arises from the dorsal rami of S1-S3 and provides sensory innervation over the gluteal region.

The inferior cluneal nerves (ICN) are included in a group of pelvic nerves that may contribute to chronic pelvic pain syndromes. The ICN course around the inferior margin of the gluteus maximus and innervate the inferolateral gluteal region.