Medical scientists typically use trabecular bone samples from the anterior iliac crest, as this sample can be collected from healthy patients as surgical waste material from procedures like the sinus floor elevation surgery. Creating human osteocyte culture is a tedious process: firstly, researchers collect the sample in sterile phosphate-based saline (PBS) with antimicrobial agents. They wash the biopsy materials three times using phosphate-buffered saline and then allocate the biopsy samples to a petri dish. They use a 23 scalpel to fragment the trabecular bone from the original sample in a PBS-treated petri dish.

Afterward, they use a 10 blade to divide the trabecular bone pieces into 1 to 2 mm square samples. In serum-free DMEM, they make 2 mg ml^−1 collagenase II solution and filter the solution with a 0.2 um filter unit. They place the bone fragments inside a 50 ml centrifuge tube, which is premixed with collagenase II and mix properly. They incubate those fragments using collagenase II for two hours at 37 degrees C inside a rocking water bath to clean any existing adhering cells on top of the bone surfaces. They then wash those samples with DMEM consisting of 10% serum made off fetal Clone I.

A subdivision phase follows: they submerge the bone samples into another petri dish; they then divide them into equal sections weighing about 100 mg. They transfer those portions into wells of a culture plate (12 wells suggested); the samples are treated with cCM. After incubating the samples at 37 degrees C with 5% CO2 overnight, they wash the samples with PBS 4 or 5 times the next day, followed by a repetition of the overnight treatments. The medium is replenished twice a week, and the process continues for seven days. At the preparation period, the scientists continue to add cytokines, hormones, chemicals, etc. into the osteocytic culture; osteocytic signaling factors are also measured in this modified culture medium. The additional analysis derives from the collection of total RNA from the samples using triazole.