The fascial system consists of solid (muscles, bone, cartilage, and adipose tissue) and liquid (blood, lymph) components.

The myofascial system, if disturbed, can be a source of pain and functional limitation by creating vague symptoms that are not always clear and a challenge for the treating physician. The article reviews myofascial pain or myofascial syndrome, highlighting the latest news and current scientific updates. Myofascial pain is characterized by the presence of muscular trigger points (TP), which are hard, palpable nodules located within the taut bands of skeletal muscle. They are tender to palpation and movement, causing local and referred pain. There are two types of trigger points: active and latent. Active trigger points are associated with pain without movement or palpation. There are also latent trigger points, which are painful only to palpation.

Myofascial pain syndrome is a disease with no standard management and surveillance protocol. The previous term to describe a TP was "fibrositis" (inflammation of the connective tissue covering the muscles). Myofascial trigger points are nodules in muscles that are tender to pressure and movement. TPs cause weakness of the muscle, as well as a limitation in the range of motion. Multiple TPs persistent for not less than a year confirms myofascial pain syndrome.

Myofascial pain was first described by Guillaume de Baillou in 1600. In 1816, Balfour further described this pain to be associated with "thickenings" and "nodular tumors."