The CTG expansions of DM affect multiple organ systems in addition to the musculoskeletal system and is associated with several complications.

**Central Nervous System**

- Intellectual disabilities can be seen in all types but are not universal for all types of DM. Most commonly seen in the congenital form of DM.

- Cerebrovascular accidents can occur secondary to DM associated atrial fibrillation.

- Anxiety and depression due to the loss of functional status

- Hypersomnia and sleep apnea are common due to sleep cycle dysfunctions.

- Ventriculomegaly is seen in congenital DM.

**Ophthalmologic**

- Cataracts are almost universal in all patients with DM and are seen early with typical onset in the ’40s. Hyperopia and astigmatism can also occur.

**Cardiac**

- More than 50% of patients experience cardiac abnormalities with DM, and they can occur prior to the onset of neuromuscular symptoms.

- Common cardiac complications include:

- 
              
- Atrial arrhythmias, conduction system slowing, ventricular arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and early-onset heart failure.

**Pulmonary**

- Pneumonia is common due to progressive loss of lung function and reduced lung volumes as a result of progressive neuromuscular-associated respiratory failure.

- Increased risk of anesthesia-related pulmonary complications

**Gastrointestinal**

- Facial diplegia and oropharyngeal dysphagia can result in dysphagia and an increased risk of aspiration.

- There is also an increased incidence of gallstones and cholecystitis due to a hypertonic gallbladder sphincter.

- Transaminitis and liver enzyme elevations are seen for unknown reasons.

- Increased risk of post anesthesia aspiration due to the weakness of pharyngeal musculature.

**Endocrine**

- Insulin insensitivity can be seen

- The loss of the seminiferous tubules results and testicular atrophy results in male infertility.

- In women, there is an increased risk of abortion, miscarriage, pre-term birth rates, and dysmenorrhea.

**Dermatologic**

- Androgenic alopecia with frontal balding and increased risk of basal cell carcinoma and pilomatrixomas.

**Musculoskeletal**

- There is a progressive loss of motor function with increased wheelchair dependency towards the end of life.

- Impairments in activities of daily living (ADLs) due to distal muscle weakness of the hands and ankle dorsiflexors.

- Myalgias are very commonly noted.