Obtaining an accurate history can be somewhat challenging for persons with narcissistic personality disorder, given the variability of the presentation. In the outpatient setting, individuals can be well related and high functioning, while in the inpatient setting, they can be some of the most aggressive and challenging patients. Most of the time, NPD patients come into contact with clinicians during emergencies were more often than not, they are noted to behave aggressively.

The aggression indicates the severity of the personality disorder, i.e., the more aggression detected, the personality disorder is considered more severe. Otto Kernberg cited extensive cases correlating aggression with the severity of personality disorders.

Per the DSM, NPD includes:

A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and with lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood, as indicated by at least five of the following:

- Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements, expects to be recognized as superior without actually completing the achievements)

- Is preoccupied with fantasies of success, power, brilliance, beauty, or perfect love.

- Believes that they are "special" and can only be understood by or should only associate with other special people (or institutions).

- Requires excessive admiration.

- Has a sense of entitlement, such as an unreasonable expectation of favorable treatment or compliance with his or her expectations).

- Is exploitative and takes advantage of others to achieve their own ends.

- Lacks empathy and is unwilling to identify with the needs of others.

- Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of them.

- Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors and attitudes

The diagnosis of NPD as other personality disorders requires evaluation of long-term patterns of functioning. One needs to be cautious not to jump to hasty conclusions because NPD can trigger countertransference. A careful evaluation of the different aspects of a person's life and an understanding of the person's childhood development can assist in the evaluation and diagnosis of NPD.