The optimal range is not yet established with this drug, but some studies site the range is between 50 ng/ml to 300 ng/ml. A dose of 115 ng/ml showed to be an important median in another research study showing efficacy in elderly melancholic patients. Patients below 115 ng/ml tended to not respond to treatment. Researchers reached a similar conclusion in younger patient populations with the same median. Treatment with this drug requires a minimum of 2 to 3 weeks to see the full effect. Desipramine is metabolized in the liver and requires monitoring for possible under-metabolism or over-metabolism with other drugs that metabolize in the liver, such as cimetidine.

Another critical point is to watch for worsening depression or the emergence of suicidal ideas during the initial period of taking this medication in patients under 24. The consensus is that antidepressants will precipitate a manic or mixed episode in a bipolar patient. Extreme precautions should be taken in patients with cardiovascular disease due to conduction defects, tachycardia, stroke, and acute myocardial infarction. Patients with a family history of sudden death, cardiac dysrhythmia, or cardiac conduction distances should have close monitoring. Widening of the QRS complex greater than 100 msec is a common indicator of toxicity. The patient's renal function requires assessment because desipramine excretion is primarily in the urine. Although bone marrow suppression and acute hepatitis are adverse side effects of this drug, there is no need to monitor these situations in the absence of history or symptoms. Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome may occur if you abruptly discontinue desipramine. This syndrome consists of mild flu-like symptoms that can last up to 2 weeks.

Additional symptoms include insomnia, nausea, dizziness, gastrointestinal complaints, imbalance, sensory disturbances, and hyperarousal. These symptoms can emerge hours to days after discontinuing this drug and are immediately relieved by the reestablishment of antidepressant therapy. Suspicion of this syndrome should lead to questions about the patient's medication regime or any scheduling where they skip days of treatment. To stop desipramine should slowly taper over weeks to months to avoid antidepressant discontinuation syndrome.