The first fetal movements which are felt by the mother are called quickening. One function of these movements is to alert the pregnant woman that she has a fetus growing in her uterus. Quickening often occurs between the 16th to the 22nd week of pregnancy. This is called a presumptive sign of pregnancy as the other movements of the woman's body can mimic early fetal movements such as flatus, peristalsis, and abdominal muscle contractions. A multiparous woman will usually first notice these fluttering movements of the fetus at an earlier gestation than a primiparous woman. A multiparous woman might feel movements as early as 16 weeks, whereas a primiparous woman may not feel anything until 20 to 22 weeks. At around 20 weeks of gestation, the trained healthcare provider can feel fetal movement externally through the abdomen. This is considered a positive sign of pregnancy.

Most providers recommend that pregnant women monitor fetal movements, especially by the third trimester. This can be accomplished by simply instructing the woman to have a general awareness of the fetus and determine if the fetus is moving less than normal on any given day or about the same as other days. Alternatively, healthcare providers might recommend a more formal fetal movement count (FMC), sometimes called a kick count. Clinicians often recommend starting this surveillance around 28 weeks gestation and continuing throughout the remainder of the pregnancy. The "count to 10" method includes the instructions for the woman to count fetal movements at the same time each day. If the woman experiences less than ten movements in a 2 to 3-hour period, she is instructed to contact her healthcare provider. One study noted that having women count fetal movements can improve maternal-child bonding during pregnancy as the mother starts to get to know her unborn child.