Non-surgical therapeutic options for treatment of intra-abdominal hypertension involves an overall goal to improve the following: abdominal wall compliance with decreased muscle contraction, evacuation of luminal contents by decompression (NG tube), evacuation of abdominal fluid by drainage, and correction of positive fluid balance through goal-directed volume resuscitation.

The primary treatment for ACS is surgical decompression. However, the early use of non-surgical interventions may prevent the progression of IAH to ACS. Early recognition involves supportive care to include keeping patients comfortable with pain well-controlled.  Decompressive procedures such as NG tube placement for gastric decompression, rectal tube placement for colonic decompression, and percutaneous drainage of abscesses, ascites, or fluid from the abdominal compartment. The neuromuscular blockade has been described to be used as a brief trial in an attempt to relax the abdominal musculature, leading to a significant decrease in abdominal compartment pressures in the ventilated ICU patient. If conservative and medical management does not resolve the IAH and further organ damage is noted, surgical decompression using emergent laparotomy may be considered.

After surgical laparotomy for compartment syndrome, the abdominal fascia may be closed using temporary closure devices such as (vacs, meshes, and zippers). The fascia can be appropriately closed after 5 to 7 days after the compartment pressures and swelling have decreased.

With surgical abdominal decompression, organ dysfunction may also improve rapidly as most organ dysfunction is seen as sequelae from compression. With less tension from the abdomen, the diaphragmatic excursion can increase, leading to improved ventilation and reduction of peak airway pressures. Compression of the IVC and circulatory system is relieved, leading to improved cardiac output and the ability to wean patients off of vasopressor support. Acute kidney injury is reversed with less compression of the renal arteries and ureters.