Streptomycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic originally isolated from the bacteria Streptomyces
griseus. It is the first discovered aminoglycoside antibiotic. Its use is primarily treating aerobic gram-negative bacterial infections, such as brucellosis, tularemia, plague (Y. pestis), tuberculosis (in combination with isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and rifampin), and certain cases of endocarditis when combined with beta-lactam antibiotics. In contrast to other aminoglycoside antibiotics, namely gentamycin and tobramycin, it lacks reliable activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The originally wide spectrum of activity against gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria has diminished largely due to developing antibiotic resistance. The mechanism of resistance appears to be associated with the inhibition of its active transport into the bacterial cell. Commonly resistant bacteria include Enterobacteriaceae and most Streptococci species.

Although streptomycin was historically one of the first and most effective treatments for pulmonary tuberculosis, it is now largely an alternative therapy, second to the current standard of "RIPE" (rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) therapy. That said, it remains a potentially effective treatment and is important to keep in mind in cases where RIPE therapy may not be tolerated or is otherwise unavailable. The use of streptomycin becomes particularly applicable in the emerging discussion of how to treat an infection with drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis in which the standard combination therapy of rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol is not effective. In these cases, streptomycin is considered an acceptable alternative therapy among other choice antibiotics with activity against M. tuberculosis such as rifapentine, rifabutin, linezolid, and certain fluoroquinolone antibiotics such as levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, and moxifloxacin.