**A. Intraoperative Complications**

- Bleeding - The most common sites of bleeding during vaginal hysterectomy are uterine vessels, Utero-ovarian ligament, and vaginal cuff.

- Ureteral injury- The incidence of ureteral injury is about 0.5 percent.

- Bladder injury- The prevalence of bladder injury during vaginal hysterectomy is up to 1.2 percent. It increases with risk factors like prior pelvic surgeries and concomitant bladder surgery.

- Bowel injury- The risk is approximately 0.4 percent.

- Nerve injuries- Most commonly, the femoral nerve, peroneal, and tibial nerves are affected by the retractors or by malposition of the legs on the stirrups.

- Conversion to laparotomy- Instances like unexpected large pelvic masses, adhesions, and hemorrhage unable to identify and control can increase the chances of conversion to abdominal hysterectomy.

- Adverse reactions to anesthetics

**B. Postoperative Complications**

- Ileus

- Bowel obstruction

- Vaginal cuff dehiscence

- Infections like vaginal cuff cellulitis and pelvic abscess

- Fistulas-vesicovaginal, ureterovaginal, and rectovaginal fistulas

- Prolapse of the pelvic structures like a Fallopian tube

Ureteral injuries during a hysterectomy most commonly occur at the following sites:

- Clamping and cutting the infundibulopelvic ligament.

- Separating the uterine vessels.

- Separating the uterosacral-cardinal ligament complex and during the closure of vaginal apex.

N.B. The details of the management of complications of hysterectomy are outside the scope of this article.