An interprofessional approach to hypoglycemia is recommended. Adequate interprofessional measures to minimize hypoglycemic events involve participation and effective communication between the primary care physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, endocrinologists, diabetes educators, pharmacists, specialty-trained diabetes nurses, the patient's family, nutritionists and/or dieticians, and the patient. The cornerstone of this management is the patient.

Patient education should address the importance of relatively detailed documentation regarding blood glucose levels, timing, units of insulin administered, and any pertinent notes such as increased/decreased food intake or exercise level relative to blood glucose measurements. Such documentation allows a primary care physician or an endocrinologist to make appropriate adjustments to diabetic medication therapy for optimizing blood glucose levels. Stability of blood glucose levels can be obtained with consistent dietary and exercise habits in addition to the appropriate timing of insulin therapy to avoid drastic spikes or dips in blood glucose levels. Hospitalized patients with newly diagnosed diabetes can be taught by the nurse diabetic educator how to do the insulin administration and self-injections while in the hospital. The educator should collaborate with the clinician managing the case so that appropriate patient education is achieved before discharge. Discussions with the patient and pharmacist will help decide the best medications to achieve safe glycemic control. Group education classes and local event planning can help patients with diabetes to learn and grow their knowledge among themselves and other members of the household.

Non-adherence to medication or diet is the most common cause of treatment failure. Patients should monitor themselves for signs or symptoms of hypoglycemia and always have sources of glucose (for example, hard candy, fruit juice) immediately available. Developing programs to educate healthcare staff has also been shown to provide better outcomes. Teaming up with local pharmacies or grocery stores can help overcome some of the barriers often encountered by patients with diabetes.

Patients should be advised to have fairly consistent exercise and dietary habits to avoid drastic changes in hour-to-hour blood glucose measurements.

With an interprofessional approach to hypoglycemia, outcomes will be optimized, leading to better patient quality of life. [Level 5]