Few myofascial structures insert on the bony edge of the pelvic inlet, yet it is bypassed by many vascular, nervous, and visceral structures. These structures may be impacted by compressive forces while the fetal head is about to engage inside the pelvis in the last week of gestation.

**Muscle Structures**

On the edge of the pelvis (the pelvic brim), the lower portion of the iliopsoas muscle is inserted posteriorly, straddling the sacroiliac joint before the muscle belly moves forward toward the pubis, sliding parallel to the pelvic brim with its medial border. It is covered by the band that below continues, after passing the arcuate line, on the upper insertion of the obturator internus muscle. The pectineus muscle originates anteriorly with respect to the pubopectineal crest of the pelvic inlet. The psoas minor muscle, inconstant, can insert directly on the pectineal line and its ligament.

**Ligaments and Bands**

The anterior longitudinal ligament, which runs anteriorly along the entire length of the vertebral column, continues with the sacral periosteum at the level of the promontory. A small bundle of the anterior iliolumbar ligaments, which is part of the fibrous capsule of the sacroiliac joint, has a curvilinear inferior course that is inserted anteriorly on the arched line.

The inguinal ligament is the continuation of the abdominal transverse muscle fascia, which originates posteriorly from the lumbar region as a continuation of the thoracolumbar fascia. The iliolumbar ligaments thicken and continue with the thoracolumbar fascia on the anterior side of the lateral aspect of the spine.