The initial treatment of most acute avulsion fractures related to dislocations includes initial reduction attempt and stabilization.

Appropriate treatment modalities are very broad and tailored to each body part. There are many things to consider, which all factor into selecting the most appropriate treatment. Factors that may influence nonoperative treatment versus surgery can be the acuity, size of the avulsed segment, the anatomic site, displacement,  associated injuries, instability, high demand patients or high-level athletes, nerve dysfunction resulting from the fracture, hand dominance (when applicable), individual patient occupation or function, intra-articular fracture extension, degree of comminution, or the age of the patient and involvement or extension into an epiphyseal growth plate. Symptomatic malunions or nonunions may also require surgical correction or fixation.

With or without surgery, early motion may be the goal with some body parts, with or without bracing, while other avulsion injuries require longer periods of immobilization due to stronger distracting forces.

Avulsion fractures may require initial close follow up and even weekly radiographs to evaluate healing, and to monitor for displacement, inadequate reduction or redisplacement.

Similar to many acute musculoskeletal injuries, ice, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), rest, and a period of partial or non-weight bearing is often included in the first phase of nonoperative treatment.

Physical therapy, or a carefully directed rehabilitation program, usually with levels of progression, can be beneficial.

A common nonoperative treatment regimen described for patients involved in sporting activities include the following, or similar phases of physical therapy and rehab. Phase one consists of rest, ice, and protection. Phase two initiates a gradual increase in the excursion of the injured myotendinous unit. Phase three begins when 75% of motion is regained, or complete active range of motion without secondary resistance is achieved. In this phase, a patient may begin a guided, progressive resistance program. This phase ends when the involved muscles have reached 50% of their anticipated strength. Phase four is the integrated use of the injured musculotendinous unit with the use of other muscles of the surrounding area and limb. Full weight-bearing is initiated, leading to beginning simple patterns of activity and motion, such as gentle jogging. It is important to continue stretching and strengthening throughout all phases. Phase four is the most common phase at which reinjury occurs. Phase five is the preparation of the athlete for a full return to competitive status. Sufficient callus strength, muscular strength, and agility must be achieved before attempting a return.

Treatment in many scenarios, including avulsion injuries, may be controversial. In injuries where definitive treatment is less clear, it may be acceptable to undergo an initial trial of nonoperative management and guided therapy with close monitoring, with surgery as an option if the nonoperative trial is unsuccessful.

Common absolute indications for surgery include open fractures, fracture fragments incarcerated in a joint, gross instability,

Fracture blisters and soft tissue trauma may necessitate provisional fixation or delay in definitive surgery to avoid wound complications.

The basic goals of surgery most commonly include open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of large or displaced fragments, and to restore articular congruity and stability.

Despite a provider’s best efforts to avoid surgery, many avulsion fractures require surgical fixation based on the significance, location, and associated conditions or injuries.

The nature of avulsion fractures usually indicates that the ligaments which are attached to bone fragments remain intact; therefore, emphasis toward anatomic reduction and/or fixation is important for the restoration of stability and function.

In treating avulsion fractures, one must recognize that although bony fixation is important, soft tissue reconstruction can be of most importance in some regions such as the shoulder, elbow, knee, and ankle.

Many soft tissue injuries do occur in isolation without avulsion fractures such as ACL tears, but the addition of an avulsion fracture (such as the Segond fracture) in addition to the soft tissue injury may actually indicate more than usual instability and may need to be taken into consideration when fixing the ligamentous or soft tissue injury. Repairing the fracture or performing a reinforcement procedure may be needed to stabilize the joint during reconstruction fully.

With any treatment modality or surgery to address a particular issue regarding joint instability, high failure rates or chronic residual instability may be due to the presence of an undiagnosed, missed, or untreated avulsion fracture.

Intraoperative stress testing may need to be performed to assess the stability or soft tissue integrity after repair or fixation of the bone and soft tissues.

In some avulsion fracture cases, treatment is geared toward prophylaxis to prevent other known associated injuries or impending fractures from happening or worsening. One example includes surgical fixation of isolated greater trochanter avulsion fractures in the elderly due to the high rate of occult intertrochanteric fracture extension found on MRI. Prophylactic fixation prevents further displacement or completion of the occult fracture.