# Continuing Education Activity

Hyperthyroidism is an uncommon condition that complicates approximately 0.1% to 0.4% of pregnancies. The condition is marked by increased levels of circulating thyroid hormones, T4 and T3, as well as a decreased level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), also known as thyrotropin. Though relatively rare, identification and treatment of overt hyperthyroidism are important to mitigate maternal and fetal complications. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
- Describe the appropriate evaluation of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
- Review the management options for hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
- Describe the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.

# Introduction

Hyperthyroidism is an uncommon condition that complicates approximately 0.1% to 0.4% of pregnancies.

# Etiology

Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy requiring treatment is most often caused by Grave disease, which is estimated to account for 85% to 95% of clinically significant cases of hyperthyroidism.

# Epidemiology

The overall prevalence of Grave disease is 0.5%.

# Pathophysiology

Throughout pregnancy, multiple physiologic changes contribute to fluctuating levels of thyroid hormones. Due to increased circulating estrogens, pregnancy brings a 50% increase in thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), which binds circulating T4, causing a decrease in free T4 levels. To compensate, the thyroid grows in size and increases the production of T4 and T3 by 50%.

Conversely, the developing placenta contains deiodinase type 3 (DIO3), which deactivates T4 and T3. Excessive function by this enzyme can lead to hypothyroidism. Typically, this effect is outweighed by increased hCG production in early pregnancy, leading to a net increase in free T4 with a decreased median TSH and reference range.

There is also an increased dietary iodine requirement, from 150 micrograms to 250 micrograms daily, due to increased thyroid hormone synthesis during pregnancy. There is also an appreciable loss of iodine in urine due to the increased glomerular filtration rate in pregnancy.

Grave disease involves TRAbs that bind the TSH receptor and impact the production of thyroid hormones. These antibodies can be stimulatory or inhibitory. In Grave disease, the net effect of TRAbs is stimulatory, causing a pathologic increase in free T4 that usually requires medical management.

Pregnancy results in a period of immunosuppression to avoid rejection of the developing fetus.

# History and Physical

Many signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism mirror normal physiologic processes of pregnancy, including tachycardia and dyspnea.

Identifying a history of Grave disease is important even if surgery or radioiodine ablation was performed, since TRAbs may persist and cause fetal hyperthyroidism.

# Evaluation

When new-onset hyperthyroidism is suspected in pregnancy, laboratory evaluation is similar to the non-gravid patient.

The interpretation of these laboratory studies is different in the pregnant patient, as the normal values vary between trimesters and the non-gravid state due to increasing levels of TBG.

A definitive diagnosis of hyperthyroidism may be difficult due to normally fluctuating levels of thyroid hormone in pregnancy. If the diagnosis is uncertain, it is appropriate to observe the thyroid level trends with further laboratory testing rather than immediately starting antithyroid drug therapy.

# Treatment / Management

Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy is treated with medications that inhibit excessive thyroid hormone synthesis. The antithyroid drugs (ATD) most commonly used in the U.S. are thioamides, propylthiouracil (PTU), and methimazole (MMI). Carbimazole is a prodrug of methimazole that is commonly used outside of North America, with similar efficacy and side effect profile.

Historically, PTU was commonly used for hyperthyroidism in all patients. However, it is associated with hepatoxicity that can lead to liver failure and subsequent need for transplantation. Therefore, methimazole is more commonly used now if tolerated. An exception to this is during early pregnancy due to methimazole and carbimazole's association with a rare embryopathy, which includes aplasia cutis, abdominal wall defects, esophageal atresia, choanal atresia, eye abnormalities, urinary tract abnormalities, and circulatory defects.

When treatment is initiated, dose-adjusted, or transitioned between drugs, thyroid function tests should be obtained to confirm a euthyroid state. Testing can be performed every two to four weeks as indicated to ensure the maintenance of euthyroid status.

Due to the natural immunosuppression during pregnancy, TRAb titers often decrease during the second half of pregnancy.

Side effects of thioamide therapy occur in up to 15% of women.

Potassium iodide (KI) is another medication that can be used to treat mild hyperthyroidism. However, there have been limited studies in pregnancy. Most use in pregnancy has been in Japan, which has shown effectiveness in treating mild hyperthyroidism with minimal adverse effects. Of note, Japan has a higher iodine intake than most of the world, so the effectiveness of KI cannot be extrapolated to other countries. Nevertheless, KI can be considered in women with mild hyperthyroidism who do not tolerate ATDs.

Surgery is optimally performed outside of pregnancy. In women who do not attain adequate control of hyperthyroidism with high doses of ATDs, who have an allergy to ATDs, or are poorly compliant with therapy, surgery can be considered. Surgery is also an option in patients who have a large goiter causing compression issues. Total or subtotal thyroidectomy can be performed in pregnancy, preferably in the second trimester, when the risk of fetal loss and complications is lowest.

If Grave disease has been previously treated outside of pregnancy with thyroidectomy or ablative therapy, there may be TRAbs that persist. These antibodies are IgG proteins and can cross the placenta and cause fetal hyperthyroidism.

Radioiodine ablation (RAI) is a procedure that can be used to destroy active thyroid tissue. However, RAI is absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy due to the ability of radioiodine to cross the placenta and subsequently ablate the fetal thyroid, leading to congenital hypothyroidism.

Beta-blockers such as propranolol can be used in pregnancy for symptomatic control until a euthyroid state is maintained.

**Fetal Surveillance**

In women with Grave disease, the fetal anatomy ultrasound provides an opportunity to screen for evidence of fetal thyroid anatomy and function. This survey should be completed between 18 to 22 weeks of gestation. Findings that may indicate thyroid dysfunction are an enlarged thyroid, intrauterine growth restriction, hydrops, advanced bone maturity, fetal tachycardia, goiter, oligohydramnios, or cardiac failure.

TRAb should be remeasured between 18 to 22 weeks and 30 to 34 weeks to evaluate the risk of fetal and neonatal hyperthyroidism, respectively.

# Differential Diagnosis

While Grave disease is the most common cause of clinically significant hyperthyroidism in pregnancy, other causes must be considered to determine if treatment is necessary.

- Gestational transient thyrotoxicosis (GTT), also known as transient gestational hyperthyroidism (TGH), is the most common cause of transient hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. It affects 1% to 3% of pregnancies and thus is encountered more frequently than Grave disease in pregnancy.

- Hydatidiform molar pregnancies are a type of gestational trophoblastic disease. Complete molar pregnancies are usually accompanied by incredibly high hCG levels and thus can have increased activation of TSH receptors.

- Single toxic adenoma and toxic multinodular goiter involve autonomous nodules that produce thyroid hormones. These autonomous nodules are usually found in women who are at least 40 years old.

- Subacute thyroiditis, also known as DeQuervain subacute thyroiditis, is a rare cause of thyroid inflammation precipitated by a viral infection, which can cause the release of thyroid hormones.

- There can be mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor that cause resistance to thyroid hormone. This leads to increased TSH levels and a further increase in circulating thyroid hormone and increases fetal exposure to thyroid hormone. Pregnant women with thyroid hormone resistance have an increased risk of spontaneous abortion.

- There are a few rare neoplastic causes of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. Struma ovarii is a type of ovarian teratoma that contains functional thyroid tissue. This can be a rare cause of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.

- Hyperthyroidism can also be caused by excessive intake of levothyroxine used to treat hypothyroidism.

# Prognosis

With treatment and close laboratory observation, pregnancy outcomes are improved, and adverse outcomes are decreased.

Many pregnant women experience remission of Grave disease towards the end of pregnancy due to the immunosuppressive effects of pregnancy and associated decrease in TRAb titers.

There is an increased risk of exacerbation or relapse in the 3 to 18 months after delivery due to the rebounding immune system, with the highest risk seven to nine months postpartum.

# Complications

Treatment of overt hyperthyroidism in pregnancy is essential to decrease the risk of maternal and fetal complications. Maternal complications include an increased risk of pregnancy loss, gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, placental abruption, and preterm labor. When thyrotoxicosis progresses to a thyroid storm, there is an increased risk of congestive heart failure, admission to intensive care, and maternal death.

Overtreatment with antithyroid drugs in pregnancy can cause fetal hypothyroidism. Conversely, women who receive adequate antithyroid treatment during pregnancy usually give birth to a euthyroid neonate. However, TRAbs that previously crossed the placenta will still be present. Antithyroid drugs are metabolized by the newborn within two to three days of birth. TRAbs can then cause neonatal hyperthyroidism, affecting 1.5 to 2% of neonates in mothers with Grave disease. This may resolve within a few weeks or persist for four to six months.

**Thyroid Storm**

A thyroid storm is a life-threatening complication that can occur when hyperthyroidism is uncontrolled and is a manifestation of the most decompensated state of disease. In addition to uncontrolled hyperthyroidism, there is usually a precipitating event before a thyroid storm. These events can include labor, cesarean section, preeclampsia, trauma, or an infection.

On initial presentation, fetal distress may be noted. As the mother receives treatment, the fetal status may improve. Delivery should be avoided if possible since both labor or cesarean section can worsen thyroid storm.

**Postpartum Thyroiditis**

Postpartum thyroiditis (PPT) is a condition that typically occurs within six weeks of delivery but may happen up to one year postpartum due to immune rebound after normal immunosuppression of pregnancy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Women who are planning to get pregnant often seek pre-conceptual counseling. In women with Grave disease, this is an opportune time to discuss treatment options before pregnancy.

Most non-pregnant women with Grave disease use methimazole due to a lower risk of hepatotoxicity than PTU.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Subclinical hyperthyroidism is typically not associated with adverse effects and does not require treatment.

Breastfeeding is not contraindicated while on ATDs as long as the dose is low. Women should take their ATD right after breastfeeding to allow some metabolism before their next lactation. If ATD doses are high, monitoring of neonatal free T4 is warranted.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The concept of universal screening for thyroid disease in pregnancy has been a point of controversy. While professional obstetric societies recommend targeted screening for thyroid disease in those who are at high risk for thyroid dysfunction, there are some arguments for universal screening. Thyroid function tests are relatively low cost. If all pregnant women are screened for thyroid disease at the initial prenatal visit, many cases of both overt hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism can be diagnosed earlier. This allows for earlier intervention to optimize thyroid hormone levels to decrease maternal and fetal risks.

Without universal screening, all members of the health care team should be aware of the symptoms of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy to know when to screen for thyroid disease. Providers, provider's assistants, nurse practitioners, nurses, and medical assistants should all know how to take a history that includes previously diagnosed thyroid disease, including any thyroid procedures.

Primary care providers and endocrinologists should inquire whether a patient with Grave disease is planning future pregnancies. This allows the patient to optimize their thyroid hormone levels with appropriate medication and to get adequate counseling during the preconception period, as it is recommended to postpone conceptions until the patient is euthyroid and stable.

Neonatology should be made aware of following neonates born to women with Grave disease for signs and symptoms of transient hyperthyroidism or neonatal Grave disease due to TRAbs that crossed the placenta before birth.