**Compartment Syndrome**

Due to the narrow make-up of the lateral leg compartment, it is prone to compartment syndrome.

The 5 P’s mnemonic can be used to remember the symptoms of compartment syndrome:

- Pain

- Pallor

- Paresthesia

- Pulselessness

- Paralysis

When ischemia occurs for a prolonged time, necrosis can occur, resulting in the replacement of muscle with fibrous scar tissue (Volkmann’s Ischemic Contracture). Rhabdomyolysis may also occur, which can cause acute renal injury and cardiac arrhythmias.

**Classification of Compartment Syndrome**

Acute Compartment Syndrome

- Traumatic causes, which are defined as experiencing a direct contact injury to the lateral aspect of the leg, include crush injuries and contusions.

- Atraumatic causes include non-contact inversion ankle sprains (which may cause the FLM to tear and hematoma formation, which compresses the lateral compartment), horse-back riding (when the height of the stirrups is too high, the ankle goes into more dorsiflexion than usual, which increases lateral compartment pressure), snowboarding (when utilizing boots that are too large, which can cause the lower leg to come into frequent contact with the higher part of the boot). 
- General medical causes: diabetes mellitus may cause an accumulation of fluid in muscle tissue, leading to idiopathic muscle infarction and increase of compartment pressure, which causes an acute compartment syndrome. Hypothyroidism, nephrosis, influenza virus-induced myositis, bleeding disorders, leukemic infiltration, and ganglion cysts of the tibiofibular joint (proximal) have all been reported to contribute to acute compartment syndrome.

- Acute compartment syndrome needs prompt surgical treatment to relieve elevated compartment pressures and prevent muscle necrosis.

Chronic (Exertional) Compartment Syndrome (CECS)

- Patients often have an insidious exercise-induced lateral leg pain, which may be associated with weakness, tightness, and cramping. Pain is usually relieved with rest. Patients are typically young and active, although CECS has also been reported in individuals performing daily activities like walking. To help diagnose CECS, patients typically have an ICP performed while resting, and then immediately after exercising on a treadmill.
- Approximately 36% of all CECS cases are isolated in the lateral compartment, with the other 64% involving multiple compartments, with the anterior and lateral compartments being the most commonly involved together (42% of total CECS cases). 
- When patients have lateral compartment CECS, two-thirds of them have it bilaterally. 
- Conservative treatment with rest, physical therapy, and cryotherapy are typically tried when CECS is diagnosed. If that fails, surgical intervention is recommended.

**Muscular Injury**

Injuries to the lateral leg compartment muscles normally involve the distal tendons of the fibularis muscles, with a prevalence of 11-37% in cadavers, which makes it a common occurrence. Additionally, in patients who have surgical correction of ankle instability, 30% of them have tears in the distal fibularis tendons. The FBM is more likely to be injured than the FLM, with tears of the proximal fibularis longus musculotendinous junction being a very rare occurrence. They can occur from an inversion ankle sprain mechanism, or from direct trauma to the proximal lateral leg compartment. Tears of the proximal fibular longus musculotendinous junction are commonly associated with lateral leg compartment syndrome, with the majority of the published case-studies reporting both conditions simultaneously. Therefore, it is important to keep lateral leg compartment syndrome on the differential diagnosis if a proximal fibularis longus musculotendinous tear is suspected. If patients have clinical symptoms of compartment syndrome with a proximal fibularis longus musculotendinous tear, the majority of them need to be corrected surgically. In other cases, patients may complain of numbness or tingling along the distribution of the common fibular nerve and superficial fibular nerve, along with swelling in the lateral leg compartment, which may be caused by compression of the nerves secondary to hemorrhage of the damaged structures, or from the traction of the nerves. Without the presence of other symptoms of lateral leg compartment syndrome, patients with these symptoms may be treated conservatively with a controlled ankle motion (CAM) boot and physical therapy, and achieve good outcomes. It is very important to use sound clinical judgment when managing patients with proximal fibularis longus musculotendinous junction injuries.

Although rarely reported in the literature, patients may also have ruptures of the origin of their EPM, which may cause lateral compartment syndrome and isolated deep fibular nerve palsy. Patients with isolated deep fibular nerve palsy can present with drop foot since the deep fibular nerve normally supplies the tibialis anterior, which performs ankle dorsiflexion. Typically caused by lumbar disc herniation, if patients present with drop foot, along with symptoms of a proximal EPM tear, it is important to keep lateral compartment syndrome causing deep fibular nerve palsy on the differential diagnosis.

**Procedural Considerations**

In patients who have pathologies of the dorsum of the foot and need anesthetization of the dorsal aspect of the foot through the superficial fibular nerve, it is important for clinicians to be aware of the anatomically variable splitting of the common fibular nerve in the popliteal fossa, so the superficial fibular nerve can be targeted appropriately.