The mainstay of diagnosis in patients with fungal rhinosinusitis is functional endoscopic sinus surgery followed by histopathological analysis of the sample.

The other technology used for the histopathological analysis of fungal sinusitis is polymerase chain reaction (PCR). One study found PCR to be the most sensitive method with a high Negative Predictive Value (NPV), which makes it also ideal for ruling out the disease.

A technology used in the diagnosis of invasive fungal sinusitis is frozen sectioning, in which debridement-tissue from infected sinuses get frozen (usually around -28 degrees Celsius), sectioned into small fragments, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for evaluation under a microscope.

Touch preparation (TP) is an alternative method of diagnosing invasive sinusitis and was found to yield comparatively rapid as well as accurate diagnosis.

Computed tomography (CT) of the head is also utilized to visualize the thickened sinus walls and opacifications, ring-enhancing lesions, or bony erosions created by the fungal growth.

1) Diagnosing allergic fungal sinusitis is dependant on major criteria presence of type 1 hypersensitivity, nasal polyps, eosinophilic mucin presence, positive fungal stain, and positive CT findings. Minor criteria of unilateral disease, asthma, and Charcot-Leyden crystals in mucin can further confirm the diagnosis. These patients are young (20 to 30) and have dark-colored rubbery nasal casts. The most common sinus involved is ethmoids. On CT, they show a "double density" sign: thick fungal mucin surrounded by hyperplasia.

2) Fungus balls usually happen in immunocompetent females in the maxiallry sinus (95%). Although inhalation of the spores can be the cause, the presence of mucosal injury might facilitate the process, as it happens in dental work or sinus surgery; this is usually asymptomatic and found incidentally in a CT. At times there is facial pain or postnasal discharge and crusting in the nasal cavity.

3) Invasive fungal sinusitis is rare but aggressive and with a high mortality rate of around 50%. The difference is an invasion of the vessels, nerves, and bones (rather than just the sinus mucosa). Zygomycetes causing mucormycosis in an uncontrolled diabetic is a classic example. Aspergillus causing infection in AIDS patients or other immunocompromised states is another example. Pain, pressure, or fever happen gradually, but after several weeks, the invasion happens, and the symptoms will exacerbate acutely, which can be confusing diagnostically. Facial nerve palsies, swelling, diplopia, proptosis are all possible. Nerve invasion causes anesthesia, and vessel invasion caused emboli, necrosis, and blackened turbinates and nares. CT will confirm the deep invasion.

4) Granulomatous sinusitis is more common outside the US in the middle east and north Africa. It is an invasive form of infection that happens more slowly and is showing a pathology of non-caseating granuloma.