Monteggia injuries are easily missed, particularly the radial head dislocation, as the ulnar shaft fracture can be distracting. To better recognize subtle dislocations, a line can be drawn through the radial shaft and head. This line should pass through the middle third of the capitellum. If it does not, a dislocation should be suspected.

The complexity of Monteggia fractures leads to a variety of outcomes. Children usually fair better than their adult counterparts. Difficulty in management and outcomes increases with Babo type 2 fractures and when associated with other comorbid fractures (radial head and coronoid process fractures).

Nerve injuries can occur from a laceration or entrapment, with radial and median nerve injuries being the most common. The most common associated motor deficit is a posterior interosseous nerve palsy. Higher incidence is seen with Babo type 2 fractures causing a radial head contusion and/or compression against the supinator muscle. Ulnar nerve injuries are rare. Nerve injuries rarely require treatment, and the majority of patients have complete resolution of symptoms in 9 to 12 weeks.

Malunion and nonunion occur in approximately 2% to 10% of cases, which is higher than the average forearm fracture nonunion rate (2%). Other notable complications include acute compartment syndrome (pre-surgical and post-surgical), radioulnar synostosis (1% to 6%), elbow stiffness from protracted immobilization (adults), myositis ossificans, ulnohumeral osteoarthritis, and wound infections (0% to 3%).