The process of gastrulation begins with the epiblast, a single epithelial cell layer, transforming into three embryonic germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm).

Shortly after the development of primitive hematopoietic cells (EryP), a group of cells called highly proliferative, multipotent progenitor colony forming cells (HPP-CFC) arise in the yolk sac. These cells initiate the first wave of definitive hematopoiesis and produce cells of the definitive erythroid lineage. These cells are often called erythroid/myeloid progenitors, and they bridge the transition between primitive and hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) derived erythropoiesis.

The second wave of definitive hematopoiesis replaces primitive hematopoiesis and the first wave of definitive hematopoiesis. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) emerge from a specialized hemogenic endothelium within a limited region of the developing aorta's ventral wall called the para-aortic splanchnopleure. The aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region develops from the para-aortic splanchnopleure and produces HSC.

EryD cells express fetal hemoglobin (HbF) and are composed of two γ-globin chains and two adult alpha-globin chains. HbF remains the predominant hemoglobin for most of gestation.

Toward the third trimester of development, as skeletal components begin ossification and bone marrow is developing inside bony cavities, the marrow of specific bones will become the essential hematopoietic organ. Both the liver and spleen at this point cease erythropoiesis as the bone marrow predominates in hematopoietic cell production. In postnatal life, definitive erythropoiesis originates from the marrow (BM) that occurs under normal physiologic conditions. In infants, all spongy bone and trabecular bone produce RBC. However, in adults, RBC production is limited to the vertebra, sternum, ribs, and proximal ends of long bones. HSCs in the BM give rise to all mature hematopoietic cells through a series of intermediate progenitors that will be discussed further in the next section.