Symptomatic uremia tends to occur once creatinine clearance decreases below 10-20 mL/min unless kidney failure develops acutely, in which case, some patients may become symptomatic at higher clearance rates. Patients with uremia typically complain of nausea, vomiting, fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, muscle cramps, pruritus, or changes in mental status. The clinical presentation of uremia can be explained by the metabolic disturbances associated with the condition. Fatigue resulting from anemia is considered one of the significant components of uremic syndrome. Patients with a history of diabetes may report improved glycemic control but are at a greater risk of developing hypoglycemic episodes as kidney function worsens. Diagnosis of uremia in young children may be difficult because of the nonspecificity of clinical manifestations.

Hypertension, atherosclerosis, valvular stenosis and insufficiency, chronic heart failure, and angina may all develop due to a buildup of uremic toxins and metastatic calcification associated with uremia and ESRD. These abnormalities may play a role in the clinical manifestations of uremia if treatment is not started timely. Occult GI bleeding resulting from platelet abnormalities may present with nausea or vomiting. Uremic fetor, ammonia, or urine-like odor of the breath may also occur in uremic patients.

Uremia can affect the central nervous system causing uremic encephalopathy, which presents with fatigue, muscle weakness, malaise, restless legs, headache, asterixis, polyneuritis, muscle cramps, mental status changes, seizures, stupor, and coma.

Typical physical findings on examination in patients with uremia are those associated with anemia, fluid retention, and acidemia. In addition, severe malnutrition may result in muscle wasting, while electrolyte abnormalities could lead to muscle cramping, mental status changes, and cardiac arrhythmias. The following are some commonly seen examination findings in patients with uremia:

- Uremic frost

- Mild icterus

- Gingival hyperplasia, petechiae, enamel hypoplasia, or gingival bleeding

- Pericardial rub

- Pulmonary edema

- Peripheral edema

- Severe hypertension