RCA has important implications in helping healthcare organizations study events that resulted in patient harm or undesired clinical outcomes and identify strategies to reduce future errors and improve patient care and safety. Most notably, RCA can help identify medication errors such as illegible handwritten prescriptions, similar name packaging or misleading drug strength or dosage presentations, ineffective control of prescription labels, and lapsed concentration due to interruptions.

Through a review of data gathered by the Joint Commission, six common categories of clinical error resulting in patient death, which can be prevented through root cause analysis, have been identified. These sentinel events account for a significant proportion of morbidity and mortality within the hospital setting. The six most common categories of clinical errors resulting in patient deaths include:

- Wrong-site surgeries

- Patient suicide

- Surgical complications

- Medical treatment delays

- Medication errors

- Patient falls.

Wrong-site surgery is a major cause of medical errors that can be mitigated through various safety checkpoints preoperatively and has been the subject of a sentinel event alert by the Joint Commission.

Patient suicide is an unfortunate cause of death commonly seen in psychiatric care settings.

Delays in medical treatment are preventable adverse events that may result in patient death and permanent injuries. This may result from misdiagnoses, delayed diagnostic test results, lack of staffing or physician availability, delays in order fulfillment, inadequate treatment, and delays within the emergency department. It is important to recognize this root cause and implement steps to improve timeliness, completeness and check the accuracy of medical communication to prevent such errors.

Medication administration errors are a common and avoidable adverse event that can occur at various patient care levels, involving many individuals in a multidisciplinary patient care team.

Similarly, patient falls are a constant source of error within healthcare facilities. It is important to recognize patients at high risk for falls and take appropriate safety precautions. Standardized protocols can reduce fall rates by ensuring a safe environment for risk-prone patients. Patient factors contributing to falls include advanced age, mobility impairment, and surgery.