While the diagnosis of XLA is relatively simple, its management is complex and requires an interprofessional team that includes a geneticist, infectious disease expert, hematologist, pediatrician, nurse practitioner, oncologist, and the primary care provider. The first and foremost goal in patients with XLA should be an avoidance of infections. This includes measures to prevent infections by frequent handwashing, maintaining good respiratory hygiene, and, if possible, drinking only treated water.

The emergence of immunoglobulin replacement therapy has caused a paradigm shift in the management of patients with XLA. Observational studies have shown that intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy has reduced the rate of infections and hospitalizations resulting in reduced morbidity and mortality. Some studies have shown a reduced incidence of bacterial infections from 0.4 to 0.06 per patient per year. Even though immunoglobulin replacement is a safe and effective treatment strategy for these patients, Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is an alternative. The risks of allogeneic HSCT such as rejection, graft-versus-host-disease make the treatment option less safe. The tedious procedure of HSCT and the difficult procurement of a suitable donor are additional factors that make it a less popular treatment option. However, in some patients, especially in developing countries, the costs of regular IVIG or its inconvenience, and the unavailability of IVIG can lead to opting for this treatment modality.

The prognosis for patients with XLA is guarded. The biggest risk of death is infections. These patients require repeated admissions and consequently, the quality of life is poor.