Claudia K Allen and her colleagues formulated the Cognitive Disabilities Model (CDM), which stemmed from their observations of adult patients with persistent mental disorders such as schizophrenia and major depressive disorder. According to the CDM, most of these patients will experience diminishing abilities to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) and to function within their communities due to their mental illness. This cognitive impairment may be either temporary or permanent. Six cognitive levels, termed Allen Cognitive Levels, were derived from the CDM. The Allen Cognitive Level Screen (ACLS) was published in 1985, providing a tool to help quickly stratify the observed cognitive disabilities. The ACLS allowed assessment of patients’ cognitive functioning via observation of sensorimotor actions. The ACLS comprises a series of increasingly complex leather lacing stitches, and a numerical score ranging from 3.0 to 5.8 derives from how accurately the test subject can replicate the therapist’s stitches. A score of 5.8 predicts that the patient will be able to function well on his or her own, but a score of less than 5.8 indicates that the patient may benefit from additional assistance. This score allows the therapist to estimate the patient’s capability in learning, problem-solving and following directions. While modifications to the ACLS have been made since its original publication, it remains one of the most widely utilized tools for occupational therapists to help assess their patients. Because of the ACLS’s limited scoring range, patients at a cognitive level of less than 3 are unable to be test subjects for the screening tool. The test is also unable to accurately assess the patient’s ability to plan for the future, so its maximum score is capped at 5.8.