Obtaining appropriate diagnostic image quality while decreasing both operator and patient radiation exposure is critical to fluoroscopy-guided angiography. The main source of radiation to the patient is direct exposure from the beam.

Collimation should be performed whenever possible. Collimation decreases the cross-sectional area of the X-ray beam, thereby decreasing the radiation dose to the patient. The reduction in irradiative volume decreases patient scatter and results in lower operator dose and improved image quality via improved contrast and a reduction of noise.

An air gap is defined as the distance from the image receptor to the patient.

Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is real-time subtraction between pre-contrast and postcontrast images to visualize vessels. By removing superimposed distracting tissues from the image, DSA can be used to better visualize vessels throughout the entire body.

The entire peripheral arterial system can be imaged with a single injection of contrast via the use of a stepping gantry or table DSA technique. In both stepping table and stepping gantry, pre-contrast and post-contrast images are taken. In the stepping table technique, the patient table moves the arterial anatomy over the field of view in synchrony with the contrast bolus. The stepping gantry technique is similar, except the patient table is fixed while the mobile gantry moves over the arterial anatomy of interest.

Fluoroscopy-guided angiography requires injection of contrast medium into the arteries, as appropriate contrast opacification of arteries is essential for high-quality images. The rate of contrast injection depends on the vessel catheterized and is described as x milliliters per second for a total of y milliliters. For example, the aortic arch can be injected at 20 to 25 for 30 to 50, meaning 20 to 25 milliliters per second for a total volume of 30 to 50 milliliters. Below are some commonly used injection rates. Note that these are rough estimates and that weight-based contrast injection rates may be used.

- Aortic arch: 20 to 25 mL per second for 30 to 50 mL total

- Abdominal aorta: 20 to 25 mL per second for 50 mL total

- Celiac: 5 to 7 mL per second for 30 to 60 mL total

- Splenic: 5 to 6 mL per second for 30 to 50 mL total

- Hepatic: 4 to 15 mL per second for 15 to 30 mL total

- Left gastric: 3 to 4 mL per second for 6 to 16 mL total

- Gastroduodenal: 3 to 4 mL per second for 6 to 16 mL total

- Superior mesenteric: 5 to 7 mL per second for 30 to 60 mL total

- Inferior mesenteric: 3 to 5 mL per second for 9 to 20 mL total

- Pulmonary artery: 25 to 30 mL per second for a total of 2 seconds

- Pelvic angiography: 7 to 15 mL per second for a total of 2 to 4 seconds

Injection rates may need to be increased to opacify abnormalities such as aneurysms. Ensuring a sufficient flow rate and sufficient dilution of contrast material is oftentimes difficult to do by hand. Therefore, dedicated automatic injection systems that can be configured to specific parameters have been produced. Automatic injectors ensure that sufficient vessel opacification occurs, and the images produced are usually of higher quality than those that can be produced by hand.