Conventionally the hyperopia is etiologically classified into:

**Axial hyperopia**(most common - simple hyperopia): It is due to anterior-posterior axial shortening of the eyeball. Genetic predisposition plays an important role. Retinal edema can cause a hyperopic shift. 1 mm decrease in axial length leads to 3 diopters of hyperopia.

**Curvature hyperopia**: It is due to flattening of the cornea or the lens or both. A radius of curvature increase in 1 mm leads to 6 diopters of hyperopia.

**Index hyperopia**: It is due to the change in the refractive index of the crystalline lens, which occurs in old age or diabetics. The refractory index gradually increases from the center to the periphery.

**Positional hyperopia**or**a****bsence of the lens (aphakia)**or**o****cular pathologic conditions**: This condition occurs due to malposition or absence of the crystalline lens (congenital or acquired) or intraocular lens owing to the creation of an aphakic zone in refractive media. Post-traumatic or post-surgical aphakia is not an uncommon cause of hyperopia.

Few ocular pathologies, e.g., nanophthalmos, microphthalmos, aniridia, may cause hyperopia.

No unanimous causative factor is identified to date. Though sporadic, few genetic factors have been identified in association with hyperopia. Apart from genetic and environmental factors, few acquired conditions are also responsible, specifically in aged persons.

- 16p11.2 microdeletion

- Myelin regulatory factor gene (MYRF) mutation

- Family history of squint, and a history of maternal smoking during pregnancy

- Cortical cataract (index hyperopia)

- Aphakia (congenital or acquired)

- Hyperglycemia

- Diabetes mellitus and after prompt control of hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus

- Prolonged space mission due to retina and optic nerve head edema

- Peripapillary pachychoroid syndrome (PPS)

- Heimler syndrome

- Kenny syndrome

- Accommodation loss due to complete CN III nerve palsy or internal ophthalmoplegia or paralysis by cycloplegic drops, lorazepam (functional hyperopia)

- After silicone oil injection in phakic and pseudophakic eyes. In aphakic eyes, the amount of hyperopia reduces, but the eye remains hyperopic

- Loeys-Dietz syndrome, Larsen syndrome.

- Leber congenital amaurosis

- X-linked retinoschisis and senile retinoschisis