The balloon valvuloplasty can be used for treating stenosis of tricuspid, pulmonary, mitral, and aortic valves, but in some cases, its potential risks outweigh its potential benefits. The following are the indications of balloon valvuloplasty in different valvular stenosis.

**Tricuspid Valve Stenosis**

The treatment of tricuspid stenosis is a combination of medical and valvular interventions. For patients with severe tricuspid valve stenosis, valve replacement surgery is preferred over balloon valvulotomy as most cases are associated with tricuspid regurgitation, and balloon valvuloplasty can worsen regurgitation. To choose balloon valvuloplasty over tricuspid valve replacement surgery in an isolated, symptomatic, severe tricuspid stenosis with mild to less tricuspid regurgitation, the surgical risk of a patient must be too high and outweigh disadvantages of over benefits of balloon valvuloplasty.

**Pulmonary Valve Stenosis**

Percutaneous balloon pulmonary valvulotomy (BPV) is preferred in moderate (gradient 40 to 60 mmHg) to severe (greater than 60 mmHg) pulmonary stenosis and it is the first-line treatment of typical dome-shaped valvular pulmonary stenosis in severe stenosis (gradient greater than 60 mmHg). BPV is also the preferred treatment in neonates with critical pulmonary stenosis.

**Mitral Valve Stenosis**

The percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty is the treatment of choice in patients with mitral valve stenosis who have following features:

- Severe mitral stenosis

- Pliable, noncalcified mitral valves

- Symptomatic

- The absence of left atrial thrombus

- The absence of moderate to severe mitral regurgitation

- Older patients or who are at high risk for surgery

It is primarily performed in patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis. There is a little experience with percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty in congenital mitral stenosis.

**Aortic Valve Stenosis**

- **Use in calcified aortic stenosis**: Use of balloon aortic valvotomy (BAV) is limited in calcified aortic stenosis. The use is generally limited to two settings:

- Percutaneous BAV is used as a bridge to surgical aortic valve replacement or transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) in a severely symptomatic aortic stenosis
- For patients with a severely symptomatic aortic stenosis who require an urgent non-cardiac surgery

- **Use in congenital aortic stenosis**: Balloon aortic valvotomy (or valvuloplasty, BAV) is a first-line treatment option for children and younger adults with aortic stenosis with the congenital disease without significant valve calcification.