Transcranial magnetic stimulation is a unique stimulation protocol that has been used for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. It can be administered using three protocols:

- Single-pulse TMS (spTMS), where the motor cortex is stimulated, and muscle activation in the contralateral limb is monitored using electromyography. Single-pulse TMS along with electromyography is helpful for presurgical planning by corticospinal tract mapping.

- Paired-pulse TMS (ppTMS) is largely delivered over the motor cortex and is used to measure cortical excitation: inhibition ratio. Two pulses are delivered consecutively at a fixed interstimulus interval and reveal the regional inhibitory or excitatory signaling strength.

- Repetitive  TMS (rTMS) is delivered in trains lasting a couple of minutes and is used commonly to suppress neuropsychiatric symptoms. For pharmacoresistant depression and PTSD, a frequency of 10 to 20 Hz is used daily for 4 to 6 weeks at the LDPFC region. Magnetic pulses are delivered for 5 to 10 seconds and turned off for another 30 to 60 seconds due to the risk of seizures and to prevent overheating.

Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation can be performed as an outpatient procedure. The patient is taken to the treatment room and is made to sit in a reclining chair with earplugs given to wear during the session. An electromagnetic coil is placed against the patient's head and is switched on-off repeatedly to produce the TMS pulses. A tapping sensation is felt on the forehead by the patient, and this is called mapping. The physician determines the amount of magnetic energy required by increasing the dose and noticing finger or hand twitch. During the process, the stimulus might be changed depending upon the individual symptoms and side-effects. After each treatment session, the patient can return to his/her routine daily activities.