Guidelines from the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America state that screening for HIV nephropathy in HIV positive patients should include serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) along with urinalysis or a quantitative measure of proteinuria at baseline when antiretroviral therapy (ART) is initiated or changed, and at least twice a year in stable patients infected with HIV. Imaging modalities, such as ultrasonography of the kidneys, has been evaluated as a possible non-invasive test for the diagnosis of HIVAN. Studies have shown that high scores of renal echogenicity were strong predictors for HIVAN, while low scores could effectively rule it out. While this appears to be useful in specific settings, most of the patients suffering from HIVAN have echogenicity scores that fall between those two values. A kidney biopsy is often the only means of achieving a definitive diagnosis. Indications for biopsy remain the same as for the general population. The decision to perform a kidney biopsy should take into consideration the clinical presentation, the likelihood of alternate diagnosis, the therapeutic options, and the risks associated with the procedure.

Currently, combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) induced nephropathy is a far more common disease than HIVAN. Differentiating patients with HIVAN versus cART induced nephropathy is important, as management is different. Besides history and physical examination findings, patients with HIVAN present with CD4 count <200 cells/mm, viral load >400 copies/mL, a rapid decline in renal function, proteinuria >300 mg/24h, hyaline or proteinaceous casts on urinalysis, and large-sized kidneys with intense cortical echogenicity. In contrast, cART induced nephropathy presents in patients with CD4 count >200 cells/mm, viral load <400 copies/mL, proteinuria <30 mg/24h, an indolent decline in renal function, hematuria or leukocyturia, needle or rod-like crystals on urine microscopy and unremarkable ultrasound findings.