Vancomycin is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitivity reaction to the drug or any component within the formulation.

**Clinical Considerations**

Although vancomycin does not have many contraindications, there are some important clinical considerations to keep in mind during patient care.

**Geriatric Considerations**

Elderly patients are more prone to vancomycin toxicity with IV administration due to age-related changes in renal function, volume of distribution, and accumulation. These patients need to be carefully monitored and require a more conservative dosage regimen.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

Oral vancomycin capsules are categorized as a category B drug for use in pregnancy. In contrast, intravenous vancomycin injection is category C. Vancomycin should not be used during pregnancy unless the benefits outweigh the risks of the medication. If treatment with vancomycin is necessary, close monitoring of maternal blood is recommended to reduce the risk of ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity in the fetus. Animal studies have not yet determined any evidence of fetal harm from maternal vancomycin use. However, vancomycin crosses the placenta, and researchers have detected it in fetal serum, amniotic fluid, and cord blood. Patients who become pregnant while taking vancomycin should contact their healthcare provider immediately. Moreover, it is essential to note that pregnant patients may require higher doses of vancomycin to achieve therapeutic concentrations due to alterations in pharmacokinetics, such as an increased volume of distribution and total plasma clearance.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Vancomycin is excreted in breast milk following intravenous administration. In comparison, oral vancomycin has minimal systemic absorption and, therefore, limited excretion through breast milk. Breastfeeding mothers who receive intravenous vancomycin should consult with their provider before continuing, as it may affect their baby's health. Nevertheless, vancomycin is recommended to treat Clostridioides difficile infections in breastfeeding women. Careful assessment regarding the discontinuation of breastfeeding is recommended before initiating vancomycin therapy in nursing mothers.

**Renal Impairment**

The reduced renal function can cause vancomycin to accumulate in the body, thereby increasing the risk of adverse effects. Dosing adjustments are necessary for renal impairment. Close monitoring of vancomycin trough concentrations is necessary for all patients with renal impairment. Patients should receive counsel to contact their provider if they experience symptoms of reduced kidney function, such as decreased urine output, swelling, and abdominal pain, as vancomycin may exacerbate renal impairment.

**Bacterial Resistance**

As with other antimicrobials, prolonged or inappropriate treatment with vancomycin can lead to bacterial resistance, such as vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE).

**Drug Interactions**

Co-administration of other medications, along with vancomycin, may increase the risk of adverse effects and toxicity. Therefore dosing adjustments, additional monitoring, and consideration of alternative treatment should merit attention when combining vancomycin with certain medications. Caution is necessary when administering vancomycin with other nephrotoxic agents such as aminoglycosides, amphotericin products, and IV contrast.