Childhood obesity significantly impacts both physical and psychological health. Obesity can lead to severe health conditions, including non-insulin-dependent diabetes, cardiovascular problems, bronchial asthma, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), hypertension, hepatic steatosis, gastroesophageal reflux (GER), and psychosocial issues. The preventive and therapeutic interventions in childhood obesity are crucial in decreasing the burden of comorbid health conditions.

**Metabolic Syndrome**

Metabolic syndrome, also named syndrome X, is a cluster of risk factors specific for cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, glucose intolerance, dyslipidemia, and abdominal obesity that commonly occur in obese children or adolescents. Insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and oxidative stress are the underlying factors contributing to metabolic syndrome.

**Dyslipidemia**

Atherogenic dyslipidemia is common in obese children and adolescents. A fasting lipoprotein level needs to be obtained in all children with obesity. Elevated triglycerides (TG) and Free fatty acid (FFA) levels, decreased HDL (high-density lipoprotein) cholesterol levels, and normal or mildly increased serum LDL (low-density lipoprotein) cholesterol levels are common findings in childhood obesity.

**Glucose Intolerance**

Childhood obesity quadruples the risk of developing glucose intolerance and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM or Type 2 diabetes). Over 85% of children with NIDDM are either overweight or obese at diagnosis.

- children with BMI 85th to 95th percentile along with,

- 
              
- immediate family history of type 2 diabetes 
              
              
- signs of insulin resistance such as acanthosis nigricans, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and polycystic ovarian syndrome.

- Children with BMI >95th percentile regardless of family history or associated features.

**Hypertension**

The most significant risk factor for pediatric hypertension is the high body mass index. One-fourth of obese children can have hypertension. Adipocyte is not only a storage depot for fat but is also an active endocrinological cell. The pro-inflammatory adipokines (leptin, resistin, and IL-6) lead to an increase in sympathetic nervous system (SNS) activation, which preferentially impacts the renal vascular beds.

**Hepatic Steatosis**

Pediatric liver disease is a severe complication of childhood obesity. Obesity-related non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) spectrum includes fatty liver, steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

**Cholelithiasis**

The prevalence of cholelithiasis is high among adolescents with obesity, and the association is more robust in girls than in boys. Increased cholesterol synthesis and cholesterol saturation of bile contribute to cholelithiasis among adolescents with obesity.

**Asthma**

Overweight or obese children have been observed to have a higher prevalence of asthma and asthma exacerbations. The link between asthma and obesity is mediated through abnormal inflammatory and oxidant stress, chest restriction with airway narrowing, and obesity-related comorbidities such as obstructive sleep apnea and gastroesophageal reflux.

**Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension**

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is an uncommon disease of childhood and adolescence characterized by increased intracranial pressure without any identifiable cause. Almost half of the children who present with this syndrome may be obese and also have more IIH symptoms at onset.

**Sleep Apnea**

Obesity and overweight are crucial risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Neurocognitive deficits and excessive daytime sleepiness are common among obese children with sleep apnea.

**Orthopedic Complications**

Fractures, musculoskeletal discomfort, and lower extremity malalignment such as Blount disease and slipped capital femoral epiphyses are more common in overweight than non-overweight children and adolescents.

**Polycystic Ovary Disease**

Obesity is frequently associated with polycystic ovary disease (PCOD). Up to 30% of women with PCOD may be obese. Hyperandrogenism and hyperinsulinemia often accompany PCOD. Obesity increases the risk of PCOD through insulin resistance and compensatory hyperinsulinemia, which increases androgen production and decreases sex hormone-binding globulin, thereby increasing the bioavailability of androgen. Adolescents with PCOD are at increased risk for metabolic syndrome and glucose intolerance. Weight loss represents an important therapeutic target in obese adolescents with PCOD.****

**Persistence of obesity into adulthood**

About 15% to 30% of adults with obesity were also obese in their childhood or adolescence.

**Psychosocial impact**

Children with obesity or overweight are more likely to experience low self-esteem and depression during adolescence. Negative psychological experiences trigger emotional eating, leading to an ongoing obesity-depression cycle. Children who are overweight or obese face bullying at school and are excluded from competitive physical activities. Overall, children with obesity have less social interaction and spend more time in sedentary activities. Numerous studies have confirmed the association of childhood obesity with ADHD and anxiety disorders.

**Eating Disorders**

Children with overweight or obesity have a high prevalence of disordered eating behaviors, increasing the risk of developing eating disorders. The majority of adolescents with restrictive eating disorders report a history of obesity in the past. Binge eating increases the risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes.

**Academic Performance**

Children who are obese and have comorbid health problems like diabetes, asthma, or sleep apnea miss school more frequently, thereby affecting their school performance negatively.