The pathogenesis of EAC is unknown. In most cases, no causative agent can be detected (idiopathic EAC). A hypersensitivity reaction to various external or internal stimuli (especially the superficial form) has been suggested. EAC has been associated with many infectious entities, particularly dermatophytes and other fungal elements such as Candida, Penicillium in blue cheese), but also with viruses (Epstein-Barr virus, poxvirus, HIV, varicella-zoster), parasites, and ectoparasites (Phthirus pubis), and bacteria (Pseudomonas). Some food and drugs (cimetidine, rituximab, salicylate, ustekinumab, diuretics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antimalarials, amitriptyline, gold sodium thiomalate, amitriptyline, etizolam, hormonal disturbances) have been implicated as additional causative factors. Some other less common entities have been reported in the literature such as Crohn's disease, pregnancy, autoimmune endocrinopathies, hypereosinophilic syndrome.

As mentioned above, when EAC is related to underlying malignancy, it is known as PEACE. The detection of unsuspected paraneoplastic erythema annulare centrifugum is particularly crucial, since it may lead to the discovery of a previously undiagnosed underlying cancer.  In Chodkiewicz et al. review of the world literature, they found a total of 40 patients with malignancies with an association with erythema annulare centrifugum. Of the associated malignancies, 37.5% were solid tumors, and 62.5% were lymphoproliferative disorders. Leukemia and lymphoma were each found in 11 individuals, which comprised the largest association between any malignancy and EAC. Chodkiewicz et al. proposed the underlying malignancy must directly or indirectly elicit cytokines or antigens to stimulate the development of the dermatoses observed in cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes.