**Medical Error Disclosure**

Of paramount importance in dealing with medical errors is complete and timely disclosure of a medical error once it is known to have occurred. Communication regarding its occurrence should be made in a timely manner to the patient and their family. This helps demonstrate respect, compassion, and commitment to quality care and patient safety by the healthcare team.

Disclosure of medical errors should also include disclosure to regulatory agencies and institutional committees so that organizational changes that can prevent such errors in the future may be implemented. Patient-safety incidents should be reported and reviewed for use in improving system-based practices to promote patient safety.

**Impact of Punitive Measures Following a Medical Error**

The criminalization of medical errors should be avoided and is seen by the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation (APSF) of the US as counterproductive. In a position statement by the APSF published in October 2022, the foundation called for improvement in systems of care as opposed to the criminal prosecution of individuals involved.

Clinical providers experience various negative emotions after a medical error, including anxiety, depression, and fear.

The recent case of the State of Tennessee vs. Radonda L. Vaught brought forth many deficiencies in the healthcare system that led to the death of an elderly patient who would otherwise have been discharged home. However, the criminalization of the particular individual resulted in many healthcare professionals voicing fear of similar consequences for themselves. In response to this trial, the Washington State Nurses Association issued the following statement: "Focusing on blame and punishment solves nothing. It can only discourage reporting and drive errors underground. It not only undermines patient safety; it fosters an environment of fear and lack of respect for healthcare workers."

A direct result of the criminalization of medical errors is the rise of defensive medicine at the provider level and delayed medical care at the nursing level. Healthcare professionals are identified as "second victims" of medical errors after the patient and their family.State vs. Vaught said they would no longer "override" the medication dispensing cabinet regardless of the patient care situation. The American Nurses Association stated, "The criminalization of medical errors will not preserve safe patient care environments."