**WBC Cell Labelling and Imaging**

- The technologist draws 50 ml venous blood into a syringe containing 300 units of heparin. A 19 gauge needle is preferred. Gloves should be worn during blood drawing, labeling, and re-injection. To avoid inadvertent needle sticks, needles should not be recapped while holding the needle cover. The syringe must be labeled with the patient's name and registration number, date, and initials of the individual drawing the blood sample.

- Sample should be delivered to the nuclear pharmacy as early in the morning as practical (preferably by 8 am).

- Cells are labeled within the nuclear radiopharmacy, which takes approximately 3 hours.

- When labeling is complete, the cells must be injected intravenously within 10 to 15 minutes if possible to preserve cell viability and function, but no later than one hour after calibration. The labeled cells must be resuspended just before injection by gently inverting the syringe several times.

- Because blood products are being injected, it is important to carefully match the patient's name and registration number with the dispensing label before injection.

- The activity injected is based on SNMMI/EANM guidelines.

- Following cell labeling and injection, patients have been routinely imaged 24 hours postinjection. Nowadays, with SPECT-CT, early imaging at 4-6 hours may be sufficient to yield a diagnosis. However, except in very unusual circumstances, imaging later than 24 hours postinjection is usually not helpful.

**FDG PET**

18-F-FDG is injected based on SNMMI/EANM guidelines. Following an uptake phase of 45 to 90 minutes, images are acquired either as a whole-body acquisition or a limited acquisition for certain indications. One should pay close attention to the patient preparation as it has a high likelihood of impacting results and decreasing the sensitivity of the test.

**Gallium 67**

Gallium 67 is less used nowadays and has been replaced by FDG PET for similar indications due to better accuracy and better radiation exposure profiles. However, in cases where 18-F-FDG PET imaging is not available, Gallium 67 may be used. Gallium 67 biodistribution can be affected by blood transfusions or gadolinium-enhanced MRI scanning when performed within 24 hrs. Recent iron transfusions can also interfere with uptake. Image acquisition should include three main photopeak windows (93, 185, and 300 keV). Imaging usually occurs at 48 hours and 72 hours after injection. Further imaging can be performed for up to 5 days.

**Tc99m-besilesomab or Tc99m-sulesomab**

Following injection of the radiopharmaceutical as per guidelines, imaging occurs at 4 and 24 hours with planar and preferably SPECT-CT.

**Bone Scintigraphy**

Following injection of the radiopharmaceutical as per guidelines, imaging occurs at 3-4 hours with planar and preferably SPECT-CT.