**Pharmacotherapy and Group Therapy**

Occasionally, patients receiving group therapy will also benefit from the inclusion of pharmacotherapy. In situations where the provider prescribing the medication differs from the provider providing treatment, proper communication between the two parties is vital to patient success. A thorough report of the patient and his or her reaction and benefits from the medication must be shared with the provider treating with group therapy. Mutual respect for one another and the well-being of the patient are required to prevent adverse reactions and ensure the patient receives the highest quality of medical care. Additionally, putting less of a value on either of the two treatment processes can negatively impact patients, so the therapist should always follow proper inclusion and management of both treatment processes.

When pharmacotherapy is part of the patient's therapy, it is prudent to have a qualified pharmacist examine the patient's medication record, checking for proper dosing, potential drug interactions, and inform the other members of the healthcare team of any red flags.

Social workers can play an important auxiliary role to providers during group therapy sessions. The social worker's presence as a layperson voicing their thoughts and feelings can help facilitate group interaction and reduce members’ resistance to contributing. Also, social workers can assist patients in attempting to reintegrate into their “normal” lives by answering patient’s questions concerning work, relationships, and other lifestyle changes.

An interprofessional team approach can benefit participants in group therapy, where information is shared among various disciplines leading to improved patient outcomes, so long as appropriate privacy considerations are maintained at all times. [Level 5]