The development of thyroglossal duct cyst, due to the failed obliteration of the thyroglossal duct before the tenth week of gestation, requires a surgical procedure with removal of the cyst/mass. This surgical procedure necessary for the removal of the cyst/mass is referred to as the Sistrunk procedure and is considered the preferred method of resection of these midline neck cysts and/or masses. Depending on whether the developed mass is benign or malignant, treatment should go accordingly. As previously mentioned, the Sistrunk procedure would be the treatment of choice in cystic masses, which have a recurrence rate of under 3% while applying this procedure.

The procedure consists of a neck incision in which we go up the hyoid bone located in the upper neck. The mid-portion of the hyoid bone is then removed along with a small amount of tongue tissue. This last step, removal of the mid-portion of the hyoid bone along with a slight bit of tongue tissue, is done to prevent the reoccurrence of a cystic mass.

During the development of the embryo, the thyroglossal duct has a tendency to wrap itself inferiorly around the hyoid bone, and on rare occasions, it can entrap itself and be incorporated into the 2nd and 3rd arch components of the hyoid bone, causing the reoccurrence of cystic masses to be possible.

Due to the possibility of reoccurrences, the procedure requires excision of the mid-portion of the hyoid bone and a small amount of tongue tissue. The incision wound is then closed-up with an absorbable suture, and the dermabond is used for skin closure.

In case of a malignant mass, depending on the case and team of surgeons at hand, the procedure will or will not be applied. Radioiodine and levothyroxine therapy is usually the most common treatments in these cases and is also the treatment of choice. Partial resection or complete resection of the thyroid might also be part of the procedure.