Infant colic is challenging for new parents and is a reason for 10% to 20% of pediatrician visits during the early weeks of an infant's life. Colic is estimated at affecting 5% to 40% of infants worldwide. The condition typically presents in the second or third week of life, peaks around 6 weeks, and resolves by the age of 12 weeks in 60% of infants and by 16 weeks of age in 90%. Inconsolable crying, irritability, and screaming without an obvious cause characterize colic; during these episodes of fussiness, which occur more frequently in the evenings, the affected infant classically appears red-faced, draws up the legs and tenses up the abdomen. The traditional methods of soothing the infant often fail to relieve the infant's distress. First described in 1954, the original "Wessel's Rule of 3s" diagnostic criteria (symptoms lasting for 3 hours per day, 3 or more days per week, for 3 or more weeks, starting around 3 weeks of age), has undergone a transition in recent years. The Rome IV criteria describe colic in infants from birth to 5 months of age to make the definition of infantile colic more consistent for research purposes. The criteria are as follows:

- An infant who is <5 months of age when the symptoms start and stop

- Recurrent and prolonged periods of infant crying, fussing, or irritability reported by caregivers that occur without obvious cause and cannot be precented or resolved by caregivers

- No evidence of infant failure to thrive, fever, or illness

While benign and self-limiting, the condition is frustrating for parents and has been linked to maternal postpartum depression and shaken baby syndrome. Since treatments for colic are controversial and inconsistent, the role of the physician as a counselor and educator to parents is critical.