**Gross Anatomy**

The stomach begins at the diaphragmatic hiatus, the lower esophageal sphincter, and ends as it continues as the first portion of the duodenum. The divisions of the stomach include the cardia, which is just distal to the gastroesophageal junction, the fundus, which abuts the left diaphragm; the body, the antrum; and the pylorus, which is the most distal portion entering the duodenum. The lesser curvature lies beneath the medial segments of the liver. It contains the incisura angularis, which is the junction of the vertical and horizontal parts of the lesser curvature that marks the transition of the body to the antrum. The greater curvature is the long left lateral edge of the stomach from the fundus to the pylorus, which connects to the greater omentum. The left border of the intraabdominal esophagus and the fundus meet at an acute angle called the angle of His.

The stomach is an organ that requires a rich supply of blood as it is an area that is highly mobile and distensible, is composed of 5 different cell types functioning at high metabolic rates, and has multiple muscle layers to facilitate the stomach waves of brisk peristalsis for the second phase of digestion. The celiac trunk, branching directly anteriorly from the aorta, provides the main arterial blood supply. The trunk supplies the common hepatic artery (CHA), splenic, and left gastric artery (LGA). The less curved side of the stomach is provided proximally by a descending branch of the LGA, with its ascending branch supplying portions of the esophagus. The CHA runs superior to the pancreas, and the right branches off to the gastroduodenal artery (GDA). It continues with the branch that proceeds from the CHA being the proper hepatic artery. The right gastric artery (RGA) then branches from the proper hepatic artery.

The RGA then runs from right to left across the lesser curved portion of the stomach and continues to branch into smaller vessels through the body of the stomach to join the network of smaller arteries supplying the stomach as branches off from the LGA. The posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (PSPDA) branches off of the GDA, which then branches into the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (ASPDA) and the right gastro-omental (gastroepiploic) artery (RGEA). The RGEA then traverses and supplies from right to left the greater curvature of the stomach. The left gastroepiploic (gastroomental) artery (LGEA) branches from the splenic artery and supplies the greater curvature body portion of the stomach, except beginning on the left side and moving and branching in the right direction. Three to 5 additional smaller arteries also branch from the splenic artery to supply the stomach. The left gastric (coronary) vein and the right gastric and right gastro-omental veins all achieve drainage into different segments of the portal vein. The short gastric veins (also termed the vasa brevia) and the left gastro-omental vein achieve drainage via the splenic vein.

The lymphatic drainage of the stomach can be understood as having four levels. Level 1 includes the perigastric lymph nodes and follows a path of drainage of the right pericardiac and left pericardiac, along with the less curved body portion, the greater curved body portion, supra-pyloric, and infra-pyloric. Level 2 is comprised of drainage along the LGA, along the CHA), along with the celiac axis, at the splenic hilum, and along the splenic artery. Level 3 is characterized by drainage in the hepatoduodenal ligament, posterior to the duodenum and pancreas head, and at the source of the small bowel mesentery. Finally, the fourth level is characterized by mesocolic and paraaortic drainage.

**Ligaments**

- Gastrohepatic ligament: Continues from the lesser curvature to the medial liver edge and contains the left and right gastric arteries. It may also include a replaced left hepatic artery.

- Gastrophrenic ligament: Extends from the fundus to the left hemidiaphragm.

- Gastrosplenic ligament: Runs from the greater curvature to the spleen, which lies in the left upper quadrant. It contains short gastric vessels.

- Gastrocolic ligament: Extends from the inferior stomach to the transverse colon and is considered part of the greater omentum. It contains the gastroepiploic vessels.

**Blood Supply**

The celiac trunk has three branches, including the left gastric, common hepatic, and splenic arteries. The left gastric artery runs along the superior lesser curvature and anastomoses with the right gastric artery. The common hepatic artery gives off the gastroduodenal artery, which runs behind the first portion of the duodenum. The right gastric artery is a branch of the proper hepatic artery. It joins the left gastric artery along the lesser curvature. The right gastroepiploic artery then branches from the gastroduodenal artery and runs in the gastrocolic ligament along the greater curvature. It then joins the left gastroepiploic artery, a distal branch of the splenic artery coursing along the greater curvature from lateral to medial. The splenic artery also gives off three to five short gastric arteries running in the gastrosplenic ligament to the gastric fundus.