Cyanocobalamin treats a variety of different conditions related to vitamin B12 deficiency. The interprofessional healthcare team must coordinate activities to manage the condition, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, pharmacists, and nutritionists. Early detection will prevent severe and permanent complications, as prolonged vitamin B12 deficiency may lead to permanent degenerative spinal cord lesions.

As there are several completely unrelated causes of this deficiency, a physician is responsible for not only identifying the probable cause but also for tailoring therapy and further management for different individuals depending on case to case basis.

The involvement of specialists may prove necessary in several instances. For example,

- A patient with D. latum infection may need follow-up with an infectious disease specialist.

- A patient with a dietary deficiency may need to see a dietician or a nutritionist.

- A patient with H.pylori infection, atrophic gastritis, malabsorption, pancreatic insufficiency, or Crohn disease may need to see a gastroenterologist or a GI surgeon.

- A patient with malignancy of bowel/pancreas may need oncology follow-up.

- Due to the correlation of pernicious anemia with carcinoma of the stomach, an appropriate gastroenterology workup may be recommended.

- Vitamin B12 deficiency suppresses the signs of polycythemia vera, which may be unmasked after treatment. It is also possible to have vitamin B12 deficiency with a normal MCV due to co-existent thalassemia/iron deficiency anemia. Hence, a hematologist may guide further treatment for such patients.

Due to the possibility of hypersensitivity to the drug, it is essential that the provider administers it with necessary precautions and performs an intradermal test if an allergy is suspected. Education about allergic reactions and other side effects is necessary for optimal outcomes and the prevention of anaphylactic shock. [Level 5]