**Peptide Hormones**

Peptide hormones are water-soluble molecules that can range from 3 to 200 amino acids in lengths and shape and are linked by peptide bonds.  Peptide hormones are synthesized locally and can travel to remote tissues with an implication for physiological growth and differentiation. The paracrine and perhaps autocrine actions of these peptide hormones contribute to the growth, survival, and functionality of the tissues on which they act.

**Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene family**is originally a 241 amino acid residue that is cleaved at different lysine residues through proteolysis to create unique, active peptides. The peptides created include melanocyte-stimulating factor (MSH), adrenocorticotropic releasing hormone (ACTH), B-lipotropin, and B-endorphin, and are expressed in peripheral tissues and the brain.

**Oxytocin and ADH**The posterior pituitary produces two peptide hormones that differ by only two AAs: oxytocin and anti-diuretic hormone (ADH). Both oxytocin and ADH are nonapeptides with a disulfide bridge.

**Insulin**is a 51 amino acid peptide hormone that consists of two disulfide-linked peptide chains.

**Glucagon**is created when proglucagon is cleaved by prohormone convertase 2, to form a fully processed bioactive peptide.

**Secretin**is another example of a peptide hormone, with an N-terminal and C-terminal end, composed of a 27 chain amino acid sequence.

**Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)**is a 37-amino acid neuropeptide, which is most commonly localized to C and Aδ sensory fibers but affects both the central and peripheral nervous systems and metabolism through a multitude of receptor types.

**Natriuretic Peptides**are small peptide hormones secreted by cardiac myocytes in response to tension or wall stress.