The genomes of Polyomaviridae are divided into three main regions: the non-coding control region, the early gene region, and the late gene region. The non-coding control region, as the name implies, does not encode any genes to be transcribed but is responsible for the regulation of gene expression. The early gene region encodes proteins (large tumor antigen and small tumor antigen) that disrupt cell cycle control and enable viral genome replication utilizing host replication machinery. The late gene region encodes structural proteins (VP1, VP2, and VP3) that form the viral capsid and facilitate host cell attachment. Additional TSPyV proteins have been identified, but their functions remain unclear.

Serologic studies of TSPyV antibodies over time suggest that newborns initially have maternally sourced antibodies that wane over the following months. Throughout childhood, TSPyV transmission likely occurs between family members due to close interpersonal contact.

Hypotheses about the potential pathophysiology of trichodysplasia spinulosa are as follows: symptomatic reactivation of latent TSPyV due to immunosuppression, repeat exposure to TSPyV while immunosuppressed, and fulminant primary infection with TSPyV while immunosuppressed.

As stated previously, there are likely unidentified variables besides immunosuppression and viral infection which influence the mechanism of disease. At the cellular level, one possible difference between asymptomatic and symptomatic TSPyV infection could be the route of intracellular viral transmission. The lytic pathway for intracellular viral transmission is a highly inflammatory process, whereas non-lytic transmission utilizing extracellular vesicles is more covert and, in fact, anti-inflammatory due to phosphatidylserine lipids on the vesicle surface.

Although not specifically demonstrated with TSPyV, other polyomaviruses (BKPyV and JCPyV) have been shown to infect target cells by way of extracellular vesicles. Therefore, it is possible that other polyomaviruses harness this ability as well.

Regardless of the mechanism by which this typically sub-clinical virus becomes pathogenic, once such conditions are met, inner root sheath follicular keratinocytes appear to be the primary target of TSPyV. Interactions with tumor suppressor genes pRB, p16, p21, and protein phosphatase 2 lead to hyperproliferation of the inner root sheath, presumably producing the characteristic follicular spines.

The absence of dermal papillae in affected skin explains the associated alopecia because papillae are essential for new hair growth. For this same reason, the mechanism by which the papillae are lost must be reversible because hair regrows after the condition resolves.