**Epidural Space**

Between the roof of the skull (i.e., calvarium) and the superior surface of the dura potentially lies the epidural space.  While arteries and veins run between the inner surface of the calvarium and the dura, the epidural space typically exists pathologically, since the superficial layer of the dura, the periosteal layer, is securely attached to the periosteum of the skull.

**Dura Mater**

The outermost mater of the meninges, the dura, is composed of two layers: the periosteal layer that lies closest to the calvarium and the meningeal layer that lies closest to the brain tissue. These together contribute to the dura being a thick, dense, fibrous membrane that is quite inelastic. The periosteal layer consists of fibroblasts and osteoblasts, with a large quantity of extracellular collagen existing within its intercellular space, giving the dura its strength.

**Subdural Space**

The subdural space is the space that potentially exists between the meningeal layer of the dura and the arachnoid mater. Similar to the epidural space, the subdural space typically exists only under pathological conditions.

**Arachnoid Mater**

The arachnoid sits between the dura and the pia and is an avascular membrane that is involved in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) metabolism via the subarachnoid space.

**Subarachnoid Space**

The subarachnoid space is the cerebrospinal fluid-filled space that exists between the arachnoid and the pia. Within the lateral ventricles of the brain, the choroid plexus produces CSF, which passes into the subarachnoid space via the foramina of Luschka.

**Pia Mater**

The deepest layer of the meninges, the pia mater, is composed of two layers and, unlike the arachnoid, follows the contours of the sulci and gyri. The outer layer of the pia, referred to as the epipial layer, contains collagen fibers; the inner layer, or the intima pia, contains elastic and reticular fibers.