No randomized controlled trials to guide the treatment of mixed connective tissue disease have yet taken place. The goal of therapy is to control symptoms and is directed by clinical manifestations and organ involvement.

Raynaud phenomenon: Symptomatic management includes avoiding caffeine, smoking, cold temperature, and injuries. Oral calcium channel blockers (CCB), e.g., nifedipine that decreases peripheral resistance, are an option. Intravenous prostaglandins and topical nitroglycerins are effective. Case reports exist of the Raynaud phenomenon responding to rituximab.

Arthritis and arthralgia usually respond to NSAIDs and hydroxychloroquine. For refractory synovitis, corticosteroids and methotrexate can be used.

Pleuritis, pericarditis, myositis, myocarditis, and aseptic meningitis usually respond to steroids. Steroid-sparing agents, e.g., methotrexate, cyclosporine, azathioprine, and mycophenolate mofetil, are commonly used as second-line agents. Steroid-resistant myositis may respond to intravenous immunoglobulin.

Pulmonary hypertension is usually less responsive to steroids. Patients who respond to a vasodilator challenge during right heart catheterization receive treatment with CCB. The efficacy of anticoagulation with warfarin is unknown. Prostaglandins (epoprostenol), endothelin receptor antagonists (ambrisentan), phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors (sildenafil), immunosuppression with corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide are all therapeutic considerations.

Esophageal disorders also respond to steroids. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) treatment is with proton pump inhibitors (PPI), lifestyle, and dietary modification, e.g., elevating the head of the bed and avoiding dietary triggers. Prokinetics and gastric fundoplication are possible options for those who fail twice-daily PPI therapy. Esophageal motility disorder requires prokinetics. Patients with malabsorption should be on a lactose-free diet, and medium-chain triglycerides should substitute for long-chain fatty acids.

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia receive initial treatment with steroids. Clinicians can consider rituximab in resistant cases.