The insertion of the device is aided by the placement of either a burr hole or a twist drill technique. Kocher's point is the choice for the ventriculostomy, which is 3 cm lateral of the midline and 1 cm anterior to the coronal suture. Other points of ventricular puncture include Keen's point, Dandy's point, and Frazier's point.

Basic equipment sets should include the following:

- Non-sterile gloves, soap, brush, hand towel, razor, and a marker pen for parts preparation and marking of the site of placement of monitor devices.

- For the procedure itself, face mask, sterile gown and gloves, an antiseptic solution, a drape, a local anesthetic agent, a 5-ml syringe, a 15 or 11-number surgical blade, and an ICP-monitoring kit. A drill with a drill bit, a bolt, an ICP sensor, and a transducer per the methods utilized. A suture material and a sterile dressing.

Stringent analysis of the pressure and pulse amplitude of ICP waveforms is favored contrary to its assessment from the height of the CSF column.

The pulse component of the waveform shows three peaks:

- P1 (percussion wave) due to arterial pulsation

- P2 (tidal wave) represents brain compliance

- P3 (dicrotic wave) owing to aortic valve closure.

With decreasing brain compliance, waveform amplitude will increase, rising P2 above P1 and P3, rounding of waveform and appearance of plateau waves, and Lundberg B and A waves.

Ventricular catheters represent a "global" ICP with minimal chances of drift and influence from pressure gradients between the parenchyma and ventricular system.

It is the most reliable method of achieving maximum accuracy with minimal expense. There are added therapeutic benefits of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage, instilling medications like antibiotics and thrombolytic agents.

Strain gauge or fiber optic-based systems inserted into the ventricles or brain parenchymas are more accurate than fluid-coupled or pneumatic devices.

Parenchymal monitors are easier to insert in cases of midline shift or malignant brain swelling, with no risks of blockage by hemorrhage or debris.

However, they cannot be re-calibrated in vivo, only measure a localized pressure and have drift issues in long-term usage.

The current non-invasive techniques are simply not accurate enough to replace traditional invasive techniques.

CT and MRI images provide only provide a single-point snapshot picture. Pulsatility index from transcranial doppler (TCD), tympanic membrane displacement (otoacoustic emissions), Near-infrared spectroscopy, as well as optic nerve sheath diameter (ONSD) assessments have a study error margin of +/- 10 to 15 mm Hg with high inter-rater variability.