Prior to surgical resection, the resectability and tumor stage must be confirmed by either biopsy or diagnostic thoracoscopy. Pulmonary fuction tests (PFTs) and cardiac screening prior to surgery are helpful to see if the patient will tolerate surgery. Also, in cases of patients with myasthenia gravis, additional preoperative measures must be undertaken. No patient in myasthenic crisis should be considered for surgical resection. Patients should receive plasmapheresis prior to surgery, and their steroid dose should be minimized. These patients often may need stress dosing before thymectomy.

There are three surgical approaches one can adopt: Median sternotomy, transverse neck incision, or thoracoscopic surgery (robotic surgery). The boundaries of a radical thymectomy are clearly defined: Laterally, the phrenic nerves, inferiorly the diaphragm, and superiorly the thyrothymic ligament. The superior horn extends high into the neck and deep to the sternohyoid muscle. The resection of the mediastinal pleura, pericardium, adjacent lung, innominate vein, or unilateral phrenic nerve is sometimes required for an R0 resection (which is the most critical long-term prognostic indicator). Both R1 and R2 resections have been correlated with local recurrence.

Lymph node dissection is an integral part of the surgery. Anterior thymic (or N1) nodes include the space around thymus, anterior to pericardium and great vessels, below hyoid, above the diaphragm, between mediastinal pleura, and posterior to the sternum. Deep thymic (or N2) nodes include the lower jugular, supraclavicular, internal mammary, upper paratracheal, lower paratracheal, subaortic/aortopulmonary window, and hilar nodes. It is recommended that both levels are removed in cases of thymic carcinoma and thymomas with the invasion of mediastinal structures. In cases of thymomas without mediastinal invasion, only N1 level nodes should be excised.

There are several postoperative complications associated with thymectomy. These are summarized below:

- Respiratory failure and prolonged intubation - commonly seen in patients with myasthenia gravis

- Pleural effusion, pneumonia, atelectasis, pneumothorax, and acute lung injury

- Phrenic and recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

- Phrenic nerve injury

- This can be avoided by limiting dissection, traction, and the use of electrocautery around the nerve.
- If the nerve is injured, one can see if the palsy resolves over time. If it does not, diaphragmatic plication or phrenic nerve reconstruction are options in skilled hands.


- Left recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

- This leads to vocal cord paralysis
- Commonly occurs in aortopulmonary window dissection


- Right recurrent laryngeal nerve injury

- Occurs around the right subclavian artery which is above the innominate vein and outside margin of thymectomy

- Surgical site infection and mediastinitis - Reduce risk by reducing steroid use (especially in patients with myasthenia gravis)