Thus far, MM remains an incurable disease, with a significant number of patients relapsing due to evolving genetic mutations in tumor cells resulting in treatment resistance. Therefore, continuous efforts in understanding the pathophysiology of MM can lead to a remarkable breakthrough in preventing relapse and managing multiple refractory myeloma.

Bispecific antibodies (bsAbs) have shown promising results in early clinical trials. A bispecific T-cell engager (BiTE) enhances the interaction of T-cells and MM cells by targeting BCMA on MM cells and CD3 receptors on the T-cells causing tumor lysis.

Rpn13 has high expression in MM cells and is involved in the regulation, proliferation, and survival of MM cells; therefore, inhibitors that target Rpn13 may play a significant role in treating MM and increasing survival.

Bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) proteins employ tandem bromodomains on acetylated histones, which leads to enhanced transcriptional activity in refractory hematological malignancies, including MM. Preclinical studies have shown the anti-tumor effects of highly specific BET protein inhibitors making MM cells more vulnerable to degranulation by NK cells opening a new perspective on treating RRMM.

The use of NK-cell-based immunotherapy and combinations of CAR-NK cell therapy with other drugs are still being studied in many trials.

The current use of carfilzomib, bortezomib, and ixazomib by targeting the ubiquitin-proteosome pathway has proven an effective treatment strategy in MM patients; however, patients can develop relapse due to drug resistance. Newer agents like proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) are being studied in the latest clinical trials as molecules that target the disease-related protein to induce its proteasomal degradation.