The management of developmental delay is a team effort that includes primary care providers as well as pediatric subspecialists such as neurologists, child and adolescent psychiatrists, developmental and behavioral pediatricians, and other pediatric subspecialists as indicated. Also, the skills from other disciplines may be necessary, for example, psychology, genetics, speech and language pathology, occupational therapy, physical therapy, nutritionists, etc. In short, treatment strategies are usually multi-modal.

Treatment strategies require that the lead member of the team, often the primary care provider, establishes a therapeutic partnership with the pediatric care team, educating and providing parents/families with necessary information about the developmental delay and any evidence of an evolving syndrome, including the course of the disorder, diagnosis, prognosis, and complications. Additionally, psychosocial support and parental counseling/guidance are essential elements of care. Information should be provided at a level consistent with the ability of the parents to understand as this will enhance acceptance and adherence to care plans.

For some families, social work support services may be necessary for coordination and transportation services, regular home visits, and other services essential to complete evaluations.

- Early childhood education

- Early intervention programs

- Early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment (EPSDT)

- Parenting problems – consider referral for parent training. This might include parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT) consisting of two phases, such as parent-directed interaction (PDI) and child-directed interaction (CDI). Additionally, parents may need help in providing their children with appropriately stimulating environments at home, school, and daycare. Many children with developmental delays are eligible for community-based services. Primary care providers should be familiar with these services, eligibility, and how to make referrals.  Among many, these include:

- Behavior Problems – consider referral to child and adolescent psychiatrist and/or behavior therapist (BCBA board-certified behavior analyst)

- Social skills problems – consider referral for social skills training (individual and group_

- Auditory impairment – consider referral to audiology (15)

- Visual impairment – consider referral to ophthalmology.

- Gross or fine motor delay— consider referral to physical therapy and/or occupational therapy (PT/OT)

- Speech & language delay — consider referral to a speech and language pathologist.

- HeadStart

- Special Education (via Individualized Education Program (IEP) or 504 Plan)

- Other community service agencies and programs