During an episode of agitation, obtaining a history is difficult, and in most cases, counterproductive, as patients might retaliate, especially if they are psychotic. Individuals who are agitated do not want to talk about their history, but the initial evaluation is the most important tool that will help a clinician to determine the outcome of an episode. After approaching the patient, the clinician should seek to build rapport by verbal de-escalation using a calm tone and let the patient know that his or her needs will be cared for and the medical staff is there to help. Once the patients trust the clinician, they may discuss the patient's basic history. Questions should not be leading and assumptions may lead to sudden outbursts. Basic questions should focus on the probable cause of the agitation. If the patient has a medical condition that led to delirium, then the focus should be on orientation questions.

A mental status exam will be necessary. If the patient is agitated due to postictal confusion, then asking about a seizure history is appropriate. If agitation is due to psychosis, it is helpful to talk about the delusions or hallucinations. If the patient is disorganized, then empathy alone can calm the patient. Conducting a physical is appropriate once the patient is redirectable and not agitated. Before doing a physical, always ask them if it is okay for you to do a brief exam. If the patient consents, then approach them with care as patients can use stethoscopes, pens, badges, and anything they can get their hands on for assault. Therefore, it is most important to make sure that the patient is calm, not agitated, and not passive-aggressive before approaching them for a physical exam. The physical exam should be focused and brief.