When patients complain of a ringing sensation in the ear, the differential diagnosis is extensive. Thus healthcare workers, including the nurse practitioners, should refer these patients to an ENT surgeon for further workup. Management of patients with MEM, as well as specifically TT syndrome, varies depending on the patient’s severity of symptoms and expectations. Several medications have been reportedly used for MEM with questionable efficacy, including benzodiazepines, carbamazepine, piracetam, botulinum toxin, as well as orphenadrine citrate with varying mechanisms of action. Benzodiazepines can be used to potentially decrease symptoms by targeting the anxiolytic component of the disorder as well as functioning as a muscle relaxant.

Another possible intervention that targets the contraction of the TT muscle is via botulinum toxin. Although the use of botulinum toxin is new to MEM, its use in non-cosmetic otolaryngology-associated disease processes like hemifacial spasm as well as laryngeal pathology such as spasmodic dysphonia is well documented.

The role of surgical intervention is also more clearly defined. The most common procedure for TT syndrome as well as stapedius myoclonus is tympanotomy with TT or stapedius tenotomy.

Tinnitus itself is not harmful; however, depending on the etiology, the underlying process can be life-threatening, such as multiple sclerosis. Other than the underlying disease process, tinnitus itself can cause a range of emotional distress to patients, from severely debilitating to causing little to no distress to the patient. Additionally, there is not enough data at this time to predict whether symptoms will discontinue or reduce, regardless of whether there is an identifiable cause for the tinnitus or idiopathic in origin.