Typically, the procedure begins at the posterior aspect of the fibula. A modified approach has been described in the proximal calf to minimize complications.

The area between the Achilles tendon and posterior border of the fibula is marked approximately 5 to 7 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus. An incision is made, and the lesser saphenous vein is identified. The vein is then retracted superficially to expose the sural nerve.

At this point, the surgeon may harvest the entire nerve, or fascicular portions depending on pathological requirements. Bevilacqua et al. recommend a biopsy of the entire nerve if the pathology may not involve all of the fascicles, and the patient's symptoms are severe. Likewise, if the patient's symptoms are minimal and the pathology may be localized in the fascicles, then a fascicular biopsy should be performed.

For a complete nerve biopsy, untied sutures are placed into both ends of the nerve, and the nerve is transected above these sutures. The nerve is then removed using these sutures as a sling to avoid nerve compression.  For a fascicular biopsy, the nerve is partially transected and sent using similar techniques. Care should be taken to avoid compression or curling of the nerve during harvesting and fixation. Individual laboratories vary on specimen fixation techniques required; therefore, guidance is necessary for local facilities.

During a fascicular biopsy, the surgeon can attempt a repair after harvest by carefully matching nerve patterns and performing an end-to-end repair of remaining structures under a microscope.