HOCM can be classified as obstructive or non-obstructive.  There is some degree of asymmetric left ventricular hypertrophy.   The degree of obstruction and clinical presentation is dependent upon the extent of hypertrophy.  It most commonly affects the ventricular septum (about 2/3 of patients), although any portion of the left ventricle can be affected.

Dynamic outflow obstruction in HOCM is due to systolic anterior motion(SAM) of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. This is due to impingement of the mitral valve leaflets on the hypertrophied basal septum.  The outflow tract obstruction is dynamic and caused by a pressure gradient which pulls the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve anteriorly further leading to outflow tract obstruction. The degree of obstruction is dependent upon contractility and loading conditions.  In 25% of patients, the obstruction can exist at rest, but about 70% of patients can be brought about with provocative maneuvers.

Most patient’s with HOCM have an abnormal diastolic function. This increases left ventricular pressures impairing ventricular filling which further exacerbates obstruction.  Because the coronary vessels are filled during diastole in combination with outflow tract obstruction and ventricular stiffness, there is an increased risk for myocardial ischemia. This may be responsible for ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death.  In severe cases, this can occur at rest. More commonly, it occurs with provocative maneuvers such as exercise during increased myocardial demand.