Thiamin (or thiamine) is also known as vitamin B1. It is one of the water-soluble B vitamins. Thiamin is present naturally in some diets or added to some food products and provided in the form of dietary supplements. During energy metabolism, thiamin plays a critical role in the human body. Thiamin is actively absorbed and passively diffused by the small intestine at nutritional and pharmacological doses, respectively.

The intestinal enzyme phosphatase hydrolyzes thiamin into a free form which is then absorbed by the small intestine. The phosphorylated form of thiamin gets stored in the heart, kidneys, liver, and brain. It has a short half-life of 14 to 18 days; therefore, regular dietary intake of thiamin is necessary.

Thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency occurs if the recommended daily intake (RDI) is not maintained. However, deficiency may also occur due to impaired intestinal absorption or high excretion rates, such as in people with alcohol dependency, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and malnutrition.

Vitamin B1 deficiency may present with early or advanced symptoms. Early symptoms mainly arise from neurological, cardiac, and gastrointestinal systems, where patients may experience weight loss, anorexia, confusion, short-term amnesia, malaise, muscle weakness, and cardiac symptoms.

Beriberi is a disorder caused by vitamin B1 deficiency which can present as wet or dry types. Wet beriberi presents as a high-output cardiac failure with signs of edema, an enlarged heart, warm extremities, tachycardia, and respiratory distress. Dry beriberi is predominantly a neurological complication involving the peripheral nervous system and presents with peripheral neuropathy, malaise, muscle weakness, seizures, or brisk tendon reflexes.

If vitamin B1 deficiency is prolonged or left untreated, an individual is at risk of advanced-stage symptoms. This condition is called Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (WKS). It is more common in the United States and 8 to 10 times more common among people with chronic alcohol consumption/misuse, severe gastrointestinal disorders, malignancies, drug use, and AIDS. It presents in two phases. Wernicke encephalopathy (WE) occurs early and presents with polyneuropathy, ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, and gait abnormalities. If left untreated, it can eventually evolve into Korsakoff psychosis (KS) with signs of severe short-term amnesia, disorientation, confabulation, and hallucinations.