Patients can have variable presentations depending on the area of involvement of the disease. The most common site of origin is the lateral aspect of the nasopharynx and the fossa of Rosenmuller.

- **Nasal symptoms:**A subset of patients present with nasal symptoms, including nasal obstruction, epistaxis, post-nasal drip, hyponasal speech, or cacosmia. Symptomatology is proportionate to the size of growth and the extent of local involvement—around 80% of the individuals suffering from the disease present with nasal symptoms.

- **Otological symptoms:**Patients may present with symptoms secondary to Eustachian tube obstruction by the tumor, such as conductive hearing loss, middle ear effusion, or aural fullness. An adult with unilateral middle ear effusion requires visualization of the nasopharynx to exclude neoplasm. Half of the patients with NPC have some form of otological complaint during the disease caused because of the growing mass obstructing the outflow of the Eustachian tube.

- **Neurological symptoms:**Intracranial extension is prevalent among 8% to 12% of patients — various forms of cranial nerve involvement present with the associated symptom. Cranial nerve palsy is found in 20% of nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients and may be the presenting symptom

- **Nodal involvement:**One of the most common presenting features is an enlarged cervical lymph node. Lymph nodes of the apex of the posterior triangle and the upper jugular are initially most commonly involved, together with retropharyngeal nodes. Supraclavicular nodes are the last to be involved and are a sign of advanced disease.

**Distant metastasis and paraneoplastic syndrome:**Symptoms associated with distant spread rarely present to the primary caregiver. The most significant spread includes the liver and lungs. It is sometimes difficult to assess the primary site of malignancy when metastatic pulmonary lesions occur. PET scan aids in the differentiation of the two. Secondly, a handful of cases present with symptoms of dermatomyositis. The progression of the disease might initiate with the malignant lesion or can present after the initial diagnosis of NPC.