**Decidualization and Placentation**

**Decidua Formation**

The decidua is a transitory interface that is present only during pregnancy. Decidua is derived from the uterine endometrium and is located between myometrium and fetal membranes. Pre-decidualisation is noted during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle under the influence of estrogen and progesterone. However, the implantation should occur before pre-decidualization. Therefore any disturbance in the decidualization process could cause implantation failure.

Decidua contributes to three vital components of the maternal-fetal interface, which are listed as follows.

- **Immune tolerance:**Decidual cells are the first cells of the feto-maternal interface in contact with fetal antigens. Two distinct immune interfaces help in immune tolerance.

- 
              
- The first immune interface starts early in pregnancy, in the first trimester. It comprises the decidual immune cells, trophoblastic cells from fetal villi, decidual stromal cells, and the spiral artery.
              
              
- The second interface forms as early as eight weeks of gestation, and it comprises immune cells from the maternal circulation and syncytial trophoblast cells from the placental chorion.

- **Trophoblast invasion:**The trophoblastic cells are derived from the blastocyst part of the embryo, which lies between the embryo's external layer and the uterine layer. Trophoblasts differentiate into villous and extravillous trophoblast cells. During implantation, invading trophoblasts anchor the blastocyst to decidua, on which placentation ensues. Trophoblast invasion can also occur in organs other than the uterus, such as fallopian tubes, causing an ectopic pregnancy.

- **Remodeling of spiral arterioles:**After implantation, fetal trophoblast and maternal leukocytes induce the remodeling of the spiral artery, which includes the erosion of the fibrinoid wall and dilation of the vessel facilitating the placenta bathed in maternal blood. The spiral arterioles' remodeling promotes the placental function of the exchange of nutrients and waste removal.

**Placenta Development**

The placenta is usually formed entirely by the third week of gestation and comprises anchoring and floating villi. Placenta has the external layer of the syncytiotrophoblast and an internal layer of the cytotrophoblast. The cytotrophoblast layer forms the barrier and functions as a significant barrier between the fetal and maternal compartments. In the second trimester, cytotrophoblast thins and functionally placenta becomes hemomonochorial with only one layer of syncytiotrophoblast.

**Leukocytes At The Maternal-Fetal Interface**

The maternal leukocytes at the feto-maternal interface are recruited by cytokines produced by decidual stromal cells and trophoblasts. Decidual natural killer cells (70%) and decidual macrophages(20%) account for the majority, followed by Regulatory T cells (10%).

- Decidual natural killer (NK) cells contribute to decidualization and implantation. Decidual NK cells aids in remodeling the spiral arteries and promoting trophoblast invasion via cytokines like interleukin-8. The number of decidual NK cells gradually decreases as the fetus's gestation advances and becomes less granulated.

- Decidual macrophages (DM) function as antigen-presenting cells. IL-10 and macrophage colony-stimulating factor secreted from trophoblast recruits decidual macrophage. Decidual macrophages are differentiated into pro-inflammatory M1 and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages. The predominant phenotype at the maternal-fetal interface should be M2 macrophage, which plays a significant role in remodeling the spiral arteries and trophoblast invasion. Vascular endothelial growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase secreted from DM promote angiogenesis and tissue remodeling. DM also has an essential function of phagocytosis of apoptotic trophoblasts. DM also plays a significant role in protecting the fetus against infections.

- Regulatory T cells (Treg) help achieve maternal tolerance to the fetal antigens and maintain a stable environment for the fetus to survive. In addition, Treg cells play a vital role in downregulating the inflammatory response for the implanting embryo.

**T-helper2 (Th2)-type Cytokines**

The maternal immune response shifts towards Th2/antibody-mediated immunity rather than cell-mediated immunity at the maternal-fetal interface. Th2-type cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10, increase at the maternal-fetal interface and make pregnancy an anti-inflammatory state embracing the semi-allogenic fetus. An infective or non-infective insult at the placental level triggering the secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokine such as IL-6, IL-12, and TNF alpha could cause placental damage leading to preterm labor, abortion, or preeclampsia.

**Human Leukocyte Antigen-G**

Extra-villous trophoblast expresses Human Leukocyte Antigen-G (HLA-G), which helps in the implantation of the embryo. HLA-G helps in promoting vascular permeability and angiogenesis and thereby helps in the remodeling of the spiral artery. HLA-G also stimulates NK cells to release growth factors that help in the growth of the fetus. Lower levels of HLA-G are associated with pregnancy complications such as placental abruption, pre-eclampsia, and recurrent abortions.

**Maternal Tolerance**

Maternal tolerance plays a vital role in the successful pregnancy outcome, permitting the pregnant woman to carry her fetus with foreign fetal antigen. Failure of maternal tolerance is associated with miscarriage and preeclampsia. The modulation of leukocytes profile at feto-maternal interface helps in maternal tolerance. An excess of decidual NK cells over T-cells can be explained by epigenetic silencing of Tcell chemoattractants in stromal cells of the decidua. The cytokines like IL-10 and TGF-β promote differentiation of the existing few T cells into Treg cells in the decidua. Apoptosis is another mechanism that helps in immune privilege. IL-10 and TGF-β secreted from decidual macrophage play a major role in preventing fetal rejection and promote fetal growth till delivery.

**Placental Immune Defense**

The placenta displays a variety of defense mechanisms to protect the fetus from most infections. They are listed as follow,

- The structural integrity of the placenta is the most robust defense by itself. The external layer of the syncytiotrophoblast doesn't have any cellular junctions, and also syncytiotrophoblast layer has a dense cytoskeletal network forming a dense brush border at the apical surface. So both the anatomic factor helps in defending any parasite.

- The antiviral cytokines secreted from the placenta also play a significant role in placental immune defense. Gamma- interferon secreted by the syncytiotrophoblast layer is a major cytokine that restricts viral infections.

- Toll-like receptors are expressed on the trophoblast, which mediates the antiinfective signaling pathway.

- Immunoglobulin G receptors expressed on the syncytiotrophoblast layer play a major role in the active transport of protective maternal antibodies to the fetus. This active transport begins in the second trimester and gradually increases throughout the pregnancy, with the highest peak at term.