Nuclear medicine techniques play an important role in the care of pediatric patients. They can diagnose, change management, monitor progression and assess response to therapies.

- **Time requirements**: Nuclear medicine exams require at least 2 to 3 times the time it takes to perform a similar test in adults. Therefore, proper planning and scheduling are required, especially in a medical practice with a mixed adult and pediatrics patient population, to avoid mistakes in scheduling and allow for the proper time to perform the test.

- **Early****team**involvement (child life, nursing, and anesthesia) in difficult cases.

- Proper understanding that there is a spectrum of findings in****normal--negative exams. This ranges from a typical/textbook normal to a normal variant versus atypical normal.

- Proper understanding that there is a spectrum of findings in****abnormal--positive exams. This ranges from a typical/textbook abnormal to an abnormal variant versus atypical abnormal.

- This spectrum knowledge is critical to avoid confusion every time an atypical presentation occurs.

- Proper understanding of the indication of the nuclear medicine exam. Some exams are ordered as a standard of care in all patients with similar pathology. At the same time, others are ordered as problem-solving tools. At other times both apply.

- **Appropriate use criteria:**Because nuclear medicine exams involve exposure to ionizing radiation, it is essential to follow the best medical practice, guidelines, and appropriate use criteria as defined by leading medical societies and the literature.

- **Optimized scanning time**: Because children cannot lay still for the duration of scans, anesthesia may be used at times. Choosing the most appropriate imaging protocol that will provide diagnostic value in the least amount of time is needed. Purchasing the latest technology scanners will allow diagnostic quality imaging with a rapid scanning time with the equivalent of a chest X-ray or lower radiation exposure dose.

- **Optimized radiopharmaceutical activity**: Purchasing the latest technology scanners will allow diagnostic quality imaging at very low radiopharmaceutical doses, the equivalent of a chest x-ray, or lower radiation exposure dose.

- **Benefits/risk estimate**: Physicians should carefully weigh the benefit-risk ratio before ordering an exam, as with any procedure or test. The benefit of using diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine techniques in pediatrics is huge when best medical practice and guidelines are followed.

- **Indications**:

- **Lymphoma:**3rd most common malignancy in children. There are mostly two types: Hodgkin's lymphoma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Better outcomes are noted in children compared to adults. However, long-term complications from treatment are center stage. Therefore, de-escalation treatment regimens are being explored that would improve outcomes and decrease immediate and late adverse effects. The role of FDG-PET is established in pediatric lymphomas and has become the standard of care in pediatric Hodgkin lymphoma initial staging, restaging, and response to therapy assessments.

- **Sarcomas:**Bone sarcomas account for approximately 6 percent of all childhood cancers, and osteosarcomas account for approximately 3 percent of childhood cancers overall. Bone scans can be used to evaluate multifocal disease. However, this is being replaced nowadays with FDG PET-CT scans for staging and restaging assessments. Although whole-body MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is the mainstay of imaging, it may have some limitations at follow-up with prostheses artifacts and assessing response to treatment. A CT scan with thin slices is required to monitor for any lung metastasis. FDG PET-CT is very good at initial staging, restaging, therapy response assessments, and reports showing sensitivity and specificity in the '90s. One should pay close attention to the PET-CT protocol used and adjust the attenuation correction CT protocol to be able to detect small lung nodule metastasis. This is crucial considering the lung is the site of 80% of metastasis.

- **Neuroblastoma:**Represents 10% of solid tumors in children. It is the most common extracranial solid tumor.

- **Pheochromocytoma/p****araganglioma:**These are rare pediatric tumors. Pheochromocytomas usually arise from the adrenals and paragangliomas from extra-adrenal locations. Pheocromoyctomas frequently will secrete catecholamines, and paragangliomas are quite variable. About two-thirds are sporadic, but several germline mutations have been described, such asRET, SDHD, SDHB, SDHC, SDHAF2, or SDHA, VHL, TMEM127, or MAX genes.

- **Miscellaneous tumors:**FDG PET scans are proven to be highly accurate in staging and restaging gastrointestinal stromal tumors and mixed germ cell tumors.

- **Thyroid cancer:**Thyroid cancer is uncommon in children compared to adults. Papillary thyroid cancer is the most common type. Although locoregional lymph node and distant metastasis are more frequent than in adults, the prognosis is significantly better, and survival rates are extremely high even with distant metastasis with appropriate treatment.

- **Congenital hypothyroidism:**Pertechnetetate scan is a fairly simple exam to perform. It can pretty accurately distinguish between several etiologies: athyrogenesis (no thyroid uptake), ectopic thyroid/lingual thyroid (uptake is noted outside the expected thyroid bed/lower neck), and thyroid hormone dysgenesis (normal thyroidal uptake).

- **Hyperparathyroidism:**Hyperparathyroidism****is rarely encountered in pediatrics and can be evaluated by a sestamibi scan. It can localize parathyroid adenomas. Precise localization in a eutopic or ectopic location can be obtained using hybrid imaging techniques.

- **Chronic urinary tract infections and kidney scarring:**DMSA scan with planar and SPECT imaging is the most sensitive technique currently available for clinical use to evaluate kidney scarring.

- **Vesicoureteral reflux and scarring: A**DMSA scan is also quite effective in detecting renal scarring in patients with vesicoureteral reflux.

- **Obstructive uropathies:**Ultrasound is the imaging of choice for patients' initial evaluation and follow-up with suspicion of obstructive uropathy. However, diuretic renograms are frequently used to confirm an obstruction and risk-stratify dilated collecting systems.

- **Lymphodysplasias:**Lymphoscintigrams****with or without newer hybrid imaging SPECT-CT techniques are simple and accurate studies to evaluate abnormalities of the lymphatic system. It involves the intradermic, more or less subcutaneous injection of a colloid radiopharmaceutical. Indications include congenital lymphodysplasias, lymphedema, lymphatic leaks, lymphangiomas, lymphangiomatosis, Gorham Stout disease, and lymphangiectasia.

- **Biliary atresia (BA):**Biliary atresia is deadly without early surgical intervention (Kasai procedure). Optimal outcomes occur when surgery is performed before 45 days of life. Delay in diagnosis can be accompanied by complications such as cirrhosis, portal hypertension, liver failure, a decrease in the success rate of the Kasai procedure, and even death. HIDA scans/hepatobiliary scans evaluate uptake in the liver as well as the hepatobiliary system. Radiopharmaceutical excretion into the bowel excludes BA. Proper preparation with phenobarbital 5-7 days before the scan is essential.

- **Myocardial perfusion:**Cardiac MRI, echocardiography, and cardiac CT are the mainstays of pediatric imaging. Anatomical information is essential in cardiac congenital anomalies. MRI is nowadays able to provide reproducible stress-induced functional parameters. However, nuclear medicine myocardial perfusion imaging can still be used as a problem-solving tool. It is seldom needed but can be helpful to evaluate for ischemia and risk stratify patients alone or in combination with MR. Common indications are congenital heart disease repair, Kawasaki disease, hypoplastic heart, anomalous origin of the coronaries, coronary bridging, cardiac transplants, and other cardiomyopathies. SPECT or PET can be used with pharmacological stress. Although PET offers the advantage of absolute myocardial blood flow quantification, this should be used with caution, and proper expertise in children should be sought as normal values are quite different and higher compared to adults.

- **Meckel diverticulum:**Meckel scan is a simple and highly accurate test to evaluate Meckel diverticulum with a reported sensitivity and specificity in the mid-'90s.

- **Medically refractory epilepsy:**Nuclear medicine techniques are valuable in the presurgical workup of medically refractory epilepsy patients. Cerebral blood flow (CBF) SPECT and FDG PET imaging are essential exams to delineate the seizure onset zone (SOZ) required to be resected. Successful SOZ localization is needed for postsurgical seizure freedom. In patients with a clinical semiology amenable to CBF imaging, ictal-interictal subtraction offers accuracy in the '90s. Inter-ictal FDG PET imaging is also very useful in MRI negative cases to detect the SOZ. In MRI-positive cases, FDG PET delineation of the SOZ has also been reported to correlate with outcomes.

- **Encephalitis:**FDG PET is the most sensitive imaging technique to evaluate brain changes in encephalitis. It can also be used to monitor treatment response and metabolic brain changes in cases that later on develop epilepsy.

- **Brain tumors:**MRI is the gold standard and workhorse of imaging in pediatric brain tumors. However, in some cases, MRI fails to fully characterize a lesion. Aminoacid imaging with C11-methionine, FDOPA, or FET PET can be used as a problem-solving tool in differentiating radiation necrosis changes versus recurrence in radiation treatment planning, defining the surgical extent, and guiding biopsies.

- **Child abuse:**Non-accidental injury in babies and children is a challenging clinical conundrum. Diagnosis is crucial, and a high suspicion should always be maintained. Bone scan offers a high sensitivity exam that adds value as an adjunct to the traditional skeletal survey.

- **Lung perfusion pathology:**Pulmonary artery anomalies and congenital cardiac malformations can be evaluated with MAA scans. Lung perfusion can be evaluated before and after an intervention.

- **Gastrointestinal motility disorders:**Delayed gastric emptying is frequently encountered in children. Solid or liquid-based gastric emptying studies can be used to assess gastric emptying.

- **Chronic microaspirations:**Patients with chronic microaspirations have frequent repeated pulmonary infections. Salivagrams are relatively easy nuclear medicine tests that require little preparation and can detect microaspirations.

- **Gastroesophageal reflux:**In contrast to salivagrams, gastroesophageal reflux studies or milk scans are also used to detect pulmonary aspiration. Jigang et al. compared both techniques in a cohort of 4186 patients and concluded that salivagrams have a much higher detection rate of 20.3% vs. 0.4% for gastroesophageal reflux studies.

- **Fever of unknown origin:**A variety of etiologies can be explored using FDG PET scans ranging from systemic inflammatory conditions, rheumatologic diseases/vasculidities, infectious processes, and oncology pathology.

- **Evaluation of device infections:**FDG PET scans are used to evaluate cardiovascular devices and implanted musculoskeletal hardware.