ACS is a serious complication of sickle cell anemia with high morbidity and mortality. Many of these individuals have repeated episodes of sickle cell crises, and thus it is important to prevent them with education. Besides the physician, the nurse and the pharmacist need to educate the patient on the importance of vaccination against pneumococcus. Patients admitted with ACS should be encouraged to use the incentive spirometer to prevent lung collapse. A pain consultant is often necessary for pain relief and reduces respiratory splinting, but the dose has to be titrated to avoid causing sedation. The hematologist should be consulted to assess the need for blood transfusions and plasma exchange. The pulmonologist should be consulted if the patient has asthma, COPD or restrictive lung disease as these disorders are associated with high morbidity in ACS. Even after a single episode of ACS, the patient and family should be educated about the importance of hydroxyurea, which is a potent inducer of HbF. The drug has been shown to lower the risk of sickle cell crises. Finally, the patient should be educated at discharge to return to the hospital is the symptoms worsen because the earlier the disorder is treated, the better is the outlook.

**Outcomes**

ACS is a severe complication of sickle cell anemia and usually required admission. There are no randomized clinical trials on the treatment of ACS and outcomes. Anecdotal reports indicate fair to a good outcome in the short term, but repeated admissions are common. In addition, the syndrome is also associated with a high morbidity and mortality. Without aggressive treatment, poor outcomes are common. Patients must be started on hydroxyurea to prevent future episodes.