**Radiographic Evaluation**

- Weightbearing AP, lateral, and oblique views are necessary. MRI and CT scans are not a requirement for the diagnosis or treatment planning of the disease. The determination extent of joint space narrowing is best from an oblique radiograph.

**Classification**

- Coughlin and Shurnas proposed this classification based on clinical and radiographic findings of the disease. The Coughlin and Shurnas Clinical Radiographic System for Grading Hallux Rigidus is as follows:

**Grade 0**

- Dorsiflexion: 40 to 60 degree and/or 10% to 20% loss compared to normal side

- Radiographic findings: normal

- Clinical Findings: No pain; only stiffness and loss of motion on physical examination

**Grade 1**

- Dorsiflexion: 30 to 40 degrees and/or 20% to 50% loss compared to the normal side

- Radiographic findings: Dorsal osteophyte is the main finding. Minimal joint space narrowing, periarticular sclerosis, and flattening of the metatarsal head

- Clinical findings: Mild pain and stiffness, pain at extremes of dorsiflexion and/or plantar flexion on examination.

**Grade 2**

- Dorsiflexion: 10 to 30 degree and/or 50% to 75% loss compared to normal side

- Radiographic findings: Dorsal, lateral, and possibly medial osteophytes giving a flattened appearance to metatarsal head, no more than 1/4 of dorsal joint space involved on the lateral radiograph; mild to moderate joint space narrowing and sclerosis, sesamoids not usually involved.

- Clinical findings: Moderate to severe pain and stiffness that may be constant; pain occurs just before maximum dorsiflexion and maximum plantarflexion on examination

**Grade 3**

- Dorsiflexion: 10 degrees or less and/or 75% to 100% loss compared with the normal side. There is a notable loss of metatarsophalangeal plantarflexion as well.

- Radiographic findings: Same as grade 2 but with substantial narrowing, possibly periarticular cystic changes, more than 1/4 of dorsal joint space involved on the lateral radiograph, sesamoids enlarged and/or cystic and/or irregular

- Clinical findings: Nearly constant pain and substantial stiffness at extremes of the range of motion but not at mid-range

**Grade 4**

- Dorsiflexion: Same as grade 3

- Radiographic findings: same as grade 3

- Clinical findings: Same criteria as grade 3, but there is definite pain at mid-range of passive motion.