Ibuprofen’s potential for toxicity in the body derives from the various cellular processes throughout multiple organ systems affected by the inhibition of the cyclooxygenase pathway. Prostaglandins and thromboxanes play important roles in maintaining the gastric mucosal layer and renal blood flow; though relatively small, ibuprofen still carries a risk of adverse gastrointestinal and renal events even at therapeutic levels. Overdose is a common reason for patient presentation with ibuprofen toxicity, with ibuprofen being the most common NSAID involved in an overdose at 29% with either exclusive use or use combined with other analgesics.

A risk score has been created by a study that sought to improve the risk-benefit ratio of NSAID usage; Their risk score was accurate in categorizing the one-year risk of major toxicity among NSAID users, with implications for the utility in further aiding safe treatment of patients using NSAIDs.

Reye syndrome is an increasingly rare phenomenon in modern times, in large part due to efforts by countries to curb aspirin usage beginning in the 1980s. The decreased usage of aspirin in children in the United Kingdom led to a decrease in the incidence of Reye syndrome, from 100 cases in 1984 to 3 cases in 2000.

Much like other widely used medications, there is increasing concern about the presence of ibuprofen in the environment and the long-term effects of environmental ibuprofen exposure. Studies currently show potential methods of bioremediation of ibuprofen in the atmosphere via bacterial strains, mineral particles, and solar radiation.