Certain types of melanoma are associated with cumulative solar damage (CSD). However, in some cases, the etiology is not always clear.

**A. Melanomas Typically Associated with CSD**

- Pathway I. Superficial spreading melanoma/low-CSD melanoma

- Pathway II. Lentigo maligna melanoma/high-CSD melanoma

- Pathway III. Desmoplastic melanoma

**B. Melanomas Not Consistently Associated with CSD Damage**

- Pathway IV. Spitz melanomas

- Pathway V. Acral melanoma

- Pathway VI. Mucosal melanomas

- Pathway VII. Melanomas arising in congenital nevi

- Pathway VIII. Melanomas arising in blue nevi

- Pathway IX. Uveal melanoma

**C. Nodular Melanoma (may occur in any or most of the pathways)**

Four major variants of primary cutaneous melanoma are:

- Superficial spreading melanoma

- The most common type of melanoma 
- Show hallmark melanoma features; asymmetry, irregular borders, color, ad increased diameter 
- The prolonged radial growth phase, which is characterized by intraepidermal expansion 
- No dermal invasion

- Nodular melanoma 

- Located in chronically sun-exposed areas, head and neck. 
- Histologically shows a vertical growth phase only, radial growth phase is absent 
- Grow rapidly and usually present at an advanced Breslow depth 
- It represents 15 to 20 % of primary melanomas but is responsible for 40 % of melanoma deaths.

- Lentigo maligna melanoma 

- Elderly patients with chronically sun-damaged skin of the face 
- Derived from ann in situ lentigo maligna precursor that presents as a slowly enlarging and changing brown to black macule with irregular borders

- Acral lentiginous melanoma