**Function**

Brachytherapy can be delivered by several means, including intraluminal, intracavitary, and multi-catheter interstitial (MIB). Sources that are permanently or temporarily implanted within the tumor are labeled as interstitial brachytherapy, while sources placed near the tumor are considered plesiotherapy.

**Equipment**

Depending on the type of implantation performed, certain types of delivery equipment will be required. After-loading technology made it easier and safer to deliver radioactive isotopes without exposing the staff to excessive amounts of radiation. Manual after-loaders are typically used in low-dose-rate brachytherapy with low-energy radioisotopes. The most well-known is the Mick ® Applicator, used for interstitial permanent seed implantation for prostate brachytherapy. It allows for the precise placement of loose seeds into the prostate.

Remote afterloading is commonly used for high-dose-rate brachytherapy with high-energy radioisotopes. A remote afterloader consists of a shielded safe where the high-activity radioactive source resides. They require a dedicated shielded room with audio/visual surveillance. The source is connected to a super elastic nickel-titanium wire that allows it to negotiate curved pathways without getting stuck. The wire is attached to a stepper motor which allows the source to allow the source to be advanced by a fixed distance and predefined dwell times with an accuracy of 1 mm. The source can travel at a maximum speed of 50 cm/second and dwell for as little as 0.1 seconds. The afterloader also contains several indexed channels that can accommodate multiple transfer tubes to the applicator. The source can exit any channel as the control console dictates outside the room. This allows the staff to deliver treatment without incurring high dose rate exposure. It has widespread use in brachytherapy-capable departments and can be used for several disease sites. Remote afterloading has resulted in a substantial reduction of staff radiation exposure.

**Applicators**

Applicators are designed to house the radioactive isotope during treatment. They can be engineered for specific clinical scenarios or custom-made. Below is a list of applicators that may be utilized, but it is by no means exhaustive.

**Vaginal Cylinder**

One of the simplest applicators is the vaginal cylinder used for uterine cancer or post-operative patients with cervical cancer. It is essentially a long tube with varying diameters based on the patient's anatomy. It has a channel in the central part of the tube, allowing for the introduction of a radioactive seed from an HDR afterloader to be used. There are also multichannel cylinders that allow for more sculpting of the dose.

**Tandem and Ring/Ovoid**

Other radiation applicators include the tandem and ring or tandem and ovoid, which are used in intact cervical cancer cases. The tandem is inserted in the cervical canal and uterus while the ovoid or ring surrounds the fornices. Radiation can be delivered using high or low dose rates.

**"Y"-Applicator**

The Rotte-Y-applicator consists of two divergent catheters inserted into the uterine cavity. It is most often used in the treatment of medically inoperable endometrial cancer.

**Valencia Applicator**

Valencia applicators are used in the treatment of skin cancers. They are composed of tungsten shielding and a flattening filter. They are placed over the skin tumor with a margin. It allows for a high dose rate of superficial radiation to be delivered.

**Breast Brachytherapy Applicators**

The most widely used intracavitary breast brachytherapy applicators include the single-channel Mammosite® and multichannel Strut Adjusted Volume Implant (SAVI ®). These allow for accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) in select patients with early-stage breast cancer. They allow for a high dose distribution around the surgical cavity with a margin with rapid dose falloff in the surrounding breast.

**Plaque and Sheet Applicators**

Plaque brachytherapy is typically utilized in the context of ocular malignancy. These are typically low-dose rate delivery and are sutured to the eye under anesthesia. The two most commonly used plaques are Iodine-125 and Ruthenium-106. The I-125 plaques consist of a backing made of inert metal such as gold, with I-125 seeds placed onto the wall of the plaque. Ruthenium-106 plaques are made in various sizes, with the Ru-106 electrodeposited onto a concave silver backing. The plaques are usually kept in place for several days, and the patient must remain in relative isolation for that time.

Using prefabricated radioactive sheets for low-dose-rate brachytherapy is a relatively new development. Before this, low-dose-rate meshes were used, but spacing and orientation made it difficult to maintain dose homogeneity.

**Interstitial Needle Templates**

Interstitial catheter placement can be performed alone or with the use of a template. They can be used in a wide range of clinical scenarios. This involves the placement of needles directly into the tumor, which allows for direct radiation delivery. The needles act as channels for accommodating the radioactive isotope, which dwells in the catheter for a pre-specified amount of time. Clinical applications include but are not limited to prostate cancer, penile cancer, sarcomas, gynecologic malignancies, nasal cavity tumors, oral cavity tumors, and urethral cancer. Syed-Neblett template is used for interstitial placement of catheters in gynecological malignancies. It consists of a rectangular template with regularly spaced openings and a central obturator that allows for the accommodation of a cylinder.

**Dosing**

The dosing used in brachytherapy varies based on the type of tumor being treated, radioisotope, dose rate (LDR or HDR), number of treatments planned if using HDR, and timing (adjuvant or definitive). Please consult individual disease articles for more details.

**Dose Rate**

Brachytherapy is typically described by the rate at which the dose is delivered. Three categories have been established to categorize brachytherapy. These include High-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy delivered at >12 Gy/hour, Pulsed dose rate (PDR) delivered at 10-30 minute intervals at a rate of 0.5-1.0 Gy/hour, Medium dose rate (MDR) offered at 2-12 Gy/hour, and Low dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy delivered at 0.4-2.0 Gy/hour. The advantages and disadvantages of LDR and HDR systems are listed in the table below.

**Low Dose Rate**

**High Dose Rate**

**Advantages**

**Disadvantages**

**Advantages**

**Disadvantages**

Single Treatment

Higher radiation exposure to staff

Lower radiation exposure to staff

More maintenance required

No source exchanges needed

The total dose delivered over hours to days

No need to order isotopes for each treatment

Source exchanges needed regularly

No shielding required



Radiation exposure to public

Fractionated treatments possible

Shielding required

Lower costs

Cannot adjust plan once delivered

Can adjust plan between fractions

Higher costs

**Isotopes**

Several radioactive isotopes may be used for brachytherapy. These isotopes are artificially manufactured using a nuclear reactor. A table of the most commonly used radioisotopes is listed in the table below. Iridium-192 is the most commonly utilized radioisotope for HDR brachytherapy. The LDR isotopes tend to have lower energy, decay by electron capture, and have far lower dose rates. A list of common radioisotopes used is listed in the table below.

**Isotope**

**Decay Mode**

**Mean Photon Energy (KeV)**

**Half-Life (Days)**

**Use**

Iridium-192

β emission (96%)

Electron Capture (4%)

380

74

HDR

Iodine-125

Electron Capture

28

60

LDR

Palladium-103

Electron Capture

21

17

LDR

Cesium-131

Electron Capture

29

10

LDR

When using LDR brachytherapy that requires permanent implantation of loose radioactive seeds, the number of seeds must be estimated pre-operatively. This is most commonly performed for prostate cancer, but other LDR techniques, such as eye plaque brachytherapy, require it as well. Nomograms such as the Memorial dimension averaging method, as well as several others, have been used in the treatment of prostate cancer. In general, there is an inverse relationship between the dose rate and prostate volume.

**Image Guided Brachytherapy and Treatment Planning Systems**

With the advent of advanced computing technology, more precise dosimetry became possible with CT, MRI, or even ultrasound-based brachytherapy planning. These advances are most evident in treating breast, cervical, and prostate cancer. Computational methods have significantly changed brachytherapy planning as it allows for 3-dimensional target definition, dwell weight optimization, and generation of isodose calculation. Unlike the older systems, which used idealized geometries and heuristics, CT-based planning allows for the evaluation of dose distribution in real-time in the patient using the actual implant geometry. Despite these advances, several assumptions derived from previous systems, such as 1 cm uniform spacing, uniform loading, and implanting at the boundary of the tumor, persist.

MRI-guided brachytherapy has established a foothold in the treatment of cervical cancer.

The use of ultrasound in the practice of brachytherapy for planning and directing needle placement is widespread. It is more cost-effective and does not result in additional radiation exposure compared to CT. Additionally, it is far less time-consuming than an MRI. Trans-rectal ultrasound-guided prostate brachytherapy is considered the standard imaging modality.

Before the widespread use of computerized brachytherapy planning and remote afterloading, the planning process relied on the use of several empirical systems. These were devised in an era when radium-226 was the dominant radioisotope. The most well-known systems are the Manchester system, the Quimby system, and the Paris system.

The Manchester system was devised in the 1930s by Herbert Parker and Rolston Paterson. The system's rules were designed to ensure dose homogeneity within the target by preferentially concentrating the radioactivity in the periphery of the implant. The ideal ratio of the periphery to core radioactivity varies with implant area (2:1 <25 cm, 1:1 25-100 cm, 1:2 >100 cm) with interstitial needles spaced 1 cm apart. The system is utilized for planar and volume implants. The amount of radioactivity required for the implant is dictated by the area of the planar implant or the volume. If the rules of the Manchester system are followed closely, then no more than a +/-10% deviation from the prescribed dose within the target area or volume can be expected.

The Quimby system was devised around the same time as the Manchester system. In contrast to the Manchester system, it uses equal-intensity implants distributed uniformly throughout the implant. Its origins and rules are not clearly defined, but the dose is specified 3-5mm from the periphery of the implant, with central doses 25-30% hotter than the prescription dose. Implants are spaced 1 to 2 cm apart. They can be used for planar and volume implants. The required radioactivity for the specified dose is ascertained by consulting a Quimby table expressed in milligram-hours to deliver a specified dose of 1000 cGy, and a multiplier determines the cumulative activity required. Generally, these implants tend to have a far higher central dose than the Manchester system.

In the 1960s, the Paris system was devised with the introduction of new iridium-192-based afterloading techniques and the phasing out of radium implants. This system requires the target's thickness, length, and width to be specified. The spacing is dictated by the thickness of the implant and the number of sources by the cross-sectional area. The linear density of the implant must be uniform. The prescription dose is 85% of the basal dose. The basal dose is calculated by averaging the minimum dose between adjacent equidistant sources in the transverse plane. Originally, the Paris system was only meant to address single and double-plane implants. As a result, the maximum thickness that can be treated with this system is 2.5 cm. Modifications to the Paris system are required for large-volume implants, but this is beyond the scope of the article.

**Radiobiology of Brachytherapy**

Brachytherapy's advantages over conventional external beam treatments include the highly conformal, high dose rate treatment with short overall treatment times. Ionizing radiation functions by inducing single and double-strand DNA damage leading to cell death by apoptosis or mitotic catastrophe, with the most sensitive period being the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. In classical radiobiology, the tumor response to radiation is based on reoxygenation, repair, redistribution, and repopulation, dubbed "The Four Rs." The speed of these processes and the rate of dose delivery (LDR vs. HDR) dictate the range over which they occur and their relative importance. Repopulation is generally irrelevant if the treatment time is very short. Sublethal damage repair is more relevant at low dose rates as the rate of repair may be closer to the rate of DNA damage accumulation in contrast to high dose rates where the damage rate far exceeds the cell's ability to repair the DNA damage. Reoxygenation and redistribution play a small role in LDR brachytherapy and are thought to increase cell sensitivity to radiation.

The biological effects of brachytherapy can be modeled using a modified linear quadratic model (LQ model), which relates cell survival to dose. Due to the differences in dose rate, sublethal damage repair plays a more significant role in LDR than in HDR brachytherapy. LDR brachytherapy dose rates are in the range of 0.4-2 Gy/hr, and the delivery is continuous compared to HDR brachytherapy, where delivery occurs over several minutes and has a time gap of hours to days between fractions. For LDR techniques, a G function is introduced, with a value ranging from 0-1, which accounts for damage repair and reduces cell sensitivity to radiation. The G function depends on the rate of DNA repair, irradiation time, and half-time for repair. For HDR treatments, the value of G is set to 1. Some LQ models may also take into account reoxygenation and redistribution, which can increase the sensitivity to radiation.

Despite the theoretical radiobiological differences between HDR and LDR, the two treatment approaches have demonstrated comparable clinical outcomes regarding tumor control and toxicity.