Glaucoma is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive degeneration of the optic disc and visual field loss, for which intraocular pressure (IOP) is the chief modifiable risk factor. Glaucoma is the most common etiology of irreversible blindness. It affects more than 2 million individuals in the United States and 67 million individuals worldwide.

Glaucoma has two main subtypes: open-angle glaucoma and angle-closure glaucoma. Juvenile open-angle glaucoma (JOAG) is an uncommon form of primary open-angle glaucoma, with earlier onset (3 to 40 years of age), higher IOP, and more severe visual field loss compared with adult-onset primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG).

Many studies report that this form of glaucoma typically demonstrates an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The myocilin (MYOC) gene is identified abundantly through linkage analysis in the trabecular meshwork (TM) of the affected patients.

**Anatomy of the Eye**

The eye can subdivide into two parts: anterior and posterior. The anterior part is located in front of the lens and divides into anterior and posterior chambers. In the posterior chamber, the ciliary body of the eye produces a fluid called aqueous humor. This fluid flows from the posterior chamber into the anterior chamber through the pupil and exits the eye via two pathways: the trabecular and uveoscleral pathways. The majority of aqueous humor outflow flows through the trabecular meshwork (TM) and the canal of Schlemm (SC), which are parts of the trabecular pathway. In the uveoscleral pathway, aqueous humor passes into the supraciliary and suprachoroidal spaces through the ciliary muscle. Finally, both routes drain the aqueous humor into the venous circulation.