A broad differential should be approached when evaluating a patient, whether in an Emergency Department or a primary care setting. Sexually transmitted infections can be localized to the oropharynx, integumentary system, external and internal genitals depending on whether the patient is a male or female, perianal/perineal, and rectum. Physicians should initially establish a primary or preliminary diagnostic impression and differential diagnosis, then formulate a confirmatory plan. The history, physical exam, and clinical presentation should all support the definitive diagnosis and also rule out your differential diagnosis.

When approaching a differential diagnosis specifically for sexually transmitted infections, each system should be evaluated separately, i.e., cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, central nervous system, musculoskeletal, and integumentary systems. Breaking the signs and symptoms down into systems specifically for each sexually transmitted infection will help differentiate a primary associated infectious process from a secondary, unrelated disorder or coinfection.

Differential STIs should be assessed by system and symptomatology: Each of the following systems can be affected by STIs, leading to direct or indirect involvement.

- Cardiovascular: HIV, Syphilis, HSV-1/HSV-2

- Respiratory: HIV, chlamydia

- Gastrointestinal: HIV, HSV-1/HSV-2, chlamydia, gonorrhea, HPV

- Genitourinary: HIV, HSV-1/HSV-2, chlamydia, gonorrhea, HPV

- Central nervous system: HIV, syphilis, HSV-1/HSV-2, gonorrhea, HPV

- Musculoskeletal: HIV, HSV-1/HSV-2, chlamydia, gonorrhea, HPV

- Integumentary system:HIV, HSV-1/HSV-2, chlamydia, gonorrhea, HPV

The use of different resources, diagnostic methods, and laboratory tests should be individualized and optimized to quickly arrive at the proper diagnosis and better serve the patient population.