A significant consideration during the planning process is the timing of reconstructive procedures. Both immediate repair and delayed repair are options. The decision must be tailored to each patient and their specific oncologic situation to ensure optimum safety, oncologic soundness, and final functional and aesthetic outcome.

Immediate repair refers to a reconstruction performed during the same surgical session as the cancer resection. While this prolongs the time under anesthesia, the advantage of using a more natural skin envelope for reconstructive options is considerable. The skin envelope created during skin/nipple-sparing mastectomy can leave the patient with a more natural-appearing breast postoperatively. Oncologic considerations such as stage and BRCA mutation status are key in determining if this approach is reasonable. Immediate reconstruction is affected by the need for adjuvant therapy, specifically radiation therapy. The risk of wound breakdown and other complications is significantly increased when a foreign body, such as a breast implant, is within the radiated field.

Delayed reconstruction is when a patient has a planned mastectomy, then returns to the operating room a second time to perform the reconstructive portion of the procedure. This option is available for patients who may not have decided whether to have breast reconstruction or require adjuvant radiation therapy to optimize outcomes.

Breast restoration utilizing alloplastic implants is discussed in a subsequent article and remains an option for many patients in immediate and delayed scenarios.