Members of the CLC channel family, are named as CIC-1, 2, 3, etc., and are voltage-gated channels that modulate a verity of cellular functions. CIC-1 is the major Cl- channel in skeletal muscle, maintaining the resting potential of the sarcoplasmic reticulum and regulating repolarization after contraction. CIC-2 is expressed ubiquitously and activated by cellular swelling, acidic pH and hyperpolarization, modulating intracellular chloride concentration, cell volume regulation, and modifying neuronal excitability. CIC-5 is predominantly expressed in the kidneys and may play a part of proximal tubule endocytosis. CIC-3 and CIC-4 function are not clearly understood and under investigation. ClC-K/Barttin channels are two members of the CLC family that function in basolateral Cl- recycling and are also predominantly expressed in the kidney (thick ascending loop of Henle and distal nephron) and inner ear. CFTR is a voltage-independent chloride channel located in the apical membrane of many epithelia, most predominantly in those of the airways, intestines, secretory glands, epididymis, and bile ducts. In some epithelial, such as that of the intestine, CFTR may account for the entire apical chloride conductance and thus plays a crucial role in salt and fluid secretion and absorption. CFTR may also be essential in the acidification of the Golgi bodies and endosomes and has been studied as a regulator of other ion channels such as ENaC. GABA- and glycine-gated chloride channels function to regulate membrane electrical excitability, specifically, by causing neuronal inhibition. GABA is predominantly used in the brain, while glycine is more common in the spinal cord and brain stem. In adult brains, binding of these neurotransmitters to their corresponding ligand-gated anion channel causes Cl- influx into the cell, which leads to hyperpolarization and neuronal activity inhibition. However, early in development, a more positive equilibrium potential of Cl- in undeveloped neurons causes excitability in response to GABA and glycine. Glycine receptors control motor rhythm generation, coordinate spinal reflex responses, and modulate processing by sensory neurons.