The reticular formation is made up of a net-like structure of various brainstem nuclei and neurons and covers an expansive portion of the brainstem, beginning in the mesencephalon, extending caudally through the medulla oblongata, and projecting into the superior cervical spinal cord segments. The reticular formation does not have any distinct cytoarchitectural boundaries and is dispersed throughout the brainstem as a network of interconnected neurons with many projections rostrally to subcortical and cortical brain structures as well as caudally to the spinal cord. Despite having non-distinct borders, the reticular formation contains over 100 individual brainstem nuclei.

Although there are no distinct borders of the reticular formation, many of its functions have been localized and correlated with general areas of the brainstem. By dividing the reticular formation into different areas based on their orientation caudally, rostrally, medially or laterally, certain areas can correlate with neuronal cell types and various functions discovered through various experiments on animal models as well as human case studies.

The reticular formation, through its vast array of projections and networks, functions to coordinate many reflexive and vital functions. The major functions that the reticular formation influences are arousal, consciousness, circadian rhythm, sleep-wake cycles, coordination of somatic motor movements, cardiovascular and respiratory control, pain modulation, and habituation. Cardiovascular control, in specific, is modulated by the vasomotor center present in the medulla oblongata.

**Dividing the Reticular Formation in the Medial to Lateral Orientation**

The reticular formation present in the pons and medulla can divide into lateral and medial tegmental fields, each associated with a different neuronal population and function. The lateral tegmental field of the reticular formation contains mostly populations of interneurons, which is the major cell type present throughout the entirety of the reticular formation. These interneurons in the lateral tegmental field influence many of the cranial nerve motor nuclei (trigeminal, facial, vagal, and hypoglossal), as well as form projections to various structures of the limbic system. Also, in the lateral tegmental field, premotor neurons are present that project via long descending axons to spinal cord motor neurons, which participate in many of the autonomic functions necessary for survival, such as respiration, regulation of abdominal pressure and function, micturition, and regulation of blood pressure. In contrast, the medial tegmental field of the reticular formation has the function of coordinating eye and head movements and integrating these movements with other somatosensory, vestibular, and proprioceptive stimuli through descending axonal tracts.

The reticular formation can also divide into three columns based on their neuronal structure and function. These three columns from medial to lateral are the raphe nuclei, located in the midline of the reticular formation core, the gigantocellular reticular nuclei more laterally, and the parvocellular reticular nuclei, which comprises the most lateral aspect of the column system. The raphe nuclei form a central ridge of the reticular formation and play an important role in mood regulation and arousal through neurotransmission via serotonin and projections to the limbic regions. The medial column of the gigantocellular reticular nuclei is composed of larger neurons and coordinates motor movements. The most lateral of the columns comprising the parvocellular nuclei contain smaller neurons and are known to regulate respiratory function, specifically exhalation. The lateral aspects of the reticular formation also are close to various cranial nerves and work to modulate their motor function.

**The Ascending and Descending Tracts of the Reticular Formation**

Many projections arise from the reticular formation and either ascend to subcortical and cortical regions of the brain or descend to other areas of the brainstem and spinal cord, allowing the reticular formation to play a major role as an integration and relay center. The major ascending pathway is known as the ascending reticular activating system and plays a role in establishing alertness, arousal, consciousness, sleep-wake cycles, and circadian rhythm. The ascending reticular activating system has a neuronal population consisting of mostly dopaminergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic, histaminergic, cholinergic, and glutamatergic brain nuclei, which have projections to the thalamus and cerebral cortex, primarily the prefrontal cortices. A major regulatory system of the ascending reticular activating system is the lateral hypothalamus. This region of the brain contains orexin neurons, which are key neurons in the coordination of alertness and sleep-wake cycles. Damage to this region of the brainstem results in reductions in the level of consciousness and progression to coma in many patients. If lesions affect the ascending reticular activating system bilaterally at the level of the midbrain, death can result. The ascending reticular activating system is also responsible for the phenomenon of habituation. This process allows the brain to ignore stimuli that are repetitive and meaningless and diverts focus to more important and changing stimuli in the environment.

The reticulospinal tracts are the major descending pathways from the reticular formation and act on many levels of the spinal cord to coordinate movements and autonomic functions. The reticulospinal tracts project to spinal cord motor neurons and help to modulate tone, balance, posture, and coordination of body movements with the assistance of other sensory stimuli, such as visual, auditory, vestibular, and proprioceptive information. In the lateral system of the descending reticulospinal tract are the corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts, which modulate fine movement control. The medial system of the descending reticulospinal tracts is composed of the reticulospinal pathway and the vestibulospinal pathway, major players in coordination posture. This reticulospinal pathway further divides into the medial pontine and the lateral medullary reticulospinal tracts, each having a unique function. The medial pontine reticulospinal tract controls extensor musculature. The lateral medullary reticulospinal tract functions to inhibit excitatory axial extensor muscles as well as control autonomic functions of breathing.

These descending pathways of the reticular formation play a major role in maintaining appropriate posture. If there is damage to the reticulospinal tract in the pons or medulla or the vestibulospinal tract, patients can experience postural instability and ataxia. Damage, which disrupts the normal signaling of the vestibular nuclei in the pons from the red nucleus located in the midbrain, may cause decerebrate posturing, causing the arms and legs to extend and internally rotate in response to painful stimuli, with hyperreflexia and hypertonic muscles. Damage to the brainstem above the red nucleus may cause decorticate posturing, in which the arms remain flexed towards the core of the body, and the legs extend in response to painful stimuli. Damage below the vestibular nuclei in the medulla may lead to hypotonia, hyporeflexia, flaccid paralysis of the limbs and body, quadriplegia, and loss of the respiratory drive. This phenomenon is called spinal shock, and patients experience these symptoms because of the loss of tonic activity from both the lateral vestibulospinal and reticulospinal tracts, which normally influence peripheral motor neurons.

**Dividing the Reticular Formation in the Rostral to Caudal Orientation**

Another way of dividing the reticular formation into vague functional areas is in the rostral to caudal orientation. The functions of the reticular formation that are more modulatory in nature are generally controlled by the rostral sections, while the caudal sections control the premotor functions. The rostral and caudal orientation of the reticular formation also determines the relative contribution of the medial and lateral columns. As one examines the reticular formation columns moving from a rostral section more caudally, the medial reticular formation column becomes less prominent, and the lateral column becomes more prominent. Animal studies that examined the impact of lesions on various areas of the reticular formation demonstrated that rostral lesions produced hypersomnia and caudal lesions produced insomnia in cat models. Many studies such as these have taken place showing contradictory behaviors in the various regulatory functions of the reticular formation based on the location of the lesions, demonstrating its prominent role in modulation, integration, and coordinating various systems throughout the body.

**Pain Modulation**

Another important function of the reticular formation is in the modulation of pain stimuli. For pain from the periphery to reach the cerebral cortex to be brought to conscious attention, pain signals travel through the reticular activating system through an ascending tract. The reticular activating system also projects descending pathways that play a role in the analgesic pain pathway, modulating the sensation of pain in the periphery and blocking transmission from the spinal cord to the cortex. The analgesic pain pathway works through the gate-control mechanism present in the spinal cord, in which presynaptic inhibition of pain stimulation occurs in zone II of the substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord before it can be transmitted to a secondary neuron and ascend to the cerebral cortex via the spinothalamic tract.

Understanding the pain and analgesic pathways that are modulated by various regions of the cerebral cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord can provide crucial insights into the phenomenon of neuropathic pain. The thought is that since the reticular formation and other pain modulating regions of the brain have extensive connections to the limbic and memory centers, chronic central pain can persist despite the cessation of the noxious peripheral stimulus. Another important phenomenon relates to the reticular formations' contribution to pain following spinal cord injuries. Due to the diffuse location and multi-synaptic network of the reticular formation, it rarely is completely destroyed after a spinal cord injury, allowing for pain pathways to the cerebral cortex to persist and contributing to substantial pain and discomfort. This condition can also lead to the misinterpretation of non-painful sensations below the level of the spinal cord injury to travel through the pain conducting ascending pathways of the reticular formation, resulting in the phenomenon of allodynia.

**Ocular Responses**

The reticular formation also plays a vital role in eye gaze, coordination of eye saccades, and head movement. Different parts of the reticular formation are responsible for various ocular functions. The mesencephalic reticular formation coordinates vertical gaze, the paramedian pontine reticular formation coordinates horizontal gaze, and the medullary pontine reticular formation coordinates head movements and gaze holding. These regions directly project to the extraocular motor nuclei and are essential for saccadic eye movements. These centers also have connections via the descending reticulospinal neurons to coordinate posture and neck movements with the eye movements.