A dermatoscope functionally simulates a magnifying lens, with the added features of much higher magnification, and an adjustable inbuilt illuminating system. A hand-lens, even with in-built illumination, cannot allow visualization beyond the surface of the skin because of the reflection and scattering of light from the stratum corneum. A dermatoscope can assess structures to the depth of reticular dermis, and record images for future comparison. The basic principle of dermoscopy is transillumination of a lesion in order to study it with high magnification to visualize subtle features. Light incident on a surface like the skin may be reflected, refracted, diffracted and/or absorbed [**Figure 1A**]. The physical properties of the skin influence these phenomena. Most light incident on dry, scaly skin is reflected, but smooth, oily skin allows light to pass through to reach the deeper dermis. Application of a linkage or immersion fluid (like mineral oil, liquid paraffin, ultrasound gel, or 70% alcohol-based commercial solutions) over the skin, enhances translucency and improves visibility of subsurface skin structures of the lesion under investigation. The essential components of a dermatoscope include: 1) a set ofachromatic lenses with magnification starting from 10× up to 200× or even higher, 2) an inbuilt illuminating system composed of halogen lamps placed within the handheld piece, and 3) a source of power supply such as rechargeable or replaceable batteries or rechargeable handles.

The newest generation of dermatoscopes include inbuilt crossed-polarizers, which filter out scattered light from the periphery, reduce glare, and permit visualization of substratal structures without the need of a linkage fluid. **Figure 1B**demonstrates**the basic working of the modern dermatoscopes schematically.**Some dermatoscopes have an inbuilt photography system with supporting software for the capture and storage of images. For those dermatoscopes without inbuilt systems, special adapters are available to connect to digital cameras. Advanced devices have whole body mapping systems for detailed analysis and follow up of skin lesions over time. Newer handheld units can attach to smart-phones for easier image capture and documentation