The clinical presentation of renal infarction is similar to that of renal colic. Nephrolithiasis and pyelonephritis are the main differential diagnosis of renal infarction. Failure to consider renal infarction as a differential in a case of flank pain initially suspected as renal colic could delay diagnosis and make it unsalvageable with reperfusion therapy.

Acute pyelonephritis can present with flank pain and fever. Urinalyses in pyelonephritis typically shows pyuria, bacteriuria, and WBC casts but generally do not help differentiate it from renal infarction.

**Significant LDH elevation is not seen in pyelonephritis or nephrolithiasis**and can be used to help distinguish these disorders from renal infarction, especially if serum transaminases are low.

The radiological finding of perinephric stranding and edema is more indicative of pyelonephritis than renal infarction.****A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen may also help differentiate renal infarction from extrarenal causes of abdominal pain, including appendicitis, diverticulitis, ruptured aortic aneurysm, biliary colic, and gynecological diseases.

Aortic dissection and renal cell carcinoma are other differentials for patients presenting with flank pain. Other causes of abdominal pain, like mesenteric ischemia, should also be ruled out because systemic embolization in a patient with atrial fibrillation could potentially occlude the blood vessels supplying the intestine leading to acute bowel infarction.

- Aortic aneurysm

- Aortic dissection

- Appendicitis

- Biliary colic

- Diverticulitis

- Gastroenteritis

- Gynecologic and ovarian disorders

- Mesenteric ischemia

- Nephrolithiasis

- "Passed" urinary stone

- Pancreatitis

- Pyelonephritis

- Renal cell carcinoma