Herpes zoster is clinically diagnosed with burning pain, characteristic morphology, and typical distribution. Herpes simplex virus can occasionally produce a rash in a pattern called as zosteriform herpes simplex.

Tests for varicella-zoster virus include the following:

- The Tzanck smear of vesicular fluid shows multinucleated giant cells. It has lower sensitivity and specificity than direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) or Polymerase chain reaction (PCR).

- Varicella-zoster virus-specific IgM antibody in blood is detected during the active infection of chickenpox or shingles but not  when the virus is dormant

- Direct fluorescent antibody testing of vesicular fluid or corneal fluid can be done when there is eye involvement.

- PCR testing of vesicular fluid, a corneal lesion, or blood in a case with eye involvement or disseminated infection.

Molecular biology tests based on in vitro nucleic acid amplification (PCR tests) are currently considered the most reliable. Nested PCR test has high sensitivity, but is susceptible to contamination leading to false-positive results. The latest real-time PCR tests are rapid, easy to perform, as sensitive as nested PCR, have a lower risk of contamination, and also have more sensitivity than viral cultures.

Differential Diagnosis

Cutaneous lesions of herpes zoster need to be differentiated from herpes simplex, dermatitis herpetiformis, impetigo, contact dermatitis, candidiasis, drug reactions, and insect bites. Preceding pain without the development of skin lesions in herpes zoster is different from cholecystitis and biliary colic, renal colic, trigeminal neuralgia, or any dental infection.

Herpes zoster tends to involve only one side of the oral cavity, which distinguishes it from other oral blistering conditions. In the mouth, it presents initially as vesicles that break down quickly to leave ulcers that heal within 10 to 14 days. The prodromal pain before the rash may be confused with a toothache which leads to unnecessary dental treatment.