The primary function of the visual cortex is to process visual information. The visual cortex subdivides into five different areas based on structural and functional classifications. The hypothesis is that as visual information gets passed along, each subsequent cortical area is more specialized than the last. Neurons in the visual cortex often respond to stimuli within a fixed receptive field, the area of the visual field that they respond to, and the neurons in each visual area respond to different types of stimuli. One of the best-studied examples of specialized cells is that of simple and complex cells. Simple cells, which are found mostly in V1, respond to specific types of visual cues such as the orientation of edges and lines. Complex cells, which occur in V1-V3, are like simple cells in that they respond to edges and orientations, but they do not appear to represent a single receptive field. Instead, they respond to the summation of several receptive fields that become integrated from many simple cells. Also, complex cells respond preferentially to movement in specific directions. Other examples of specialized cells include end-stopped cells, which detect line endings, and bar and grating cells.

V1 is the first of the cortical regions to receive and process information and also the best-understood portion of the visual cortex. V1 is divided up into six distinct layers, each comprising different cell-types and functions. Notably, layer 4 is the location that receives information from the lateral geniculate. Layer 4 is also the layer that has the highest concentration of simple cells. Complex cells, on the other hand, can be found in layers 2, 3, and 6. V1 responds to simple visual components such as orientation and direction. The summation of this information provides the foundation for more complicated pattern recognition later in the visual stream.

V2 receives integrated information from V1 and subsequently has an increased level of complexity and response patterns to objects. Researchers have recorded cells in this region responding to differences in color, spatial frequency, moderately complex patterns, and object orientation.

As visual information disseminates throughout the brain, more specialized cells are present. The theory is that there are specialized cells or groups of cells that learn to respond to particular objects; this would allow for the immediate recognition of things seen previously.