Treatment algorithms exist for both impending fractures and pathologic fractures and generally involve operative fixation combined with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy.

**Impending Pathologic Fractures**

An impending fracture is a biomechanically weakened area of bone that has a propensity to fracture with far less force than would be required for the normal bone to fracture due to the pathophysiology of the underlying lesion. For instance, normal weight-bearing through a pathologic lesion could tip the scales towards a pathologic fracture due to the biomechanical fragility of the surrounding bony architecture. Impending fractures may require prophylactic fixation, meaning surgical intervention in the form of internal fixation prior to a fracture event as a means of augmenting inherently weak bone and preventing future failure.

There are two recognized classification systems for impending pathologic fractures:

- Harrington criteria was first described by Harrington et al. in 1980 to determine indications for prophylactic internal fixation. Harrington criteria is based on four parameters: lesion involves more than 50% of cortical bone, the lesion is greater than 2.5 cm, presence of pain following radiotherapy, and fracture of the lesser trochanter. There are significant limitations to this grading system as it only applies to the proximal femur and does not account for disease-specific tumor pathology.

- Mirel classification was first described by Mirel in 1989 and has been extrapolated as an algorithm for prophylactic fixation. The study was a retrospective analysis of 78 lesions of long bones that had undergone radiation therapy without prophylactic internal fixation. This scoring system is depicted in Table 1. This scoring system has a maximum of 12 points, with more than 8 points indicating the need for prophylactic fixation.

Recently, there has been an interest in alternative scoring systems such as CT-based structural rigidity analysis (CTRA). A study by Damron et al. in 2016 evaluated CTRA compared to Mirel’s criteria in pathologic femoral fractures and found CTRA to have a higher predictive value in identifying impending fractures.

The benefits of prophylactic fixation of an impending fracture are two-fold. Elective fixation removes pain and morbidity associated with a true pathologic fracture and facilitates easier surgical management.

**Pathologic Fracture**

Pathologic fractures may occur secondary to benign lesions, metastasis, primary bone lesions, or metabolic bone abnormalities. Treatment of pathologic fractures is dictated by the pathophysiology of the causative lesion and the expected survival.

Fracture healing rates, prognosis, and patient activity level must be considered to determine the extent of fixation. It is important to recognize that altered disease biology leads to decreased or destroyed fracture healing potential. For example, the fracture healing rates for metastasis from multiple myeloma, renal, breast, and lung carcinoma are 67%, 44%, 37%, and 0%, respectively. This variation of fracture healing potential across different malignancies highlights the importance of proper diagnosis of the primary lesion for successful preoperative planning. For example, a fracture through a lesion secondary to myeloma has a much greater healing potential than one through a lesion secondary to lung carcinoma. Therefore, a construct involving plates and screws might be sufficient for a myeloma-induced fracture, whereas a more extensive bone-replacing prosthesis would be necessary for a fracture induced from lung cancer.

For renal cell carcinoma, metastases should be widely excised when possible. A review of 887 patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma revealed a statistically significant improvement in cancer-specific survival (4.8 years versus 1.3 years) when complete metastasectomy was performed.

In terms of survivability, there are established rates of 6-month survival documented in the literature. For example, 6-month survival for prostate, breast, renal, and lung are 98%, 89%, 51%, and 50%, respectively.