LDH serves as a general indicator of acute and chronic diseases. Elevation in serum LDH activity follows isoenzyme patterns that are characteristic of various diseases.

- LDH increase can serve as a prognostic marker of cancer progression for different types of cancer. LDH also serves as one of the important diagnostic markers of cutaneous lymphoma. The concentration of LDH-5 is demonstrated as a predictor of radiotherapy and chemotherapy response in cancer patients. LDH is useful in evaluating metastatic cancer patients. Contrarily, LDH-5 serves as a marker for radio-sensitization.

- The enzymes can function to monitor progressive conditions such as muscular dystrophy or HIV infection.

- In sports medicine, LDH potentially indicates muscle response to training, with an increase in skeletal and cardiac muscles after 3-5 hours of training.

- If LDH-1 is found to be greater than LDH-2, it indicates myocardial infarction, with a ‘flipped’ ratio of LDH-1/LDH-2 greater than 1. The increase in LDH persists for approximately ten days. It increases at 12 hours and peaks at 24-48 hours. A very high level thus indicates acute myocardial infarction.

- Greater than a 50 times increase in LDH-1 and LDH-2  indicates megaloblastic anemia.

- Increased LDH-5 in serum is a marker for muscular dystrophy.

- A ten times increase in serum LDH indicates toxic hepatitis with jaundice.

- An increase in LDH-3 is associated with the massive destruction of platelets as in pulmonary embolism.

- LDH is used to assess the nature, or pathological accumulation of pleural, peritoneal, or pericardial fluids. Serum LDH, compared to serous fluid LDH, helps in distinguishing exudate from transudate effusions.

- In patients with non-seminomatous testicular cancer LDH is used as a staging (S classification) marker.

- Abnormally low levels of LDH are very rare and usually not considered harmful.