Electrocardiography (ECG) is the least expensive and most readily available test for the diagnosis of LVH. While its specificity is relatively high, its low sensitivity makes the clinical utility somewhat limited. Various criteria for LVH by ECG have been suggested over the years. Most criteria utilize the voltage in one or more leads, QRS duration, secondary ST-T wave abnormalities, or left atrial abnormalities.  The best recognized established ECG criteria are the Cornell voltage, the Cornell product, the Sokolow-Lyon index, as well as the Estes-Romhilt point scoring system.

ECG is relatively insensitive in diagnosing LVH because it relies on the measurement of the electrical activity of the heart by electrodes placed on the surface of the skin to predict the left ventricular mass. The intracardiac electrical signal is problematic to measure in this way because the measurements are impacted by all elements that lie between the heart muscle and the ECG electrodes, specifically fat, fluid, and air. Because of the variations in these elements, ECG underdiagnoses LVH in patients with pleural effusions, pericardial effusions, anasarca, obesity as well as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Also, LVH diagnosed by ECG is strongly impacted by both age and ethnicity. While electrocardiography is not sensitive and cannot be used to definitively exclude the diagnosis of LVH, it still plays a diagnostic and management role. In the Losartan Intervention for Endpoint Reduction in Hypertension (LIFE) study, LVH regression (diagnosed by ECG utilizing the Sokolow-Lyon index or the Cornell product criteria) in response to losartan (Cozaar) improved clinical cardiovascular outcomes independent of blood pressure response.

An echocardiogram is the test of choice in establishing the diagnosis of LVH.  Its sensitivity is significantly higher than ECG, and the test can also diagnose other abnormalities such as left ventricular dysfunction (both systolic as well as diastolic) and valvular heart disease. Cardiac ultrasound utilizes transthoracic or transesophageal positioning of the transducer to measure the left ventricular end-diastolic diameter, posterior wall thickness, and interventricular septum thickness. From these measurements and the patient’s height and weight, the LV mass index can be determined. According to the American Society of Echocardiography and/European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging, LVH is defined as an increased left ventricular mass index (LVMI) to greater than 95 g/m in women and increased LVMI to greater than 115 g/m in men. Despite the advantages of echocardiography and Doppler analysis, an important consideration in using this tool as a screening test in all hypertensive patients is its significant cost when compared to ECG.

In terms of specific testing for LVH, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is now considered the gold standard as it is even more precise and reproducible than cardiac ultrasound. It can accurately estimate LV mass and determines if other structural cardiac abnormalities are present. The widespread use of MRI is severely restricted in clinical practice due to its cost, logistics, and limited availability. While it may never be useful in screening for LVH, it has a significant role in clinical research and in the assessment of cardiovascular anatomy in certain clinical situations.