A thorough history is the most helpful initial aspect but usually must be obtained from several sources. Because patients with anoxic brain injury are typically unresponsive upon initial presentation, sources such as family members, individuals who were part of the initial resuscitation of the patient, or outpatient care providers can provide information regarding the patient's medical history and witnessed events or interventions performed. A full understanding of baseline neurologic status is essential, utilizing the resources that may have known the patient before the event. If possible, information such as prodromal symptoms, medication use, substance abuse, time of onset, and, if applicable, duration of CPR should also be ascertained.

The elimination of confounding factors is also necessary for a reliable neurologic examination. These factors include but are not limited to, sedating medications, anticholinergic medications, paralytic drugs, metabolic abnormalities such as acute hepatic or renal failure, shock or continued irreversible hypoperfusion state, therapeutic hypothermia from targeted temperature management, and pathologic hypothermia. These conditions have a potential impact on cerebral consciousness and reflexes of the brainstem and can possibly demonstrate false findings on detailed neurologic examination. Particularly on the initial evaluation of the patient, these considerations are paramount and should be actively pursued when considering the neurologic examination of an obtunded patient.

There may be physical findings of myoclonic activity or myoclonic status epilepticus in the setting of anoxic encephalopathy. While this may produce confounding examination findings, this does not exclude anoxic injury. Post-hypoxic myoclonus findings may be observed within 24 hours after a hypoxic insult has occurred. However, there are case reports available that describe delayed myoclonus even 48 hours after hypoxic insult due to sedation or paralytic medication use.