**Tendinopathic Cascade**

The pathophysiology of LHB tendinitis/tendinopathy begins with the early stages of tenosynovitis and inflammation secondary to repetitive traction, friction, and shoulder rotation. Inflammation develops early on in the tendinous portion in the bicipital groove. The tendon increases in diameter secondary to swelling and/or associated hemorrhage, further compromising the tendon as it becomes mechanically irritated in its confined space.

The resultant increased pressure and specific sites of traction predispose the tendon to pathologic shear forces. In addition, the sheath of the biceps tendon is a direct extension of the synovial lining of the glenohumeral joint. Thus, concomitant or preexisting RC pathology can directly compromise the LHB tendon itself.  In the early stages of the disease, the LHB tendon remains mobile in the bicipital groove.

As the pathophysiology escalates, there is an ensuing LHB sheath thickening, fibrosis, and vascular compromise. The LHB tendon undergoes degenerative changes, and associated scarring, fibrosis, and adhesions eventually compromise LHB tendon mobility. In effect, the tendon becomes pathologically “anchored” in the groove, further exacerbating the potential points of traction and overall increasing shear forces experienced by the LHB tendon along its course.

In advanced, end-stage conditions, the LHB tendon can eventually rupture at its origin near the superior glenoid tubercle, or as it exits the bicipital groove near its musculotendinous junction.

**Overhead Throwing**

During an overhead throw, such as pitching in baseball, the thrower’s shoulder is brought into a position of maximum shoulder abduction and external rotation during the late cocking phase. Biceps injuries occur in this position secondary to the peel-back phenomenon.  Subsequently, the biceps muscle eccentrically contracts to decelerate elbow extension during the follow-through phase of throwing.