Microcytocytic anemia: Microcytosis can be caused by a deficiency in a component in hemoglobin, causing the cells to appear much smaller on a peripheral blood smear (PBS). Hemoglobin forms from heme and globin molecules. For example, during heme synthesis, the ferrochelatase enzyme inserts iron into the protoporphyrin ring structure to make the heme molecule.

Anemia of chronic disease is due to an evolutionary response of the body to protect its iron from bacteria that use the iron for their growth. Because bacterial infections cause inflammation leading to an increase in acute phase reactants like hepcidin, hepcidin traps iron in macrophages and decreases iron absorption in the GI tract. This effect is very similar to the presentation of iron-deficient anemia.

On the contrary, thalassemias have mutations in the alpha or beta globin chains, causing a disruption in hemoglobin synthesis as well. All of these types of hemoglobinopathies produce microcytic erythrocytes.

Macrocytic anemia: Macrocytic anemia can categorize as either megaloblastic anemia versus non-megaloblastic anemia. During pyrimidine synthesis, folate becomes tetrahydrofolate and donates a carbon. Vitamin B12 or cobalamin is a cofactor for the enzyme that transfers the carbon group from tetrahydrofolate. A deficiency of either of these enzymes impairs the process of properly dividing erythrocytes to their normal size. The erythrocytes stop dividing due to the deficient pyrimidines found, causing the enlarged cells.

However, non-megaloblastic anemia has a different effect on macrocytes created. Liver disease can compromise lipid production, and the hypothesis is that the lipids within the phospholipid bilayer of erythrocytes become compromised by liver failure.

Normocytic anemia: Normocytic anemia is commonly due to hemolysis whether it is intravascular or extravascular. However, aplastic anemia is also a cause of normocytic anemia due to the destruction of myeloid stem cells, stem cells from which erythrocytes originate.