# Continuing Education Activity

Postmastectomy radiation therapy (PMRT) is recommended for patients with more advanced breast cancer and/or certain high-risk pathologic features. In select patients, post-mastectomy radiation therapy has been shown to improve local control and overall survival. PMRT is directed at the chest wall and often includes the regional lymph nodes that drain the breast. This activity reviews the principles of post-mastectomy radiation therapy and the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients undergoing it.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the mechanism of postmastectomy radiation therapy.
- Identify appropriate candidates for postmastectomy radiation therapy. 
- Describe the potential adverse effects of postmastectomy radiation therapy. 
- Review a well-coordinated interprofessional team approach to provide effective care and appropriate monitoring to patients undergoing postmastectomy radiation therapy.

# Introduction

A modified radical mastectomy is the primary treatment for women with locally advanced breast cancer. Additionally, some women with early-stage breast cancer may elect to undergo a mastectomy for cosmetic reasons, to potentially avoid radiation, or due to a genetic mutation that portends a higher risk for subsequent breast cancer. A mastectomy involves removal of the whole breast and often is paired with some degree of axillary lymph node sampling (either sentinel lymph node biopsy or axillary node dissection of levels 1 and 2). Post-mastectomy radiation therapy (PMRT) is recommended for patients with more advanced disease and/or with certain high-risk pathologic features. In select patients, post-mastectomy radiation therapy has been shown to improve local control and overall survival. PMRT is directed at the chest wall and often includes the regional lymph nodes that drain the breast. This article will focus on the key aspects of post-mastectomy radiation therapy.

# Epidemiology

Locally advanced breast cancer encompasses a heterogeneous group of patients including those with advanced primary tumor size, extensive or widespread nodal disease, and inflammatory breast cancer. In 2013, 30 to 40% of patients diagnosed with breast cancer had regional lymph node involvement, and 10% of patients had a primary tumor 5 centimeters or greater in size. Unlike most other malignancies, the prognosis for patients with locally advanced disease is favorable, with 5-year breast cancer-specific survival ranging from 78% to 90%.

# Treatment / Management

**Indications for Post-Mastectomy Radiation Therapy (PMRT)**

Several large randomized trials have demonstrated a clinical benefit with the addition of postmastectomy radiation therapy in patients with high-risk disease.

**Current controversies in PMRT**

**Less than 4 positive lymph nodes**

Despite earlier trials showing a consistent survival advantage for all node-positive patients, the validity of these findings among patients with less than 4 positive lymph nodes is often debated. The main criticisms of these trials were the use of less effective systemic therapies (i.e., taxanes, dose-dense chemotherapy scheduling, HER2 targeted agents, and prolonged use of hormonal therapy were not consistently used) and inadequate axillary lymph node dissections. Furthermore, several other studies suggest the rate of locoregional recurrence among patients with 1 to 3 positive nodes is low

Given the conflicting data, the NCCN recommends postmastectomy radiation therapy should be “strongly considered” in patients with 1 to 3 positive lymph nodes while also taking into account other clinical characteristics (i.e., age, comorbidities, life-expectancy), pathologic risk factors (i.e. tumor size, ratio of positive lymph nodes, tumor grade, LVSI), and biologic tumor makeup (i.e., hormonal receptor status and targetable mutations). These recommendations also are in line with recently updated postmastectomy radiation therapy guidelines put forth by a joint panel comprised of the American Societies of Clinical, Radiation, and Surgical Oncology

**T3N0**

A similar controversy exists among node-negative patients with large primary tumor size (greater than 5 cm)

**Complete nodal response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy**

Current recommendations for postmastectomy radiation therapy are based on clinical stage prior to initiation of any therapy. However, an excellent/complete pathologic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in either the nodes and/or the breast is associated with a significantly decreased risk of locoregional recurrence

**Internal mammary node coverage**

If internal mammary nodes (IMNs) are involved (i.e., pathologically enlarged on CT and or metabolically active on PET), they should be included in the radiation field. Elective IMN coverage is somewhat controversial. In the earlier postmastectomy radiation therapy trials, the radiation portal encompassed all draining lymphatics of the breast including the axillary, supraclavicular, and internal mammary nodal (IMN) chain

Several large trials have evaluated the volume of elective nodal irradiation (ENI) volume to include in patients with centrally/medially located tumors, positive lymph nodes, or in node-negative patients with high-risk disease after mastectomy

In summary, comprehensive lymph node coverage has yielded mixed results but may offer a small improvement in disease-free survival and possibly even breast cancer-specific survival. Given the insufficient evidence, a multi-disciplinary expert panel on post-mastectomy management suggests the radiation treatment field should include the IMN, supraclavicular, and apical axillary regions as well as the chest wall if comprehensive nodal radiation is recommended

**Postmastectomy radiation therapy****after implant/tissue expander**

Postmastectomy radiation therapy after breast reconstruction has been associated with increased rates of capsular contracture, reconstructive failures, revision surgeries, and overall worse cosmetic outcomes

Most often, implant reconstruction occurs in two phases with the placement of a tissue expander followed by a permanent implant. Several studies evaluating the optimal sequence of two-phase reconstruction with radiotherapy have demonstrated higher rates of reconstructive failures ranging from 32% to 40% when radiation was delivered to the tissue expander as compared to radiation directed at the permanent implant

# Radiation Oncology

**Simulation and Treatment Volumes**

Patients are simulated in the supine position with their arms raised above their head. Immobilization devices, such as a wing-board with a vacuum bag, can be used to support the arms and neck and replicate the same position during daily treatments. The head is turned up and away from the treated breast to remove the chin from the beam divergence.  The mastectomy scar is often delineated with a radio-opaque marker to make sure the entire scar is included in the radiation plan. The medial, lateral (mid-axillary line), superior (caudal edge of the clavicle), and inferior (1 to 2 cm below the inframammary line) field borders also can be delineated with a radio-opaque marker to guide initial beam placement. For patients with left-sided breast cancer, deep-inspiratory breath hold, a technique in which patients are instructed to hold their breath for 20 to 30 seconds at peak inspiration, can often increase the distance between the heart and chest wall, thus lowering the cardiac dose. If considering this technique, testing a patient’s ability to perform this exercise should be done at the time of simulation.

Several contouring atlases are available for chest wall and nodal delineation including the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)

**General volume delineation guidelines for the chest wall**

- The chest wall clinical target volume (CTV) should be contoured to the muscle-rib interface to include the pectoralis muscles and the entire scar plus margin. The cranial border extends to the caudal border of the clavicular head, and the caudal border is clinically determined based on markers placed at the time of simulation and using the contralateral breast as a guide. The lateral border typically extends to the mid-axillary line and medial border to the sternal-rib junction to avoid crossing midline.

-  If using image guidance during treatments, the chest wall planning target volume (PTV) is created by expanding the CTV by 0.5 cm. Otherwise, the CTV to PTV expansion ranges from 0.5 to 1 cm. To ensure chest wall dose, the PTV can extend into the ribs about 2 mm.

**General volume delineation guidelines for lymph nodes**

- Axillary levels 1 through 3 are demarcated relative to the pectoralis minor muscle and axillary vessels in which level 1 lies lateral and inferior, level 2 lies posterior, and level 3 lies superior-medial.

- The supraclavicular (SCV) lymph nodes lie superior to level 3 and commence just caudal to the cricoid cartilage. SVC nodes extend inferiorly to the caudal edge of the clavicular head, laterally to the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid or junction of the one rib with the clavicle and medially it excludes the thyroid and trachea.

-  If treating the internal mammary nodes with IMRT, the first three intercostal spaces should be contoured.

-  PTV for the lymph nodes is generated by expanding the CTV by 0.5 cm when using image guidance.

**Radiation Planning Technique**

Patient anatomy, target volume, dose constraints, and physician preference are used when determining the optimal radiation technique. A description of various radiation techniques is detailed below.

**3D conformation radiation therapy (3DCRT)**

The most commonly used treatment technique for PMRT is a forward-planned technique using photons called 3D conformation radiation therapy (3DCRT). The dosimetrist and radiation oncologist often use 3 to 5 beams to treat the chest wall and regional lymphatics. The dosimetrist and radiation oncologist work together to determine the best beam angle, field size, blocks, beam energy, and weighting to create a customized plan for each patient. The radiation field setup for a typical plan is discussed below:

- The chest wall is treated with two opposing tangential fields. The superior field edge of the tangential fields is often just below the clavicular head, which will be the inferior field edge of the supraclavicular field (discussed below). The tangents should be placed at an angle to avoid the contralateral breast and minimize dose to the heart and lungs, ideally with less than 1 cm (or no heart) in the field and less than 2 cm of the lung in the field.

- The supraclavicular and Level 3 lymph node volumes are treated with a single oblique anterior supraclavicular field is often angled 10 to 15 degrees away from the midline to avoid overlapping the spinal cord and esophagus. The acromioclavicular joint and part of the humeral head will be blocked out by the multileaf collimator. The energy of the beam can be adjusted so that the 45 Gray (Gy) line reaches to the posterior edge of the lymph node volumes. An optional posterior axillary “boost” field may be added to increase deep axillary coverage or to reduce hot spots from a single anterior field.

- The internal mammary chain can be covered using a direct matched electron or photon field. Alternatively, the tangents can be partially widened superiorly to cover the top three intercostal spaces encompassing the internal mammary nodes.

-  An even, non-divergent match line between the tangential chest wall beams and the anterior supraclavicular beam is generated by using a half-beam block (one isocenter technique) or by angling the couch (couch-kick) to create a horizontal match line between the tangential and supraclavicular field edges (two isocenter technique).

**Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT)**

Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is generally considered when heart or lung dose-volume constraints with 3DCRT planning are not met. IMRT is an inverse planning technique using photons. This means that after the target and normal structures are contoured, the dosimetrist will enter the goals of coverage and limits to normal structures, and the radiation treatment planning system will run to optimize the plan. IMRT typically involves a greater number of beams compared to 3DCRT. Volumetric modulated therapy (VMAT), is the type of IMRT technique that employs continuous arcs during treatment.  While VMAT can be very conformal, it does result in the expansive spread of low dose to a larger volume of normal structures compared to a 3DCRT plan, due to the exit dose of the photon beam arc.

**Intensity-modulated proton therapy (IMPT)**

Protons are heavy ions that deposit the maximum dose at a specific distance in tissue (Bragg Peak), after which no dose is deposited into the tissue. In other words, there is no exit dose when using proton therapy resulting in possibly less dose to normal tissues and therefore has the potential to reduce long-term side effects. This is in contrast to photon beams that have both an entry and exit dose

Proton treatment planning involving the chest wall and lymphatics most commonly employs two enface proton beams to cover the targets. The treatment planning system will then optimize the plan and account for uncertainties pertaining to dose calibration using Hounsfield units (HU) and proton end range.

Comparison of conventional photon versus proton radiation in comprehensive breast irradiation is an area of ongoing research.  A nation-wide randomized trial, RADCOMP (NCT02603341), is actively accruing patients with locally advanced breast cancer who require RNI after either mastectomy or breast conservation surgery to receive either photon or proton therapy. The primary endpoint of this study is a reduction in major cardiovascular events at 10 years. Other endpoints to assess include long-term disease control, survival, and quality of live endpoints.

**Radiation Dosing and Fractionation**

Conventional dosing for PMRT is 50-50.4 Gy in 1.8-2.0 Gy per fraction (25-28 total fractions) to the chest wall and 45-50 Gy in 1.8-2.0 Gy per fraction (25 total fractions) to the regional lymph nodes. Hypofractionation, which involves giving a larger daily dose over a shorter period (fewer total fractions), is an active area of research in the post-mastectomy setting to reduce treatment costs and increase the convenience for patients. The Alliance group is currently evaluating the effect of hypofractionated PMRT in the setting of breast reconstruction with the primary endpoint being two-year reconstructive complication rate (NCT03414970).  In this study, patients with stage IIA-IIIA breast cancer who have undergone mastectomy and breast reconstruction are randomized to receive either standard daily radiation therapy for 5 to 6 weeks or daily radiotherapy given over a shortened course of 3 to 4 weeks. Further dose hypofractionation for postmastectomy radiation therapy is being explored in the United Kingdom (FAST-Forward). This phase III, multicenter, randomized controlled trial (FAST-Forward) is evaluating two different 5-fraction PMRT dosing regimens (27 Gy or 26 Gy in 5 fractions) compared to standard control (40.05 Gy in 15 fractions).

Since photons require tissue interaction to build up the dose, the dose at the skin surface is lower than the dose at the target. A chest wall bolus may be used to increase the skin dose for patients who have an increased risk of chest wall recurrence (i.e., large tumors, positive/close margins, inflammatory breast cancer). In general, a 0.5 cm tissue equivalent bolus can be used every other day to increase the skin to 85% of prescription dose, or in cases of inflammatory breast cancer, a daily bolus can be used to ensure skin dose reaches 95% of the prescribed dose. Alternatively, a single sheet of brass bolus (2-sheet thickness for inflammatory/T4 tumors) can be used daily and is equivalent to 0.5 cm tissue equivalent bolus every other day.  A mastectomy scar boost to 10 to 16 Gy in 5 to 8 fractions is considered in the presence of close (less than 2 mm) or positive margins, and for inflammatory breast cancer, however, a boost is generally avoided in patients planned for reconstruction if they don’t have other risk factors for recurrence.

**Plan Evaluation**

Radiation oncologists work with dosimetrists to customize the plan to the patient’s anatomy and targets using the options listed above. The radiation oncologist then evaluates the plan to assess the adequacy of target coverage while minimizing the dose to lung, heart, and other nearby tissue using the dose-value recommendations.

# Complications

**Radiation Toxicity**

In general, postmastectomy radiation therapy is very well tolerated, and patients can continue their normal routine. Postmastectomy radiation therapy does not lead to decreased immunity nor feelings of illness, and patients are not radioactive; therefore, they are safe to be around other people. Adverse effects or toxicity associated with postmastectomy radiation therapy will be discussed in terms of acute and chronic.

**Acute Toxicity**

Acute toxicity is generally defined as occurring during and within 3 months of radiation treatment. The most common adverse effects include fatigue, temporary sore throat, and radiation dermatitis.  Radiation dermatitis gradually develops as more radiation treatments are delivered and can include skin erythema, hyperpigmentation, rash, and dry followed by moist desquamation. Skin toxicity may peak in intensity 1 to 2 weeks after the end of treatment. Patients are advised to keep their skin moisturized during the course of radiation to help with the daily healing of healthy skin tissue. Other topical agents like aloe, hydrocortisone, or silver sulfadiazine can help with burning, itching, and desquamation of the skin, respectively. If a patient develops large confluent areas of moist desquamation, hydrogel or hydrocolloid dressings can be applied. The skin should be monitored regularly for signs and symptoms of infection. A skin bolus is typically removed in the event of brisk erythema or moist desquamation. Generally, by 2 to 4 weeks after treatment, the skin is well healed, although some patients will have residual long-term skin hyperpigmentation and or subcutaneous fibrosis throughout the treatment field.

**Chronic Toxicity**

Common chronic, or long-term, toxicity associated with postmastectomy radiation therapy includes hyperpigmentation and fibrosis of the chest wall affecting cosmetic outcome after reconstruction (breast implant). Other potential long-term toxicities include minor risks of radiation pneumonitis (higher when treating comprehensive lymph nodes), rib fracture, arm lymphedema, radiation-induced heart disease (RIHD) (particularly for left-sided treatments), hypothyroidism (if treating supraclavicular region), and an extremely low risk of secondary malignancy. The management of arm lymphedema and the risk of RIHD will be discussed in more detail below.

Chronic arm lymphedema is a very challenging complication of postmastectomy radiation therapy, and thus prevention and/or early intervention is key. Early signs of lymphedema include swelling, limb heaviness, aching, tightness, and fatigue. The risk of lymphedema after axillary RT ranges from 11% to 15% at 1 to 5 years post-treatment and is significantly higher in the setting of prior axillary dissection

The most worrisome late side effect of postmastectomy radiation therapy is the increased risk of cardiac disease. Data to support dose-volume constraints for normal tissues are limited. General dose-volume constraints are recommended by the ongoing national randomized trial, RADCOMP.  An early landmark trial by Darby et al. demonstrated a linear correlation between dose to the heart and rate of major coronary events. In this analysis, for every 1 Gy increase in mean dose to the heart, the relative rate of major coronary events increased by 7.4% and was observed as early as 5 years and continued up to 20 years after treatment

Proton beam therapy may reduce dose to the heart and lung, particularly when treating comprehensive lymph nodes. There have been several dosimetric comparison studies between 3D conformal, IMRT, and proton beam therapy, along with comparisons of passive scatter and pencil beam technology

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Postmastectomy radiation therapy (PMRT) is associated with a decrease in locoregional recurrence and an improvement in overall survival among patients with high risk pathologic features including positive lymph nodes, positive margins, and for inflammatory breast cancer.

- There is controversy over the benefit of PMRT in patients with T3N0 breast cancer, however, the risk of recurrence is increased in the presence of other high-risk pathologic features such lymphovascular invasion, high tumor grade, close or positive margins, and premenopausal status.

- Target volume should include the chest wall and comprehensive lymph node areas which include the axillary, supraclavicular and internal mammary lymph nodes. If all lymph nodes are negative and the patient has a positive margin, then chest wall alone can be the target. Studies evaluating the role of comprehensive lymph node coverage have demonstrated a small improvement in disease-free survival and overall survival, however, this comes at the cost of increased dose to the heart.

- 3D conformal radiation therapy (3D CRT) and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) are two of the most common treatment techniques used for postmastectomy radiotherapy.  There are several different consensus guidelines for target volume delineation.

- Long-term side effects of PMRT include increased risk of heart disease and secondary malignancy. Deep-inspiratory breath hold is a technique used to reduce the radiation dose to the heart.  Proton beam therapy has the potential to reduce the dose to the heart and normal tissue and is currently an active area of research.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

There is good evidence that post-mastectomy radiation lowers the risk of locoregional recurrence of breast cancer. But this therapy is not devoid of side effects. Patients undergoing radiation therapy need to be managed by an interprofessional team that includes an oncologist, oncology nurse, physical therapist, and an internist. These patients need follow up to ensure that they are not developing a recurrence of cancer or side effects from the therapy. Besides history and physical exam, a mammogram and routine blood tests are required every 6 to 12 months. In addition, women over the age of 60 also need assessment of their bone density. To reduce the risk of fractures, the patient should be encouraged to discontinue smoking and enroll in a physical therapy program. A cardiology referral is necessary to screen for heart disease. The pharmacist should emphasize the importance of integrative therapies like yoga, meditation, massage, and music to lower stress. A dietary consult should be obtained to ensure that the patient is eating a healthy diet rich in calcium.

**Outcomes**

There have been many studies conducted on the benefits of post-mastectomy radiation and the overall impression is that there is a reduction in relapse rates and overall mortality in patients who receive extensive irradiation. So far the studies have not shown a significant difference in recurrence following radiation in patients with one or 2-3 positive lymph nodes. Unfortunately, most studies have not been long-term with only a few following patients at 10 years.