# Continuing Education Activity

Accommodative insufficiency is a condition characterized by a reduced ability to carry out near work. It occurs in as much as 10% of the population. It is the most common form of accommodative dysfunction in non-presbyopic disorders. This article describes the optics of the human eye and the principles of ametropia. The article also explains the concepts involved in a thorough differential diagnosis and managing patients with this condition. An interprofessional healthcare team approach is emphasized in helping patients with accommodative insufficiency.

**Objectives:**
- Describe accommodative insufficiency and explain methods of diagnosis.
- Review the risk factors for developing accommodative dysfunction. 
- Explain the common physical exam findings associated with accommodative insufficiency.
- Outline the typical presentation and differential diagnosis of a patient with accommodative insufficiency.

# Introduction

As an optical system, the eyes function in line with the basic principles of refraction.

Accommodation is the adaptative faculty that enables clear vision with subjective variation in the linear distance of visual targets.

The focusing powers of the crystalline lens are directly proportional to the increase or decrease in lens convexity. At the near point of accommodation, the ciliary muscles contract and relax zonular tension, thus enabling increased convexity and focusing power. For the far point of accommodation, the ciliary muscles relax and exert greater tension on the zonules (of Zinn), thus reducing lenticular convexity.

Under typical conditions, the healthy eye responds to near-point (linear) stimuli by activating the near triad, which includes accommodation, convergence, and miosis. These mechanisms are synergistically engaged to enable single, clear binocular vision.

Inhibition in one of these reflexes can most likely lead to dysfunction of accommodative response. Concerning the near reflexes, accommodation and convergence are most closely intertwined. This interrelationship can be reported as the 'accommodative convergence to accommodation (AC/A)  ratio.

The accommodative mechanisms can be subject to functional anomalies in maintaining visual clarity. Based on the Duke-Elder classification, these include:

- Accommodative insufficiency (AI)

- Accommodative spasm

- Accommodative inertia

- Ill-sustained accommodation

- Accommodative infacility

AI is a functional vision anomaly characterized by the inability to sustain focus at near.

# Etiology

Depending upon the severity and type, errors of refraction are often characterized by intermittent or sustained periods of 'blur' resulting from a defocus of visual targets.

With repetitive exertion, fatigue of the ciliary muscles usually develops.

This group of individuals at risk excludes presbyopes and those with organic causes, like autonomic degenerative diseases. These are related to other comorbid factors (such as age-related crystalline nuclear sclerosis and neurological involvement).

Individuals with visual tasks that require prolonged and repetitive stimulation at the near point of accommodation can often develop symptoms of chronic fatigue consistent with AI.

AI may also occur as a side effect of exposure to therapeutic doses of pharmacological agents, which include parasympatholytics (such as hyoscine and atropine) and sympathomimetic agents.

# Epidemiology

Accommodative dysfunction occurs in the majority of patients with binocular vision problems. Limited data are reported in the literature regarding the actual prevalence of accommodative dysfunction in the general population.

Most data account for the prevalence of accommodative dysfunction amongst school children ranging from 8 to 15 years of age.

Children with cerebral palsy are also reported to have lower accommodative amplitudes as compared to age-matched peers.

# History and Physical

An individual with AI tends to complain of blurry vision during near visual tasks, headaches, visual fatigue, and other asthenopic symptoms (such as eyestrain, diplopia, etc.).

Young children may become symptomatic after an illness or fever.

The clinician should consider other essential factors in the history of the patient, which include: substance abuse, trauma, infectious disease, anemia, demyelinating disease, myasthenia gravis (MG being the more localized finding), and Grave's orbitopathy.

# Evaluation

For proper diagnosis of accommodative and vergence dysfunction, numerous tests and examinations should be performed to provide a proper diagnosis. Optimal correction of any existing refractive error is obligatory.

The NPC, for example, is useful in detecting the presence of convergence insufficiency together with AI.

Parameters representing the ability to stimulate accommodative responses optimally to presented stimuli are often reduced for individuals with AI. These patients tend to show reduced amplitudes of accommodation (AoA) beyond the minimum expected finding based on Hofstetter's formulae (15-0.25×age) or Donders table of age-expected diopters of accommodation.

Individuals who under-accommodate at near usually manifest a lag of accommodation, while patients who over-accommodate manifest an accommodative lead. Accommodative lag/lead can be determined either by the monocular estimated method (MEM) retinoscopy or by the fused cross-cylinder (FCC) test.

The FCC test is the more subjective option and tends to be tedious and less accurate, especially for young children. MEM retinoscopy is performed with fixation directed to a near target. An attempt is then made to swiftly neutralize the movement of the reflex with spherical lenses of appropriate power. The expected finding is a lag between +0.25 DS and +0.75 DS. A lag greater than +1.00 DS indicates the presence of AI.

Accommodative facility testing is another method to assess the subject's ability to stimulate and relax accommodative responses at a normal rate. It also tests the accuracy of repetitive alterations in demand on the accommodative system. This is often determined using +/-2.00diopter flipper lenses.

NRA/PRA values are indirect measurements of the fusional vergence abilities of the eye. The procedure for testing NRA involves adding plus lenses over the distance correction until the letters blur out. This same procedure is repeated for the PRA, with the only difference being that minus lenses are used in place of the plus lenses.

Horizontal fusional vergence amplitudes (both near and far) are measured using base-in (BI) and base-out prisms (BO). BI prisms are used for negative fusional vergence (NFV), and BO prisms for positive fusional vergence (PFV) amplitudes. Blur, break, and recovery findings are then compared to Morgan's expected ranges. Individuals with symptomatic AI will demonstrate suboptimal fusional vergence in reserve to meet certain accommodative demands.

The AC/A ratio is a key factor to consider in the proper diagnosis and management of accommodative and vergence dysfunction. The normal value is 4:1. Horizontal phoria findings at near can be used to determine the  AC/A ratio gradient. In determining the AC/A ratio gradient, +1.00D lenses are used to induce a prismatic effect (with the optimal near prescription in place) for esophoric findings, while -1.00D lenses are placed in the near prescription for exophoric findings. The difference between phorias with and without the gradient lens is then taken as a fractional value of the lens power used.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of AI should begin with proper refraction and correcting any underlying refractive error. It should be noted that low levels of ametropia may have an exacerbating effect on individuals with AI. Correction of these small refractive errors may substantially alleviate the symptoms of AI for the sufferer.

Examples of these signs include low PRA and amplitude of accommodation values. Others are high retinoscopic values as measured with the MEM method and difficulty clearing the minus lenses during accommodative facility testing. This may be a problem for myopes as prescribing plus lenses can negate the refractive endpoint. Myopes, however, may benefit from bifocals or progressive lenses, especially if they are found to suffer AI or accommodative esophoria. Studies have shown that this may slow myopic progression.

In cases where the cause of AI is organic or due to a paralysis of the accommodative system, plus lenses can be recommended either permanently or temporarily as needed.

Vision therapy offers some promise in managing AI and is generally aimed at improving accommodative amplitude and positive fusional vergence in reserve.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of AI is key to the clinical decision-making processes regarding management and evaluation.

Pseudo-CI is a key differential diagnosis to actual CI. This is often considered an AI with a secondary CI finding. In true CI, the NPC is receded. However, measures of accommodation, such as the AoA, are within normal limits. In cases of CI, when an accommodative anomaly exists, there tends to be an accommodative excess. From a clinical perspective, repetition of the NPC with +0.75 or +1.00 lenses may improve performance in pseudo-CI cases. In contrast to just AI, high plus lenses tend to increase exophoria, thus making it more difficult for the patients to converge (while worsening symptoms). In such cases, tailored vision therapy can be of great value.

Certain ocular diseases like Adie's tonic pupil can present symptoms mimicking AI. Infective conditions that produce neuropathological sequelae like syphilis and meningitis may also affect accommodative ability by disrupting the parasympathetic pathway.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of AI is directly related to the degree to which accompanying symptoms can be alleviated through oculovisual therapeutic management.

# Complications

As with other vergence anomalies, AI can degenerate and become strabismic without proper management. AI can also present with poor academic performance in affected children.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Successful outcomes of vision therapy are only achievable if the patient is compliant. Subjects with AI, particularly latent hyperopes, may become discouraged from wearing their spectacle routinely. Parents can show dissatisfaction and disagree with the recommendation of bifocal lenses for their children. Thorough approaches that encourage patient adherence and family support are crucial.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Accommodative and vergence dysfunction can sometimes be indicative of a potentially debilitating disease.

The patient may require interprofessional management, which includes neurological, hematological, pathological, and infectious disease evaluation and testing. Important signs and symptoms to consider, especially during triage, include persistent or intermittent diplopia. Cover testing and extraocular muscle (EOM) function assessment can provide better insight into underlying causes. Acute onsets of abnormalities of accommodation and vergence should seek urgent neuro-ophthalmic evaluation. [Level 1]