**Imaging Studies**

Patients suspected to have paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration should undergo brain imaging with computed tomography scans (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to rule out hemorrhagic strokes, primary and secondary brain tumors, and ischemic strokes as part of their initial workup.  MRI of the brain in PCD is usually normal but can show cerebellar atrophy as the disease progresses. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography scan can show increased activity early in the disease.

**CSF Analysis**

Patients with paraneoplastic neurological syndromes often have mild pleocytosis, protein elevation, and/or oligoclonal bands. These findings are neither sensitive nor specific.

**Paraneoplastic Antibody Assay**

- Anti-Yo (PCA-1): this is the most commonly detected onconeural antibody in PCDand is commonly associated with breast cancer and ovarian cancer.

- Anti-Hu:  small-cell lung cancer, prostate cancer, and seminoma testicular cancer.

- Anti-Ri: breast, ovarian and small cell lung cancers

- Anti-Tr: Hodgkin lymphoma

- Anti VGCC: small cell lung cancer and lymphoma

- Anti- Ma2: small cell lung cancer and testicular cancer

- Anti- CRMP5 (Anti- CV2): small cell lung cancer and thymoma

- Anti-mGluR1: Hodgkin lymphoma.

To diagnose a patient with definitive PCD, the patient must have severe cerebellar symptoms for less than 12 weeks with a normal brain MRI, and the patient must also have a moderate disability with at least a score of 3 on the Modified Rankin Scale (MRS), Clinical evidence of both appendicular and truncal ataxia must be present in addition to an established diagnosis of cancer within 5 years of symptoms onset. Patients with cerebellar symptoms and detectable onconeural antibodies are also considered to have definitive PCD.

Patients who have the classic symptoms without onconeural antibodies are considered to have probable PCD and should undergo further imaging to detect underlying malignancy, and should have repeat paraneoplastic antibody assay.