Treatment and management of plasma cell neoplasms depend on the disease entity. Non-IgM MGUS is an asymptomatic disease with low risk of progression, so it is usually managed through close follow-up. SBP and EMP are treated with localized radiotherapy. Although standard treatment of plasmacytomas is absent; plasmacytomas are highly sensitive to radiotherapy; therefore, local radiation therapy is effective

PCM treatment depends on the risk stratification. Following risk stratification, all patients need to be assessed to determine their eligibility for autologous hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). When compared with chemotherapy alone, intensified chemotherapy followed by HCT has been shown to improve both the disease-free survival and the overall survival. For high and intermediate risk groups, induction chemotherapy followed by HCT and maintenance therapy is recommended. If a patient is not a candidate for high dose chemotherapy and autologous HCT, the only treatment option is chemotherapy alone. Triple chemotherapeutic regimens such as bortezomib, lenalidomide, dexamethasone (VRd); bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, dexamethasone (VCd); and bortezomib, melphalan, prednisone (VMP) are all possible options. Initial chemotherapy should be continued until the patient reaches a plateau phase (12 to 18 months) in which the M-protein is stabilized and the disease shows no progression. The preferred method to assess the response to therapy is the measurement of monoclonal (M) protein in serum and urine. Amyloidosis and light and heavy chain deposition diseases are generally managed similarly to PCM. Eligibility for HCT should be determined, and chemotherapy alone should be used only in HCT ineligible patients. Overall, plasma cell neoplasms management requires multidisciplinary care and prompt risk stratification and treatment for the high-risk diseases