Antibiotics have transformed the healthcare system, making once lethal infection readily treatable. It has also helped to make other medical advances like cancer chemotherapy and organ transplants possible. Prompt initiation of antimicrobials has reduced morbidity and mortality, for example, in cases of sepsis. However, 30% of all antibiotics prescribed in hospitals are unnecessary or suboptimal.

Health care is in dire need of responsible and optimized use of antimicrobial agents for the safety of our current and future patients. It is important to enlighten the point that antibiotics differ from other drugs. With emerging resistance, the antibiotics that were being used are no longer as effective as they are. Compared to other specialties, their drugs are continuously improved in addition to the old ones. Like all medications, antibiotics have serious adverse effects. Around 20% of hospitalized patients on antibiotics experience side effects. C.difficile has widely illustrated the adverse impact on patients' health even to those not directly exposed to antibiotics. Around 140,000 visits to the emergency department occur annually for antibiotics.

In hospitalized patients, severe reactions, including renal and bone marrow toxicity, can be seen. A retrospective study from 2006-2010 by Baggs et al. revealed 0.6% increased sepsis risk within 90 days of discharge following sepsis admission. The study included 473 US hospitals and revealed broad-spectrum antibiotics were associated with a 50% increased risk of readmission within 90 days.

The goal of antimicrobial stewardship is better patient care, reduced antibiotic use, and cost-effective health care are favorable side effects. Antimicrobial stewardship programs have shown promising results in numerous health care settings. Reported benefits include reducing the incidence of C.difficile infection, reducing AMR, improved dosing in renally-impaired patients, improved infection cure rates, decreased mortality rates, and hospital cost savings. The meta-analysis by Davey et al. has shown that interventions for a reduction in excessive antibiotic prescription in inpatient patients can reduce AMR or nosocomial infections. Likewise, interventions to increase effective prescribing following the national and local guidelines can improve the clinical outcome.

The CDC's 2019 Antibiotic resistance Threat report has shown an 18% overall decline in deaths from AMR compared to the 2013 report and a decline in deaths by AMR by 28% in-hospital patients. Similarly, the report has shown a 41% decline in VRE, 33% in Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter, 29% in multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 25% in Candida, and 21% in MRSA. Although the results for high-priority pathogens are promising, the report also highlighted a 315% increase in erythromycin-resistant invasive group A Streptococcus, 124% in drug-resistant gonorrhea, and 50% in ESBL Enterobacteriaceae.

The CDC's annual outpatient antibiotics prescription report for 2018 has shown that 249.8 million antibiotics prescriptions have been dispersed throughout the US. This antibiotic dispense is equivalent to 763 prescriptions per 1000 people. When comparing with the highest prescription according to provider specialty, their data reveals the highest prescription by dermatologist-525 antibiotic prescription per 1000 person followed by physician assistants and nurse practitioners with 423 prescriptions per 1000 person and Emergency Medicine 392 per 1000 person.

With the overuse or abuse of antimicrobials, up-trending antimicrobial resistance, and limited antimicrobial resources, it is high time we take action.