The genome of HPVs includes the early genes (E1, E2, E4, E5, E6, E7), involved in regulation of the vegetative and proliferative phases of the viral life cycle, the late genes (L1, L2) which encode the capsid proteins, and a non-coding long control region (LCR) involved in viral replication and transcription regulation. HPV infects the basal epithelial cells of the transformation zone after gaining entry through micro-abrasions.  A class of cell surface receptors on the keratinocytes called Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) are thought to be the initial receptors for the virus, attaching to L1 of the capsid and inducing conformational changes and subsequent cleavage of L2.  The viral genome is slowly internalized over a 12 hour period through clathrin or caveolae-mediated endocytosis.  Entry of the viral genome into the nucleus occurs through nuclear membrane breaks.  Viral replication then begins. As the basal cells mature and reach the terminally differentiated layer of epithelium, expression of the L1 and L2 capsid proteins occurs to enable assembly of viral particles, which are sloughed off along with the dead squamous cells, allowing continued transmission and infection of the virus. This is the usual life cycle of most HPV genotypes. However, high-risk HPV types, especially HPV16, have been shown to often integrate their genome into the human genome. Integration has been proposed as an early event in the progression of LSIL to HSIL. It involves the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 maintaining double strand breakpoints in host DNA by attenuating the DNA damage response (DDR) involved in repairing such breaks so that the viral genome can integrate at these breakpoints.  The high-risk HPV E6 oncoprotein is known to interfere with p53, a cellular tumor-suppressor protein required for sensing base excision repair machinery and repairing oxidative damage, by inducing increased proteasome-dependent degradation of p53.  High-risk HPV E7 oncoprotein inactivates members of the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor protein family.  Retinoblastoma is coupled with an E2F transcription factor.  Inactivation of Rb uncouples E2F, thus allowing it to upregulate genes required for S-phase entry and progression.  The aforementioned E6 and E7 interactions are just glimpses of how these oncoproteins interact with various proteins in the nucleus.  Essentially, overexpression of E6/E7 causes cell cycle dysregulation.  Studies suggest integration also causes host gene expression changes, amplifying oncogenes and disrupting tumor suppressor genes. As the HPV genome is double-stranded and integrated into the host genome, it effectively evades the immune response leading to persistent infection.  Epigenetic modification of various genes and changes in expression of miRNAs have also been shown to play a role in carcinogenesis. Much remains to be elucidated regarding the molecular pathogenesis of cervical neoplasia.