Obtaining radiologic imaging is usually the first step in diagnosing these tumors. Cross-sectional imaging, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are the common imaging modalities used. No pathognomonic imaging characteristics are associated with solitary fibrous tumors of the pleura, and radiographic findings are like those found in other soft tissue tumors. A well-circumscribed, homogenous mass originating from the pleura is typically seen on CT.

The tumor usually arises from the pleural surface and frequently displaces or invades surrounding structures. SFTPs are usually pedunculated with associated changes in the position or shape of the tumor during respiration.

MRI helps differentiate the tumor from adjacent structures and determine the extent of vertebral involvement in massive posterior chest tumors.

Some radiographic features like large size, pleural effusion, and necrosis are more characteristic of malignant SFTPs.

The diagnosis of SFTP may be suspected based on imaging and clinical features. However, a definitive diagnosis requires histologic confirmation. Fine-needle aspiration biopsies rarely provide adequate tissue samples to make a diagnosis. Core biopsies may be sufficient to establish the diagnosis of SFT but are commonly limited in showing histologic features indicative of an aggressive tumor. Histological features are described in the “Histopathology” section.

Another useful tool in diagnosing solitary fibrous tumors of the pleura is immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemistry can help distinguish solitary fibrous tumors from other entities like mesotheliomas.