Naso-orbito-ethmoid complex fractures require surgical fixation and/or reduction to restore the aesthetic contours and proportions of the face. If the medial canthal tendon is avulsed, it will need to be reduced. Pre-injury photographs can inform the reduction and fixation process to return, as close as possible, the face to its original appearance. The surgical approach will depend on the severity and distribution of fractures; an effort should be made to use the smallest incision possible that will provide the necessary exposure to minimize the aesthetic impact of the postoperative scar.

The coronal incision provides good exposure of the upper midface and is the gold standard approach to NOE fractures that involve the frontal sinus. The midface degloving approach provides greater exposure of the lower midface; this technique, however, is associated with a number of complications, such as postoperative anesthesia and nasal deformity. After complete exposure of the fractures, the first priority is the reduction and fixation of the bony segments.

In type 3 NOE complex fractures, reduction of the MCT (canthopexy) is achieved via transnasal wiring, which is performed by drilling a small hole into the medial orbital wall and tethering the MCT with a wire. The use of a needle to secure the MCT in lieu of a drill is sometimes necessary for unstable comminuted fractures of the medial orbital wall.

Disruption to the lacrimal canalicular system is a common complication of midfacial trauma, with epiphora reported immediately postoperatively in nearly half of patients. Long-term epiphora, however, is relatively uncommon.