The aim of treatment in DIGO is to alleviate the patients' discomfort, enabling them to do simple acts like eating and chewing pain-free, treat the inflammation, reduce the swelling, and give a better cosmetic appearance to the gingiva.

The modalities of treatment are medical and surgical. Medical management is the first line of therapy, whereas surgery is reserved for recurrences or cases that persist despite good medical treatment.

Discontinuing or changing the medication must be placed under consideration.

Plaque control should be the first step in the treatment of DIGO, correct oral hygiene, and professional plaque removal, including tooth surface cleaning and periodic scaling.

Control of inflammation, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, antibiotics to control infection, and topical antifungal medication like nystatin, may also be utilized. Folate supplementation has also been used.

A sufficient period of six to twelve months should be allowed to elapse after discontinuing the inducing drug before surgery is considered.

**The Role of Azithromycin in Cyclosporin Induced Gingival Overgrowth**

In the last decade, researchers have found that azithromycin can help to reverse gingival overgrowth caused by cyclosporine A in renal transplant patients.

The effect of azithromycin on cyclosporine A-induced collagen turnover and cell proliferation was studied by Kim et al. They concluded that azithromycin: inhibits the proliferation of human gingival fibroblasts, and collagen accumulation - both induced by cyclosporin A – activates MMP-2 in renal transplant and normal fibroblast, inhibits mRNA levels of type 1 collagen and rises levels of MMP-2.