Lipedema can be complicated by lymphedema later in life. Lymphedema can be primary or secondary. Intrinsic abnormality (i.e., hypoplasia or dysfunction of lymph vessels) is responsible for primary lymphedema, and extrinsic abnormality (i.e., surgical lymphadenectomy) causes secondary lymphedema. It is characterized by bilateral and asymmetric swelling of both lower extremities due to inadequate drainage of fluids, cells, and proteins, resulting in excessive accumulation of interstitial fluid. The inability to pick up the fold of skin (or pinch the skin) at the base of the second toe called the “Stemmer sign” (Described by the scientist Stemmer in 1976) is pathognomonic for lymphedema. Also, pitting is evident in lymphedema. Lipedema is often complicated by secondary lymphedema and is called lipo-lymphedema.

Association of obesity with lipedema is very common. The important differentiating point between these two conditions is tissue tenderness; easy bruising is not found in obesity. Also, diet and exercise can reduce the fat deposition in obesity. In lipedema, fat distribution is disproportionate between the upper and lower bodies, which is not seen in obesity.

Development of depression, appearance-related distress, self-loathing, poor quality of life, and social isolation are highly prevalent in patients with lipedema. Higher rates of suicide in women with lipedema have also been reported. Several other co-morbidities and complications are associated with lipedema like lordosis, genu valgum, arthritis of knees, antalgic gait, ankle pronation, varicose veins, cellulitis, etc.

Cardiovascular risk includes increased aortic stiffness index and increased mean systolic and diastolic aortic diameters, while decreased aortic strain and distensibility have been reported. Connective tissue changes in the aorta considered responsible for higher aortic distensibility, aortic strain, and arterial elasticity are possible risk factors for cardiovascular mortality.