Initial: Administer 25 to 50 mg orally daily as a single dose with the main meal.

Maintenance: Administer 25 to 50 mg orally daily after initial response to treatment. The maintenance dose should have its basis in clinical efficacy and tolerability.

Acitretin is available in 10 mg and 25 mg in hard gelatin capsules. In psoriasis treatment with acitretin, improvement is seen approximately at weeks 4 to 6. The maximum benefit may take between 3 to 4 months. Treatment dosing is initiated at 25 mg orally once daily. When the disease is stable, dosing is often reduced to 10 mg orally once daily or 25 mg orally every other day as a maintenance protocol. Treatment with acitretin leads to decreased plaque thickness, scaling, and pruritis. However, there is not much reduction in body surface area (BSA).

In combination with phototherapy, dosing is recommended at 25 mg orally once daily for two weeks before phototherapy, with a need to decrease the initial dose of ultraviolet (UV) light. If a patient is already on a stable dose of UV light and is starting acitretin, reduce the dose by 30% to 50% approximately seven days after initiation of acitretin.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, the use of acitretin is contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**A 53 % reduction of acitretin plasma concentrations was observed in patients with end-stage renal disease. The drug was not able to be removed by hemodialysis in these subjects.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered a pregnancy category X medicine. As per the box warning, acitretin must not be given to pregnant patients, patients who intend to become pregnant during therapy, or at least three years following discontinuation of treatment. Significant human fetal abnormalities have been reported with the administration of acitretin.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**Due to the potential for serious adverse reactions to infants, the manufacturer recommends avoiding acitretin in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of acitretin are not established for pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**In a multiple-dose trial, a 2-fold increase in acitretin plasma concentrations were observed in geriatric patients.