The abdomen extends from the rib cage superiorly to the pelvis inferiorly. It contains the foregut, midgut, hindgut, and the alimentary tract needed for digestion and excretion. Multiple large blood vessels run through the posterior abdomen as well as multiple lymphatic pathways. This dynamic tract is in constant motion with continuously changing functions at any point in time. The abdominal wall is a structure that encases and protects all organs and vessels within the abdominal cavity. The multilayer abdominal wall expands and contracts with the alternating pressures of the abdominal cavity. It can contract when intra-abdominal pressures are needed to increase, for example, during defecation, exhalation, childbirth, coughing, vomiting, or just during the positional changes required during daily life. It also can expand with physiologic needs. The abdominal wall can accommodate increased abdominal girth, for example, obesity, childbirth, or postprandial state to accommodate the increased amount of food within the gastrointestinal tract.

The multiple layers of muscles allow for a person to change position. The torso of the human body needs to be in constant motion, whether it be for walking, standing up, sitting down, or twisting from side to side. The multiple muscles have various orientations, insertions, and attachments to accommodate all directions of motion. Tasks accomplished through motion rely upon a constant dynamic of relaxation and contraction of the muscles and their effects on the surrounding bony structures to facilitate movement. There are many functions of the anterolateral wall; however, these would not be possible without the components that make up the wall.