Early management of hypertension is pivotal in reducing cardiovascular mortality, the incidence of left ventricular hypertrophy, mitral regurgitation, and to slow the progression of renal failure. While the target blood pressure in ADPKD patients has yet to be established, the HALT-PKD Study A noted that in early stages of ADPKD with preserved renal function, blood pressure management with systolic blood pressure less than 110 mmHg was strongly associated with significant reductions in the rate of total kidney volume growth, albuminuria, and left ventricular mass index. ACE inhibitors and ARBs are the mainstays of therapy, with beta-blockade and calcium-channel blockers as second-line treatment. As third-line therapy, thiazides are preferred in patients with normal renal function, while loop diuretics are recommended in patients with impaired renal function.

Screening for a cerebral aneurysm is recommended at the time of ADPKD diagnosis in patients at high risk (those with a family history of an aneurysm or intracranial hemorrhage in a first-degree relative).

Smoking cessation and hypertension management are most prudent, as smoking and high blood pressure increase the risk of a cerebral aneurysm. Of note, RAS blockade and statin use decrease the cerebral aneurysm rate.

Tolvaptan has demonstrated a slower decline than placebo in the eGFR over a one year period in patients with late-stage chronic kidney disease but is associated with elevations of bilirubin and alanine aminotransferase levels.

Multiple additional therapies have been studied in the effort to prevent progression of ADPKD. Dietary sodium restriction, which was part of the HALT-PKD trial, was shown to possibly reduce renal progression, as sodium excretion was associated with an increased risk of kidney growth and eGFR decline.

Statins have shown some benefit in all-cause chronic kidney disease and have suggested benefit in ADPKD patients. Statins are deployed in chronic kidney disease patients as progressive renal failure is a coronary heart disease equivalent.

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors such as sirolimus have been studied but have not shown any benefit on renal outcomes. Diuretics, such as amiloride, have also been tried to decrease cyst volume without measurable improvement in renal function. Protein restriction has provided variable results.

Octreotide has also been studied in ADPKD and has shown a non-significant slowing of renal function decline with possible attenuation of the effect after 2 years.

Metformin has been suggested as an agent that might help slow the decline in renal function seen in patients with ADPKD. This was based on the finding that metformin can impact cystogenesis in preclinical renal models. In a two year study, ADPKD patients on metformin decreased their kidney function (GFR) by only 58% as much as patients on placebo (1.71 vs 3.07). Metformin is also known to be safe and tolerable. These results, while promising, need to be confirmed by a larger trial to better evaluate efficacy.