Manganese toxicity is unique neurotoxicity that progresses from early psychiatric abnormalities to symptoms reminiscent of Parkinson disease, such as postural deficiencies, bradykinesia, shuffling gait, mask-like facies, micrographia, and speech difficulties. Neurons within the basal ganglia are specifically affected, yielding a parkinsonian syndrome.

The transport within the CNS of Mn is carried out primarily by a family of proteins known as the natural resistance-associated macrophage proteins (Nramps) and the divalent metal transporter-1 (DMT-1).

Transport of Mn3+ (oxidized form) is via transferrin in the bloodstream and transported across cell membranes via transferrin-receptor complexes. Transferrin receptors are located on cells of the BBB, neurons, and other cells of the central nervous system (CNS).

Other known important proteins of Mn in the CNS include zinc transport proteins, the dopamine transporter (DAT), calcium channels, choline transporters, and citrate transporters.

Cells utilize channels known as ATPase 13A2, SLC30A10, Ferroportin, and SPCA1 for the export of Mn. Relationships between deficiencies in these efflux channels have been linked to the development of hereditary Mn-induced parkinsonism in recent studies.

Manganese cytotoxicity is derived from the triggering of apoptosis in cells accumulating toxic doses of Mn. This discovery was made given similar chemical pathways are elevated in cells undergoing apoptosis, and those with exposure to excess Mn.

Mechanisms related to glutamate excess appear to predominate the picture of toxicity in the basal ganglia. Dopaminergic functionality in the globus pallidus appears unrelated to Mn exposure; however, there is some suggestion that down-regulation of dopaminergic transporters occurs in the striatum.

Disruption of transport and glutamine replenishment mechanisms (mainly extracellular reuptake) significantly increases extracellular concentrations of the excitatory neurotransmitter, minimizing neurotransmission in astrocytes, glia, and neighboring neurons of the basal ganglia.

Mn appears to induce a pro-inflammatory state within glial cells via the production of interleukins and Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha (TNF-A).

Normal circulating manganese levels in the blood are from 4 to 15 micrograms per liter. Organs with the highest density of Mn include the liver, bone, pancreas, the adrenals, and pituitary glands. The high concentrations in the liver and pancreas are likely related to their roles in excretion.

The predominant form of Mn in the human body is in the reduced Mn2+ form. This form of Mn is transported through the circulation via albumin, beta-globulin, and complexed to form stable compounds with weak acids and bases.

Studies have identified the globus pallidus as the main target of toxic Mn accumulation in conditions of excess.

Excretion of Mn occurs primarily via biliary means coincident with a lesser degree of urinary excretion.