**Electrocardiogram**

It establishes the diagnosis of STEMI. In cases of post-MI VSR, it may show atrioventricular or infra-nodal conduction abnormalities in approximately 40% of patients.

**Transthoracic Echocardiography**

It is the test of choice for the diagnosis of VSR. Echocardiography helps in determining the size and site of rupture and the magnitude of the left-to-right shunt. Basal VSR is best visualized in the parasternal long axis with medial angulation, the apical long axis, and the subcostal long axis. Apical VSR is best visualized in the apical 4-chamber view. Echocardiography also provides insight into the feasibility of using percutaneous closure devices in this setting. The assessment of ventricular function is the key to prognostication and management as they remain important determinants of mortality.

**Right Heart Catheterization**

Pulmonary artery catheterization with oximetry measurement can help diagnose VSR by showing an oxygen saturation step-up in the right ventricle and pulmonary artery. This is helpful in differentiation from post-MI acute mitral regurgitation in which this step-up is absent.

**Left Heart Catheterization**

Ventriculography performed after angiography may reveal VSR if it is highly suspected. Visualization is best in the left anterior oblique projection with cranial angulation.

**Cardiac MRI and CT**

These are additional imaging modalities that can be utilized. However, these studies are more difficult to perform in hemodynamically unstable patients and do not play a significant role in this setting.