**Adult Patients**

**Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting (CINV)**

Chemotherapy agents are broadly divided into five emetogenic levels. Each level states the expected frequency of emesis if the patient receives no prophylactic antiemetic.

- High – over 90 percent risk of emesis

- Moderate – over 30 and up to 90 percent risk of emesis

- Low – 10 to 30 percent risk of emesis

- Minimal – under10 percent risk of emesis

The Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer/European Society for Medical Oncology (MASCC/ESMO), the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) make antiemetic therapy based guidelines based on the risk of emesis.

Aprepitant is available as a capsule for PO administration in 40 mg, 80 mg, and 125 mg strengths. It is also available in a prodrug preparation known as a fosaprepitant for intravenous administration. Fosaprepitant comes in powder form for reconstitution in 150 mg/ vial strength. A standard recommendation for highly emetogenic chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting prevention (CINV) would include a 125 mg capsule given PO one hour before administering chemotherapy on day one, often combined with a 5-HT3 antagonist and dexamethasone.

The 80 mg capsule is given 1 hour before chemotherapy on days two and three, often combined with a 5HT-3 antagonist and dexamethasone. The intravenous preparation, fosaprepitant, is administered as a one-time 150 mg dose given 30 minutes before chemotherapy. No repeat dosing is necessary when using fosaprepitant.

**Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting (PONV) and Post-discharge Nausea and Vomiting (PDNV)**

Aprepitant 40 mg capsule is administered PO within three hours of induction to prevent anesthesia-induced postoperative nausea and vomiting. Due to its increased cost compared with other antiemetics used in anesthesia practice, its use should only be for patients at high risk of nausea and vomiting or in whom the act of vomiting would jeopardize surgical repair.

The Apfel score is a validated and frequently used scoring system to predict postoperative nausea and vomiting risk.

**Pediatric Patients**

**Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting (CINV)**

Oral capsules may be used in the same manner as adult patients if the pediatric patient is greater than 12 years of age or under the age of 12 and greater than 30 kg.

Oral suspension is the dose form of choice for pediatric patients over six months of age up to 12 years old or 30 kg. A standard regimen for highly emetogenic chemotherapy is a dose of 3 mg/kg PO 1 hour (before chemotherapy) on day one and 2 mg/kg PO 1 hour (before chemotherapy) on day 2.

Fosaprepitant may be substituted for oral suspension if the patient cannot tolerate PO administration and has intravenous (IV) access. The dosing of fosaprepitant is age-stratified and adjusted within the age group depending on whether it is used as a monotherapy or combined with dexamethasone and a 5HT-3 antagonist. It is worth noting that multiple dosing regimens exist based on the prescribed chemotherapy regimen and institutional practices, just as in adults. Therefore, consultation with the treating oncologist and pharmacist and reviewing up-to-date reference literature is recommended.

**Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting (PONV) and Post-discharge Nausea and Vomiting (PDNV)**

FDA has not approved aprepitant and fosaprepitant for the indication of prophylaxis of anesthesia-induced postoperative nausea and vomiting in the pediatric population. However, literature does exist demonstrating efficacy and safety.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment is necessary for mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Use caution in severe hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh score>9).

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dosage adjustment of aprepitant is necessary for patients with renal impairment or patients with ESRD undergoing hemodialysis.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**The review suggests that aprepitant can be safely used during the first trimester of pregnancy. Aprepitant is a former FDA category drug B.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**There is a lack of clinical data regarding the use of aprepitant during breastfeeding. Clinicians should consider the developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding, the mother’s clinical need for the aprepitant, and possible adverse drug reactions from the aprepitant on the breastfed infant.