Blood products are transfused through intravenous tubing with filters. The filters, which typically have pore diameters of 170 to 260 microns, are also used to prevent particulate debris from being administered. However, the trapped particulate leads to bacterial growth, and the American Association of Blood Banks (AABB) advises against using a filter for more than four hours. Before transfusion, the tubing should be primed with an isotonic, calcium-free blood-compatible solution, for example, normal saline. Citrate is used as a preservative in packed red blood cells, and clots will form in the intravenous line if there is more calcium than the citrate can buffer.

The suggested equipment required for a blood transfusion includes the following:

- Blood components or whole blood could be provided through various central venous access devices or peripheral intravenous catheters. The following sizes should be considered:

- 20-22 gauge for routine transfusion in adults

- 16-18 gauge for rapid transfusion in adults

- 22-25 gauge for pediatrics

- The requirements for administration sets might vary

- Blood filters

- The administration of platelet-poor plasmas requires supplies that often differ by product and brand.

- Infusion devices, such as infusion pumps, blood warmers, rapid infusers, and pressure devices, can be used to transfuse blood components.

- A pressure infusion device may be needed for the rapid transfusion of blood components.

- A blood warmer device is often needed to prevent hypothermia in the rapid administration of cold-blood components, for instance, in trauma settings or operation theatres.