There are four stages in the development of the tooth germ.

- Bud stage

- Cap stage

- Early bell stage

- Late bell stage

**Bud stage:**This stage starts in the eighth week of intrauterine life with the emergence of enamel organs. The enamel organs are swellings formed by dental lamina under the influence of mesenchymal cells. From these enamel, organs develop each tooth.

**Cap stage:**This stage is marked by the growth and expansion of the enamel organ, which results in the formation of a concavity in its inner aspect. The growth continues and at about 12 weeks of intrauterine life i.e., during the late cap stage, inner enamel epithelium forms from the inner cuboidal cells of the enamel organ. The inner enamel epithelium cells are columnar in shape, unlike enamel organ cells, which are cuboidal. This layer defines the shape of the crown and later differentiates into ameloblasts responsible for the formation of enamel. The cells from the outer layer of the enamel organ form the outer enamel epithelium and remain cuboidal. They maintain the enamel organ's shape.

The condensed mesenchymal cells beneath the inner enamel epithelium form the dental papilla, which later gives forms pulp. The enamel organ has a surrounding fibrous capsule known as the dental follicle, which later forms the periodontal ligament.

At 14 weeks of intrauterine life, apart from the inner and outer enamel epithelium, two other layers, namely stratum intermedium, and stellate reticulum, is formed. The stratum intermedium lies over the inner enamel epithelium and consists of 2 or 3 layers of cells. Its functions include transportation of the nutrients to and from the enamel forming cells, the ameloblasts. The stellate reticulum layer lies between the stratum intermedium and the outer enamel epithelium. The cells in this layer are star-shaped, hence the name stellate. Their function is to protect the underlying dental tissues and maintain the shape of the tooth.

Further growth of the inner and the outer enamel epithelium cells forms a cervical loop where the two entities meet and eventually form Hertwig's root sheath, which determines the shape of the root.

**Bell stage:**At this stage, the dental lamina disintegrates and is ready for the formation of dental hard tissue.

**Dentine formation (Dentinogenesis):**Cells from the inner enamel epithelium induce the cells at the periphery of the dental papilla to form dentin forming columnar cells i.e., odontoblasts. Initially, the odontoblasts secrete an unmineralized dentin matrix. The dentine matrix that forms before the initiation of mineralization is known as predentine. When the predentin becomes approximately 5 μm thick, mineralization begins within the matrix at random points in the form of spherical zones of hydroxyapatite called calcospherites are formed within the dentine matrix and eventually these calcospherites fuse to form mineralized dentine. The first mineralized layer of dentin is termed mantle dentine, and the remaining bulk is termed as circumpulpal dentine. As the deposition continues, the odontoblast cells retreat in the direction of dental papilla, forming an S-shaped curve. This formation leaves an elongated process known as the odontoblast process, which is later surrounded by the dentinal tubules.

**Enamel formation (Amelogenesis):**Enamel formation starts immediately after the first layer of dentin is laid down by the odontoblasts. The cells from the inner enamel epithelium differentiate into ameloblasts. These are columnar cells attached to the stratum intermedium via ita base. A pyramidal extension is present at the secretory end of ameloblasts known as Tomes' process through which the enamel matrix is secreted at the amelodentinal junction. Once the enamel matrix is laid down, immediately, the mineralization process begins by secretion of calcium and phosphate ions into the enamel matrix, forming hydroxyapatite crystallites. As more matrixes are secreted and mineralized, the ameloblast cells move away from the amelodentinal junction forming a pattern of crystallites contained within enamel prisms. These prisms are also known as enamel rods as they run from the amelodentinal junction to the enamel surface.

As the enamel matures, the crystallites within the enamel increase in size, and the organic content reduces. Once the enamel formation completes, the ameloblast cell loses the Tomes' process, flattens, and becomes the reduced enamel epithelium. This layer protects the enamel during eruption and eventually become the junctional epithelium.

**Root formation:**Once the crown formation is completed, root formation starts. The Hertwig's root sheath formed by the downward growth of the inner and outer enamel epithelium grows in the apical direction, encloses the dental papilla, and outlines the shape of the root. The dental follicle forming the periodontal ligament and cementum lies external to this sheath.

**Cementum formation (Cementogenesis):**After completion of the root, fragmentation of the Hertwig's root sheath occurs. This process enables the cells from the adjacent dental follicle to come into contact with the root dentine. These cells further differentiate to form cementum-forming cells termed as cementoblasts. These cells are single-layered cuboidal cells on the surface of the root dentine. The cementum matrix is secreted by these cells, and later, the process of mineralization starts by deposition of hydroxyapatite crystals. The unmineralized thin layer of cementum lying on the surface is termed as cementoid.

**Periodontal ligament formation:**Cells of the dental follicle other than cementoblasts differentiate into fibroblasts that secrete collagen. When the formation of cementum starts, these collagen fibers secreted by fibroblasts within the dental follicle orientate themselves into bundles perpendicular to the surface of the root and form the principal fibers of the periodontal ligament. One end of these fibers become embedded in the developing cementum, and the other end in the alveolar bone and these are known as Sharpey's fibers