Volume status and renal function should be assessed at baseline before initiating SGLT-2 inhibitors since all four agents can cause intravascular volume contraction, potentially resulting in a symptomatic decrease in blood pressure and short-term transient alteration in serum creatinine. Therefore, renal function and blood pressure should be monitored routinely after initiating SGLT-2 inhibitors. In addition, patients with a history of renal dysfunction, receiving loop diuretics, and elderly patients receiving therapy with an SGLT-2 inhibitor should be monitored even more carefully as there is a greater risk for volume depletion.

Laboratory monitoring of complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP), lipid panel, and kidney function tests should be performed routinely as changes in serum creatinine, eGFR, hematocrit, hemoglobin, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, serum bicarbonate, serum phosphate, and potassium may occur.

Blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) should be assessed at baseline and monitored routinely throughout treatment. Patients with clinical implications and manifestations of metabolic acidosis should be thoroughly investigated for ketoacidosis, as DKA may present even if the serum glucose range is below 250 mg/dL.

In the event of ketoacidosis, SGLT-2 inhibitor should be promptly discontinued, and appropriate management for ketoacidoses, such as insulin, intervenous fluids, and carbohydrate replacement, should be initiated. Although the risk of ketoacidosis is significantly greater in type 1 DM patients compared to type 2 DM patients receiving treatment with an SGLT-2 inhibitor, severe ketoacidosis necessitating urgent hospitalization has been reported in both groups. Therapy with an SGLT-2 inhibitor is not indicated for patients with type 1 DM.

Patients receiving therapy with insulin and insulin secretagogues, in addition to SGLT-2 inhibitors, should be monitored for hypoglycemic symptoms.

Before initiating canagliflozin and ertugliflozin, patients should be screened for risk factors for lower limb amputations such as peripheral vascular disease, history of amputations, neuropathy, high HbA1C at baseline, and diabetic foot ulcers. Patients receiving canagliflozin and ertugliflozin should be routinely monitored for infections or ulcer formations of the lower extremities, as non-traumatic lower-limb amputations have been reported. Infections of the lower extremity, gangrene, and foot ulcers are the most commonly reported etiologies necessitating amputation.

**Disease Monitoring**

**Diabetes Mellitus:**Monitor the glycemic goals in patients with diabetes. According to ADA 2022, the goals for nonpregnant adults are hbA1c <7% without significant hypoglycemia. Preprandial capillary plasma glucose 80–130 mg/dL and peak postprandial capillary plasma glucose <180 mg/dL.

**Heart Failure:**Monitoring heart failure treatment includes appropriate measurement of fluid intake and output, vitals, and body weight(at the same time each day). Clinical signs and symptoms of hypoperfusion and congestion should also be monitored. During medication adjustment, serum electrolytes, serum creatinine, and BUN should be measured. (ACC/AHA/HFSA 2022)

**Chronic Kidney Disease:**Monitor ACR (albumin to creatinine ratio) and eGFR in patients treated with SGLT2 inhibitors. Clinicians must recognize that initiating SGLT2 therapy leads to an acute reduction in eGFR. Consequently, a drop in eGFR should be anticipated with treatment initiation and is not an indication to discontinue the drug if the eGFR decline is <30% due to improved outcomes in chronic kidney disease.