A comprehensive history and thorough physical examination are essential elements of the examination of children with developmental delays. Additional information can also be gathered by a play interaction with the child us age-appropriate toys (e.g., toy cars, blocks, crayons, and paper) as well as watching the child move around the clinic. Additionally, home videos may prove to be useful.

**History**

- Collect comprehensive data on the entirety of the child's development from conception to the current age.

- Collect a detailed family history of at least first, second, and third-degree relatives. The construction of a pedigree chart is often helpful.

- Prepare a detailed narrative of the presentation and course of the relevant developmental delays.

- Obtain and review prenatal, perinatal/birth, and postnatal records when they are available.

- Check the neonatal history for adverse events, including HIE, jaundice, hypotonia, hypothyroidism, congenital abnormalitiesChart each of the developmental lines by listing each critical developmental milestone, including sitting, crawling, walking, talking, social interaction, language, learning, etc.

- Obtain an immunization history

- Obtain a nutritional history — (i.e., feeding and eating habits).

- Collect a detailed medical history, including hospitalization, surgeries, accidents, injuries, medications, etc.

- Collect data on social and academic performance in school

**Physical Examination**

- Growth parameters — such as occipitofrontal circumference, weight, height, and BMI.

- General physical examination involving head-to-toe assessment.

- Detailed neurologic exam, including hearing and vision evaluation.

- Examination for dysmorphology.