A 32-year-old male with no significant past medical history presents to the emergency department with abdominal pain. He states the pain began a few days ago in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen and now feels as though it is spreading to the mid-abdomen.

He describes the pain as coming on suddenly and sharp in nature.   Since the onset, his pain started to improve until the morning of his presentation to the emergency department, when it acutely worsened. He says that the pain is much worse with movement.

The patient is concerned about a possible hernia as he does heavy lifting at work. Review of systems is negative, including no anorexia, no nausea or vomiting, no testicular pain or swelling, no urinary or bowel complaints, and no fevers or chills.

The patient denies prior abdominal surgeries. He does smoke a half pack of cigarettes a day, drinks alcohol socially, and denies any recreational drug use. He notes no inherited medical conditions in his family.

Vital signs on arrival:

- Blood pressure (BP) 120/73

- Heart rate (HR) 60

- RR 18

- Temperature: 35.6 C

- Oxygen saturation: 98% on room air

- Height 5'10" (178 cm)

- Weight 154 lbs (70 kg)

**Physical Exam**

- General: Alert and oriented, in no apparent distress, although ambulates into the emergency room holding his abdomen.

- HEENT: Normocephalic, atraumatic, sclera anicteric.  Mucus membranes are moist.

- Cardiovascular (CV): Regular rate and rhythm, no murmurs, rubs, gallops

- Pulmonary: clear to auscultation bilaterally

- Abdomen: moderate tenderness to palpation in the right lower quadrant without rebound, guarding, or rigidity.  Bowel sounds are present throughout.  Negative psoas and obturator signs.

- Genitourinary (GU): genitalia examined in a standing position with a normal external exam, no masses felt with a cough, intact cremasteric reflex

- Back: No cerebrovascular (CVA) tenderness

- Neurological: No focal deficits

- Skin: Warm and dry, no rashes