The incidence of cancer of the penis varies and is related to a number of factors. Clinicians have identified risk factors including the history of phimosis, balanitis, chronic inflammation, penile trauma, lack of neonatal circumcision, tobacco use, lichen sclerosus, poor hygiene and history of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), especially HIV and human papillomavirus (HPV).

Neonatal circumcision has been correlated with lower rates of penile cancer and has been established as an excellent prophylactic measure that can eliminate the occurrence of penile carcinoma. The reasoning behind this is that it eliminates the closed preputial environment where penile carcinoma develops. This helps prevent chronic irritation effects of smegma which can lead to chronic inflammation, which is a known risk factor for penile cancer. It also eliminates the possibility of phimosis and balanitis. Patients with a history of phimosis have an increased risk for penile cancer of 25% to 60%. Male circumcision has also been shown to be effective against the HIV-1 infection. Population-based studies support the fact that neonatal circumcision can be an effective prophylactic measure against penile cancer. Studies have shown a very low incidence rate in the Jewish population where neonatal circumcision is a universal practice. African tribes and Asian cultures that do not routinely perform circumcision have much higher rates of penile cancer, and it, in fact, accounts for 10% to 20% of all male malignant neoplasms in these groups.

Sexually transmitted diseases are also noted to be a risk factor for the development of penile cancer, particularly HIV and HPV. Patients with HIV have an 8-fold increased risk for the development of penile cancer. Forty-five to eighty percent of penile cancers are related to HPV with a strong correlation to types 6, 16 and 18. High-risk HPV is more common in men with a history of phimosis. A positive HPV status may be suggestive of a higher cancer sensitivity to radiation therapy and a better overall prognosis.

A final risk factor to consider is tobacco use. Cigarette smokers are 3 to 4.5 times more likely to develop penile cancer.