Patients treated with acetaminophen should have monitoring for desired clinical effects, such as pain or fever relief. Serum concentrations are unnecessary when appropriately dosed. In overdose settings, laboratory evaluation is necessary. In acute overdoses in which ingestion occurs over less than eight hours, a serum APAP concentration should be assessed and plotted on the Rumack-Matthew nomogram, with the time course starting at the onset of ingestion, to determine toxicity and need for treatment. Nonacute ingestions require an assessment of acetaminophen concentration and transaminases, and treatment should occur.

Additionally, caution is necessary for patients with renal or hepatic impairment or patients with alcoholic liver disease, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, or severe hypovolemia. However, there is evidence that acetaminophen may be safe to use in the setting of alcoholic liver disease.

Acetaminophen can cross the placental barrier, but there is no evidence of increased teratogenic effects due to using normal doses of acetaminophen during pregnancy.

Pregnant women should exercise caution when using acetaminophen early in pregnancy because of increasing evidence that in utero acetaminophen exposure to the fetus might increase the risk of neurological, reproductive, and urogenital disorders.

MacIntyre I. et al. conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical trial on the effects of oral acetaminophen on daytime systolic blood pressure.