The size and location of the chondral defect determine which osteochondral allograft transplantation technique is most appropriate. Small solitary defects can be filled with a single plug that is matched exactly to the size and shape of the defect, providing complete coverage of the chondral deficiency and integration with the surrounding tissues. Below is a discussion of some of the more common methods employed to address articular surface defects.

It should be noted that due to the rather soft nature of articular cartilage, transplanting the cartilage alone without some aspect of its accompanying bony support is not possible since securing it in place is problematic if not impossible without some reliable form of shear resistant fixation.

Larger lesions may require a more significant arthrotomy of the joint to fully visualize the defect to ensure that the entire zone of injury is appropriately addressed. Having a healthy rim of cartilage available along the edges of the graft is essential for appropriate integration into the patient's tissue.

The Snowman technique, or mosaicplasty technique, is one method to address larger chondral lesions, allowing for coverage of a bigger area than is allowed by single plugs. In this technique, a single plug is placed with a standard reaming technique and held in place with wire fixation. A second plug is subsequently reamed, overlapping with the first allowing for a confluence of the two plugs, covering a larger articular surface area.

The Shell technique is ideal for the treatment of asymmetrical cartilage defects and defects that are difficult to access with standard arthrotomies, such as defects of the posterior femoral condyle. In this technique, the entire affected recipient site can be removed en bloc, and a size-matched donor bone is cut and contoured to cover the recipient lesion, covering the defect as a "shell" of protection.

The small fragment allograft technique alternatively may be used in defects of the tibial plateau where the entire meniscotibial unit is replaced by a donor unit and stabilized with screw fixation.

Finally, while this article addresses the osteochondral allograft transplantation methods, there are newer technologies wherein articular cartilage scaffolds or membranes can be sewn or adhered to the articular surface defects found within the knee. Those techniques show promise in many situations and will likely, in some instances, replace the need to transplant an auto or allograft osteochondral segment.