**Some of the Other Issues of Concern Include**

Safety assessment

- Home safety

- Driving safety

- Elder mistreatment

Goals of care and advanced directives

**Safety Assessment**

**Home safety**: About 57,000 adults above age 65 died of unintentional injuries in 2018 as per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than half of which is estimated to be due to falls. Decline in overall health at old age along with isolation leads to a higher risk of accidents at home. Clinicians should discuss common ways to prevent falls at home, such as lights, handrails, and walking assistance devices. CDC has published a checklist for home fall prevention for older adults, which can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/steadi/pdf/check_for_safety_brochure-a.pdf

**Driving**: Driving is a complex task and is affected by the decline in visual, motor, and cognitive ability in old age. However, it is also one of the important IADLs that help older patients maintain mobility and engage socially. Therefore, the prospect of "retiring from driving" is highly stressful for the elderly, and such recommendations should be made based on individualized assessment. Besides testing for visual acuity, neck mobility, and reaction time, a multidisciplinary approach including an ophthalmologist, a psychiatrist, a pharmacist, a physical therapist, and an occupational therapist can help assess and improve driving function. If the risk of driving is high, options for alternative forms of transportation and mobility should be discussed with patients and caregivers.

**Mistreatment**: Elder mistreatment includes abuse and neglect. Various studies show the prevalence of elder mistreatment ranging from 2 to 36%. In the U.S., the prevalence is around 9.5%. Still, the reported prevalence is low as elder abuse tends to be underreported.

**Goals of Care and Advanced Directives**

Clinicians should discuss goals of care and advance directives primarily in ambulatory settings, well in advance of facing health crises. Effective communication allows the patient to cope with the serious illness and empowers them to direct their treatment. Goals of care discussion should be individualized as different patients would have different short or long-term goals. Similarly, advanced directives discussion allows the providers to know about the patient's wishes, prevents confusion at the end of life, and minimizes healthcare costs by deferring unwanted medical procedures. Such discussions do not increase depression, anxiety, or hopelessness in patients rather improve their quality of life and even survival by up to 25%. It also decreases stress, anxiety, and depression among family members and improves family satisfaction.