An exposure history alongside idiopathic or early-onset parkinsonism and psychiatric deficits defines manganese toxicity.  However, patients rarely present with all Parkinsonian symptoms concomitantly, so a high index of suspicion may be required for patients presenting with piece-meal symptomatology. History-gathering should proceed as standard, elucidating the patient's symptoms and changes from baseline. It is important to involve family members or corroborating parties in the history-taking as psychiatric impairments, and memory fluctuations characterize the early symptoms of manganism.

Early symptomatology of manganism involves changes in the patient's psychiatric and emotional state. The patient may experience personality changes concomitant with periods of rapid emotional fluctuations, which need to be qualitatively differentiated from the patient's baseline.

Early neurological dysfunction was also a hallmark in these patients, characteristic of the basal ganglia/nigrostriatal system involvement. Symptoms discovered included tremor, gait abnormalities, headaches, dysfunctional speech, hyperreflexia, hypertonicity, and tremors.

Other systems affected by Mn exposure include the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems. A form of obstructive lung disease formed in approximately one-third of the welders involved in the California study by Bower et. al.

Focusing on the patient's social history can confirm the diagnosis in patients suspected of having manganism. Patients will have an occupational history consistent with exposure, including welding, metal manufacturing, mining, battery manufacturing, smelting, those intimately exposed to gasoline combustion, and steelworkers.

Query the patient about drug use, as recent studies have shown, bath salts use intravenously puts patients at risk for Mn overload due to poor purification processes.

Further discussion of patients' past medical histories should include known or presumed hepatic insufficiency, as patients with decreased liver function are at increased risk for developing manganism.