# Continuing Education Activity

This activity outlines the current scientific literature and knowledge of the risks and benefits of inhaling nicotine through proprietary devices. It discusses the largely unknown and unquantified risks, and a dramatic increase in the use of these devices, particularly in pediatric populations, as well as the role of the interprofessional team in recommending these devices.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the risks of inhaling nicotine through electronic devices. 
- Review the at-risk populations for electronic nicotine delivery systems. 
- Summarize the long term risks for inhaling nicotine through electronic devices.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients addicted to nicotine.

# Introduction

One of the latest public health controversies has centered around the introduction and the rising popularity of electronic nicotine delivery systems.  These devices most commonly called e-cigarettes or vaporizers, aerosolize various combinations of glycerol, propylene glycol, flavorings, nicotine, or cannabis to be inhaled by consumers. The marketing strategy for e-cigarettes is a “healthier” alternative to traditional tobacco and a novel aid for smoking cessation with little data to support these claims.

# Function

Electronic nicotine delivery systems come in an array of designs. The primary differences are in nicotine concentration, the variety of additives and flavorings, battery type, and superficial aesthetics. The classic e-cigarette consists of a compact lithium-ion battery, a vaporization chamber, and a solvent mixture cartridge.

Particularly popular among youth consumers are the “pod-mod” class of devices that resemble a slick and modern universal serial bus drive. These super-compact vaporizers can deliver highly concentrated puffs at levels that would be aversive to even chronic tobacco users.

# Issues of Concern

There are many constituents in the aerosols and liquids of e-cigarette cartridges. The most common include glycerol, propylene glycol, and nicotine. Micro-constituents that have been found in smaller concentrations include acrolein, formaldehyde, acetone, acetaldehyde, heavy metals, and many more.

Due to the profound cardiovascular and respiratory harm induced by conventional cigarettes, it is crucial for further research to help reveal the short-term and long-term consequences of the new alternatives. Early studies suggest a short-term increase in vital signs such as blood pressure and heart rate. Other studies have shown that e-cigarette vapors induce platelet activation in the endothelium of healthy naïve participants.

Furthermore, exposure to any form of nicotine has been shown to impair the development of neural circuits and to lead to a permanent impairment of neurochemical and behavioral functioning.

Much anecdotal evidence exists suggesting e-cigarettes have associations with the development of chronic respiratory symptoms.

In 2019, outbreaks of vaping associated lung injuries were reported in increasing numbers throughout the United States.

# Clinical Significance

E-cigarettes are frequently cited as smoking cessation and reduction aids by vendors. However, little solid evidence has been published to date to support such a claim. However, one study out of the UK and published in the New England Journal of Medicine randomized 886 participants into two separate treatment groups.

Since there is unclear clinical guidance, clinicians may struggle to advise patients on if and how to weave e-cigarettes into their treatment plans. Most experts take the harm reduction approach. FDA approved aids are suggested first due to their established efficacy and safety.

# Other Issues

Overall rates of cigarette usage were declining among high-school students before e-cigarettes entered the market in 2007.

One study attempted to quantify the receptivity of never-smoking American adolescents to tobacco advertising. 41% of the 12- to 13-year-old participants were found to be receptive to at least one of the tobacco advertisements, and the highest response was for the media that included electronic cigarettes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional cooperation and education can positively benefit patients and improve outcomes. The more members of the healthcare team asking about e-cigarette use and educating patients, the better. Most interventions will occur in the primary care setting where physicians, nurse practitioners, and pharmacists will discuss smoking cessation with patients. Each team member needs to be educated regarding the risks and benefits of electronic nicotine delivery devices. When questioning patients about their social history, it will be necessary for all team members to ask specifically about e-cigarette use as patients may not consider e-cigarettes to be harmful or in the same category as traditional cigarette smoking and thus may not disclose their use. Due to the rising popularity of these devices in the pediatric population, it is crucial to ask and educate about e-cigarettes during well-child exams. Some adolescences who would not have smoked may try e-cigarettes, which correlate with higher levels of smoking later in life. Interventions with adolescents aimed at smoking have demonstrated effectiveness in decreasing rates of e-cigarette users who later convert to traditional smoking.

Only through a concerted effort by clinicians at all levels can the morbidity associated with smoking decrease. Patients require ongoing education that smoking is harmful to health, and a coordinated effort from all members of the interprofessional team can contribute to that goal. [Level 5]

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Nurses will have an essential role in collecting and updating the social histories of patients and relaying any e-cigarette use to the healthcare team. The healthcare team needs to be aware of the risks and potential benefits of e-cigarettes and how they relate to patient care and health.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Patients who use e-cigarettes heavily may need nicotine patches/replacement while in the hospital and may experience typical symptoms of nicotine withdrawal for which nurses must monitor.