**Constitutional Symptoms**

Although non-specific, almost all patients with giant cell arteritis have one or more constitutional symptoms (weight loss, fever, fatigue, anorexia, malaise), which are the most common symptoms of GCA. Fever is usually low-grade and is present in up to 40% of GCA patients at presentation.

**Headache**

New-onset headaches or a change in baseline headaches in an elderly patient shall always raise a concern about the possibility of GCA. However, headaches may be absent in patients with isolated extra-cranial large vessel involvement, accounting for 10 to 15% of GCA. More than 75% of patients with GCA have headaches as a symptom, which is usually temporal but can be occipital, periorbital, or non-focal as well. Headaches have an insidious onset and gradually progress over time, although they may spontaneously resolve rarely, even in the absence of treatment (even while the disease process is ongoing). The intensity and quality of headaches vary, and headaches can be severe and not respond to typical over-the-counter analgesics. Scalp tenderness while combing or brushing hair is frequent and can be focal in the temporal areas or diffuse. In rare and severe cases, scalp necrosis can be seen.

**Jaw Claudication**

Jaw claudication or pain and discomfort while chewing or talking due to decreased blood supply to jaw muscles is a rather specific symptom for GCA and is seen in more than 30% of patients with GCA. Jaw claudication carries a high positive likelihood ratio for a positive temporal artery biopsy. Severe compromise in blood flow can lead to tongue necrosis which is rarely seen.

**Temporal Artery Abnormality**

Enlargement, nodular swelling, tenderness, loss of pulse of the temporal artery, either unilateral or bilateral, are seen in up to 50% of patients with GCA. Temporal artery nodularity also carries a high positive likelihood ratio for a positive temporal artery biopsy.

**Visual Symptoms**

Visual complications are seen in up to 15% of patients with GCA and, most commonly, are due to anterior ischemic optic neuropathy caused by vasculitis involving the ophthalmic artery or the posterior ciliary arteries (although can be due to ischemia anywhere in the optic pathway).

**Polymyalgia Rheumatica (PMR)**

Both PMR and GCA share similar pathogenesis. PMR is characterized by synovitis and periarthritis involving the shoulder and hip girdles, leading to pain, stiffness, and loss of range of motion of the bilateral shoulder and hip girdles. PMR can occur before, with, or after GCA. Further, 40 to 60% of GCA patients have PMR, and 15 to 20% of PMR patients have GCA.

**Neurological Symptoms**

Up to 30% of GCA patients experience neurological symptoms. Transient ischemia or strokes, especially involving the posterior circulation, can be seen in GCA. Mononeuropathies or peripheral neuropathies can also be seen, especially C5 nerve root involvement, leading to a loss of shoulder abduction. Notably, GCA does not affect intra-cerebral arteries.

**Respiratory Symptoms**

Up to 10% of patients with GCA experience dry or a productive cough (w or without sputum), sore throat, or hoarseness of voice. Throat pain can also occur due to pharyngeal ischemia.

**Extracranial Symptoms**

10-15% of cases of GCA have extracranial involvement, including the thoracic or abdominal aorta and its branches, including the carotid, subclavian, axillary, and brachial arteries. Lower extremity arterial involvement is less common. Extracranial involvement may occur in association with cranial involvement or even in the absence of cranial involvement. Up to 50% of these patients do not have the typical cranial symptoms and have a negative temporal artery biopsy. Involvement is usually unilateral but can be bilateral. Initial symptoms are upper extremity claudication, bruits, lack of pulses in upper extremities, asymmetric pulse and blood pressure readings in upper extremities, and Raynaud's phenomenon with or without digital ischemia/gangrene. Eventually, aortic aneurysms, thoracic, more commonly than abdominal aortic aneurysms, may form, although dissection is rare.