The mechanism of action for hydrocodone is as follows:

- Hydrocodone is an opioid receptor agonist and produces analgesic effects by activating mu-opioid receptors. Hydrocodone activates delta and kappa-opioid receptors as the plasma drug concentration increase beyond typical starting doses.

- Opioid receptors are located primarily within the central nervous system and are in the enteric plexus of the bowel, interstitial cells of Cajal, and immune cells of the gastrointestinal tract. Opioid receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors, and agonist stimulation inhibits cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) formation, leading to inhibition of nociceptive neurotransmitters' release, post-synaptic neuronal hyperpolarization and reduced neuronal excitability.

- Cough is a protective reflex evoked by airway stimulation. Coughs mediated by mechanical stimulation cough receptors are attenuated by narcotic antitussives primarily at the nucleus tractus solitarius(NTS) level via repression of glutamatergic transmission. Modulation of mu and kappa-opioid receptors possibly contributes to the antitussive activity of opioids. Opioids depress the cough reflex by directly affecting a cough center in the medulla and causing respiratory depression at higher doses.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**After single oral ingestion, hydrocodone IR (immediate-release) reaches maximum serum concentrations within one hour. Following an oral dose of hydrocodone ER (extended-release), peak plasma concentration(Tmax) is attained at 14–16 hours for the different doses (range is 6 to 30 hours).

**Distribution:**The apparent volume of distribution after hydrocodone ER administration is 402 Liter (for an adult of 70 kg), suggesting extensive tissue distribution.

**Metabolism:**Hydrocodone is metabolized in the liver primarily via the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. Hydrocodone converts to its active metabolite, hydromorphone, through O-demethylation catalyzed by the CYP2D6 enzyme. Studies have shown that pain relief correlates with plasma concentrations of hydromorphone rather than hydrocodone. Hydrocodone is also metabolized to an inactive metabolite, norhydrocodone, by CYP3A4.

**Excretion:**The half-life elimination of hydrocodone IR and ER is approximately 4 hours and 7 to 9 hours, respectively. Hydrocodone and its metabolites are excreted primarily by the renal route.