Before inserting the cystourethroscopy, the external genitalia is inspected for any lesions or anatomic abnormalities. In women, rigid cystourethroscopy insertion can be implemented using a sheath obturator. The scope will need to be directed anteriorly as it is advanced into the bladder. A flexible scope can be inserted similarly as a Foley catheter, with active deflection being used as needed.

In men, the penis is placed on the maximal stretch to straighten the urethra. When a rigid scope is passed, the penis is grasped with 5 fingers of the surgeon’s non-dominant hand. When a flexible scope is passed, the penis is pinched between the third and fourth digits of the non-dominant hand, allowing the thumb and index finger to be free to help guide the scope into the urethra. The penis should be angled 45 to 90 degrees relative to the abdominal wall as the scope passes through the anterior urethra. Once beyond the membranous urethra, the scope is directed anteriorly to enter the bladder. This is accomplished with active upward flexion when using the flexible scope and by dropping the distal end of the scope toward the operative table when using a rigid scope.

The lower urinary tract is systematically evaluated as the scope is advanced, with maximal irrigation running. The penile and bulbar urethra should be evaluated for any sign of stricture. The patient should be encouraged to relax when the scope is advanced through the membranous urethra. Once the scope is in the prostatic urethra, the verumontanum and utricle can be identified posteriorly. The size of the prostatic lobe, length of the prostatic urethra, and presence of a median lobe or bladder neck obstruction should be noted.

Upon entering the bladder, the mucosa should be carefully inspected. When using a rigid cystoscope, generally, a 30-degree scope is used initially to inspect as much of the bladder as can be visualized. The floor and trigone of the bladder are initially inspected, with the identification of the ureteral orifices, noting their location and number. Efflux from each ureter should be observed for the presence of blood. The remainder of the bladder should be inspected for bladder stones, trabeculation, bladder diverticula, erythematous patches, or papillary/sessile bladder lesions. The surgeon can visualize the lateral walls by rotating the cystoscope and keeping the camera orientation fixed. The dome and posterolateral walls of the bladder are inspected using a 70 or 120-degree lens on a rigid scope or by retroflection on a flexible scope. Prior to removing the scope, the bladder should be drained.