Reactions classify as Phase I, Phase II, or Phase III. It is important to note that these reactions do not have to take place sequentially and can even take place in reverse, Phase II, and then Phase I, or as a single reaction. Phase I metabolism consists of reduction, oxidation, or hydrolysis reactions. These reactions serve to convert lipophilic drugs into more polar molecules by adding or exposing a polar functional group such as -NH2 or -OH. These reactions also often create active metabolites and which is beneficial in activating prodrugs into their active and therapeutic state. Phase I includes the use of the cytochrome P450 system found with the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum. If the CYP450 system becomes inhibited in any way the drug level will increase, and vice versa if induced, the drug level will decrease.

Phase I reaction using the CYP450 system includes both an oxidative and reductive step using NADPH and not ATP: **Drug + O2+ NADPH -> Drug*+ H20 + NADP+**.

Drugs that have already have -OH, -NH2 or COOH groups can bypass Phase I and enter Phase II directly to become conjugated. Phase II reactions consist of adding hydrophilic groups to the original molecule, a toxic intermediate or a nontoxic metabolite formed in phase I, that requires further transformation to increase its polarity.  These reactions include conjugation reactions, glucuronidation, acetylation, and sulfation. The ultimate goal of phase II reactions is to form water-soluble products that can be excreted by the body.

A drug can ultimately undergo further metabolism during Phase III. In this phase, the drug that gets transported via an ABC transporter, which will require energy (ATP) consumption to actively uptake or efflux a compound from one side of the cell membrane to another. On the other hand, it can get transported via an SLC transporter which facilitates the passage of specific solutes across the membrane and actively transports other solutes against their electrochemical gradients by merging this action with another solute or ion. The function of an uptake transporter is to transfer a molecule into the cell, and the function of an efflux transporter is to transfer a molecule outside the cell.

In general, these reactions serve to deactivate substances. However, they may also bioactivate some substances by transforming them from nontoxic and/or inactive to the toxic and/or active form. If the process produces a toxic intermediate, its effect on the body is dependent on a few different factors. Some of these factors include how rapidly the intermediate can undergo further metabolism to a less toxic metabolite, the amount of toxic byproduct that is produced and then accumulated in cells, the type and amount of damage caused by the toxic intermediate, and the factors that would prolong excretion of the toxic metabolite.