**Musculoskeletal Complications**

Both GH and IGF-1 stimulate the production of periosteal bone formation. IGF-1 creates somatic growth by binding to the insulin-like growth factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R), which is relatively ubiquitous. IGF-1R is a receptor tyrosine kinase that brings about phosphorylation and activation of several intracellular signaling pathways, one of which is the AKT pathway activation that results in somatic cell growth and proliferation. In the craniofacial region, this manifests as characteristic features such as prognathism, teeth separation, jaw thickening, frontal bossing, and nasal bone hypertrophy.

The changes noted in the extremities are due to a combination of increased soft tissue, cartilage, bone overgrowth, and deformity. Cartilage hypertrophy results in the widening of joint spaces, and the widening of the phalanges occur due to the thickening of the base of the bone and the diaphysis. The spine is also affected by cartilage and bone overgrowth, the phenotype of which is dorsal kyphosis and lumbar hyperlordosis. Deformity due to overgrowth of the costochondral joints can cause splaying of the ribs. Bone mass can give differing results in these patients because acromegaly is associated with other endocrinopathies that may contribute to a low bone mineral density. An example of this would be hypogonadism. Peripheral arthralgias and myalgias are also common.

**Skin Manifestations**

The major changes seen with the skin result from hyperhidrosis, and patients may complain of excessive sweating and general oiliness of their skin. Additional findings may include skin tags. Skin is also generally thickened as a result of glycosaminoglycan deposition and connective tissue overgrowth.

**Neurologic Complication**

Carpal tunnel remains the most common neuropathy. Interestingly, the mechanism is thought to be edema of the median nerve, not external nerve compression from soft tissue and bone overgrowth. Also, cerebral aneurysms have been reported with increased frequency in patients with acromegaly, often found incidentally on imaging during an evaluation, but they can also present as cerebral hemorrhage if they should rupture.

**Cardiovascular Complications**

Hypertension is frequent in these patients. The pathophysiology seems multifactorial. Primarily, there is an increased plasma volume and perhaps an element of endothelial dysfunction as well. Secondary contributors to the development of hypertension include sleep apnea and insulin resistance. Myocardial biventricular hypertrophy can also occur directly from GH on the myocardium, leading to diastolic dysfunction. Histologically there is necrosis of myocardial cells, interstitial fibrosis, and infiltration of lymphocytes. Initially, this presents as a hyperkinetic heart, then evolving to biventricular hypertrophy and, eventually, diastolic and systolic dysfunction.

**Metabolic Complications**

Both insulin resistance and diabetes occur in acromegaly. This is because GH in excess causes insulin resistance at the level of the liver and peripheral tissues. There is an increase in beta-cell function as compensation attempts to maintain euglycemia. Physiologically, GH stimulates the hydrolysis of triglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerol. The combination of chronic insulin resistance and lipotoxicity results in beta-cell dysfunction and eventual apoptosis with the subsequent development of diabetes.

**Respiratory Complications**

The most common respiratory complication is sleep apnea. Most acromegalic patients with sleep apnea have the obstructive kind due to craniofacial anatomic changes such as macroglossia, soft tissue overgrowth of the palate and uvula, and alterations of the jaw. However, one-third of patients do have central sleep apnea. Other abnormalities can occur again due to anatomic changes related to the ribcage, thus altering ventilatory mechanics.

**Neoplastic Complications**

The risk of colon cancer in acromegaly remains a very controversial topic. A large meta-analysis evaluating the presence of colorectal malignancy in acromegaly was published in 2008. It included around 700 patients with acromegaly compared to around 1500 controls. They found that the odds ratios of developing colon adenomas and colon cancer in patients with acromegaly were 2.5 and 4.3, respectively.