The initial evaluation of the patient complaining of shoulder pain is variable. Many patients can be diagnosed based on exam and do not require additional workup at the initial presentation. The presence of profound weakness marked swelling, erythema, or deformity should prompt a more aggressive workup. Initial imaging of the shoulder with routine radiographs including an AP, axillary lateral, true AP, and scapular-Y view may help visualize pathology about the shoulder. Furthermore, using a true supraspinatus outlet view instead of a regular scapular-Y view may improve acromial characterization.

The Dutch Orthopedic Association published guidelines for treating what they refer to as subacromial pain syndrome. Their recommendations include early anti-inflammatories, injections for persistent cases, and advanced imaging (MRI) for cases lasting longer than six weeks.

In cases when the evaluator may be less certain regarding the diagnosis, an MRI of the shoulder without contrast is the best study to characterize the soft tissues. Usually, this is indicated in patients who fail a conservative treatment effort of more than six weeks, who have profound symptoms, or who have an unclear diagnosis.

Secondary impingement, which is usually associated with swimmers or overhead athletes, is a part of the constellation of symptoms of overuse and instability. There are reports regarding athletic patients who have lax shoulders, scapular dyskinesia, and train often. The mainstay of treatment in that population involves rest, physical therapy, and a gradual return to activities. It is a separate entity from degenerative shoulder pathologies and may be on the differential in a younger or more athletic population.