Third-generation cephalosporins are medications used in the management and treatment of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. They are encompassed among the beta-lactam class of drugs. This activity describes the indications, action, and contraindications for third-generation cephalosporins as a valuable agent in the management of gram-negative meningitis, Lyme disease, Pseudomonas pneumonia, gram-negative sepsis, Streptococcal endocarditis, melioidosis, penicillinase-producing Neisseria gonorrhea, chancroid, and gram-negative osteomyelitis. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional healthcare team in the treatment of patients with gram-positive and gram-negative infections and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of third-generation cephalosporins.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of third-generation cephalosporins.
- Review the toxicity of third-generation cephalosporins.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance third-generation cephalosporins, and improve outcomes, including antibiotic stewardship and how it affects antimicrobial selection as it pertains to improving care coordination among the interprofessional team when starting antibiotic therapy with third-generation cephalosporins.