**Prevention**

The treatment of central pontine myelinolysis is primarily aimed at prevention. Various studies have been conducted to determine the rate at which sodium should be corrected. The current recommendations are to correct the sodium not more than 8-12 mEq/L per 24 hours. However, in patients with hyponatremia lasting 48 hours or of unknown duration, the rate of serum sodium correction should not exceed 6-8 mEq/L per 24 hours.

In cases of severe hyponatremia (sodium <120 mEq/L) with neurologic symptoms, a hypertonic solution of 3% saline should be administered. If neurologic symptoms are not present, the primary focus should be on a slow rate of sodium correction with intravenous fluids to achieve a rate that does not exceed 8-12 mEq/L per 24 hours. During the infusion of fluids, it is essential to monitor serum sodium levels every 4-6 hours. If there are severe derangements in sodium, sodium levels can be monitored hourly.

Retrospective studies have shown that desmopressin has been safe and effective in preventing and reversing the overcorrection of hyponatremia. These studies also assessed the introduction of desmopressin as either proactive therapy, reactive therapy, or rescue therapy. They concluded that a proactive strategy of desmopressin administration with hypertonic saline was associated with a lower incidence of sodium overcorrection. Typically, desmopressin 1 to 2 mcg is administered intravenously or subcutaneously, every 6-8 hours for 24 hours. Patients are simultaneously given intravenous hypertonic saline at 15 to 30 ml/hr.

**Reintroduction of Hyponatremia**

5% dextrose in water (D5W) and desmopressin can be utilized with the goal of reintroducing hyponatremia to ensure that the rate of correction will be 8-12 mEq/L when the rate of sodium correction has been too rapidly corrected. Desmopressin binds to V2 receptors of the renal collecting duct, which translocates aquaporin channels to the apical lumen of the collecting duct and increases water reabsorption. It can be given at a dose of 2 to 4 mcg intravenously or subcutaneously. D5W at 6 mL/kg of lean body weight can be infused over 1 to 2 hours and should decrease serum sodium by 2 mEq/L. Infusion of D5W is continued until goal serum sodium is reached.

**Supportive care**

Supportive care measures include ventilator support, intense physiotherapy and rehabilitation, and anti-parkinsonism drugs.

**Experimental Strategies**

There have been no randomized control studies conducted to confirm the efficacy of these treatment modalities. However, they have been used in a small number of cases and have been shown to have positive outcomes.

Plasmapheresis has also been studied to improve neurologic sequelae of CPM. In a small number of case studies in patients with severe hyponatremia, plasmapheresis was seen to improve neurologic manifestations from 10 days to 1-year post-therapy. Although patients improved clinically, MRI findings remained unchanged after plasmapheresis. These studies lead investigators to believe that therapeutic plasmapheresis could possibly reduce high-molecular myelinotoxic substances that are released during osmotic stress.

The use of glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone, has also been studied as glucocorticoids are known to impact the permeability of the blood-brain barrier. Studies done in rat models showed minimal neurologic impairment in rats that were treated with dexamethasone 2mg/kg at 0 and 6 hours after hypertonic 3% saline was administered. The rats that were treated with dexamethasone also exhibited rare lesions on brain imaging in comparison to the untreated group, which exhibited numerous brain lesions. There have been few cases where dexamethasone was used in humans. However, this is not well studied, and further investigation is warranted.