The treatment for patients with calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease is based on decreasing inflammation and stabilizing any underlying metabolic disease that may predispose them to calcium pyrophosphate crystal deposition. In patients with acute flares, with the involvement of one or two joints, the treatment of choice is usually joint aspiration and intra-articular glucocorticoid administration, unless contraindicated.

For patients presenting with acute inflammation involving three or more joints, the treatment is typically systemic, often with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Patients with contraindications for NSAIDs may receive treatment with colchicine or systemic glucocorticoids.

Corticosteroid injection should only be performed after septic arthritis has been ruled out or considered unlikely. In patients presenting with signs and symptoms suggestive of septic arthritis, the recommendation is to defer glucocorticoid administration until synovial fluid cultures are negative.

Other measures include the application of ice packs and joint rest with restriction of weight-bearing to decrease further inflammation. Patients with recurrent episodes of acute CPP arthritis may receive daily low-dose colchicine.

While several medications decrease serum urate levels and prevent urate crystal formation, there is no current therapy directly targeting CPP crystal deposition. Hence, the treatment of CPPD relies on treating predisposing metabolic diseases, soft tissue inflammation, and symptomatology.