The primary function of the esophagus is to transport food entering the mouth through the throat and into the stomach. This function begins at the very beginning of the esophagus, following some taste buds located on the organ, at the upper esophageal sphincter (UES). The UES, also termed the pharyngoesophageal sphincter, is a circular bundle of muscle tissue which normally remains closed in a contracted position. During swallowing, the muscles relax temporarily and allow the passage of materials or bolus in the form of food, drink, mucus, and saliva into the esophagus. Next, the bolus travels into the esophageal body. Peristaltic movement propels the bolus down the esophagus via primary and secondary peristalsis. During the pharyngeal stage of swallowing, the muscular walls of the pharynx contract providing a strong initial peristaltic motion of the bolus and sending the bolus through the UES with kinetic energy. This peristaltic wave continues into the esophagus and constitutes the primary peristalsis. If the primary peristalsis is not sufficient to carry the bolus to the stomach, realized by the body as continued distention of the esophagus following primary peristalsis, secondary peristalsis initiates and continues until the bolus is successfully moved to the stomach. The lower esophageal sphincter (LES), also termed the cardiac sphincter and cardioesophageal sphincter, is located slightly more than an inch (about 3 cm) proximally from where the esophagus meets the stomach. Similar to the UES, the LES is normally contracted and closed, primarily preventing stomach contents from entering the esophagus body. The LES is controlled involuntarily and is triggered to open during esophageal peristalsis, thereby allowing the propelled bolus to enter the stomach and completing the primary function of the esophagus. While the primary function of the esophagus is to allow for the passage of material from the mouth and throat to the stomach, it is also a means by which material may be expelled from the body from the stomach and out the mouth in cases of vomiting, eructation, and at times when the gag reflex is initiated. However, this function is typically not desirable as food being expelled via this route may result in malnutrition and possible damage to the esophagus from gastric acid.