Blunt eye trauma can manifest as open globe and close globe injury. The closed globe injuries are broadly classified as contusion and lamellar lacerations. Open globe injuries can be divided into laceration and globe rupture. The laceration is secondary to penetrating injury, perforation injury, or injury due to an impacted intraocular foreign body (IOFB). The mechanism of blunt eye trauma can be due to coup, countercoup, and anteroposterior compression or horizontal expansion of the tissue. The mode of injury can be a direct blow to the eyeball or accidental blunt trauma.

Closed globe injuries are often seen in pediatric children while playing with friends and at home. The most common pediatric eye injuries are sports-related trauma, wooden stick injury, and thermal burns due to firecrackers. The other common modes of injury can be assault, workplace trauma, road traffic accidents, self-fall, and nonaccidental injuries.

Globe rupture occurs when there is a defect in the cornea, sclera, or both structures. Global rupture often occurs after direct penetrating trauma; however, if sufficient blunt force is applied to the eye, the intraocular pressure can increase enough to rupture the sclera. The high-velocity impact or sharp cutting objects may result in perforating or penetrating open globe injuries.

A retrobulbar hematoma is frequently associated with orbital trauma and associated orbital floor fractures. This trauma may also occur iatrogenically during sinus surgery, ocular surgery, or other eye procedures. In the setting of anticoagulation, this may occur in rare scenarios with increases in Valsalva (e.g., from vomiting, straining, or coughing).