Each hip bone consists of three bones: the ischium, ilium, and pubis. Together, these bones form the hip or innominate bone; they articulate in the midline with the sacrum posteriorly and anteriorly at the interface between the two pubic bones. The pelvic brim is the line formed by the continuation of the pectineal line on the pubic bones, the arcuate line of the ilium, and the ala of the sacrum. Below this brim is defined as ‘true pelvis,’ whereas the ‘false pelvis’ above this line is, in fact, part of the abdominal cavity.

The ilium is the physically largest of the three pelvic bones. It is located superiorly relative to the pubis and ischium. It is composed of a wing-shaped portion called the superior ala along with the inferior body. The rim of the superior ala is called the iliac crest. Anteriorly this crest ends at the anterior superior iliac spine and posteriorly at the posterior superior iliac spine.

The ischium is the inferior posterior portion of the hip bone. It consists of a superior body and an inferior ramus. At the posteromedial junction, the bone has a projection called the ischial spine—the concavity between this spine and the posterior inferior iliac spine forms the greater sciatic notch. The concavity between this spine and inferior ramus is called the lesser sciatic notch. The ischial tuberosity lies at the posterior and inferior surface of the ischium and is divided into a medial part which serves as an attachment for biceps, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus muscles, and a lateral part to which the sacrotuberous ligament is attached.

The pubis is the inferior, anterior portion of the hip bone. It consists of a superior ramus, body, and inferior ramus. The superior ramus helps form the acetabulum and is ridged by an upper pectineal line and lower obturator crest. The inferior ramus of the pubis fuses with the inferior ramus of the ischium. The pubis and ischium together form the obturator foramen, through which pass important neurovascular structures. The body of both the left and right pubis join to form the pubic symphysis joint in the midline, each covered with a layer of hyaline cartilage and intervened by a fibrocartilage disc.

The articular facet for the head of the femur, the acetabulum, is a hemispherical concavity lined by hyaline cartilage. It is formed by contributions from all three of the pubis, ilium, and ischium.

The sacrum forms from the fusion of the five sacral vertebral bodies, which get progressively smaller as they transition from superior to inferior. The sacrum is roughly triangular in shape, gently concave, and pierced by four bilateral sacral foramina to allow passage of the regional nerve roots.

The coccyx is a triangular bone formed by the fusion of four small pieces, and it articulates with the inferior-most part of the sacrum at the sacrococcygeal joint. This joint is reinforced anteriorly and posteriorly by corresponding sacrococcygeal ligaments. Furthermore, at each side, a lateral sacrococcygeal ligament forms a foramen through which the S5 nerve root passes.

The structural integrity of the bony pelvis is maintained by various important joints and ligaments. The pubic symphysis and sacrococcygeal joint have been described earlier.

The sacroiliac joint is formed by the articulation between the auricular surfaces of the median ilium and the pelvic surface of the sacrum.

Other important ligaments in the region include the sacrotuberous, sacrospinous, and iliolumbar ligaments.

****The functions of the pelvic bones are locomotion, childbirth, and support to the abdominal viscera. It transmits the weight from the axial to the lower appendicular skeleton. Likewise, the pelvis bears the weight of the upper body when sitting. The bony structure also provides attachment sites for many abdominal, pelvic, and lower extremity muscles and provides attachment sites for external reproductive organs. Additionally, the pelvic girdle serves to protect the pelvic and abdominopelvic viscera.