Type I diagnosis is made clinically. On slit-lamp examination, subepithelial spots or flecks are seen, starting centrally, sometimes with diffuse haziness and a ground-glass appearance. Retroillumination reveals branching or lattice-like lines in the superficial stroma spreading from the central cornea toward the periphery. (See figures 1 and 2) The deposits result in recurrent erosions. The deep stroma, Descemet’s membrane, and endothelial layers are spared. LCD1 is almost always a bilateral process, but may not be symmetric and has been seen unilaterally. Genetic analysis will also reveal the TGFBI mutation.

LCD variants, now considered offshoots of LCD1, vary from type I only slightly, and subtype diagnosis may not be necessary for appropriate treatment.

- Type IA has lattice lines similar to type I, with the addition of “mulberry shaped” gelatinous deposits in the affected corneas. Erosions appear in adolescence. Also called gelatino-lattice corneal dystrophy.

- Type III has thicker lattice lines, radially oriented, which occur after the seventh decade of life.

- Type IIIA is the most well-defined of the variants and shows thicker, ropy lattice lines extending from limbus to limbus. It also occurs later in life.

- Type IIIB is poorly elucidated, has asymmetric corneas, and occurs in middle age as opposed to type I and III, which occur in young and older ages, respectively.

- Type IV has deeper deposits than the earlier types and therefore exhibits erosions less often than other types. It has large, nodular lattice lines that progress from posterior to anterior, unlike the other varieties which progress from anterior to posterior. It has a late onset and shows substantial phenotypic variation.

- Type V is poorly elucidated and has deposits that are indistinguishable from type I. It is also called French type IIIA and type III-like LCD.

- Type VI, also called type I/IIIA, has thinner lattice lines than type III but thicker than type I, and presents in the second to third decade of life.

- Type VII is also poorly elucidated, onsets late in life, and is characterized by patients with bilateral symptoms but a greater degree of asymmetry than is seen in other LCDs. It is indistinguishable from type 1 on histology or electron microscopy. Also known as Asymmetric LCD.

- Polymorphic corneal amyloidosis has mostly polygonal inclusions in the deep, central stroma with few or no lattice lines. No erosions are seen.

Type II diagnosis is also made clinically by the triad of lattice corneal dystrophy, cutis laxia (loose skin), and progressive cranial and peripheral neuropathy.GSN gene is affected.

Avellino dystrophy, included here for the sake of facilitating differential diagnosis, shows superficial spots in the stroma with small “thorns,” linear inclusions, and superficial circular patches.

- The linear deposits are whiter and more dash-like, while the lattice lines in LCD are more refractile.

- The linear deposits rarely cross or form the characteristic “lattice” for which LCD was named.

It is important to note that the size and appearance of lattice lines in any of these pathologies change with the patient’s age and progression of the disease.