Evaluation of a patient suspected of microscopic polyangiitis involves a thorough clinical, radiological, histopathological, and lab evaluation:

- A detailed clinical evaluation to elicit the site and extent of involvement of the different organ systems is the first step in the evaluation.

- **Lab Evaluation:**It****involves routine complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, and measurement of serum titers of MPO and PR3 antibodies, which may be seen in most cases. However, low serum levels cannot be used to rule out AAV reliably.
- The complete blood cell count (CBC) shows leukocytosis and anemia.
- The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is elevated.
- Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine levels are elevated.
- Abnormal urine sediments, proteinuria, hematuria, leukocyturia, and erythrocyte casts are found on urine examination.
- The antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) test is positive in 80% of cases. Among these, perinuclear ANCA, related to myeloperoxidase, is present in 60%, while cytoplasmic ANCA, related to proteinase-3 ANCA, is present in 40%.
- Blood cultures may be performed to rule out bacterial endocarditis.
- On complement testing, C3 and C4 levels are normal.

- **Radiological Evaluation:**It****involves a chest X-ray and a CT scan of the chest to look for pulmonary lesions in the case of patients presenting with hemoptysis and pulmonary fibrosis.

- **Other Tests**:
- Electrocardiography (ECG) - For myocardial infarction, pericarditis, or heart failure
- Gastrointestinal endoscopy - In cases of gastrointestinal bleeding
- Electromyography (EMG) - In cases of clinical evidence of neuropathy

- **Histopathological Evaluation:**This should be done when possible (skin, renal. and lung biopsy) to look for evidence of vasculitis and immune deposits. The extent of inflammation seen on renal biopsy may be used to measure disease activity and help guide treatment.