**Ground Section of the Bone**: Traditionally, the ground section is used to observe the histology of the bone without staining. In the ground section, the bone can be examined histologically without calcification.

- **Steps for the ground section of the bon**e: The specimen is placed 20% formalin solution for 24 hours, washed with tap water. The bone is sectioned to the desired thickness by any of the following methods. 1. Ultramicrotome with a diamond cutting blade.  2. Grinding with burr from both sides. 3. Hand grinding using a carborundum stone. A continuous spray of water and Paris powder is recommended while grinding the tissue to avoid damage to the histology of the tissue.
- **Advantage**of the Ground section method: Minimal minerals are lost during the method.
- **Disadvantage**: Ultrathin sections are difficult to achieve.

**Other Methods for Undecalcified Bone Preparation for Periosteum and Endosteum Study**

- The specimen is put in an air-tight container with 20% phosphate-buffered formalin with minimal light exposure.

- Trim and cut the bone with a band saw according to the required size and part to be studied. The specimen should be trimmed to the adequate thickness.

- The specimen is kept in 10 to 20% formalin for two weeks.

- Shift the specimen in ascending concentration of ethanol: 1 week in 70% ethanol, one week in 80% ethanol, one week in 90% ethanol, one week in 100% ethanol.

- The specimen is cleared in butanol for one week avoiding exposure light.

- The specimen is put in a mold and embedded with a resin solution matching the density of the tissue. While embedding cutting surface of the tissue should be directed downward, hardener can be added to the resin also.

- The mold is kept overnight, a mix of two-component resin, based on methyl methacrylate (2 part powder and 1 part of the liquid) is poured in the recess to cover the base of the block. After 10 to 15 minutes, the mold can be pulled away. The prepared block should be stored in a desiccator.

- For fluoroscopic examination, a ground section of the tissue of 20 to 50-micrometer thickness is used. Ultramicrotome with a diamond blade is used to section the block.

- Mounting the section: carefully selected sections taken on the slide and kept in the incubator at 60 to 80 degrees Celsius for one hour.; section adheres to the slide and can be used after cleaning and polishing.

- The staining methods can also be used like hematoxylin and eosin, Von Kossa staining method, Masson Goldner's Trichrome.

- Tissue can be processed for fluorochrome examination.

Phenotypic properties of the human periosteum and the distribution of the cells within various strata are observable with immunohistochemical staining techniques and RT-PCR.

**Fluoresence Microscopy**

- Remove fresh periosteum by utilizing blunt forceps to protect the cambium and fibrous layers.

- Fix the periosteal sample tissue in 1% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) for a minimum of 4 hours.

- Freeze the sample in liquid nitrogen and ascend vertically into the OCT compound of the cryosectioning.

- Take 2 to 8 micrometers thick cross-sections at 5 degrees Fahrenheit temperature. Stain the section with standard hematoxylin/eosin staining method to verify the orientation of the periosteum and to check for both the cambium and the fibrous layers.

- **Immunostaining:**Incubate the samples with 0.2% Triton X-100 in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) at room temperature for 10 minutes.

**Tartrate-resistant acidic phosphatase (TRAP) stain**, Incubate cells for 15 minutes with ELF97 substrate in 110 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.2) containing 1.1 mM sodium nitrite and 7.4 mM tartrate (Sigma Aldrich).

**For Decalcified Bone**

**Light Microscopy:**

- Immerse bone specimen in 2% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde for two weeks.

- Decalcify in 7% with 0.5 % paraformaldehyde for 35 to 50 days.

- Embed the tissue in paraffin; cut 2 to 3-micrometers-thick sections with an ultramicrotome. Take the selected section on glass slides and rehydrate through a series of graded alcohol concentration.

**Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)**

- Cut the tissue into small samples (approximately1 mm)

- Fix into 2% paraformaldehyde and 0.5% gluteradehyde.

- Embed in the acrylate- and methacrylate-based resin Lowicryl HM23 with descending temperature according to standard protocol.