LH deficiency can be congenital or acquired but based on the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, the causes of LH deficiency can subdivide into hypothalamic and pituitary causes.

**Hypothalamic Causes**

-  Kallmann syndrome

Kallmann syndrome is a congenital cause of LH deficiency that often presents with hypo or anosmia. It occurs due to genetic mutations that result in the failure of differentiation or migration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons.

- LH beta-subunit mutations

LH beta-subunit mutations involve inactivating mutations in the beta subunit of LH or LH receptor and result in infertility and amenorrhea due to reduced LH levels required for ovulation. The LH levels may be high as compared to normal, but the mutated hormone lacks functional capacity.

- Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) results from the complete or partial absence of GnRH-induced release of LH and FSH. This condition is relatively rare and can occur in both men and women.

- Stress-related hypogonadotropic hypogonadism

Stress-related hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is caused due to hypothalamic suppression by prolonged strenuous physical exercise and extreme weight loss. These conditions cause an elevation of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which inhibits pulsatile GnRH release from the hypothalamus, which results in low FSH and LH levels, which present as amenorrhea.

**Pituitary Causes**

The pituitary causes are numerous and include pituitary tumors, Sheehan syndrome, hyperprolactinemia,  infection and inflammation, cerebrovascular accidents, and trauma.

- Hyperprolactinemia

Hyperprolactinemia usually results from a prolactin-secreting pituitary tumor (prolactinoma). The high level of prolactin inhibits the secretion of FSH and LH from the anterior pituitary and result in hypogonadism, infertility, and galactorrhea.

- Sheehan syndrome

Sheehan syndrome is caused by massive hemorrhage during childbirth and causes ischemic infarction of the pituitary gland. All the hormones produced by the pituitary are reduced or absent (panhypopituitarism), and the absence of pituitary reproductive hormones (FSH and LH) causes hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.