Management should be targeted at treating the conditions contributing to metabolic syndrome and possibly reverting the risk factors. Thus, modifiable factors such as diet and exercise should be emphasized in patients with metabolic syndrome.

As per the most recent Joint National Committee (JNC) guidelines, the target blood pressure in the general population should be 140/90 mmHg, and in patients with diabetes mellitus, the goal is less than 130/80 mmHg. The most recent Joint National Committee-8 guidelines have further specified that in patients aged 60 or older the goal should less than 150/90 mmHg.

Patients with hypertriglyceridemia defined as triglycerides more than 150 mg/dL should be evaluated and further workup should include checking full lipid analysis, thyroid-stimulating hormone level, urinalysis, and liver function tests. After a comprehensive analysis, patients should first be counseled for lifestyle changes including abstinence from smoking, weight loss, and diet and exercise modification. Physicians will start treating hypertriglyceridemia once the level is above 500 mg/dL, and usually, patients have mixed dyslipidemia disorder by that point. Patients are usually on a moderate to high-intensity statin therapy first; however, fibrates, niacin, and omega acids are also available for treating hypertriglyceridemia. Elevated LDL should also be aggressively managed in these patients especially if the atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) risk score if more than 7.5%, which establishes a patient’s 10-year ASCVD risk. These patients should be placed on high-intensity statin therapy with a goal of dropping the LDL by 50%.

Patients with severe obesity may benefit from bariatric surgery. Bariatric surgery is considered as the most effective single therapy of metabolic syndrome. The most common procedures carried out are laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. Bariatric surgery is recommended for patients with BMI≥ 40 kg/m2 or in those with a BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2 and other comorbidities. Patients should have a long-term follow-up after surgery to avoid surgical, nutritional, and psychiatric complications.