Dental caries is one of the most common chronic diseases that affect over 90% of people in the United States before age 30. Dental caries is a multifactorial disease involving an array of risk and protective factors that are dependent on personal, biological, behavioral, and environmental factors. Dental caries occur when a biofilm dysfunction causes long periods of low pH resulting in a net mineral loss of the tooth structure. Risk factors for dental caries include but are not limited to plaque buildup on teeth between brushings, medications that cause dry mouth, consuming drinks with sugar, constant snacking between meals, oral appliances, frequent tobacco use, acid reflux, diabetes, head and neck radiation therapy, bulimia, and Sjogren’s syndrome. Although some of these risk factors are modifiable with behavioral changes, others cannot, which is why clinicians must develop an individualized treatment plan for the patient.

Dental caries present as a caries lesion on the tooth, which can present as a change in color or surface structure as a result of demineralization or a loss of enamel surface integrity, exposing underlying dentin becoming a cavitation. Initial caries development is characterized by demineralization, forming a non-cavitated lesion. The disease process can be stopped by re-establishing the homeostasis between remineralization and demineralization with the application of fluoride varnish. However, if the disease progresses, a cavitated lesion will form, which is characterized by a complete loss of enamel, exposing the underlying dentin. At that point, there is no biological mechanism to replace the loss of hard tissue, and treatment by placing a restoration may be required to stop the progression.