Characteristic signs of orbital apex syndrome (OAS) are painful external ophthalmoplegia with vision loss. The ophthalmologist may be the primary physician to suspect and diagnose orbital apex syndrome. Patient symptoms include reduced or total loss of vision on the involved side, torsional, horizontal, or vertical diplopia, inability to open the eye, prominence of the eyeball, difficulty moving the eye in different gazes, facial pain, and abnormal head postures.

The prior medical history may be significant for one or many conditions predisposing to OAS. Patients may have a history of uncontrolled high blood sugars at presentation or in the recent past; a history of immunosuppression or malignancy may predispose an individual to infectious involvement of the orbital apex.

The clinical signs of orbital apex syndrome are due to the involvement of the optic nerve, oculomotor nerve, trochlear nerve, abducens nerve, and the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve. The signs which may be present on examining a patient with orbital apex syndrome include proptosis, defective vision, a relative afferent pupillary defect due to involvement of the optic nerve, restricted ocular movement due to the involvement of the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerve, facial pain and paresthesia over the forehead and the upper lid due to the involvement of the ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve, and anisocoria due to the involvement of the pupillary fibers. In addition, optic disc edema, pallor, or choroidal folds may also be seen. Pulsatile proptosis with a preceding history of a head injury may indicate a vascular etiology like a carotid-cavernous fistula.