The evaluation of any trauma patient begins with evaluating the airway, accessing the breathing, and managing the circulation. The diagnosis of intra-abdominal injury following penetrating trauma depends primarily on the initial presentation and hemodynamic status of the patient. If hemodynamic stability can be established, in the absence of peritonitis, a computed technography (CT) scan is a feasible option. This scan is able to detect intraperitoneal free fluid, solid organ damage, and active serosanguinous extravasation if present. If the patient is potentially hemodynamically unstable and rapidly deteriorating, the ideal initial radiologic assessment is the Extended Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (EFAST). This EFAST exam is a point of care ultrasound for critically ill patients. It is a comprehensive tool that specifically targets the detection of hemorrhage in the spaces of the abdomen. With experience, trained health care professionals learn to quickly assess and identify pathologic states in pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial cavities of the body. Indications for an EFAST ultrasound include blunt or penetrating trauma to the torso where there is a suspicion of intraperitoneal hemorrhage, pericardial tamponade, and hemothorax.

**Components of the extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma (EFAST) ultrasound**

1. Right upper quadrant (RUQ) - when evaluating this region, the evaluator must consider that if the hemorrhage is present within the peritoneum, is most commonly found within the RUQ. The anatomical structures found within a right upper quadrant include:

- Inferior pole of the right kidney

- Subphrenic space (between diaphragm and liver)

- Hepatorenal space (between liver and kidney, also known as Morrison's pouch)

- Pleural space

2. Left upper quadrant (LUQ) - the anatomical structures visualized in the LUQ space, also known as the peri-splenic space, include:

- Inferior pole of the left kidney

- Subphrenic space

- Splenorenal space

- Pleural space

3. Suprapubic space -  the anatomical structures visualized in the suprapubic space vary based on gender:

- Pouch of Douglas (females)

- Rectovesicle space (males)

4. Subcostal space - visualize the pericardium and evaluate for hemopericardium.

5. Pulmonary - visualize the space surrounding the lung for pneumothorax or hemothorax

It is essential to note in patients that have penetrating abdominal gunshot wounds and peritonitis and/or hemodynamic instability, the mainstay is an operative intervention, and this operative intervention should not be delayed to obtain diagnostic testing.