Opioids have had a wide range of uses in medicine throughout history. However, their use has recently fallen under increasing scrutiny due to the opioid crisis/epidemic currently plaguing the world, particularly in the USA. Opioids are still a crucial tool in many fields and aspects of medicine. They are especially vital in treating pain and as anesthesia adjuncts or primary anesthetic agents during surgery and post-operatively.

Intravenous opioids are frequently utilized to provide analgesia and supplemental sedation during procedures requiring general anesthesia or monitored anesthesia care. Common anesthetic-specific uses for opioids that have been FDA approved include use during almost every phase of surgery, including use during pre-induction for chronic pain conditions, induction of anesthesia, maintenance, as well as to reduce immediate postoperative pain and decrease agitation; these agents are the most widely utilized agents for postoperative acute pain control. Long-term, postoperative pain control utilizing opioids is also an FDA-approved use. As the popularity of regional blocks increases, it is important to note that opioid anesthetics have also received approval for analgesic supplementation in general and regional anesthesia techniques.

As multimodal anesthetic approaches increase in popularity, opioids have become one of the more common adjuncts utilized during surgical procedures for induction and maintenance of anesthesia. The multimodal approach has been demonstrated to reduce the incidence and severity of the adverse effects that can commonly accompany opioid use.

The opioid epidemic has created a movement away from using opioids as frequently as has been the case in the recent past; ongoing opioid use following surgery has been a component of the opioid epidemic, creating a significant concern for perioperative clinicians. While the movement away from perioperative opioid use has cogent reasoning, it remains unclear whether limiting intraoperative opioids and other changes as surgeons and anesthesiologists/nurse anesthetists move toward a multimodal anesthesia paradigm will improve anesthesia outcomes (including persistent opioid use following surgery).