Evidence-based medicine intersects with the best available scientific evidence, clinician expertise, and patient preference. While randomized control trials (RCTs) are generally considered the gold-standard method of gathering "evidence-based medicine," they have limitations in lifestyle medicine. Research in lifestyle medicine often needs to be based in real-world settings, involves multiple interventions, is highly customized for the patient, and cannot practically be confined to randomized studies with a control group.

For example, over eight years, case evidence from 800 patients treated with plant-based nutrition and exercise programs for a myriad of illnesses led to hundreds of individuals decreasing the dose or stopping medications for many diseases, including but not limited to diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, arthritis, psoriasis, and gastroesophageal reflux. Simultaneously, many of these patients also had increased energy and functionality, improved cognition, and decreased anxiety and depressive symptoms.

Adherence to lifestyle advice varies significantly, with most studies showing an average of about 50%. Many factors influence a patient's ability to implement lifestyle changes, including motivation, time, finances, treatment priorities, and perspective about the source of difficulties.

Therefore, adherence and engagement to the plan for lifestyle adjustment increase with patient ownership of a treatment plan and a sense of partnership in its development and planning, considering personal barriers, and making concrete, stepwise actions to follow.

The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists 2015 clinical practice guidelines for mood disorders expanded the model of care to include evidence-based lifestyle interventions as important recommendations in conjunction with the standard psychological therapies, medication, and procedures.

Further guidelines from other mental health societies and organizations will assist lifestyle medicine in becoming fully incorporated into the standard of care.