ASAS occurs when occlusion/hypoperfusion occurs at the anterior spinal artery or any major radiculomedullary branches.

Many etiologies have correlations with occlusion/hypoperfusion of the anterior spinal artery.

- **Aortic surgery**(iatrogenic): most common cause of ASAS.

- **Atherosclerotic disease**: a common cause of ASAS. Development of a thrombus/emboli that occludes the anterior spinal artery leading to ASAS.

- **Thoraco-abdominal aortic disease**(aortic dissection): dissection of the aorta causes occlusion of radiculomedullary arteries.

- **Cardiac arrest**: absent blood flow to the anterior spinal artery

- **Cardiac emboli**: This is an infrequent cause of ASAS. This category includes infectious endocarditis, which may lead to septic emboli, and this may lead to an anterior spinal artery or major radiculomedullary arteries occlusion and thus the development of ASAS.

- **Vasculitis**: a rare cause of ASAS. (ie. polyarteritis nodosa).

- **Degenerative spine disease**: although a rare cause of ASAS, the literature describes patients with cervical spondylosis or thoracic disc herniation that present with ASAS. A large disc herniation can compress the anterior spinal artery and cause spinal cord infarction resulting in ASAS.

- **Vertebral fracture**: anterior cord impingement by a fracture fragment.

- **Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy**: This condition is sometimes known as idiopathic transverse myelitis. Naiman et al. first described it in 1961.

- **Shock**: hypotension leads to ASAS.

- **Luetic aortitis**: it was common during the syphilitic era, but rarely seen at present.

- **Minimally invasive spine surgery**: rare iatrogenic cause. Percutaneous balloon kyphoplasty.

- **Arteriovenous malformations (AVM)**: spinal cord AVM.

- **Digital subtraction angiography**: a rare cause of ASAS during diagnostic****and embolization procedures. The overall incidence is 1.4 to 6.5%.

- **Sickle cell disease**: thrombosis.

- **Other hypercoagulable diseases**: thrombosis.

- **Cocaine use**: vasospasm, vasculitis, and thrombosis.