Hyperoxaluria can be broadly divided into primary (rare) and secondary (common) based on etiology.

Primary hyperoxaluria is caused by an inherent genetic defect or absence of a specific enzymatic activity, ultimately leading to greatly increased oxalate levels in the body. The incidence of primary hyperoxaluria is slightly less than 3 to 1,000,000 population or about 1,000 persons in the US, making it extremely rare. Symptoms typically appear in childhood with a median age of presentation of only 4 to 5 years old. It often leads to multiple recurrent calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and progressive renal damage, which may become end-stage requiring dialysis. Of the three types of primary hyperoxaluria, type 1 is by far the most common, being responsible for 80 percent of the reported cases.

- Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 1: Glyoxalate is produced as an intermediate molecule in the metabolism of hydroxyproline, glycolate, and glycine. Glyoxalate is generally detoxified in the peroxisome of the hepatocytes by the enzyme alanine:glyoxylate-aminotransferase (AGT), which converts glyoxalate to glycine. In the event of a deficiency or absence of this enzyme, glyoxalate accumulates in the cytosol, where it is converted to oxalate by lactate dehydrogenase. A deficiency of this B6-dependent enzyme (AGT) has been linked to the AGXT gene mutation on chromosome 2.

- Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 2: On chromosome 10, a specific gene codes for the enzyme glyoxalate hydroxypyruvate reductase (GRHPR). This enzyme converts glyoxalate to glycolate. A deficiency of this enzyme will lead to a buildup of glyoxalate, which is eventually converted by LDH to oxalate.

- Primary Hyperoxaluria Type 3: This is the least common type. It is caused by a deficiency of mitochondrial enzyme 4-hydroxy 2-oxoglutarate aldolase coded by the gene HOGA1 on chromosome 9. Lack of this enzyme limits conversion of 4-hydroxy 2-oxoglutarate into glyoxalate. This will divert more of the oxoglutarate towards the oxalate pathway.

Secondary hyperoxaluria mainly pertains to excess exogenous oxalate gained either through diet or due to intestinal pathologies. The overwhelming majority of hyperoxaluric patients will have the secondary type of the disorder. The following are some of the causes of secondary hyperoxaluria:

**Diet**

- Dietary sources include foods rich in oxalates such as spinach, rhubarb, collard greens, nuts, beets, and tea, among others. High dietary oxalate has been thought to play a relatively small (10-20%) contributory role in hyperoxaluria.

- The 24-hour urinary oxalate increases 1.7 mg for every 100 mg of dietary oxalate ingested.

- Increased vitamin C is a risk factor for hyperoxaluria, as vitamin C is a potential precursor to oxalate. Amounts exceeding 1,000 mg a day of vitamin C are considered a potential risk factor.

- Cranberry juice and concentrates are not recommended in calcium oxalate stone formers or patients with hyperoxaluria due to their relatively high oxalate content.

- Dietary calcium combines with oxalate in the intestine, which protects against excessive oxalate absorption and hyperoxaluria. Therefore, decreased calcium in the diet becomes a risk factor for hyperoxaluria.

**Enteric Hyperoxaluria**

- Enteric hyperoxaluria: Free intestinal calcium will tightly bond to free oxalate creating an insoluble molecule of calcium oxalate. This lowers free intestinal oxalate levels and prevents excessive oxalate absorption, which would otherwise eventually be excreted by the kidney. However, intestinal pathologies leading to fat malabsorption, such as Roux-N-Y intestinal bypass surgery, cause a buildup of unabsorbed fatty acids and bile salts in the intestinal lumen that bond to the ingested dietary calcium, which results in inadequate intestinal oxalate binding and subsequent increased oxalate absorption. As the malabsorption continues further in the intestinal lumen, the colon's permeability to oxalate increases, aggravating the problem. The soluble oxalate, which could not combine with calcium, diffuses passively into the blood and is eventually filtered by the kidneys resulting in very severe hyperoxaluria. In addition to this, vitamin B6 deficiency often ensues in these conditions, further increasing endogenous oxalate production.

- While usually associated with Roux-N-Y intestinal bypass surgery, enteric hyperoxaluria can be found in any condition that results in chronic diarrhea such as chronic biliary disease, various pancreatic disorders, short bowel syndrome, fat malabsorption, and irritable bowel syndrome.

**Other Causes**

- Pancreatic insufficiency in patients with chronic pancreatitis develops saponification due to the binding of calcium and unabsorbed fatty acids, leaving an excess of unbound intestinal oxalate to be absorbed, then filtered by the kidneys and excreted in the urine.

- Oxalobacter formigenes: This gram-negative, facultative anaerobic, oxalate-degrading bacteria normally colonizes the colon by age 3. Antibiotic use, inflammatory bowel disease, or dietary changes may lead to disruption of the Oxalobacter colonies with subsequent increased intestinal oxalate absorption.Oxalobacter colonization have been found to have a 40% increase in their average urinary oxalate levels compared to calcium oxalate stone formers with normal intestinal Oxalobacter.Oxalobacter colonies once they are lost. (Oxalobacter) is relatively resistant to sulfa and penicillin antibiotics but very sensitive to tetracyclines, macrolides, and fluoroquinolones.) Female stone forming patients with recurrent urinary tract infections have significantly higher average urinary oxalate levels than similar female patients who do not have a history of multiple infections. This is most likely due to the loss of intestinal Oxalobacter from the multiple courses of antibiotics used to treat the frequent urinary infections.Oxalobacter colonies, their urinary oxalate levels were normal, while over 50% of similar cystic fibrosis patients who had lost their Oxalobacter were found to be hyperoxaluric.