# Continuing Education Activity

Syndactyly is one of the most common congenital anomalies of the extremities. It is a failure of differentiation of the digits, defined as a fusion of adjacent digits. Syndactyly can be seen in the upper and lower extremity, and up to 50% of cases are bilateral. To avoid the morbidity associated with this condition, it must be promptly diagnosed and treated. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of syndactyly and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of syndactyly. 
- Review the evaluation of syndactyly.
- Describe the surgical management of syndactyly. 
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to adequately treat syndactyly and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Syndactyly is one of the most common congenital anomalies of the extremities. Syndactyly refers to the soft tissue and/or osseous fusion of adjacent digits in either the upper or lower extremity. This results in the appearance of "webbed" or "super" digits depending on the extent of the anomaly. Syndactyly is described as simple or complex, depending on the presence (complex) or absence (simple) of bony fusion. Complete syndactyly extends to the tip of the digits with the inclusion of the nail folds, while incomplete syndactyly does not extend the full length of the digit. Complicated syndactyly is defined by the presence of interposed accessory phalanges or abnormal bones.

# Etiology

In the developing human, all digits are initially fused by a layer of loose mesenchymal tissue - syndactyly occurs as a failure of separation of this fusion. Limb development begins in the 5th week of gestation, deep to a region of ectoderm known as the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). The AER is responsible for longitudinal growth of the limb. Development begins with the activation of mesenchymal cells in the somatic lateral mesoderm. The hands start their development during the 6th week, where mesenchymal tissue of the hand plates begins to form the phalanges. The feet undergo a very similar process in the 7th week of development. Digits form due to signaling from the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) through sonic hedgehog protein (SHH). Higher concentrations of SHH lead to the formation of the ulnar aspect of the limb, and lower concentrations are seen away from the ZPA, leading to radial sided limb development. Finally, the dorsal and volar ectoderm is responsible for the development of the dorsal and volar structures of the extremity. As development continues, “notches” form between the digits at the AER. These notches progress proximally as the previously fused mesenchymal tissue undergoes apoptosis, separating the digits via BMP-4 signaling pathways. By the end of the 8th week of development, the digits have formed.

The failure of apoptosis separating the mesenchymal tissue or the failure of notch formation in the AER leads to syndactyly.

# Epidemiology

Syndactyly is found in approximately 1 in 2000 live births.

# History and Physical

A thorough history and physical exam should be performed on any children presenting with syndactyly. Any family history of syndactyly should be noted. Incomplete penetrance may result in situations where syndactyly may "skip" a generation. It is important to ascertain if there were any pregnancy or birth complications. For patients presenting as neonates or infants, a thorough newborn orthopedic exam should be considered to search for any suggestion of an underlying syndrome. It is important to note that isolated simple syndactyly is not typically associated with an underlying genetic syndrome.

With specific attention to the syndactyly deformity, it should be noted which digits are affected, whether the affected digits appear to be fused via soft tissue only or a combination of bony and soft tissue fusion. The distal extent of the interdigital connection should be noted. If there is a question of subtle incomplete syndactyly, a physical examination of the fingers in the sagittal plane is useful. Normally, the web spaces are angled at or near 45 degrees with one of the affected digits extended, and the adjacent digit flexed.  The presence of flexion and extension creases in the affected digits should be evaluated as they can give a clue to the underlying bony fusion and function of the digits.

As some patients may have had previous treatment or surgery, history should also include previous records and operative reports. Photographs prior to surgery or demonstrating the progression of creep post-surgically may be useful. The skin should be examined for previous scars and skin donor sites to help plan future incisions. Particularly in a revision setting, a thorough sensory examination and vascular examination should be performed.

# Evaluation

After assessing the patient’s extremity, multiplanar radiographs of the affected hand or foot are indicated. X-rays evaluate for osseous fusion of the phalanges and/or metacarpals. It is also valuable in assessing for possible supernumerary digits that may have not been noticed on physical examination. After the physical exam and imaging have been performed, the deformity can be classified. Classification can be descriptive, including terms such as incomplete or complete (involvement of the entire length of the digit), simple or complex (presence of bony fusion), and/or complicated (presence of accessory phalanges or abnormal bones).

- Type I: Most common with involvement of the long and ring fingers in the upper extremity or second and third toe in the lower extremity. Follows an autosomal dominant pattern with incomplete penetrance

- Type II: Synpolydactyly with the involvement of the long and ring fingers in the upper extremity and/or fourth and fifth toes in the lower extremity with an accessory digit in the syndactyly web.

- Type III: Syndactyly involving in the ring and small finger.

- Type IV: Complete syndactyly of all fingers

- Type V: Metacarpal or metatarsal fusions of the ring and small finger in the upper extremity and third and fourth toes in the lower extremity.

Advanced imaging is usually not necessary in cases of simple syndactyly. However, in cases of complex and/or complicated syndactyly, MRI imaging may be useful to assess the location of flexor tendons and neurovascular structures prior to planned surgery.

# Treatment / Management

Syndactyly can be managed by operative and nonoperative means. Simple syndactyly of the toes is typically managed non-operatively if it is not affecting function. Surgery for cases of isolated syndactyly of the toes in this circumstance is of cosmetic benefit and should only be performed after a thorough discussion of risks with the patient and family. Other indications to pursue nonoperative management include incomplete simple syndactyly and webs associated with superdigits. Superdigits have been classified into two types: Type I is two metacarpals that support one oversized digit, and type II involves a single metacarpal supporting multiple digits.

Operative management is common for syndactyly to produce a more functional hand (or foot). If operative management of syndactyly is warranted, the timing of the surgery is important to discuss. Typically, syndactyly releases are performed around 12 to 18 months of age. Delaying the surgery until the child is older than 18 months reduces the risk of scar contracture and webspace creep as the child grows. However, syndactyly of border digits (small finger and thumb webspace) and syndactyly with multiple fusions should prompt earlier release as the smaller digit tethers the longer digit as the patient grows. Release occurs around 6 months of age, to avoid angulation, rotary, or shortening of the adjacent digit as well as allowing for early development of grip and coordination.

**Surgical Release**

Multiple nuances exist in the surgical release of syndactyly depending on the complexity of the involved digits. With this in mind, we will discuss simple complete syndactyly and describe modifications when more complexities are encountered. It is important to note that loupe magnification or the use of an intraoperative microscope is mandatory to achieve a successful outcome and to limit the risk of neurovascular complications.

Achieving the optimal surgical outcome for patients with syndactyly is multifactorial and consists of multiple goals. Goals include (1) creating new paronychial nail folds, (2) developing the interdigital commissure (skin) of the digits to be separated, and (3) creating a new webspace.

The zig-zag approach to the commissure allows for triangular based flaps to be created to assist with coverage of the digits. Planning the incision should start distally at the fingertips where planning for the paronychial fold begins. The typical technique for the development of these folds involves laterally based triangular flaps that, once released, will be sutured into the respective digit creating a new nail fold.

Other cases to consider include incomplete syndactyly, syndactyly of multiple digits, and complex syndactyly. In incomplete syndactyly, multiple flaps can be considered. The goal of the surgery for incomplete syndactyly depends on the length of the fusion of the affected digits. If one third or less of the length of the digits is involved, a dorsal rectangular flap with volar based triangular flaps can be utilized to reconstruct the webspace successfully.

Finally, when bony fusion is involved (complex syndactyly), additional operative steps are required. When planning on separating fused phalanges, preoperative planning is essential. Synostosis separation needs to be planned to retain as near normal anatomy as possible. In complex cases closing wedge, osteotomies may be indicated to correct for angulation differences. Collateral ligament integrity should be tested intraoperatively to determine if advancement or reconstruction is indicated. In cases of complex and complicated syndactyly, the amputation of a nonfunctional ray may achieve a more functional hand than reconstruction and needs to evaluated by the surgeon on a case by case basis.

# Differential Diagnosis

Syndactyly is typically easy to diagnose on physical exam, however, there are congenital hand deformities and syndromic conditions that should be considered whenever evaluating a child for syndactyly.

- Poland syndrome

- Apert syndrome

- Ectrodactyly (cleft hand)

- Constriction band syndrome

- Synpolydactyly

- Carpenter syndrome

- Oculodentodigital dysplasia

# Prognosis

Prognosis depends on the treatment strategy and complexity of the syndactyly. Complex and complicated syndactyly have less optimal outcomes and often require repeat surgical procedures.

# Complications

As with any surgical procedure, an infection can occur. Although infection is a relatively rare complication of syndactyly surgery, it has the potential to be devastating if not recognized and addressed promptly with surgical debridement or antibiotics. Recent data suggests a postoperative infection rate of 1.6%. Complications from the surgery are more likely to be present in patients with syndromic presentations and multiple preoperative medical diagnoses.

If nonoperative treatment is chosen, this may lead to diminished dexterity and function in the hands. Nonoperative treatment or observation of syndactyly between digits with length differences may result in increased deformity and growth disturbance. The shorter digit may create a tethering effect on the longer digit pulling the longer digit into angular deformity toward the shorter digit and also into flexion.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Postoperatively patients typically are placed into a bulky soft dressing, splint, or cast depending on the complexity of the surgical procedure, surgeon preference, and patient factors that may affect compliance with post-operative care. Dressings are typically taken down at 2 weeks.

# Consultations

Syndactyly often requires an interprofessional healthcare team to achieve good outcomes. At a minimum, a hand surgeon/orthopedic specialist needs to be consulted for evaluation to assess surgical candidacy. If an underlying genetic syndrome is suspected, a referral to a pediatric geneticist or geneticist is warranted. Finally, physical therapy, occupational therapy, or hand therapy consultations may be indicated to assist with postoperative care such as pain, scar, and edema control, as well as mobilization of the digits.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As mentioned in the previous sections, it is important to discuss with parents if and when surgery is necessary. Surgery is indicated for syndactyly if it is felt the function of the affected extremity can be improved. It is also important to educate parents that delaying the surgery until the patient is older will improve outcomes unless specific situations, as previously discussed, are involved (border digit involvement and multiple fused digits). Although repeat surgery is relatively uncommon, it is important to discuss with the family complications such as scar formation and contracture, webspace creep, possible devascularization of the digit, and digital nerve injury.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Syndactyly is best managed by an interprofessional team, including a pediatrician, hand or orthopedic surgeon, hand or physical therapist, and occupational therapist. When a patient's presentation is concerning for a genetic syndrome consultation of a geneticist to provide recommendations for further workup and treatment of associated findings is essential. In patients who form hypertrophic scars or in postoperative patients where excessive scar formation is a concern, the involvement of a therapist early may improve the postoperative cosmesis, function, and limit contracture.