Management of depression and anxiety requires an interprofessional team, including clinicians (MD, DO, NP, PA), psychiatrists, nurses, therapists, and pharmacists. When treating depression and anxiety with escitalopram, the interprofessional healthcare team should communicate and collaborate to achieve the best outcome for the patient. This collaboration can include thoroughly reviewing the patient’s medications to avoid drug interactions and adverse events. Furthermore, pharmacists may monitor the drug level in the blood in cases of overdose, and serum electrolyte levels will require monitoring for disturbances. Emergency physicians, medical toxicologists, and intensivists consultation are necessary in case of overdose. Any member of the interprofessional team who notes any issues or has a concern should contact other team members as appropriate for potential corrective action. In escitalopram overdose, these coordinated activities and open communication strategies will result in more effective therapeutic outcomes when using escitalopram while minimizing adverse effects. [Level 5]

A randomized controlled trial in which clinical care was provided by an interprofessional team of registered nurses, PSW (personal support workers), home care case manager, the client’s primary care providers, psychiatrists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, and social workers has demonstrated that interprofessional nurse-led mental health intervention effectively decreased healthcare utilization and improved patient outcomes under real-world conditions related to antidepressant therapy.