# Introduction

The human body has certain types of general sensations, e.g., touch, pressure, etc., and certain special sensations such as smell and sight. One of these special sensations is taste. Technically known as gustation, this sense serves to provide the ability to discern the characteristics of substances that one ingests. At a basic evolutionary level, taste allows one to assess whether these substances are nutritious or potentially hazardous. This sensation is primarily relayed via receptors located on the tongue, but at the higher cortical level, taste is considered a multisensory experience since the smell of a particular food item, its texture, and whether or not it activates pain receptors (e.g., spicy food) all play a role in determining how it “tastes.”

# Cellular Level

Taste is sensed by chemosensory receptors known as taste buds. Taste buds themselves consist of columnar cells arranged circumferentially to form a single “taste pore” between them and microvilli extending from the columnar cells arranged around this pore. These microvilli are the location of the actual taste receptors, which are coupled to ion channels in the apical membrane and are responsible for sensing taste stimulus. Nerve fibers are associated with the basolateral surface of these cells and are responsible for conducting impulses to the central nervous system.

# Development

The primary organ associated with taste reception is the tongue, and understanding taste reception and the relevant anatomy requires knowledge of the tongue’s anatomy.

The tongue contains three types of papillae, the circumvallate, along the terminal sulcus, fungiform, on the anterior surface of the tongue, and foliate papillae on the lateral surface of the tongue.

# Organ Systems Involved

Taste reception and conveyance involve the tongue to send primary taste input, but the olfactory system also plays an essential role in how tastes are perceived. Taste is not a standalone sensation; how one perceives taste is inexorably linked with the smell of the stimulus as well.

# Function

Taste is functionally crucial for a few reasons. Taste sensation can change according to the body’s specific nutritional needs at different points in time, thereby guiding an organism to particular sources of whatever nutrient it needs, e.g., salt depleted animals in which adrenalectomy has been performed will choose drinking water that has a higher content of salt to replete body stores.

Once taste signals reach the central nervous system, multiple reflex pathways are activated, leading to the body “preparing” for a meal, with increased salivation and elevated secretory activity in the stomach.

# Mechanism

The mechanism of taste signals converting from the form of a chemical stimulus to electrical impulses for transmission to the brain requires specific ion channels and second messenger systems. The type of system utilized for transduction depends upon the taste itself.

As molecules of food enter the oral cavity, they reach “taste pores” on the apical surface of taste buds surrounded by microvilli known as “taste hairs,” binding to specific receptors on the cell surface and result in depolarization or activation of intracellular signaling by second messengers, depending on the type of taste sensation.

Following the creation of electrical impulses, they potentiate along their nerve pathways.

# Related Testing

"Taste" testing involves assessing gustatory and olfactory function, and in some rare cases, imaging or electrogustometry is necessary.

# Pathophysiology

Taste may be affected in many clinical conditions due to inflammation and damage of specific neural pathways involved in taste sensation; this may be due to infection, drugs, radiation, etc. Chemical stimulus appreciation may be affected by mineral deficiencies, e.g., zinc. Impairment of smell due to any reason can also negatively impact taste perception, as mentioned above.

# Clinical Significance

Taste may be affected in many clinical conditions, such as upper respiratory and middle ear infections since the facial nerve passes through the middle ear along its course to the central nervous system. Bell palsy can often present with taste disturbance as well. Radiation therapy is also a common etiology of taste disturbances, designated post-irradiation gustatory dysfunction.