The clinical significance of proper wound classification lies in its ability to help predict the likelihood of surgical site infections, postoperative complications, and reoperation.

The human body is not sterile. The infection results from dynamic interactions between a host, a potential pathogen, and the environment. It occurs when the microorganism successfully manages to evade the host's defense strategies, causing harmful changes in the host itself. The development of an infection is preceded by a series of complex interactions not yet fully known.

- The development of an infected wound depends on the pathogenicity and virulence of the microorganism and the immunocompetence of the host.

- The host/pathogen interaction does not always translate into a pathological form, and it is necessary to introduce new terms and definitions.

- Microbiological assessment by itself is not a reliable method for diagnosing an infected lesion, but a comprehensive, holistic patient assessment is also required.

The wounds do not all have the same conditions; therefore, different wounds support different communities of microorganisms. The acquisition of microbial species by wounds can result in three distinct consequences: contamination, colonization, and infection.

Colonization is not always synonymous with infection.

Surgical wound infection control began in the 1960s in the United States with the classification of wounds into four categories (clean, clean-contaminated, and dirty or infected) and with surveillance reports from Cruse and Foord. Subsequently, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formulated definitions for the various hospital infections, further modified in 1992 when surgical wound infections became known as site infections. Subjective definitions of infected wounds led to the development of two wound classification systems: the ASEPSIS and the Southampton Wound Assessment Scale. Numerous tools based on different combinations of infection indicators have undergone development for open wounds.

Some criteria for recognizing infected wounds include the presence of abscess, cellulitis, or the presence of secretions (serous exudate accompanied by inflammation, purulent serum, purulent blood, and pus).

Additional suggested criteria include delayed healing; discoloration; a friable granulation tissue with ease to bleed; unexpected pain and/or irritation; pocketing at the wound's base; bridging of the epithelium or soft tissues; abnormal smell; wound degeneration.