**Treatment of Polydactyly of the Hand**

The treatment of polydactyly depends on the complexity and location of the deformity. If it is a simple surgery, an outpatient surgical procedure may be enough. If it is more complex, then the surgery can involve the bones, ligaments, and tendons. Minor cases can be treated by tying off the base of extra digits, which interrupts blood flow and causes the digit to fall off.

In the early postnatal period, type A ulnar or postaxial polydactyly can be corrected by suture ligation or excision in the office under local anesthesia. After the suture ligation, there is an increased risk of painful neuroma formation. Sharp excision is another alternative for ulnar polydactyly to avoid neuroma formation. Type B ulnar polydactyly is also corrected by suture ligation that induces necrosis of the distal segment, which causes the autoamputation of extra digits approximately 10-20 days later.

If preaxial or radial polydactyly involves the radial hand and thumb, the functional and stable thumb should be ensured by using reconstructive techniques. Due to the functional importance, consultation with a surgeon who is expert in hand surgery is typically needed.

**Treatment of Polydactyly of the Foot**

Surgical therapy is indicated to enhance cosmesis and to improve quality of life. In order to minimize the effect on development and walking, surgery should be done at the age of approximately 1 year. Management of polydactyly of the foot seems to be simple at first glance, but careful consideration is needed before and during the surgical correction due to the multiformity of its configuration. But as a whole, treatment should be individualized.

Most medial and lateral digits of tibial and fibular polydactyly are usually resected. Care must be taken to minimize hallux varus in the case of tibial polydactyly. Because of its rare presentation, the treatment of central polydactyly of the foot is not well described. But in most of the cases, a racquet-shaped incision can be used to excise supernumerary central digits.