Drepanocytes; Hemolysis of the sickle cell compounds the illness by potentiating the systemic inflammatory environment.

S-polymer damages the cell membranes leading to a calcium/potassium transit problem. The S-polymers also precipitate against the inner surface of the red cell membrane leading to iron-mediated oxidative damage. The damaged sickle cells then adhere to the vascular endothelium leading to vascular occlusion.

Spherocytes; Spherocytes are small round cells that lack the flat, light-colored center of regular erythrocytes. The hereditary form is autosomal dominant in roughly 75% of cases, while the remaining 25% are autosomal recessive or de novo.

Normally reticulocytes are macrocytic and carry a bluish hue due to the presence of internal RNA. They are pitted and matured within the spleen and should normally be < 2.5% of the red cell population. The difference in color tone between the bluish reticulocytes and the red cells is referred to as polychromasia. Autoimmune hemolysis is identified by the presence of a positive Coomb test alongside the spherocytes

Codocytes; The basic mechanism of target cell formation is when the intracellular volume has become disproportionately smaller than what is needed to keep the surface area full.

Schistocytes; Schistocytes are disrupted red blood cells. Helmet cells are a subset where the red cell has been "chopped" mechanically, leaving behind a roughly semicircular residual. It looks akin to a helmet with a straight border next to the semicircle and sharp, angular edges. Triangular cells are the remnants, the triangle-shaped detritus of red cells; they are very small fragments with significant distortions from significant disruptions. Schistocytes might actually be 'normal' in adults and full-term neonates if their presence is < 1% of the population.

Echinocytes or Burr cells are typically reversible dysmorphisms. They have an area of central pallor and multiple small projections, almost spicular, with uniform size and presentation.

Acanthocytes are spiculated erythrocytes with projections of varying size, shape, and distribution.

Tear Drop Cells; It is believed that the approach to teardrop cell (dacrocyte) formation may be multifocal though the underlying mechanism may be common.

Elliptocytes; The basic pathomechanism involved in elliptocytosis involves defects in the horizontal cytoskeletal network of the red cell. This involves problems with the spectrin dimer interaction or the spectrin-actin-protein 4.1 junctional complexes.

Bite cells; The commonality amongst diseases with bite cells (degmacytes) is the denaturation and precipitation of their hemoglobin.

Stomatocytes; The basic defect in stomatocytosis is believed to be the dysregulation of fluid and cation movement into the cells. PIEZO1 codes for a transmembrane protein that is felt to establish "mechanosensitive currents" across the red cell membrane.