**Transvaginal Ultrasound**

The patient is kept in a dorsal lithotomy position, and the transvaginal probe is introduced into the vagina either by the patient or the sonographer. The transducer is covered with ultrasound gel, and a condom or condom-like cover is placed over the gelled probe. KY jelly or a similar gel is then placed on the covered transducer for patient comfort.

- Baseline assessment includes evaluation of uterus, endometrium, ovaries, and cul de sac. 

- Uterus: The uterus is evaluated in both sagittal and transverse planes (Figure 4). Attention is given to evaluate the size, shape, orientation of the uterus, cervix, myometrium, and endometrium. The length and height of the uterus are measured in the sagittal plane, and width is measured in transverse or coronal planes at the level of the tubal ostia or cornual regions. The myometrium is evaluated for any pathology like fibroids or adenomyosis. The location and character of all pathological lesions are noted and documented in the images and the final report.
- Endometrium - The endometrium is measured perpendicularly from one echogenic to the other echogenic border at its thickest part in the midsagittal plane (Figure 5). If the fluid is visualized in the cavity, the endometrium is measured by combining the anterior and posterior endometrial thicknesses separately without including the fluid.
- Adnexa: The adnexa is evaluated for any masses such as hydrosalpinges, para-ovarian cysts, or para-tubal cysts. 
- Ovaries: The ovaries are identified bilaterally and measured in three dimensions (length, height, and width) (Figure 6). The antral follicles are seen as round or oval anechoic structures. A baseline AFC is performed by counting the number of follicles between 2 to 10 mm and measuring the dimensions of follicles greater than or equal to 10 mm in the early follicular phase in both ovaries.
- Cul de sac: The cul de sac is evaluated for any fluid, and a sliding sign is performed to assess for any adhesions. The examiner's hand is placed on the patient's abdomen to apply pressure on the uterus. The transvaginal probe is placed near the posterior vaginal fornix to assess whether the cervix and the uterus glide over the anterior rectum and sigmoid colon. The lack of sliding of these organs implies adhesive disease of these structures.

- Monitoring during ovulation induction cycles: A transvaginal ultrasound is performed to assess the follicular growth, endometrium, and uterine arterial blood flow during ovulation induction cycles.

- Follicular assessment: The measurement of the follicles is usually performed using a transvaginal ultrasound. The follicle size can be done using two different techniques during the transvaginal scan using a traditional real-time 2D scan or sonography-based automated volume calculation (Sono AVC). In traditional real-time 2D scanning, the follicles are measured by calculating the average of two orthogonal diameters. To accommodate the asymmetrical growth in the follicles greater than 15 mm, one can calculate the average of diameters in three orthogonal planes for greater accuracy if clinically warranted.
- Endometrial assessment includes measurement of endometrial thickness, identifying the endometrial morphological pattern, and grading the endometrial vascularity. To assess endometrial vascularity, the color flow power doppler box is reduced to as small as possible and focused for a few seconds on the endometrial layer, occupying 50% of the screen.

**Transabdominal Ultrasound**

A transabdominal ultrasound is performed as needed with infertility. The transducer is placed on the patient's abdomen to assess the uterine size, shape, and orientation. In addition,  the myometrium, endometrium, and ovaries are also assessed. This route of scanning is performed to assess ovarian reserve only in virgin patients, patients with vaginal or pelvic pain, or if the pelvic organs are located cranially and anteriorly due to their enlargement or adhesive disease.

**Saline Infusion Sonogram**

The patient is kept in a dorsal lithotomy position. Transvaginal ultrasound is performed as described above to assess the uterine size, orientation, adnexa, and ovaries. Any cul de sac or peritoneal fluid is noted and quantified. This detail is important in later considering tubal patency assessment after saline infusion. The transvaginal probe is removed from the vagina. A bivalve speculum is placed in the vagina. Cervix is cleansed with betadine or an alternative anti-septic solution. SIS catheter is introduced in the cervix. There are multiple types of SIS catheters (Figure 7).

When tubal patency needs to be assessed, it is preferable to use a catheter with a balloon that can be wedged in the lower uterine segment to block the backflow of fluid so that the fluid with bubbles can be better directed into the tubal ostia. After the catheter placement, the speculum is removed, and the transvaginal probe is reintroduced into the vagina. Normal saline is introduced through the catheter into the uterine cavity by the assistant while the sonographer or the physician is performing the ultrasound. Instillation of the normal saline into the uterine cavity distends the uterine cavity with the anechoic fluid. Any lesions in the endometrial cavity are visualized and measured in three dimensions and characterized accordingly (Figure 8).

If tubal patency assessment is planned or required following the intrauterine assessment, a sonohysterosalpingogram (hysterosalpingo contrast sonography -HyCoSy) is performed. During HyCoSy, an agitated mixture of air and normal saline is injected into the uterine cavity through the SIS catheter while performing a real-time ultrasound. Attention is paid to the cornual ends bilaterally to visualize the passage of fluid with air bubbles through the ostia of the fallopian tubes and noting the spilling of the mixed fluid into the adnexa region or elsewhere in the abdominal cavity (Figure 9).

The final step is to evaluate the area where the balloon is located. The balloon is deflated, and the catheter is removed under ultrasound guidance. This part of the procedure is imperative to fully evaluate the previously occupied area by the balloon. Labeling of all pathological structures should also be noted on the ultrasound pictures while scanning.