# Definition/Introduction

Coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) is the pressure gradient responsible for coronary and, thus, myocardial perfusion; this ensures myocardial oxygen delivery. Maintaining CPP is vital because rates of myocardial oxygen extraction are the highest of any organ at approximately 70 to 80% under resting conditions; augmentation of coronary flow by either increasing coronary perfusion pressure or inducing coronary vasodilation is, therefore, the predominant means for increasing myocardial oxygen supply.

This article aims to:

- 1) Define CPP and describe from which pressures it is derived

- 2) Explain how CPP contributes to coronary blood flow

- 3) Explain how CPP becomes altered in cardiac disease

- 4) The role of reduced CPP in type 2 myocardial infarction

- 5) Therapeutic modification of CPP in cardiovascular disease

CPP in the left ventricle is established by the pressure gradient between the aortic diastolic blood pressure and the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP)

Coronary Perfusion Pressure (CPP) = Aortic Diastolic Pressure – Left Ventricular end-diastolic Pressure (LVEDP)

CPP is based on diastolic pressures because the left ventricular myocardium gets perfused during diastole rather than systole. The right and left coronary arteries both originate from the coronary sinuses at the aortic root prior to division into the right coronary and left circumflex and anterior descending arteries

While high left ventricular pressures are required to drive systemic circulation, the right ventricle generates lower pressures to perfuse the pulmonary circulation. Therefore, the right ventricular pressures are far lower than the pressures exerted by the left ventricle. Right ventricular perfusion occurs predominantly in systole because systolic aortic pressure exceeds systolic right ventricular pressure.

# Issues of Concern

**Coronary Perfusion Pressure and Coronary Blood Flow**

It is important to note that CPP is not the only determinant of coronary blood flow. While CPP provides the pressure which drives coronary perfusion, coronary autoregulation describes the process which allows coronary blood flow to match myocardial demand over a range of CPP between 60 to 180mmHg.

Flow = Difference in pressure across a vessel/resistance

Therefore, CPP represents the pressure gradient across the coronary vasculature, while resistance is mediated by autoregulation to deliver the required flow rates.

**Table 1. Coronary autoregulation is under the control of neurohormonal, endocrine, metabolic, and endothelial-derived systems, which induce either coronary vasoconstriction or vasodilation.**

# Clinical Significance

**Coronary Perfusion Pressure in Cardiovascular Disease**

CPP becomes reduced in common cardiac conditions, including heart failure and coronary artery disease; patients with these conditions are more prone to myocardial ischemia.

The impaired ejection of blood from the left ventricle defines systolic heart failure; this increases LVEDP, and thus CPP and left ventricular perfusion are reduced.

Atherosclerotic plaques causing stenosis of coronary vessel lumens characterize coronary artery disease. Plaques impede flow through coronary circulation, necessitating compensatory coronary vasodilation distal to the plaque to maintain coronary flow and myocardial oxygen delivery. As stenosis progresses, the coronary flow becomes dependent on CPP. Myocardial ischemia occurs when CPP is unable to sustain coronary perfusion as autoregulation fails.

**Coronary Perfusion Pressure in Type 2 Myocardial Infarction**

Type 1 myocardial infarction implies the rupture of a coronary atherosclerotic plaque with subsequent thrombus formation and stenosis of the arterial lumen.

Type 1 and 2 myocardial infarctions are associated with similar mortality rates

**Therapeutic Modification of Coronary Perfusion Pressure**

Two examples of therapies that modify CPP are glyceryl trinitrate and the intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP).

- Glyceryl Trinitrate

Glyceryl trinitrate is an agent used in the acute management of type 1 myocardial infarction. Studies have shown that low-dose glyceryl trinitrate administration reduces LVEDP without reducing aortic diastolic pressure, thus increasing CPP.

- Intra-Aortic Balloon Pump

The IABP is the most commonly used form of mechanical support in the acutely failing heart.

**Pearls**

- Left ventricular myocardial perfusion occurs in diastole rather than systole due to the arrangement of the coronary anatomy.

- Coronary perfusion pressure is a significant determinant of myocardial oxygen supply; local factors regulate coronary flow across a range of coronary perfusion pressures.

- If coronary perfusion pressure becomes acutely reduced in patients with circulatory shock, type 2 myocardial infarction may occur; this has a different etiology from the widely known type 1 myocardial infarction.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

**Coronary Perfusion Pressure and Interprofessional Team Monitoring**

Blood pressure is a common measurement in both hospital and community healthcare settings. Adequate blood pressure is required to drive blood flow to organs. Coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) is the term used to measure the flow through coronary arteries.

**Coronary Perfusion Pressure**

Blood pressure is a vital determinant of coronary blood flow. Interestingly, while the non-cardiac organs get perfused during systole (cardiac contraction) and diastole (cardiac relaxation), the high pressures generated in the heart during contraction impede coronary blood flow.

**Myocardial Infarction**

Myocardial infarction due to inadequate blood supply to the heart is a common cause of mortality in the United States, with 790000 cases per year. Therapeutic advances and improvements in care have led to improvements in long-term survival post-myocardial infarction.

Many patients will be treated with glyceryl trinitrate sublingual spray or intravenous infusion after myocardial infarction. At high doses, glyceryl trinitrate infusions decrease blood pressure.

**Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation**

Cardiac arrest describes a state where cardiac output ceases due to an array of potential underlying causes. CPR is necessary for patients who have had cardiac arrest to temporarily replace the oxygenation function of the lungs and the pumping function of the heart while rendering treatment to return the patient’s spontaneous circulation. It is important to maintain CPP during CPR because, due to the absence of cardiac output, these patients are unable to maintain coronary or cerebral perfusion. Studies in humans have shown that greater CPP is associated with higher rates of patient survival.

**Hypotension**

Hypotension is a common clinical finding in hospital inpatients and arises from a wide array of causes. Hypotension and circulatory shock, when blood pressure is unable to ensure organ perfusion, most commonly result from hypovolemia (low circulating blood volume) and sepsis (abnormal immune response to infection). When hypotension occurs to the extent that CPP is not maintained, a myocardial infarction occurs. This type of myocardial infarction results from low blood pressure rather than the presence of a thrombus in the coronary arteries. Patients who suffer from this type of myocardial infarction have a similar mortality rate compared to patients with myocardial infarction resulting from a coronary artery thrombus.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Frequent observation of vital signs is crucial to identify changes in the patient's condition, which may require changes in clinical management. The above examples highlight the importance of this monitoring and the physiology which underlies these conditions.