**Optical Principles**

**Schiener's Principle**

Schiener, in 1619 was the first to describe that the eyes refractive error can be determined by employing a double pinhole aperture before the pupil. He observed that when parallel rays of light are passed through the eye from a distant object, they are limited to two small bundles when a double pinhole is placed in front of the eye. In hypermetropic eyes, the bundle of rays is intersected by the retina before they join, and hence two small light spots are observed.

In myopic eyes, the two bundles of rays cross each other before falling on the retina, and thus two small spots of light are seen. The two points of light can be merged to form a single point by taking the double pinhole at the eye's far point. Hence, the ocular refractive error can be determined from the far point of the eye.

**Optometer Principle**

In 1759, Porterfield was the first to describe an instrument called an optometer for assessing the limits of distant vision. The principle is known as the optometer principle. This instrument gives the leverage of power variation in the refracting apparatus. The autorefractors using this principle have a single converging lens placed at the focal length distance from the eye instead of interchangeable trail lenses.

Based on the target's position, light from the target situated on the far side of the lens enters the eyes with vergers of varying amounts. The light vergence at the focal plane of the optometer lens is directly related to the target's displacement. Hence a scale can be plotted with equal spacing showing the dioptres of correction needed.

**Optometers Development**

For a long time, Schiener's and optometer's principle and their modifications have been used for automating the refraction. In today's era, autorefraction is a proven and tested well-established technique. Currently, computerized and electric autorefractors are widely used, and older ones are rarely used.

- Early refractometers

- Modern refractometers

**Early Subjective Optometers**

These were first developed from 1895 to 1920. The subjective optometers required the patient to adjust to the instrument to get the best focus and alignment of the target. They become unpopular due to instrument accommodation. The examples were Badal and Young Optometers.

**Early Objective Optometers**

They were designed as an alternative method for assessing the optical correction needed in the eye. However, these were less accurate as compared to retinoscopy. These objective optometers will depend on the examiner's decision when the image is transparent or need a coincident setting. They are more common in Europe and employ both optometers and Schiener's principle.