First described as a method of providing surgical anesthesia to the upper abdomen, the celiac plexus block (CPB) has been in practice for nearly a century. The CPB is a multimodal adjunct suitable as a diagnostic or therapeutic tool in managing abdominal visceral pain. The CPB targets visceral afferent pain fibers from the liver, gallbladder, omentum, pancreas, mesentery, and digestive tract from the stomach to the mid-transverse colon. Therefore, a CPB may treat pain in malignant and benign neoplastic disorders involving the pancreas, biliary tree, retroperitoneal organs, and other abdominal organs. The CPB is indicated in intractable abdominal pain nonresponsive to less aggressive analgesic interventions; it is particularly useful in treating abdominal pain associated with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. This activity describes the indications, contraindications, and techniques involved in performing a CPB and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with intractable abdominal pain.

**Objectives:**
- Articulate the role of the celiac plexus in the autonomic innervation of the intra-abdominal anatomy.
- Outline the use of the celiac plexus block as a therapeutic or diagnostic tool in the management of abdominal pain.
- Review the contraindications and complications associated with a celiac plexus block.
- Implement a structured interprofessional team approach to effectively and efficiently apply the techniques used in performing a celiac plexus block.