# Continuing Education Activity

Radiation-induced coronary artery disease (RICAD) is one of the most common causes of morbidity and mortality in patients treated with chest radiation therapy (RT) for cancer. With increased rates of oncologic treatment, the rates of RICAD are increasing in parallel. This activity will discuss in detail the etiology of RICAD, epidemiology, clinical presentation, evaluation, screening recommendations, treatment options, differential diagnosis, and complications, as well as the role of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of radiation-induced coronary artery disease.
- Review the presentation of a patient with radiation-induced coronary artery disease.
- Summarize the surveillance and treatment options for radiation-induced coronary artery disease.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by radiation-induced coronary artery disease.

# Introduction

Radiation-induced coronary artery disease (RICAD) is a known cause of morbidity and mortality in patients treated with chest radiation therapy (RT) for cancer but has also been known to occur from other forms of radiation exposure.

RICAD affects younger patients, is closely associated with the type of chest RT and radiation dose, and usually affects proximal epicardial coronaries, including left main arterial disease.

# Etiology

Radiation exposure can be natural or iatrogenic. Most natural exposure does not result in high radiation levels at a single time, and sources of this type of exposure include radon gas in the ground seeping into basements and crawlspaces, cosmic rays from sun exposure, and high altitude.

The degree and incidence of RICAD are closely associated with the location and dose of RT delivered and the total number of fractions, with patients receiving chest radiation having a prolonged risk of RICAD and associated myocardial infarction up to 25 years after initial RT.

# Epidemiology

The most common conditions associated with RICAD are breast cancer (BC) and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL).

Younger age at the time of RT exposure is associated with increased risk for RICAD, with a study on patients receiving RT for HL showing the highest relative risk of RICAD in patients under 25 years of age at the time of exposure.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of RICAD is theorized to be a result of accelerated atherosclerotic disease of the coronaries.

# Histopathology

The coronary arteries are particularly vulnerable to RT of the chest. These arteries consist of three wall layers (tunica intima, media, and adventitia), of which only the tunica intima comprises the endothelium.

An autopsy study of HL patients who had received RT during their lifetimes noted that atherosclerosis was disproportionate to expected based on age and risk factors. The most commonly involved vessels were the proximal epicardial coronaries, with left main and right ostial lesions being the most common. Additionally, there was no evidence of small vessel disease or vasculitis of coronaries.

# History and Physical

The classic presentation of RICAD would be CAD in a young patient who has previously been exposed to thoracic RT with or without traditional risk factors for CAD.

There may be decades between initial exposure to RT and symptoms of RICAD. The mean time from radiation exposure to the development of RICAD is estimated at 82 months, and patients are usually less than 50 years old at the time of presentation although cases have been reported in children and adolescents as well.

Physical examination findings in RICAD are similar to patients with CAD in the general population. A study on patients who received RT for HL showed abnormal resting heart rate and abnormal heart rate recovery post-exercise.

# Evaluation

One of the keys to evaluating RICAD is the surveillance of patients with a known history of chest RT. The European Society of Cardiology recommends an evaluation for CAD starting as early as ten years post thoracic RT, with continued surveillance testing every five years, regardless of symptoms.

Biomarkers like brain natriuretic peptides and troponin have been shown to be elevated in patients with RICAD.

Functional stress testing for CAD has been studied using stress echocardiography and stress myocardial perfusion imaging. There is a high incidence of perfusion defects suggesting ischemia noted.

The most commonly involved vessel in patients who received RT for BC is left main disease due to left-sided radiation. In patients with HL, all proximal vessels, including the right coronary artery, left main, left anterior descending artery, and left circumflex artery, can be involved, with some data suggesting the right coronary is most commonly involved.

For patients who present with symptoms concerning for acute coronary syndrome, the evaluation should be based on clinical risk score-based decision pathways used for CAD in the general population. High-risk patients should undergo invasive coronary angiography, and intermediate-risk patients should undergo either anatomic or functional testing for CAD.

# Treatment / Management

In patients with a diagnosis of RICAD, aspirin and statins are reasonable to prevent major adverse cardiovascular events. In animal models, captopril and simvastatin decreased the effects of a radiation-induced injury.

In terms of revascularization therapy, percutaneous coronary intervention has been widely used to manage RICAD in the same way as patients with CAD in the general population. Earlier studies that looked at patients who received bare-metal stents for obstructive RICAD showed high rates of target lesion revascularization, thought to be due to accelerated atherosclerosis.

Revascularization with coronary artery bypass surgery is fraught with multiple obstacles. Firstly, mediastinal RT causes not just coronary artery fibrosis but affects other structures in the anterior mediastinum, including the chest wall, pericardium, and lung tissue, which may also be affected by radiation-induced fibrosis. Postoperative pulmonary complications are much more common as a result.

Lastly, there is evidence that in these patients, internal mammary grafts do not remain patent as long as in the general population due to having received radiation exposure as well, making conduit selection for bypass grafting very challenging.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for RICAD includes conditions that can mimic stable or unstable CAD and acute coronary syndrome. It also includes other conditions that are associated with thoracic radiation.

- Pericarditis (acute and chronic constrictive)

- Pulmonary embolism

- Coronary microvascular dysfunction

- Restrictive cardiomyopathy

- Pulmonary fibrosis

- Costochondritis

- Kawasaki disease

- Myocarditis

- Esophagitis

# Prognosis

Besides the inherent increased morbidity and mortality in patients with RICAD at a younger age than CAD patients in the general population, certain risk factors portend a poorer prognosis in these patients. In patients with pre-existing CAD, the risk of adverse cardiovascular events increases by 60% following RT.

# Complications

Complications of RICAD are similar to CAD in the general population, including:

- Acute coronary syndrome

- Ischemic cardiomyopathy

- Acute heart failure

- Arrhythmias

- Valvular dysfunction

- Sudden cardiac death

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education starts with the initial discussion before the initiation of RT. Patients should be informed of their risk for developing RICAD based on the expected radiation dose, concomitant chemotherapy, and other risk factors. Other options for treatment should be offered, and if RT is considered the best option, patients should be referred to centers specializing in focused RT, like photon therapy. Patients who undergo RT should discuss the role of surveillance imaging and overall CAD risk reduction with their providers.

# Pearls and Other Issues

**Prevention**

3D conformal radiotherapy, proton therapy, and other new forms of delivering RT that focus the radiation beam away from the heart should be used to cut down the cumulative radiation dose to the heart.

However, given the inherently increased risk of CAD with chest radiation, patients with a history of the same should undergo aggressive CAD risk factor modification, including smoking cessation, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia management.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Radiation-induced coronary artery disease may be overlooked as a potential diagnosis. An interprofessional team approach can sometimes aid in narrowing the diagnosis. Members should include but are not limited to the primary care providers (including MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), cardiologists, oncologists, radiation oncologists, nursing staff, and pharmacists. Emergency room providers and nurses should be trained in recognizing the risk of RICAD in patients with a history of prior thoracic radiation, especially given its presentation in younger patients. A multidisciplinary clinical approach combined with an interprofessional team approach with a high index of suspicion with a concerning history is likely to significantly increase early recognition of this condition by providers and optimize healthcare outcomes.