Two things are required for the eruption of a tooth to occur: removal of bone, primary roots, and later soft tissues, and a force that moves the tooth in an occlusal direction following the eruption pathway.

The steps leading to tooth eruption can be generally divided into intraosseous and supraosseous. In the intraosseous stage, bone resorption and movement of the tooth within the bone occurs. The supraosseous stage begins when part of the erupting crown is above the alveolar crest.

**Preeruptive Movements**

Crown development happens within the alveolar bone, during which small, random movements occur before the eruption. These movements are local and not in an axial eruption direction.

**The Intraosseous Stage of Tooth Eruption**

The first eruption movements begin when the crown finishes its development and root formation begins.

Different areas of the dental follicle are believed to initiate bone resorption occlusal to the developing crown and induce alveolar bone formation apical to the developing root, contributing to the translocation of the tooth to the alveolar crest.

The dental follicle is an organized connective tissue surrounding the tooth germ in the early stages of tooth formation.

Root formation happens at the same time as eruption, which may accelerate the eruption's speed.

**Mucosal Penetration and Eruption to the Occlusal Plane**

After the cusps reach the alveolar crest, the eruption pathway is completed, and the eruption rate accelerates, which will slow down again when the tooth reaches the occlusal plane.

Proteins from the enamel matrix are released before and during the penetration of the oral mucosa, which is thought to be responsible for a hypersensitivity reaction that triggers the common symptoms of teething: fever, rhinitis, and local erythema.

The eruption movement that takes the tooth from the gingival plane to the occlusal plane is believed to be generated primarily by the periodontal ligament collagen fibers: collagen maturation involves a cross-linking and shortening process, providing a propulsive eruptive mechanism.

Root growth and bone apposition at the crypt's base and interradicular septa contribute to the propulsive force that moves the erupting tooth from its gingival emergence to the occlusal plane.

**Post-occlusal Eruption**

After the tooth reaches its functional position in the occlusal plane, events to stabilize the tooth in its new position occur. This is done by bone activities like forming circumferential bone and lamina dura visible in x-rays and maturation of periodontal ligament fibers.

There is still the question of how horizontal movements take place. Possibly teeth move in the horizontal plane, e.g., buccally, through bone resorption and formation and cementum apposition in a coordinated effort.

**Tooth Eruption Theories**

Numerous mechanisms to explain tooth eruption have been hypothesized. Marks and Schroeder suggested that for a theory to be valid, it should fulfill three eruption facts: 1) teeth are moved axially but also three-dimensionally, 2) teeth erupt with different characteristics and at a stage-specific speed, and 3) the functional position of teeth is inheritable.

A brief description of past and newer tooth eruption theories is given below:

**Cushioned Hammock Theory**

According to this theory, proposed by Harry Sicher, a cushioned hammock ligament below a tooth is responsible for its eruption.

**Root Formation Theory**

According to this theory, the apically directed force by the proliferating root exerts a reactive occlusal force resulting in the coronal movement of the erupting tooth. However, as previously mentioned, teeth without roots can erupt, and the teeth erupt even after the completion of their root formation. Also, some teeth erupt to a distance greater than their total root length. Moreover, the newly formed dentin at the apex of the root is unmineralized and is vulnerable to trauma.

**Vascular/Hydrostatic Pressure theory**

The local increase in tissue fluid pressure in the vessels of the dental pulp and the periapical region are believed to exert hydrodynamic and hydrostatic pressure within the vessels resulting in tooth eruption.

**Bone Remodeling Theory/Dental follicle theory**

Osteoblasts and osteoclasts from the dental follicle cause bone remodeling via resorption in the coronal area and bone apposition in the apical region, thereby forming a pathway through which the tooth can passively erupt.

**Periodontal Ligament Traction Theory**

According to this theory, the periodontal ligaments-dental follicle complex exerts eruptive force via the traction power of the fibroblasts when they contract.

**More Recent Theories of Eruption**

**Bite Forces Theory**

The soft tissues of the dental follicle are believed to detect bite forces, which in turn direct bone remodeling and tooth eruption.

**Innervation-Provoked Pressure Theory**

This theory postulates that the innervation in the root membrane causes pressure in the apical aspect of the tooth resulting in tooth eruption.

**The Equilibrium Theory**

Once the tooth reaches its functional plane, further eruption occurs in response to the vertical growth of the lower jaw away from the maxilla. As the teeth get more space, they erupt occlusally to maintain occlusal contact with the tooth in the opposing arch.

**Neuromuscular Theory**

This theory states that the simultaneous and balanced forces of the orofacial muscles under the control of the central nervous system are responsible for the active eruption of a tooth. The coordinated neuromuscular forces convert into electrical, electrochemical, and biomechanical energies to stimulate cellular and molecular responses within and around the dental follicle and enamel organ. This action prepares a pathway and other cellular functions for the eruption of a developing tooth.

**Eruption Patterns**

The age at which deciduous and permanent teeth erupt can vary extensively. The sequence of eruption is more significant than the timing, which may differ in both deciduous and permanent teeth. Generally, a variation of 6 months on either side of the usual eruption date is considered normal. The first teeth to erupt in the oral cavity are the deciduous mandibular central incisors at approximately 5 to 8 months of age, followed by maxillary central incisors a month or two later. In general, by the age of 19 months, the child has a total of 12 erupted deciduous teeth. By 23 months, children should have 16 deciduous teeth, and by 27 months, all the deciduous teeth should have erupted.

The first permanent teeth that emerge in the oral cavity are the maxillary and mandibular first molars at around six years of age (six-year molars). They erupt distally to the deciduous second molars. Their eruption is accompanied by or preceded by the exfoliation of the deciduous mandibular central incisors. Between 6 to 7 years of age, the permanent mandibular incisors erupt, followed by the permanent maxillary incisors between 7 to 9 years of age. The permanent anterior teeth develop lingual or palatal to the deciduous teeth, whereas the permanent premolars develop between and beneath the roots of the deciduous molars they replace.