All patients with HIV/AIDS are candidates for highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). This therapy has shown a reduction in the morbidity and mortality, in addition to lowering the risk of transmitting the infection to others. Drug dosing is once daily. For example:

- Rilpivirine/emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil is a tablet that contains 25 mg rilpivirine, 200 mg emtricitabine, and 245 mg tenofovir disoproxil

- Rilpivirine/tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine is a tablet with 25 mg rilpivirine, 25 mg tenofovir alafenamide, and 200 mg emtricitabine

- Dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine is an antiretroviral drug combination containing 50 mg dolutegravir, 600 mg abacavir, and 300 mg lamivudine

Management of opportunistic infections in HIV/AIDS is tailored based on the causative organisms

**Toxoplasma gondii:**In patients who are Toxoplasma-seropositive and with CD4+ counts less than 100 cells/mm^3 prophylactic double strength daily dose of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) should be initiated. The alternative prophylactic regimen is dapsone-pyrimethamine and leucovorin. Acute infections can be treated with a combination of pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine and leucovorin. Alternative drugs include spiramycin, clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Spiramycin is the recommendation for use in pregnancy to prevent congenital transmission. Anticonvulsants may be useful in patients with a history of seizures who have TE but are not recommended as prophylaxis.

**Pneumocystis jirovecii:**All HIV positive patients, including pregnant women, must be started on TMP-SMX for chemoprophylaxis when their CD4+ count is less than 200 cells/mm^3. Alternative prophylactic medications include dapsone, dapsone plus pyrimethamine plus leucovorin, atovaquone and aerosolized pentamidine. PCP is treated with TMP-SMZ which is the drug of choice. Other drugs include dapsone, TMP, clindamycin plus primaquine or IV pentamidine, atovaquone suspension. Aerosolized pentamidine is not used to treat PCP. Recommended duration of therapy is 21 days.

**Cryptococcus neoformans:**Combination therapy of flucytosine and amphotericin B is the treatment of choice for cryptococcal meningitis. An alternative regimen of fluconazole and flucytosine are options, although it is inferior to amphoterin B.

**Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC):**MAC organisms are resistant to first-line antituberculosis therapy. Clarithromycin is the preferred drug of choice and the first agent along with ethambutol (second drug) for the initial treatment of MAC. Rifabutin has been added as the third drug. Azithromycin may be used when clarithromycin cannot be tolerated due to drug interactions or patient intolerance. The fourth agents that can be used are either levofloxacin or moxifloxacin.

**Mycobacterium tuberculosis:**Drug-susceptible TB infection is treated for 6 months using a combination of isoniazid (INH), pyrazinamide (PZA), rifampin (RIF) or rifabutin, and ethambutol (EMB) for 2 months by directly observed therapy (DOT), followed by INH and RIF for 4 months. In patients with cavitary disease noted on chest X-ray or those with positive cultures, the treatment should be for a total of 9 months with an additional 3 more months of INH and RIF. All patients receiving INH therapy must be prescribed pyridoxine supplements. Extrapulmonary TB except for CNS disease, bone, and joint involvement, should be treated for 6 to 9 months (2 months of INH, PZA, RIF, and EMB, followed by 4 to 7 months of INH and RIF). In patients with CNS, bone, and joint diseases, treatment must be for 9 to 12 months. Intermittent dosing has better medication compliance rates when administered by DOT and achieves higher peak serum concentration.

**Cytomegalovirus:**Oral or IV ganciclovir, IV foscarnet, IV cidofovir has been used successfully to treat life-threatening cytomegalovirus infection in people with CMV retinitis. In pregnancy, intravitreous ganciclovir coupled with valganciclovir is given in the first trimester for retinal disease.

**Herpes simplex viruses:**Both orolabial and genital HSV lesions are treatable with oral acyclovir, valacyclovir or famciclovir. Duration of treatment is 5 to 10 days. IV acyclovir can be used for severe mucocutaneous lesions.

**Histoplasma capsulatum:**IV liposomal amphotericin B is used in severe disseminated histoplasmosis. Duration of treatment is 2 weeks followed by 3 days of oral itraconazole 200 mg 3 times daily and finally 200 mg daily for at least 12 months.

**Coccidioidomycosis:**Fluconazole or itraconazole are options in the treatment of mild disease as well as meningitis. Itraconazole is used for bone or joint disease, while amphoterin B is used for pulmonary involvement. Posaconazole or voriconazole are also possibilities, although the data is limited.

**Mucocutaneous candidiasis:** Oral fluconazole is the drug of choice. Both itraconazole and posaconazole solutions are as effective as fluconazole but less tolerated. Esophageal candidiasis can be treated with a 14 to 21-day therapy of oral or IV fluconazole or oral itraconazole. Vulvovaginal candidiasis is treatable with oral fluconazole, topical azoles (clotrimazole, miconazole) or oral itraconazole solution.

**Cryptosporidiosis:** ART must be initiated in patients with a goal to restore CD4+ cells count greater than 100 cells/mm^3 as this leads to the resolution of clinical cryptosporidiosis. Diarrheal losses should be adequately repleted either orally or by the IV route. Multiple agents including nitazoxanide, spiramycin, paromomycin, bovine dialyzable leukocyte extract, and bovine hyperimmune colostrum are studied, but none of these are effective consistently without concurrent ART use.

**Microsporidiosis:** ART must be initiated in patients with a goal to restore CD4+ cells count over 100 cells/mm^3 as this leads to the resolution of clinical microsporidiosis.

**JC virus infection:**There is no definitive treatment available for JCV. Initiation of ART to reverse immunosuppression is the main therapy in these patients.

**Bartonellosis:** Doxycycline and erythromycin have been used to treat BA, bacteremia, peliosis hepatis, bone infections successfully. Duration of the therapy is usually long and requires treatment for at least 3 months. CNS infections receive treatment with doxycycline with or without RIF. Azithromycin can be used in patients with concerns for medication compliance.

**Syphilis:**Penicillin is the drug of choice. Early syphilis can be treated with benzathine penicillin. Neurosyphilis can be treated with IV aqueous crystalline penicillin G or procaine penicillin for 10 to 14 days. Tertiary syphilis involves complex management and must always include a specialist to guide the course of the treatment.

**Human papillomavirus infection:** Oral and genital warts are difficult to treat as more than one medications are often necessary for refractory or recurrent lesions. Podophyllotoxin, imiquimod, cryotherapy, trichloroacetic acid (TCA), or bichloroacetic acid are all options with varying efficacy. Surgical treatments are very effective and include electrocautery, tangential shave excision, curettage, tangential scissor excision, electrosurgery, infrared coagulation. A specialist must address all cancerous lesions.

**Hepatitis B virus infection:** In HIV/HBV coinfections, fixed-dose formulations of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) or tenofovir alafenamide (TAF)/emtricitabine are the treatment of choice due to their anti-HBV activity. Lamivudine or emtricitabine, if used long term, as the only drug active against HBV, can lead to a high rate of HBV drug-resistance mutations.

**Hepatitis C virus infection:**Emphasis should be on starting ART at the earliest in these patients to reduce the risk of progression of liver disease. HCV infection is not preventable with vaccinations. There is also no post-exposure prophylaxis. Treatment of chronic hepatitis C is based on the viral genotype and is beyond the scope of this review.