Asymptomatic patients should undergo observation, a "watch-and-wait" attitude. They should be followed monthly by physical examinations and laboratory tests, including complete blood counts. The appearance of symptoms warrants treatment. Recall that the asymptomatic period is a transitory respite. Anticipation and preparation are in order; patients will progress.

The treatment of T-PLL has become relatively restricted, and patients, where applicable, should be considered for clinical studies. The older armamentarium of splenectomy, splenic radiation, leukapheresis, and CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) have been shown to be ineffective in the treatment of T-PLL. Nucleoside agents such as fludarabine, cladribine, and Pentostatin have only a modicum of effect.

Alemtuzumab (AKA CAMPATH-1-H) remains the mainstay of therapy for the treatment-naive patient as well as those with refractory or relapsed disease.

Allogeneic HSCT (alloHSCT) is favored as consolidation therapy, particularly when started early (within a year of diagnosis) when used in patients who are fit for transplant protocols and for those patients in CR (NOT in partial response [PR] or less). Purportedly autologous and allogeneic HSCT have no significant differences though data for the former are limited. Clinical opinion appears mixed, but alloHSCT, under ideal conditions for consolidation, has produced up to seven years of disease control.

As stated before, when possible, eligible patients should be screened for entry into clinical trials of newer agents. Recent clinical trials have shown some potential for a BCL-2 (B-cell Lymphoma 2) inhibitor, Venetoclax, in T-PLL.