The cornea is a five-layered structure that provides the majority of the total refractive power of the eye (**Fig. 1**). In the past, penetrating keratoplasty (PK) had been the gold standard surgical treatment of corneal diseases for any layer, including diseases of the endothelium. With the improvement in technology and innovation over the last two decades, endothelial keratoplasty (EK) techniques involving transplantation of corneal components have been deployed to treat these diseases (**Table 1**). When compared to PK, EK introduces less foreign antigens, has improved visual recovery and outcomes, minimizes astigmatism, has less risk of dehiscence, and results in better globe stability.

History of Endothelial Keratoplasty Techniques

The first endothelial transplant was developed by Dr. Tillett in 1956. The technique required a large incision and used a partial thickness graft created by the trephination of half of the posterior donor cornea.**Fig. 2A)**.

Next, in 2004, Melles et al. revolutionized the field with what is now called Descemet stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK), after a few modifications made by Price et al.**Fig. 2B**).

DSAEK had become widely adopted, and eye bank produced precut tissue has proven to be reliable; thus, replacing the need for preparation by surgeons.

DMEK uses a graft consisting of endothelium and DM without any stroma (**Fig. 2C**). The graft is around 10-15 μm in thickness and prepared via a descemetorhexis performed on the donor eye.**Fig. 2D**).

The femtosecond laser has also been used to assist in EK procedures. Femtosecond laser-assisted DSEK (FS-DSEK) has been used to produce successful DSEK grafts consistently. However, a visual improvement from FS-DSEK appears limited when compared to DSAEK or PK.

In settings with a scarcity of donor tissue, some modified or newer techniques may offer a solution. Hemi-DMEK and quarter-DMEK are variations involving grafts with smaller, modified shapes prepared by surgeons, and they appear to have similar visual outcomes, although with lower endothelial cell density.

The observation of corneal clearing despite nonattachment of grafts in some cases has led to investigating techniques that do not use transplants, and instead, rely on primary intention healing of the endothelium (**Fig. 2E**).

Further comparison studies are warranted, but DSO may provide similar visual outcomes to DMEK after a longer recovery time without the risk of rejection, detachment, or need for immunosuppression.**Fig. 2F**).