In toxoplasma seropositive pregnant women diagnosed before 18 weeks gestation, treatment should begin with spiramycin until ultrasonography and PCR can evaluate for the presence of congenital fetal infection.

There is no specific therapy for rubella in primary or congenital infection. The cornerstone of management is, therefore, prevention. All children and adolescents without contraindications to the MMR vaccine should receive it. MMR administration is contraindicated in pregnancy. Pregnant women found to be non-immune to rubella should be counseled on the importance of vaccination and vaccinated upon completion of the pregnancy.

The treatment of CMV infection in immunocompetent pregnant women is supportive. Ganciclovir and valganciclovir are used in the treatment of congenital CMV infection. They are associated with a reduction in hearing loss and improved weight gain and head circumference in congenital CMV.

Antiretroviral prophylaxis should be given to all infants born to HIV-positive mothers.

The only treatment of syphilis in pregnant women is intramuscular penicillin.

A primary HSV outbreak in pregnancy should be treated with acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir.

Treatment of acute and chronic HBV in pregnant women is primarily supportive. Infants born to HBV-positive mothers should receive a single-antigen HBV vaccine within 12 hours of birth combined with HBV immunoglobulin.

Treatment of primary parvovirus infection in pregnant women is supportive. Treatment of congenital infection is likewise primarily supportive, and in utero fetal transfusions have become a cornerstone of therapy in the management of the associated severe fetal anemia.

Treatment of both primary and congenital Zika virus infection is supportive, so prevention is vital. Several vaccines are in development.

Patients with preterm rupture of membranes should receive antibiotics targeting the most common organisms implicated in chorioamnionitis.

Recommended antibiotic regimens include ampicillin and gentamicin.

Diagnosed bacterial vaginosis should be treated in all pregnant women.

Pregnant patients colonized with GBS should receive intrapartum antibiotics, with penicillin G being the medication of choice in non-allergic patients.