**Radiological Findings**

As with other lung infections, radiological images are crucial for the correct diagnosis of the disease. However, unlike other lung diseases, non-tuberculosis mycobacteria have characteristic lung presentations. The two major radiological patterns of NTM lung infection are fibro-cavitary and nodular bronchiectatic patterns.

**Laboratory Diagnosis**

The isolation of non-tuberculosis mycobacteria in human specimens can be challenging. Since the bacteria is present in the environment, especially in water sources, a positive test in a sputum specimen could produce a false-positive result. Also, the NTM species from the environment that have colonized the airway could lead to contaminant specimens, contributing to a falsely positive test result with a poor positive predictive value. Hence, current guidelines recommend that a collection of three early morning sputum specimens be obtained on three different days to achieve an accurate diagnosis of non-tuberculosis mycobacteria lung infection.

Nuclei-acid amplification (NAA) is the most accurate test for identifying mycobacterial strains. Culture remains the test of choice for NTM laboratory confirmation. There are two media used for the culture: solid media or liquid media. Solid media includes either egg-based media, such as the Löwenstein-Jensen medium, or agar-based media such as Middlebrook 7H10 and 7H11 media. Solid media allows the visualization of morphologic, grown rate, and species characterization. The liquid media system is more sensitive but is more prone to contamination by other micro-organisms and bacteria overgrowth.

**NTM Identification**

The treatment of non-tuberculosis infection is specific and different for every particular NTM species. Making a correct identification of the species is the main factor of successful treatment. The most accurate NTM identification method is via gene sequence. Sequencing the 16S rRNA gene allows for the correct identification and discrimination between species. However, species-level identification may need several gene sequences and more complex methods. Only specialized laboratories dedicated to the identification of species levels by using different gene sequences can perform this test. The matrix-associated laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) method has increasingly been employed for the identification of NTM. This method is identifying target bacteria by comparing mass spectral pattern molecules specific to NTM.

**Drug Susceptibility**

When NTM are cultured, drug susceptibility tests are always conducted to assist physicians with the choice of drug regimens. However, there are difficulties with the drug susceptibility test because these organisms behave differently in vitro than in vivo.