Patients can have spontaneous resolution of mild symptoms. Generally, the symptoms progress in severity. Prediction of how severe the reaction can be is not possible. Multiple factors determine severity. Further patients can have biphasic reactions where they have a recurrence of symptoms after resolution with no recurrent exposure. This has been reported in up to 15 percent of children; the reaction can become protracted where it lasts for days, and even weeks. These are instances with delayed hypersensitivity reactions develop anaphylaxis; these reactions occur hours after exposure to the allergen.  If patients are untreated in any of these instances, the result can be fatal.

Risk factors for severe outcomes include:

1. Asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and interstitial lung disease: Patients with these conditions may have subacute reactions as a result of prescribed antihistamines, and steroids.

2. Cardiac and hypertensive patients, who are on alpha-blockers,  beta-blockers, and ACE inhibitors block natural body compensatory mechanisms and require larger doses of epinephrine to treat the anaphylaxis.

Anaphylaxis treatment begins with triage and the removal from exposure, which can involve decontamination if topical agents are involved or clothing is contaminated. Removal of the patient's clothing and standard precautions by staff such as masks, gloves, and gown should take place. Hand washing by staff who may have used latex gloves or eaten peanuts may be necessary. ABC’s (airway, breathing, and circulation) of emergency care should have priority.  Patients should have oxygen and intravenous administration of fluids. The patient should receive epinephrine intramuscularly (IM) (1 to 1000 dilution {1 mg/1ml} 0.3cc) 0.3 to 0.5 mg which can be repeated every 5 to 15 minutes as needed. Most patients should respond to 1 to 3 doses if symptoms persist, progress or the patient becomes hypotensive IV epinephrine should be started at 0.1 mcg/kg/minute by infusion device and titrated to maintain perfusion of body organs. Patients on beta-blockers should be given glucagon 1 to 5 mg over 5 minutes. Antiemetics should be given to treat vomiting often associated with glucagon administration. Histamine type 2 receptor blockers such as famotidine 20 mg IV or ranitidine at  50 mg IV should be administered. The glucocorticoid, methylprednisolone 125 mg, should be given.

Weight-base dosing is recommended for pediatric patient populations. IM epinephrine is dosed at 0.01mg/kg and injected in the outer thigh. The maximum dose for children over 50 kg is 0.5 mg; this is done every 5 to 15 minutes for up to three doses if needed until obtaining an adequate response. After three doses, IV administration should begin 0.1 to 1 mcg/kg/minute titrated to effect. IV fluids should be 10 to 20 ml/kg infusion for hypotension and fluid replacement. H1 histamine blockers should be dosed at 1 mg/kg for diphenhydramine up to a maximum of 40 mg. H2 histamine blockers ranitidine is 1 mg/kg up to 50 mg and famotidine at 0.25 mg /kg iv not to exceed 40mg/day for patients 1 to 16 years of age. (If labs show renal dysfunction, consultation with the pharmacy is recommended for dosing based on creatinine clearance in both pediatrics and adults). Glucocorticoid administration methylprednisolone is 1 mg/kg up to a max of 125 mg.

Respiratory symptoms of wheezing and bronchospasm can have treatment with aerosolized albuterol dosing for adults is 2.5 mg in 3 ml, and children o.15 mg/kg min dose; this does not affect mucosal edema/angioedema as this is an alpha-receptor control mechanism.

Treatment for patients with refractory hypotension to IV epinephrine should receive methylene blue which inhibits nitric oxide synthase and guanylate cyclase. Ideal dosing is not known. Dosing that has been used in cardiac surgery for treating profound vasodilation is 1 to 2 mg/kg given over 20 to 60 minutes. Other agents are non-adrenergic pressors such as vasopressin for hypotension. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is also useful in specialized treatment centers where it is available.