Criteria for diagnosing alcohol intoxication include known or admitted ingestion of alcohol, behavior change, clinical signs including slurred speech, incoordination, nystagmus, memory loss, and lack of another condition to account for the symptoms. The signs and symptoms associated with alcohol toxicity depend on the blood alcohol concentration (BAC). As the BAC increases, so do the severity of the symptoms. At a BAC of 0 to 50%, one would expect to see relaxation, increased talkativeness, and decreased fine motor control. At a BAC of 50% to 100%, patients develop impaired judgment and coordination. From 100% to 200%, one sees gait instability, slurred speech, and mood and behavior changes. At a BAC of 200% to 400%, patients develop nausea and vomiting, hypothermia, dysarthria, amnesia, diplopia, and nystagmus. With a BAC of greater than 400%, patients can develop respiratory depression followed by coma and even death. The extent and severity of these symptoms vary depending on how quickly the alcohol is ingested and the rapidity of the rise and fall of the BAC.

The speed of absorption can be affected by co-ingested food, female sex, cigarette use, and concentration of alcohol in the beverage. It is also affected by tolerance to alcohol; a significant history of alcohol use can allow a patient to be conscious, cohesive, and free of motor deficits at BACs that would cause severe symptoms in patients without tolerance. It is important to ascertain the quantity and type of alcohol consumed and over which period of time it was consumed. Patients may complain of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. A full physical exam is necessary with special attention paid to the vital signs, nutritional status of the patient, and skin findings such as capillary prominence, spider naevi, telangiectasia, palmar erythema, and muscular atrophy. As with all physical exams, airway, breathing, and circulation should be the first focus. Acute alcohol intoxication can cause respiratory depression; establishing that the patient is protecting their airway is of primary importance. The physical exam should be repeated often as some patients will become aware of injuries as their intoxicated state improves.