**Toxoplasmosis:**

Toxoplasmosis results from infection with the parasite Toxoplasma gondii. This parasite goes through its reproductive stages in the intestines of the Felidae family and then gets expelled as an oocyst into the environment. Then, these oocysts cause toxoplasmosis through inhalation of fecal particles or by the ingestion of infected tissue. After infection of the mother, there is a transplacental transmission of the parasite to the fetus causing congenital toxoplasmosis. The likelihood of infection is the highest in the third trimester but the earlier in the pregnancy that the infection occurs, the more severe the manifestation of the congenital birth defects.

**Other:**

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is an airborne DNA virus of the herpesvirus group that spreads by sneezing, coughing, or contact with active lesions.

Syphilis is an infection of the spirochete Treponema pallidum and spreads by sexual exposure or vertical transmission. Vertical transmission most commonly occurs transplacentally but can also occur due to peripartum exposure to vaginal fluid. In women recently infected with syphilis, the probability of transmission is more than 80%.

Parvovirus B19, a single-stranded DNA virus, is the only member of the Parvoviridae family that is pathogenic in humans. It passes through respiratory droplets, blood exposure, or vertically transmitted through the placenta.

**Rubella:**

Rubella is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus that gets transmitted from infected individuals through aerosols. It also passes from the infected mother to the fetus transplacentally.

**CMV:**

CMV is a human-specific double-stranded DNA virus of the Herpesviridae family. Horizontal transmission is via the mucous membrane, blood transfusions or, organ transplants. It can pass from mother to fetus transplacentally but also from contact with cervical or vaginal secretions during the birthing process or by breastmilk postnatally. Though rarer, a woman with a latent CMV infection can infect her fetus if she becomes infected with an additional strain during pregnancy.

**HSV:**

HSV-1 and HSV-2 are large, enveloped double-stranded DNA viruses. These viruses are passed from direct contact with mucous membranes, saliva or sores and can occur despite a lack of active infection. Once acquired, the virus often is asymptomatic or non-specific, which leads to the spread of the infection due to a lack of proper precautions. HSV-1 is more commonly found orally, while HSV-2 is more often a genital infection, but infection of either virus can occur anywhere on the body. This virus is primarily passed to the infant during delivery when the mother has an active infection with sores but has been known to occur during latent infections. While episodes of active HSV can be relatively rare after initial infection, pregnancy often triggers active infection in approximately 75% of HSV positive women. Infants born to mothers initially infected with HSV in the third trimester of pregnancy are at the highest risk for contracting neonatal HSV.