Management of globe rupture is a surgical emergency until proven otherwise. Patients with this condition typically present to the emergency department, and it is important that the triage team recognize the emergent nature of this presentation and immediately activate a trauma assessment. The patient must be placed in a room promptly evaluated by a physician who is familiar with the patient's presentation and chief complaint. Prompt history, physical exam, and visual acuity will give the physician some initial guidance and direction before consulting ophthalmology or considering CT imaging. Some evidence suggests that earlier surgical repair reduces the risk of endophthalmitis.

Once globe rupture is safely ruled out, other potential causes of acute ocular pain, including corneal abrasions or ulcerations, can undergo an evaluation and the patient appropriately treated. Management of acute ocular pain requires a coordinated interprofessional effort between nursing staff, ER clinicians, pharmacists, and ophthalmologic specialists to coordinate an accurate and prompt diagnosis that will result in appropriately directed management and treatment.

Nursing will assist both during the evaluation period, as well as during any operative procedures, providing clinician support, administering medications, and answering patient questions. If antimicrobial therapy is necessary, an infectious disease board-certified pharmacist can be an invaluable resource, assisting with agent selection based on the latest antibiogram data available. This type of interprofessional teamwork is necessary for globe rupture injuries, to guide patients to the best possible outcomes.