Prompt parenteral antibiotic therapy with urgent removal or drainage of the gallbladder should be the goal to prevent increased morbidity and the rare possibility of mortality. A broad-spectrum antibiotic, hydration, and optimizing the patient for surgery should be done ASAP.

Although the conventional practice is to perform an open cholecystectomy, it is possible to achieve a laparoscopic removal of the gallbladder by experienced surgeons. Surgeons who undertake a laparoscopic approach should have a low threshold to convert to an open procedure when encountered with technical difficulties. The conversion rate from laparoscopic to open cholecystectomy is higher in empyema of the gallbladder than that in uncomplicated acute cholecystitis. The higher rate of conversion is attributed to reduced visualization or distortion of the anatomical structures in the Calot's triangle and increased bleeding due to inflamed friable tissue.

An initial decompression of the distended gallbladder, either under radiological guidance or intraoperative laparoscopically guided, facilitates the more straightforward dissection of the gallbladder. Postoperative complication rates irrespective of approach, either laparoscopic or open, are higher than for cholecystitis for gallstone disease. Postoperative complications, including wound infection, bleeding, cystic duct stump leak, and common bile duct injury, subhepatic abscess, have all been reported. Subtotal cholecystectomy is rarely is performed when the surgeon encounters pericholecystic inflammation that makes a safe dissection of the Calot's triangle impossible. In older patients or those who are too ill to undergo surgery due to associated comorbidity, a percutaneous or transhepatic radiologically guided drainage is a temporizing procedure. This initial drainage procedure often leads to a dramatic improvement in the patient's condition, which then permits an elective cholecystectomy when the patient's condition improves.

Antibiotic therapy is usually continued until the fever subsides.