The circle of Willis, otherwise known as the cerebral arterial circle, encircles the optic chiasm. It is composed of anastomoses of blood vessels that communicate the anterior and posterior blood supply of the brain. The following vessels comprise the circle of Willis:

- The left and right anterior cerebral arteries are connected through the anterior communicating artery.

- The left and right internal carotid arteries

- The left and right posterior cerebral arteries

- The left and right posterior communicating arteries, which connect the left and right internal carotid arteries to the left and right posterior cerebral arteries, respectively

Vascular branches from the circle of Willis perfuse the intracranial optic nerve and optic chiasm; however, this arterial network is notoriously complicated. There is minimal literature regarding the specific vascular supply to the optic nerve and chiasm. Understanding the vascular supply in this area has significant clinical relevance in neurosurgery – inadvertent injury to the blood vessels in this area is a common cause of post-surgical morbidity and mortality. Baykal et al. studied the vascular supply to the optic nerve and chiasm (the “opto-chiasmatic area”) to determine which neurosurgical treatment approach is least associated with vascular complications. They organized the optic structures into four zones and determined vascular supply as listed in Table 2.

Table 2. Vascular Supply to the Opto-Chiasmatic Area (adapted from Baykal et al.)

Zone

Location

Vascular Supply

Zone 1A

Superior surfaces of the optic nerves

-  Proximal segment of the internal carotid artery

Zone 2A

The superior surface of the optic chiasm

-  Anterior cerebral artery

-  Anterior communicating artery

Zone 1B

The inferior surface of the optic nerves

-  Proximal segment of the internal carotid artery

-  Superior pituitary artery

-  Posterior communicating artery

Zone 2B

The inferior surface of the optic chiasm

-  Distal segment of the internal carotid artery

-  Posterior communicating artery

-  Anterior choroidal artery