Acute and long-term methamphetamine use may lead to abnormal findings on examination of the following systems: cardiovascular, CNS, gastrointestinal, renal, skin, and dental. Tachycardia and hypertension are frequently observed, and atrial and ventricular dysrhythmias may occur. Chest pain from cardiac ischemia and infarction, acute aortic dissection or an aneurysm has been associated with methamphetamine abuse. Hypotension may be observed with methamphetamine overdose with profound depletion of catecholamines. Acute and chronic cardiomyopathy results directly from methamphetamine cardiac toxicity and indirectly from chronic hypertension and ischemia; intravenous use may result in endocarditis; patients may present with dyspnea, edema, and other signs of acute congestive heart failure (CHF) exacerbation.

Severe abdominal pain may result from acute mesenteric vasoconstriction; methamphetamine has also been associated with the formation of ulcers and ischemic colitis. Renal failure may occur from rhabdomyolysis, necrotizing angiitis, acute interstitial nephritis or tubular necrosis.

Skin findings include delusions of parasitosis, and chronic skin-picking may result in neurotic excoriations and prurigo nodularis ("speed bumps"). Injectors frequently present with abscess and cellulitis, which they often blame on a "spider bite." Dental examination usually reveals severe caries, especially of the maxillary teeth "meth mouth.” This results from maxillary artery vasoconstriction, xerostomia, and poor hygiene. Methamphetamine use during pregnancy can be fatal to the mother and fetus from placental vasoconstriction resulting in spontaneous abortion. Methamphetamine is secreted in breast milk.