As the underlying etiology of keratoendotheliitis fugax hereditaria is genetic, and the pathophysiology is incompletely understood, treatment is mainly supportive based on published case reports. As reported, the best treatment is topical corticosteroids, though the frequency and dose have not been published. However, not all patients respond to topical steroid treatment. Also, reports exist that oral antihistamines have been of symptomatic benefit to patients, and drowsiness typically associated with some drugs in this class may help patients who struggle to sleep through their symptoms.

Regardless of the treatment choice selected, therapy should begin immediately as early intervention reportedly limits symptoms. Delaying treatment until corneal inflammation is apparent seems not to affect recovery. Many patients have reported that early treatment with topical steroid drops or ointments may stop symptoms from progressing or alleviate symptoms more rapidly.

In regards to visual acuity, some patients have found more satisfactory results with rigid contact lenses than with glasses.

As NLRP3 activation plays a central role in inflammation, the mutation that causes keratoendotheliitis fugax hereditaria may cause dysregulation of the protein and resultant inflammation, modulators that inhibit activating upstream effects or subsequent proinflammatory downstream effects may be of benefit in the treatment of this disease. Inhibitors of NLRP3 effects including MCC950, beta-hydroxybutyrate, type 1 interferon, and interferon beta, resveratrol, arglabin, CB2R agonists, and MicroRNA-223 may, therefore, prove beneficial in the treatment or prevention of acute attacks and prevent corneal scarring.