**Iatrogenic Lesions**

The path of the nerve is a sensitive area for the surgeon who must work in the area of the posterior triangle of the neck. The nerve is at risk for various iatrogenic lesions. One of these can be linked to the cannulation of the internal jugular vein with nerve palsy. Other iatrogenic causes refer to carotid endarterectomy, cardiac, or pulmonary surgery with sternotomy and radiation therapy. Some lesions can occur for lymphatic biopsies in the neck and thyroid surgery.

**Direct Pathologies**

Direct pathologies to the XI nerve are rare but mainly involve a malfunction of the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid and can arise from cervical diseases in the foramen magnum and the jugular foramen and intracranial area.

Aneurysms to the internal carotid artery or posterior inferior cerebellar artery may cause permanent damage from ischemia to the nerve. A fracture of the atlas bone due to direct trauma could compress the nerve; a hyoid bone fracture may compress the nerve XI.

The following syndromes may negatively affect nerve function: Collet-Sicard-syndrome, Vernet-syndrome, Jugular-foramen-syndrome, Schmidt-syndrome, Villaret-syndrome, Garcin-syndrome, Pharyngo-cervical-brachial variant of Guillain-Barre-syndrome, Sandifer syndrome, Eagle-syndrome, Diphtheria (infection), Poliomyelitis or Tetanus (both situations that rarely can affect the XI nerve), botulism, and sarcoidosis. Other causes are diabetes, vitamin B12 deficiency, and tumors.

**Nerve Transfer**

The accessory nerve can be used in the procedures of neurotization and reinnervation of cervical plexus nerves, such as the radial, suprascapular, musculocutaneous, and axillary. You can use the nerve in patients with quadriplegia to replace the phrenic nerve.

Likewise, if the cranial nerve is subject to paralysis and permanent lesion, it can be replaced by the upper trunk of the brachial plexus, in particular, by fascicles of the upper trunk inherent in the axillary nerve.