Investment in stillbirth prevention is necessary. Stillbirth must be integrated into initiatives for women's and children's health globally. There needs to be intentional leadership; champions must be identified to act, educate, and make changes. The voice of women must be heard and have advocates. We must be prepared to invest in interventions, and indicators must be put in place to allow us to measure the success of our actions.

Stillbirth needs to be clearly defined. Every death must be counted, and actions to prevent these deaths must be tracked and monitored. High quality obstetric and midwifery care should be universally available. Childbirth must be provided with skilled attendants who can perform assisted vaginal deliveries and cesarean sections for fetal and maternal indications. Of all stillbirths, half occur during birth. Seventy-five percent of these are preventable with access to quality care. The ability to provide induction of labor for premature rupture of membranes and post-term pregnancy needs to be addressed.

Women who have experienced a stillbirth need social recognition, and we must work to abolish the long term stigma of stillbirth that serves only to degrade women and hide their burden. Respectful and supportive care is essential, including bereavement care after a stillbirth.

Stillbirth can be prevented by addressing and treating infection, malnutrition, non-communicable diseases, lifestyle factors, preterm labor, and post-term birth. Addressing birth control in adolescents, pregnancy spacing, and poverty will also benefit. We must strive to provide all women access to family planning and access to resources, which can help to prepare women of all ages for pregnancy. This includes providing effective antenatal care and support: folic acid supplementation, intermittent treatment of STIs (syphilis), smoking cessation counseling, screening and management of maternal illnesses, and the detection and management of fetal growth restriction identified as early as possible in pregnancy.

We must promote stillbirth investigation as part of peer review.