Anyone can be a victim of human trafficking. The causes of this crime are multifactorial. Human traffickers are criminals motivated by money and profits and do not respect human rights or the health and safety of their victims.

**Essential Elements: A-M-P Model**

Human trafficking involves three essential elements: action, means, and purpose. According to the National Human Trafficking Resource Center (NHTRC) and the TVPA, the Action-Means-Purpose, or A-M-P Model helps determine whether force, fraud, or coercion was present, indicating the encounter was not consensual. A trafficker recruits, harbors, transports, provides, or obtains an individual. Force, fraud, or coercion is the means used to compel the victim to provide commercial sex acts, labor, or other services.

Federal law defines "sex trafficking" as "the recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, obtaining, patronizing, or soliciting of a person for the purposes of a commercial sex act, in which the commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such an act has not attained 18 years of age." Force, fraud, or coercion do not need to be present for a minor under the age of 18 involved in any commercial sex act because minors cannot consent to a sex act with an adult. Minors are easier to exploit and manipulate and so are more vulnerable to trafficking.

The TVPA's definition of "labor trafficking" is "harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage or slavery.”

The United States Department of Health and Human Service’s (HHS) "Look Beneath the Surface" campaign and Stop, Observe, Ask, and Respond (SOAR) training in 2017 attempted to teach healthcare providers and the general public to identify victims of trafficking. Force may involve rape, torture, beatings, or imprisonment and can be psychological or physical. Physical confinement is rare. More often, "invisible chains" are used to maintain power and control, similar to their use in intimate partner violence. Fraud may include false claims of a job, marriage, promises of a better life, or a family. Coercion also involves threats, debt, or bondage that help foster a climate of fear and intimidation and may consist of abuse of the legal process.

According to the TVPA, a “commercial sex act” is any sex act where anything of value is given to or received by any person, such as survival sex, drugs, transportation, food, or clothing."

**Force, fraud, and coercion**are the defined means of exploitation for human trafficking.

**Force**: The use of physical power

- Example: Beatings, physical restraint, rape

**Fraud**: The use of false promises

- Example: Promising payment or citizenship for work

**Coercion**: Threats of harm

- Example: Blackmail

Intimate partners and family members are potential traffickers and tend to use force more than fraud or coercion.