The prevalence of endometrial cancer in the United States is 25.7/100,000 women per year. The lifetime risk for developing this disease is approximately 2.8% in American women. The peak ages of diagnosis are between ages 55 and 64 years (median 62 years). Though the risk for endometrial cancer is slightly lower in American black women than white women (24.8 versus 26.3 new cases/100,000 per year), the lethality of endometrial cancer in black women significantly exceeds the lethality of this disease in white women (8.1 versus 4.2 deaths/100,000 per year). The discrepancy might be explained by a significantly higher incidence of advanced uterine corpus cancers and aggressive endometrial cancer histotypes, such as high-grade endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas, ESC, carcinosarcomas, endometrial stromal sarcomas in black women.

As briefly reviewed in the section on Etiology, the development of the most common endometrial cancers and their intraepithelial precursors - type 1, low-grade endometrioid carcinoma, EmGD, and EIC - depends largely on a hormonal milieu of persistent estrus uninterrupted by progesterone or progestins. Thus, estrogen-secreting, ovarian tumors and polycystic ovaries (PCO), which interfere with regular ovulation and menstruation, result in elevated levels of free-estrogens leading to endometrial hyperplasia.per se has been associated with elevated risk for endometrial cancer, even after adjusting for infertility.

High body mass indices (BMI), as well as diabetes type II and insulin resistance, anovulation, menstrual disruption, amenorrhea, and infertility, are consistently associated with increased risks for low-grade endometrioid carcinoma and in recent studies high-grade endometrioid carcinoma, as well.

Obesity and hyperinsulinemia, a common feature of insulin-resistant type II diabetes, lower the levels of sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) to result in higher circulating levels of free estrogen.****In a reported large case-control study, diagnosis of insulin-dependent diabetes type I was found to have an even higher odds ratio for endometrial cancer than was diabetes type II.

Androgen precursors, produced by PCO, ovarian hilus cell hypertrophy, or the adrenal cortex, are converted to estrogen in adipose tissues.

Risk factors for type 2, high-grade endometrial cancers also include obesity, though the effect of increasing risk per each element of weight gain over matched control women was less for type 2 endometrial cancers than for type 1, low-grade endometrioid carcinomas.BRCA mutations and dysfunction, discussed in the Etiology section, it is interesting to find that the association of breast cancer diagnoses with endometrial cancers is dramatically greater for type 2 ESC than type 1 endometrioid carcinoma.

Members of Hereditary Breast Ovarian Cancer families associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations often are treated with tamoxifen for breast cancer or as prophylaxis against contralateral breast cancer. Although exogenous estrogen HRT unopposed by progestin is associated with increased risks for endometrial endometrioid carcinomas in general populations, a case-control study specifically focused on BRCA1, and BRCA2 mutation carriers with endometrial cancers demonstrated no significant increased risk (OR = 0.23, 95% CI 0.03 to 1.78) in patients who were taking estrogen-only HRT. In contrast, significantly increased risks (OR = 6.91, 95% CI 0.99 to 98) for endometrial cancer were found in mutation carriers taking progesterone-only HRT (p = 0.003) or those who had histories of tamoxifen use.****It has been suggested that women treated with tamoxifen, especially at higher dosages, may be susceptible to more aggressive uterine sarcomas and high-grade carcinomas, but as yet the evidence is insufficient to support these observations.

Exogenous estrogen, iatrogenic, and in some cases, possibly environmental, unopposed by progesterone or progestins are associated with increased risks for endometrial endometrioid carcinomas (see above: Etiology, and below: Management, Prevention, Differential Diagnosis).

Family history of endometrial, colorectal, ovarian, and other cancers that characterize Lynch syndrome and related MMR deficient hereditary diseases increase risks for endometrial cancer.MMR genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, and inherited EPCAM interference with MMR, accounts for fewer than 5% of all endometrial carcinomas, the “lifetime risk” through age 70 years of mutation carriers for endometrial cancer is approximately 12% to 60%, depending on the mutated gene.PTEN mutations may convey increased risks for endometrial cancers as well as a myriad of other tumors.

Several epidemiologic factors are associated with decreasing the risks for endometrial cancers. Estrogen-progestin combined oral contraceptives (COC) use reduced risk for endometrial cancer with each increasing five years of use by as much as 33% compared with women who had never used these formulations, and the risk reduction persisted for more than 30 years after COC were discontinued.

The risk for endometrial cancers, both type 1 and type 2 carcinomas, was found to decrease with advancing age of first childbirth, overall by 11% in a large epidemiologic study, and the risk for women who first gave birth after 40 years age was 44% lower than women who gave birth before age 25 years.****The finding of endometrial cancer risk reduction with older age at the time of first birth confirmed a previous study, which paradoxically showed that endometrial cancer risk was reduced by advancing parity, short intervals between births, and between the last birth and menopause.

Recent reports indicate that alcohol consumption may increase, and coffee and tea consumption may reduce, the risk of endometrial cancer.