**Non-Operative Management**

Numerous non-operative treatments are employed in the pre-surgical management of knee arthroplasty. Treatments include both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic options. Multiple studies have investigated these different treatment options, and guidelines have been put in place by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons in the 2013 evidence-based guidelines, 2nd edition.

The AAOS recommends with strong evidence for low-impact aerobic exercises, neuromuscular education, and strengthening. They also strongly recommend the use of NSAIDs and tramadol.

The AAOS recommends moderate weight loss in patients with a BMI greater than 25.

The AAOS recommends strongly against acupuncture, glucosamine/chondroitin, and viscosupplementation.

The AAOS recommends moderate against lateral wedge insoles.

The AAOS cannot recommend for or against manual therapy (i.e., chiropractic, joint manipulation), physical agents including electrotherapeutic modalities, biologic injections, corticosteroid injections, valgus directing force brace, acetaminophen, opioids, or pain patches.

**Preoperative Evaluation**

A review of the literature did not demonstrate a uniform protocol as to what preoperative evaluation is necessary before knee replacement. A thorough history and physical exam are necessary. Comorbidities, smoking status, alcohol consumption, and mental status should all undergo evaluation. The patient's risk for the development of thromboembolic events should be a consideration. However, typically, most patients will undergo evaluation and preoperative clearance by their primary care provider and potentially cardiologist if significant cardiac comorbidities are present. Other subspecialty preoperative evaluations may be necessary depending on patients' other comorbidities (i.e., rheumatology, nephrology, neurology). Bernstein et al. developed a protocol that assessed patients for 19 different risk factors. Identifying these risk factors allowed for preoperative intervention, and these patients were found to have a statistically significant shorter length of stay and lower average total direct variable cost. No difference was noted in patients' 90-day readmission rate.

**Preoperative Surgical Planning**

It is essential to assess for previous surgical incisions, patients' limb-lengths, limb deformity, the range of motion, ligamentous stability, and gait. Patients' neurovascular status should also be considered; ankle-brachial index (ABI) may be a prudent screening, and if less than 0.9, a vascular consultation should be obtained. Patients with preexisting peripheral vascular disease should also have their ABI assessed.

Plain radiography typically provides sufficient detail, and further studies are typically not necessary. Weight-bearing AP, lateral and sunrise views should be routinely performed. AP hip to ankle x-rays allow for evaluation of extra-articular deformities and allow for assessment of the mechanical axis. Radiographic markers can be placed during imaging to allow for the use of templating software to assess for estimated implant sizing and positioning. A lateral patellar shift of more than 3mm was an independent risk factor for patellar maltracking. Images should be interpreted to assess for Insall-Salvati ratio, a preexisting slope of the tibial plateau, and coronal alignment. Custom implants are made based on CT or MRI sequences, and these studies should be performed when a custom implant is desired. Custom implants can be particularly helpful in patients with significant deformity where intramedullary or extra-medullary guides will not work, as well as in patients with preexisting hardware.

**Laboratory Testing**

Basic preoperative labs should be performed such as CBC, BMP, HbA1c in patients with diabetes mellitus. A goal of HbA1c of less than 7.0 is desirable; however, studies have shown that a HbA1c under 8.0 is acceptable to avoid excessive delay and complications in knee replacement. Many centers also perform preoperative urinalysis and nasal swabs/decolonization in potential MRSA carriers.