Massive transfusion is traditionally defined as transfusion of 10 units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) within a 24 hour period. The goal of massive transfusion is to limit complications and to limit critical hypoperfusion while surgical hemostasis can be achieved. This article reviews the current literature on massive transfusion protocols and explores the potential complications of this life-saving intervention.

Patients potentially requiring massive transfusions can be seen across medicine from traumatic injuries, gastrointestinal bleeding, and obstetric catastrophes. While surgery is the most common use of major transfusion protocols (MTPs), trauma remains the best-studied category in massive transfusion. An estimated 3% to 5% of civilian trauma patients and 10% of military trauma patients will receive a massive transfusion. One study at a level 1 trauma center found that only 1.7% of all their patients underwent a massive transfusion, defined as 10 units within 24 hours. While the incidence of massive transfusion is relatively low, patients requiring massive transfusions have a high mortality.

Massive transfusion requires the consideration of multiple physiologic parameters such as volume status, tissue oxygenation, management of bleeding and coagulation abnormalities, and acid-base base balance.

**Volume Status and Tissue Oxygenation**

The focus when a patient is in hypovolemic shock secondary to acute blood loss is to expand intravascular volume and maintain oxygen delivery to tissues. At baseline, oxygen is delivered to tissues at approximately four times the rate of oxygen tissue consumption. Therefore, volume expanders such as crystalloids may be employed during a massive transfusion to maintain blood pressure and tissue perfusion. However, if a patient is in severe shock, or if they continue bleeding, blood will eventually be required to maintain oxygen delivery at an appropriate rate.

Due to the surplus of oxygen delivery in a normal physiologic state, the body is able to maintain tissue oxygenation at below-normal hemoglobin levels. Ample evidence supports different hemoglobin “thresholds” at which a patient requires transfusion to maintain adequate oxygen delivery. However, it is important to remember that these transfusion guidelines are not helpful in the setting of acute blood loss. Hemoglobin is reported as a concentration. In acute blood loss, the hemoglobin concentration will remain the same. It is only after time and fluid shifts that the hemoglobin will lower. Therefore, hemoglobin “thresholds” cannot be used to manage transfusion in the setting of acute blood loss.

**Acidosis**

Patients requiring a massive transfusion are often acidotic even before transfusion begins. Prolonged states of hypoperfusion lead to acidosis. Once acidosis has set in, it further interferes with coagulation by reducing the assembly of coagulation factors. There is a direct relationship between decreasing pH (increasing acidosis) and reduction in the activity of coagulation cascade components. This results in delayed and thin fibrin clot formation, which is more quickly destroyed through fibrinolysis.

**Hypothermia**

Many patients with acute, blood-loss anemia are also susceptible to hypothermia, which again can lead to coagulopathy. Lower ambient temperatures and decreased blood volume can predispose these patients to hypothermia. Hypothermia reduces the efficacy of both the coagulation cascade (by reducing the enzymatic activity of coagulation proteins) and platelet plug formation. At 34 C, effects on coagulation begin, and at 30 C, there is approximately a 50% reduction in platelet activation.

**Coagulopathy and Dysfunctional Hemostasis**

Due to massive bleeding, coagulation factors are often being consumed in patients who may require massive transfusion. Additionally, dilution of the remaining coagulation components due to volume expanders in addition to hypothermia and acidosis can lead to coagulopathy and altered hemostasis. The decreased ability to stop bleeding leads to further hypothermia and acidosis, creating a positive feedback loop that results in worsened patient outcomes.