**Cavernous Sinus Tumors
**

- Tumors in CS represent a major challenge for surgical resection because of their proximity to critical neurologic structures making it difficult for complete excision or leaving a high risk of complications with surgical resection. Radiotherapy is important in providing excellent tumor control and avoiding the risk of surgery.

- About 400 patients with cavernous sinus meningiomas treated with stereotactic radiosurgery in three large series from a dose of 12 to 14 Gy resulted in a five-year tumor control rate ranging from 94 to 98 percent.

- Transsphenoidal surgery is the preferred treatment for most kinds of pituitary adenomas. Gamma knife surgery (GKS) is a common treatment for recurrent or residual pituitary adenomas.

- Radiotherapy may offer transient relief, particularly in nasopharyngeal cancer.

- Whole radiotherapy may offer a transient improvement of metastatic lesions.

**Cavernous Sinus Vascular
**

- Carotid-cavernous aneurysms have the lowest rates of rupture is shown for unruptured cerebral aneurysms in a Japanese cohort.

- Unruptured intracranial aneurysms treatment has been evaluated by a 2003 ISUIA performing cost-effectiveness analyzes that showed treatment was ineffective or not cost-effective for large aneurysms (greater than 25 mm) and located in the cavernous carotid artery for 40-year-old patients.

- The management of CCFs depends on the classification of CCFs, the onset of symptoms, and the risk of long-term neurological impairment. Most of (20% to 60%)indirect CCFs will close spontaneously.

- Endovascular treatment with trans-arterial or transvenous embolization is the preferred approach for closure of CCFs.

- Surgery can be considered when endovascular treatment is not possible or is unsuccessful. Surgery includes placement of packing, sealing with fascia and glue, suturing or clipping the fistula.

- Stereotactic radiosurgery is indicated when an endovascular approach is not feasible, and surgical intervention is difficult or carries a risk of significant morbidity.

- The management of increased intraocular pressure with topical agents, beta-blockers, acetazolamide, and intravenous corticosteroids may give some relief. If vision loss is threatened or intraocular pressure remains elevated, closure of the fistula required for favorable pressure control.

- The management of CST should include antimicrobial with/without surgical drainage of the air sinuses or mastoid regions and antithrombotic therapies.

- Patient with CST should be treated for 3 to 4 weeks with intravenous antibiotic(s) or somites 6 to 7 weeks on the clinical picture. Treatment should be broad-spectrum with vancomycin vs. nafcillin plus a third-generation cephalosporin plus metronidazole until a definite pathogen.

- Retrospective analysis suggests that treatment with heparin may reduce mortality in carefully selected cases of septic cavernous-sinus thrombosis.

- Steroids in the acute phase of cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) were not useful and were detrimental in patients without parenchymal cerebral lesions. These results do not support the use of steroids in CVT (evidence level III) in the International Study on Cerebral Veins and Dural Sinus Thrombosis (ISCVT).

**Inflammation
**

- Glucocorticoids have been used for the management of THS since the 1960s.

- Radiotherapy and immunosuppressive medications like cyclosporine, azathioprine, methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, and infliximab have been tried in many case reports with benefits.

- Other inflammatory CCS may respond to treatment of the specific systemic inflammation or vasculitis etiology.