Acute appendicitis during pregnancy poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, and leukocytosis. The cause of acute abdominal pain may be due to a myriad of diagnoses, including gynecological, obstetrical, gastrointestinal, urological, metabolic, and vascular etiologies. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has a surgical abdomen, the cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies. An interprofessional team best manages the disorder to ensure prompt diagnosis and treatment.

The general surgeon should always be involved in the care of pregnant patients with suspected appendicitis. However, it is essential to consult with an obstetrician and gynecologist to rule out problems related to the pregnancy and any other specialist according to clinical findings and suspicion.

The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group, as they will monitor the patient's vital signs. The nurses should refrain from administering pain medications until the surgeon has examined the patient.

In the postoperative period, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics, perform a medication record check for drug interactions and verify dosing on all drugs administered.

The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the cause.

The Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) guidelines state that laparoscopic appendectomy is safe in pregnancy and is the standard of care in pregnant patients.