# Continuing Education Activity

Toxic megacolon is a rare, but potentially deadly complication of colonic inflammation. It is defined as a nonobstructive dilation of the colon, which can be total or segmental and is usually associated with systemic toxicity. This activity outlines the evaluation, diagnosis, treatment, and management of toxic megacolon. It also includes essential information about patients at risk for toxic megacolon and when surgical intervention might be necessary. Furthermore, it discusses the role of the interprofessional team in managing and caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of toxic megacolon.
- Review the evaluation process for toxic megacolon.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for toxic megacolon.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance toxic megacolon and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Toxic megacolon is a rare but potentially deadly complication of colonic inflammation. Its definition is a nonobstructive dilation of the colon, which can be total or segmental and is usually associated with systemic toxicity.

# Etiology

Toxic megacolon can be a potential complication of any disease-causing infectious colitis. The common causes include

**Inflammatory Causes**

-   Ulcerative colitis

-   Crohn disease

**Infectious Causes**

-   Clostridium difficile

-   Salmonella

-   Shigella

-   Campylobacter colitis

-   Enterohemorrhagic or enteroaggregative Escherichia coli O157 (can lead to hemolytic-uremic syndrome)

-   Cytomegalovirus

-   Entamoeba

**Ischemia**

Of note, Cytomegalovirus is the leading cause of toxic megacolon in HIV and AIDS patients, especially in those who have disseminated cytomegalovirus.Entamoeba is the least common cause

Factors that can precipitate toxic megacolon include, but are not limited to

- Hypokalemia

- Medications (antimotility agents, opiates, anticholinergics, antidepressants)

- Barium enema

- Colonoscopy & bowel preparations

# Epidemiology

The incidence of toxic megacolon in the general population is unknown. Toxic megacolon can occur in males and females of all ages. Nevertheless, people at most risk are those with inflammatory bowel disease, especially in the early phase of the disease.

Clostridium difficile infection can be asymptomatic or can lead to severe disease with toxic megacolon.C. difficile colitis related toxic megacolon cases has been increasing. Before 1990 there was an increase from 0.4% to 3%, and after 1990 to 4.3% in proportion to its prevalence.C. difficile infection occurs in about 20% of hospitalized patients, and symptomatic C. difficile infection presents in 1% of hospitalized patients.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of toxic megacolon is not entirely known. Nevertheless, one of the possible mechanisms proposed suggests that mucosal inflammation initiates the process. It releases inflammatory mediators, bacterial products and increases the production of inducible nitric oxide synthase, which in turn increases nitric oxide, and thus causes dilation of the colon. A study showed that patients with toxic megacolon have significantly high levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase in the muscularis propria, which could support this proposed mechanism.

# Histopathology

Dilation of the colon, thinning of the colonic wall, and deep ulcers are gross features that toxic megacolon shares with ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. However, the hallmark of toxic megacolon is acute transmural inflammation of the colon with necrosis and granulation tissue, filled with inflammatory cells, such as neutrophils and lymphocytes. The muscle fibers are usually shortened and rounded with collections of eosinophilic cytoplasm.

A key feature that distinguishes toxic megacolon from the neuropathic process is the presence of submucosal and myenteric plexi within the colon.

# History and Physical

A thorough history of the patient is critical. Knowing the patient’s medical history ahead of time, HIV/AIDS status, medications, or exposures can help point physicians towards the right diagnosis. It is imperative to review the patient's medication as some (like steroids) can mask the full picture of toxic megacolon, and others can aggravate it (anticholinergics or opioids, for example).

Patients with a diagnosis of toxic megacolon will look toxic. Those patients are critically ill and usually present with abdominal pain and distention, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea (may or may not be bloody), and altered sensorium. On physical exam, abdominal tenderness and decreased bowel sounds are usually present.

Comorbidities are frequently seen in those patients, as well. Clinicians can expect to find fluid and electrolyte imbalance, hypotension, anemia, weight loss, uncomplicated diabetes, and renal failure.

Peritonitis symptoms (fever, abdominal pain, tenderness, altered mental status, hypotension) could indicate bowel perforation. Patients who have received steroids may not show this picture as steroids can mask some of those symptoms. Nevertheless, if the patient continues to have a fever for 2 or 3 days while being treated with steroids, the clinician should consider the possibility of a perforated bowel.

# Evaluation

The diagnostic basis is the patient’s systemic symptoms and greater than 6 cm dilation of the colon seen on radiographic images.

- Radiographic evidence of the dilation of the colon greater than 6 cm **AND**:

- At least **three**of the following:
            
              
- Fever over 38 degrees C
              
              
- Heart rate greater than 120 beats/min
              
              
- Neutrophilic leukocytosis exceeding 10500/micro/L
              
              
- Anemia

- At least **one**of the following:
            
              
- Dehydration 
              
              
- Altered sensorium
              
              
- Electrolyte disturbances
              
              
- Hypotension

**Vital Signs and Laboratory**

Vital signs and laboratory results will show fever, tachycardia, anemia, and leukocytosis with a left shift. Increase inflammatory markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein, are also commonly seen. Patients who present with severe diarrhea and volume loss can present with hypokalemia and hypoalbuminemia; this generally indicates poor prognosis.

**Radiography**

Plain abdominal imaging is still the most frequently utilized modality; however, computed tomography (CT) is seeing increasing use, especially because it can provide more reliable information about the severity of the disease. CT is commonly used to assess possible complications of toxic megacolon, which include abscess, perforation, or ascending pylephlebitis.

Key features visible on CT include colonic wall thickening, pericolic stranding, bands of high and low intensity stretching over thickened submucosal folds (accordion sign), and multilayers appearance due to alternating densities of edematous submucosa and hyperemic mucosa (target sign).

An abdominal ultrasound is also an option, but it provides nonspecific findings that might not always help with diagnosis.

**Colonoscopy**

Colonoscopy is not necessary for diagnosis. Therefore, colonoscopy is discouraged due to the high risk of perforation.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment focuses on medical management and supportive care to decompress the colon to avoid perforation. The treatment of the underlying cause, correction of any electrolyte disturbances (ex. hypokalemia), symptom management, and prevention of further complications are also important components of a good treatment plan.

**Medical Management**

Initial treatment involves supportive therapy and medical management. This approach is usually successful in about half of the patients. Patients should obtain admission to the intensive care unit in case of unexpected deterioration. Initially, checking complete blood count, abdominal films, and electrolytes should take place every 12 hours. Once patients improve, images and labs can scale back to once daily. All the medications which can aggravate the megacolon, such as opioids, anticholinergics, etc., should be stopped. Patients should be started on IV fluids to provide adequate hydration.C. difficile are oral vancomycin or oral fidaxomicin. If those are not available, oral metronidazole is an alternative.

Patients with ulcerative colitis should also be given steroids as soon as possible. Generally, the recommendation is hydrocortisone 100 mg over 6 hours (400 mg daily) or methylprednisone 60 mg daily for 5 days. Higher doses did not show significant benefits.

Lastly, patients must be on bowel rest. A nasogastric tube can be inserted to help decompress the stomach, but it will not decompress the colon. As the patient continues to improve, they can gradually start eating to promote gut healing.

**Surgical Management**

A surgeon should be involved in the patient's care from day 1, in case intervention might be necessary. The current surgical treatment of choice in acute toxic megacolon is subtotal colectomy with ileostomy and either a Hartmann pouch, sigmoidostomy, or rectostomy. Previously there were two additional surgical methods used: total proctocolectomy and the Turnbull method. Turnbull's method was essentially a colon decompression technique that served to prepare a patient for a colectomy. However, studies showed that this method was associated with increased bleeding and high mortality (71%) versus those with subtotal colectomy with ileostomy (8%). Studies conducted with patients treated with total proctocolectomy showed a mortality of 21%.

The exact time of surgery in toxic megacolon patients is still unclear. If there is perforation, bleeding, or clinical deterioration of a patient, surgical intervention is unavoidable. Nevertheless, some studies conclude favorable outcomes in patients where surgical intervention is done soon after making the diagnosis of toxic megacolon, whereas other studies show an increase in mortality, especially in patients older than 65.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis includes

- Hirschsprung disease

- Acquired megacolon

- Colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie syndrome)

- Diffuse gastrointestinal dysmotility

# Prognosis

For patients with inflammatory bowel disease, the mortality rates are around 0 to 2%; this is attributable to multiple factors, such as early intervention and better treatment.

# Complications

If toxic megacolon does not receive proper treatment, it has a risk of rupture. Bowel perforation, peritonitis, abscess, and abdominal compartment syndrome are severe complications that warrant immediate surgical intervention.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although toxic megacolon is a relatively rare disease, patients should receive education about this condition, especially those with inflammatory bowel disease. Since those patients are at an increased risk of developing toxic megacolon, they should understand the precipitating factors as well as potential symptoms. Early diagnosis and treatment can increase the chances of survival.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Toxic megacolon is a medical emergency that demands urgent attention. Failure to recognize the disorder is associated with high mortality and morbidity. Thus, optimal disorder management is best by an interprofessional team. Assistance from a radiologist is vital to make the diagnosis. These patients need ICU care with close monitoring. Nurses should be aware of the potential complications of the disorder and communicate with the surgeon if the patient has signs of peritonitis. Aggressive hydration, replacement of electrolytes, and antibiotics are essential. The pharmacist should check the patient's medication record to ensure that they are on no medications that cause ileus and is on appropriate antibiotics. While most patients do recover with medical therapy, some may require surgery.

The surgical group should be involved early in the process in case initial therapy fails and surgery is unavoidable. High risk of colon perforation and abdominal compartment syndrome are situations where surgery is necessary to avoid further complications.

Disclaimer: This research was supported (in whole or part) by HCA Healthcare and/or an HCA Healthcare affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA Healthcare or any of its affiliated entities.