Swine flu was first isolated from pigs in the 1930s by researchers in the United States and was subsequently recognized by pork producers and veterinarians as a cause of flu infections in pigs worldwide, and for the next 60 years, H1N1 was the predominant swine influenza strain. People who are closely associated with pigs have been known to develop an infection, and pigs have also been infected with human flu from these handlers. In the vast majority of cases, cross-species transmission of the virus had remained confined to the specific area and not caused national or global infections in either pigs or humans. Unfortunately, due to the potential for genetic variation in the swine flu virus, there is always a possibility for cross-species transmission with the influenza viruses to occur. Investigators concluded that the "2009 swine flu" strain, which originated in Mexico, was termed novel H1N1 flu since it was mainly found infecting humans and exhibits 2 main surface antigens, hemagglutinin type 1 and neuraminidase type 1. The 8 RNA strands in novel H1N1 flu have 1 strand from human flu strains, 2 derived from avian (bird) strains, and 5 that were derived from swine strains. During the 2009 pandemic, the Centers for Disease and Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated that there were 43 to 89 million cases of swine flu reported during a 1-year span, with 1799 deaths in 178 countries worldwide.

The 1918 deadly influenza pandemic caused by H1N1 influenza virus, infected approximately 500 million people around the world and caused the death of roughly fifty to a hundred million people. The H1N1 variant of swine flu is the progeny of the strain that caused the 1918 swine flu pandemic. Although persisting in pigs, the descendant variants of the 1918 virus have also known to infect humans, contributing to the yearly seasonal epidemics of influenza. Direct transmission of the virus from pigs to humans is a rare occurrence, with only 12 documented cases in the United States since 2005. The potential retention of influenza virus strains in swine after these strains have disappeared in the human population, essentially make pigs a reservoir where swine influenza viruses could persist, and later emerge to reinfect humans once their immunity to these strains has waned.

More recently in 2015, a mutant strain of H1N1 which caused the global pandemic in 2009, spread across India with over 10,000 reported cases and 774 deaths.

People who have a higher risk of becoming seriously ill if infected include:

- Children younger than 5 years old

- Adults older than age 65, younger adults, and children under age 19 who are on long-term aspirin therapy

- People with compromised immune systems due to diseases such as AIDS

- Currently gestating females

- People suffering from chronic diseases such as asthma, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, or neuromuscular disease