A chest x-ray would be needed as part of the initial evaluation to assess for infiltrates and also compare to prior films to check for transient or changing infiltrates with time. Laboratory tests for complete blood count with differential, and anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs), other serologic studies, and stool for ova and parasites should be obtained.

Pulmonary function testing can be done to evaluate for evidence of obstructive or restrictive lung disease that could occur depending on the underlying EP. CT chest without contrast may be done to further evaluate the lung parenchyma and to look for bronchiectasis.

The diagnosis of PE can be made in three different settings:

- Peripheral eosinophilia with lung opacities.

- Elevated BAL eosinophil count greater than 25%.

- Lung tissue eosinophilia on biopsy.

Any one of the above findings can be used to diagnose PE. The peripheral eosinophil count can be normal in PE. Bronchoscopy with BAL is a common diagnostic tool that identifies the pulmonary eosinophilia with BAL fluid eosinophil greater than 25%. Normally, eosinophils constitute less than 2% of the BAL cell count. Peripheral eosinophilia occurs when eosinophil blood count is greater than 0.5 × 10/L (500/microliters). However, to diagnose eosinophilic pneumonia on the sole finding of blood eosinophilia and pulmonary opacities requires markedly elevated eosinophilia (greater than 1 × 10 /L) together with typical clinical-radiologic features.

Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) has become a widely accepted noninvasive surrogate of a lung biopsy for the diagnosis of eosinophilic pneumonia. Surgical biopsy or video-assisted lung thoracoscopy is rarely required to make a diagnosis of eosinophilic pneumonia. However, it may be useful at times when the underlying etiology causing eosinophilic pneumonia needs to be determined or when the diagnosis is unclear based on BAL only. Once a diagnosis of pulmonary eosinophilia is established, clues from the history, physical, and investigations should guide the clinician towards further investigations and a diagnosis of the underlying etiology.

In patients with poorly controlled asthma, the workup would be guided towards allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA). Other differentials to consider would be EGPA and CEP. Testing for ABPA would include serum IgE levels, Aspergillus-specific antibodies, Aspergillus skin testing, serum precipitins for Aspergillus, and CT of the chest to assess for bronchiectasis. In asthmatics, the presence of bronchiectasis affecting three or more lobes, centrilobular nodules, and mucoid impaction on the CT of the chest is highly suggestive of ABPA. Of note, the presence of high attenuation mucus is highly specific for ABPA.

The diagnosis of drug-induced eosinophilic pneumonia is based on exposure to a drug without any obvious other cause of eosinophilic pneumonia, and with the removal of that drug, eosinophilic pneumonia improves. The way a certain diagnosis can be made would be to re-challenge with the drug and see if the pulmonary involvement recurs, however, this is not practical in most clinical settings.

In acute eosinophilic pneumonia, the chest radiograph shows bilateral opacities and bilateral pleural effusions. Chest CT can show interlobular septal thickening. The BAL eosinophil count is greater than 25% with no significant peripheral eosinophilia. Pleural fluid is eosinophil-rich and exudative.

Elevated peripheral eosinophils are commonly seen in chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, along with a BAL eosinophil count frequently greater than 40%. The radiographic presentation of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia is usually peripheral bilateral alveolar opacities in nearly all cases, with about a fourth having migratory opacities. The classic pattern of " the photographic negative of pulmonary edema," is also seen only in about one-fourth of cases. Pleural effusions and adenopathy are rare.

In EGPA, ill-defined pulmonary opacities can be seen on chest x-ray, however often the chest x-ray can be normal. CT chest can show ground-glass opacities or consolidations that are peripheral or random in distribution. Peripheral eosinophilia is seen which can be significantly elevated, and an elevated BAL eosinophil count greater than 25% can be seen if there is active pneumonitis. ANCA positivity is seen in approximately 40% of cases, mainly perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCAs) with myeloperoxidase activity. The American College of Rheumatology uses four out of these six criteria to make a diagnosis of EGPA: asthma, peripheral eosinophilia greater than 10% of white count differential, neuropathy, pulmonary opacities, paranasal sinus abnormality, and a biopsy showing tissue eosinophilia. There may be a significant overlap between EGPA and CEP as they both occur in patients with prior asthma and atopy, with peripheral pulmonary opacities, peripheral eosinophilia, and BAL eosinophilia. Biopsy to make the diagnosis of EGPA is preferred, but not essential, in patients with characteristic clinical features and marked eosinophilia. A lung biopsy is not commonly done for the diagnosis due to the patchy involvement; instead skin, nerve, and muscle are sites where biopsies can be obtained with more ease.

Hypereosinophilic syndrome is diagnosed based on findings of persistent eosinophilia greater than 1.5 × 10 /L (1500/microliters) for longer than six months causing organ damage (heart failure, pulmonary fibrosis, hepatosplenomegaly, CNS involvement) without evidence for parasitic, allergic, or other known causes of eosinophilia. Pulmonary involvement is present in about 40% of patients, showing up as pleural effusions, pulmonary emboli, and interstitial opacities. BAL eosinophilia is usually mild and is not seen in all cases of HES.

If the patient is from an endemic area of parasites or traveled to certain locations, serology towards endemic parasites such as Strongyloides, Ascaris, Toxocara, etc. should be screened and a stool sample for ova and parasites. A positive serology would point towards a parasitic etiology of the eosinophilia but would not be confirmatory. Ascariasis is usually diagnosed by larvae in sputum or stool for ova and parasites within the time frame of pulmonary symptoms. Diagnosis of Strongyloidiasis depends on the demonstration of larvae in the feces or in sputum and BAL fluid. Both can have peripheral and BAL eosinophilia. Antibody testing for Strongyloides with ELISA can also be used for diagnosis. Transient pulmonary opacities may be seen on chest radiography.

Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia has significant peripheral eosinophilia and BAL eosinophilia and is diagnosed based on findings of a cough that is worse at night, residency in an endemic area, peripheral eosinophilia, and response to therapy with diethylcarbamazine.