The Florida Department of State’s Administrative Code, Register and Laws Section is the point rules put into effect get filed by state regulatory agencies. Agency rulemaking governed by Chapter 120, Florida Statutes, the Administrative Procedures Act. Regulations published in the Florida Administrative Code.

**64B9-2.021 Curriculum Guidelines**

- All nursing programs requesting the Board of Nursing approval must conform with the Florida Department of Education curriculum framework.

- The curriculum for professional nursing programs that terminate in a bachelor’s degree must consist of at least 40% clinical training.

- The curriculums for professional nursing programs that terminate in an associate’s degree and professional nursing programs that end in a diploma must consist of at least 50% clinical training.

- This list not listed in its entirety; more information found on the Department of State's Administrative Code Website.

**64B9-2.022 Clinical Training**

- Clinical learning experiences must be an integral part of the total curriculum plan and show a relationship to concurrent theory.

- Clinical training must be in the United States, the District of Columbia, or a territory of the United States.

- Clinical training must include experience in long-term care, acute care, and community-based care.

- The clinical instructor must directly supervise no more than 12 students, unless, by written agreement the clinical training site allows more, not to exceed 18 students.

- Indirect supervision is allowed for community-based clinic experiences when the clinical instructor is available by telephone unless the clinical experience is an invasive or complicated nursing activity. The monitoring of invasive or complicated nursing activities needs approval by the community-based clinical site.

- Up to fifty percent of each clinical training category: long-term care, acute care, and community-based care may be simulated when accompanied by traditional clinical experience.

- Traditional clinical experience consists of activities that include observation, hands-on experience with patients, and interaction with an interprofessional team.

- The simulation consists of activities or events replicating clinical practice using scenarios, high-fidelity manikins, medium-fidelity manikins, standardized patients, role-playing, skills stations, and computer-based critical thinking situations.

- Debriefing is an integral part of the simulation that follows the experience.

- This list not listed in its entirety; more information found on the Department of State's Administrative Code Website.

**64B9-3.002 Qualifications for Examination**

- An applicant seeking certification to take the licensure examination shall submit a completed Nursing Licensure by Examination Application demonstrating that he or she meets the qualifications prescribed by the Nurse Practice Act, Chapter 464, F.S.

- Forms are also available from the Florida Board office or on the Board’s website.

- Qualifications include a high school diploma or an equivalent of a high school diploma.

- For graduates of an approved nursing program, a notice of graduation or completion of the requirements for graduation.

- For graduates of programs in a country other than the United States, the applicant must obtain a report by a credentialing agency that meets the requirements of Rule 64B9-3.014, F.A.C.

- If the individual applying is a graduate of a foreign prelicensure education program not taught in English, or if English is not the person applying's native language, successful completion of a board-approved test of proficiency of English as a foreign language is a requirement.

**64B9-3.008 Licensure by Endorsement**

- A person applying for licensure by endorsement shall submit a completed Nursing Licensure by Endorsement Application, and verification of licensure forms from the original state or territory in which licensure obtained, and from a territory or state in which the person applying holds an active license, and pay the required fee.

- To apply for endorsement under Section 464.009(1)(a), F.S., an individual applying shall be required to show current licensure in another state of the United States, and the licensure requirements of the original state of licensure at the time of initial licensure.

- Any applicant who has not been in active practice of nursing within the past five years required to take a remedial course as specified in Rule 64B9-3.0025, F.A.C., before licensure.

- This list is not listed in its entirety; more information found on the Department of State's Administrative Code Website.

**64B9-3.016 Multi-State License Upgrade**

- Registered and practical nurses currently licensed in Florida may upgrade their licenses to include multi-state practice by submitting a Multi-State License Upgrade Application to the board. Forms available on the board website.

**64B9-15.0045 Certified Nursing Assistant Renewal Fee**

- For renewal of Certified Nursing Assistant Certificate, as provided in Section 464.203(8), FS., the fee is $50.00.

**64B9-5.002 Continuing Education Requirement**

- During each biennium, one contact hour must be earned for each calendar month of the licensure cycle.

- Those persons licensed by examination within a biennium are exempt from the continuing education requirement for that biennium. This exemption should apply to a person who is licensed by endorsement during a biennium if such person was licensed in the original state of licensure by successful completion of an acceptable licensure examination during that biennium. A licensee who has endorsed into the State of Florida during a biennium or whose license was reactivated or reinstated during a biennium shall be required to accrue one (1) contact hour for each calendar month remaining in the biennium after licensure, reactivation, or reinstatement (however, no hours are required if the time remaining in the biennium is six months or less). This exemption or limitation shall only apply if the license is timely renewed at the end of the biennium, and does not apply if the license is suspended, revoked, or is (or becomes) inactive at the end of the biennium.

- An RN who also holds a current license as an LPN may meet the continuing education requirement for renewal of both licenses by completing appropriate continuing education for an RN. An RN who also holds a current ARNP certificate may satisfy the continuing education requirement for both licenses by completing the proper continuing education for an RN or may satisfy up to fifty percent of the continuing education requirement by completing continuing medical education coursework equivalent to the contact hours required by these rules.

- A nurse who is the spouse of a member of the Armed Forces and caused to be absent from Florida due to the spouse's official duties with the Armed Forces shall be exempt from continuing education requirements. The licensee must show proof in a satisfactory manner of the absence, and the spouse’s military status.

The following continuing education courses are a mandatory part of the hours required in subsection (1), at the stated time periods:

- A two-hour course in the prevention of medical errors each biennium

- A one hour course in HIV/AIDS in the first biennium only

- A two-hour course in Florida laws and rules each biennium

- A two-hour course in recognizing impairment in the workplace every other biennium after that

- For biennial renewal on or after January 1, 2019, a two-hour course on human trafficking, and each biennium after that

- A course in domestic violence every third biennium.

**64B9-8.005 Unprofessional Conduct**

Unprofessional conduct includes:

- Inaccurate recording

- Misappropriating drugs, supplies or equipment

- Leaving a nursing assignment without advising licensed nursing personnel

- Stealing from a patient

- Violating the integrity of a medication administration system or an information technology system

- Falsifying or altering of patient records or nursing progress records, employment applications or time records

- Violating confidentiality of information or knowledge concerning a client or patient

- Discriminating by one's race, creed, religion, age, sex or national origin, in the delivery of nursing services as it relates to human rights and dignity of the individuals

- Engaging in fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit in taking the licensing examination

- Impersonating another licensed practitioner, or permitting another person to use his certificate to practice nursing

- Providing incorrect or false information to the employer regarding the status of the license

- Practicing beyond the scope of the licensee’s license, educational preparation or nursing experience

- Using force against a patient, striking a patient, or throwing objects at a patient

- Using abusive, threatening or foul language in front of a patient or directing such expression toward a patient

- Accepting a gift from a patient or client the value of which exceeds the employer’s policy regarding gifts.

- Knowingly obtaining or using or attempting to obtain or use a patient’s property with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the patient of the use, benefit or possession of the funds, assets or property, or to benefit someone other than the patient.

**64B9-4.004 Requirements for Documentation**

A Registered Nurse applying for initial certification as an Advanced Registered Nurse Practitioner shall submit with a completed application the following:

- Acceptable proof to the Board of satisfactory completion of the educational program consisting of an official Registrar’s copy of the applicant’s transcript sent directly to the Board from the school, and that denotes successful completion of the formal post-basic program or awarding of the masters’ degree in a clinical nursing specialty.

- Also, a verification form prescribed by the Board submitted by the director of the advanced nursing program indicating successful completion with the official school seal is a requirement.

Advanced registered nurse practitioners licensed after July 1, 2006, and all certified registered nurse anesthetists, certified nurse midwives, and psychiatric nurses must supply documentation of national certification by a national nursing specialty board identified in subsection 64B9-4.002(2), F.A.C., or documentation of certification by a specialty board that meets the requirements set forth in subsection 64B9-4.002(3), F.A.C., by submitting one of the following:

- A copy of the recertification or original specialty board certificate

- Such other documentary proof which evidences certification by an appropriate specialty board, or verification from the specialty association of certification.

**64B9-8.003 Citations**

- “Citation” means an instrument that meets the requirements outlined in Section 456.077, F.S., and which is served upon a licensee for the purpose of assessing a penalty in an amount established by this rule.

- The Board designates the first instance of the following as citation violations, which shall result in a penalty of $100.00: Failure to report a misdemeanor to the Board, in writing within 30 days after the licensee has been convicted or found guilty of, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, regardless of adjudication, a crime in any jurisdiction, in violation of Section 456.072(1)(x), F.S.

- The Board designates the second instance of the following as citation violations, which shall result in a penalty of $100.00; Failure to report address change in violation of Rule 64B9-1.013, F.A.C., provided the licensee was not ordered to do so in a Board disciplinary order. Failure to submit updates of required information in practitioner profile within 15 days after the final activity that renders such information a fact, as required by Section 456.042, F.S.

- The Board designates the first instance of the following a citation violation, which shall result in a penalty of $1,500: Providing to another individual a confidential password, access code, keys, or other entry mechanisms, which results in a violation of, or threatens, the integrity of a medication administration system or an information technology system. In addition to the fine, the licensee will be required to complete a 2-hour continuing education course in legal aspects of nursing within 60 days of the issuance of the citation.

**64B9-15.008 Testing and Competency Evaluation**

- The Certified Nursing Assistant Examination must consist of the Written Exam and the Clinical Skills Test. Both the Written Exam and the Clinical Skills Test passed within a two-year period to achieve certification. Results on either the Written Exam or the Clinical Skills Test which are over two years old are invalid, and both the Written Exam and the Clinical Skills Test repeated.

- For the Clinical Skills Test, the recommended minimum passing level for each task is Three Standard Errors of Measure below the mean. The minimum passing level of the Clinical Skills Test varies depending on the difficulty of the items selected by the testing service for each form of the examination and established by the testing service for each kind of the test based on its testing expertise. The candidate must have a minimum passing score on each of the five tasks on an examination form to pass the Clinical Skills Test.

- If a person applying fails to pass the nursing assistant competency examination in three attempts, the individual applicant is not eligible for reexamination unless the applicant completes an approved training program.

- This list not listed in its entirety. Additional information can be found on the Department of State's Administrative Code Website.

**64B9-15.0097 Notice of Non-Compliance – Minor Violations**

- A Notice of Non-Compliance is a notification by the Department of Health issued to a licensee as a first response to a minor violation. It is not accompanied by a fine or another disciplinary penalty.

The Board designates the following as minor violations for which a Notice of Non-Compliance may be issued for the first violation thereof:

- Failure to notify the Department of an address change for more than sixty days, in violation of Section 464.203(6), F.S., provided the failure does not constitute a failure to comply with an order of the Board.

- False, deceptive or misleading use of a certified nursing assistant title, in violation of Section 456.072(1)(a), F.S., provided no criminal prosecution resulted and no practice issue was involved.

- Further resources available from the board.

**64B9-4.0025 Provisional Certification**

- Before certification by the appropriate professional or national nursing specialty board, applicants for certification as certified registered nurse anesthetists, psychiatric nurses, or certified nurse-midwives may apply for provisional state certification.

- Each applicant for provisional state certification must be a graduate of an appropriate educational program under Rule 64B9-4.002, F.A.C.

- The provisional ARNP certification is valid for twelve months.

- The provisional ARNP certification will expire if no specialty board certification submitted within twelve months of the date granting provisional ARNP certification.

**64B9-15.0096 Mediation**

The Board finds that mediation is an acceptable resolution for the first instance of the following violations:

- Issuance of a worthless bank check to the Department or the Board for initial licensure or renewal of a license provided the licensee does not practice on a delinquent license.

- Failure to report a change of address for more than thirty days but less than sixty days, in violation of Section 464.203(6), F.S., provided the failure does not constitute a failure to comply with a directive from the Board.

**64B9-15.0095 Citation for Certified Nursing Assistants**

- “Citation” means an instrument that meets the requirements outlined in Section 456.077, F.S., and which is served upon a licensee to assess a penalty in an amount established by this rule.

- Instead of the disciplinary procedures contained in Section 456.073, F.S., the Department of Health might issue a citation to the subject within six months after the filing of the complaint which is the basis for the citation. All citations include a requirement that the respondent corrects the violation, if remediable, within a specified period and impose whatever obligations will remedy the offense.

- The Board designates the following as a citation violation, which shall result in the Board imposing a penalty of $25.00: A first-time failure to report a misdemeanor to the Board, in writing within thirty days after the licensee has been convicted or found guilty of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, regardless of adjudication, a crime in any jurisdiction, in violation of Section 456.072(1)(x), F.S.