Desflurane, along with the other inhalational agents, sevoflurane and isoflurane, is a potent vasodilator and can cause a decrease in blood pressure by decreasing systemic vascular resistance (SVR). A concomitant increase in heart rate sometimes occurs. Cardiac output is typically preserved with the use of this agent. Desflurane dilates cerebral arteries and causes a decrease in cerebral metabolic rate. Desflurane also causes an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP), like other inhalational anesthetics. This increase in ICP can be targeted by hyperventilation and hypocapnia in a patient as carbon dioxide (CO2) autoregulation is maintained with use. There is also a dose-related depression in electroencephalogram (EEG) activity with the use of desflurane.  When used to maintain anesthesia in the pediatric population, after induction with another inhalational agent, desflurane was associated with an increased rate of emergence delirium.

Rapid increases in desflurane concentration can cause a transient but clinically significant elevation in heart rate and blood pressure. These effects are secondary to catecholamine release, which is more pronounced with desflurane than isoflurane or sevoflurane. This resulting sympathetic response is controllable by concurrent administration of esmolol, clonidine, or the use of an opioid. Slowing the rate of increase in the concentration of desflurane can also decrease the catecholamine release. Volatile anesthetics promote skeletal muscle relaxation and enhance the effects of neuromuscular blocking agents. Desflurane enhances the effects of rocuronium, greater than either sevoflurane, isoflurane, or intravenous anesthetics. As with all inhaled anesthetics, there is a decrease in the ventilatory response to CO2.