In patients with acute oliguria, one of the most common functional derangements that are observed is the sudden fall in the GRF, leading to acute renal failure. It results in rapid increment in plasma urea and creatinine levels, metabolic acidosis with hyperkalemia, other electrolyte abnormalities, and volume overload. This warrants an expedited hospital admission for management and hence avoidance of the cascade of life-threatening events. Life-threatening complications include:

- Electrolyte imbalance: Hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, salt, and water retention leading to pulmonary edema, ascites, or pleural effusions, hyperphosphatemia, or hypocalcemia.

- Neurologic: drowsiness, confusion, somnolence, hyperreflexia, seizures, and coma.

- Cardiovascular: As a result of the fluid and salt imbalance, congestive heart failure, pulmonary edema, and hypertension usually occur. In some cases, hypotension may be seen, which is a manifestation of other concomitant illnesses such as sepsis. Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes due to hyperkalemia can be seen. In about a quarter of cases, arrhythmias may occur due to electrolyte imbalance. Pericarditis is also seen rarely and is a manifestation of uremia.

- Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, ileus, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, gastritis.

- Respiratory: Kussmaul breathing due to metabolic acidosis.

- Musculoskeletal: muscle weakness or paralysis.

- Pharmacological: As a result of the renal injury, the metabolism of various drugs is slowed down, leading to an increased risk of toxicity. It warrants dose modification for drugs.

- Infectious: Increased risk of urogenital tract and respiratory infections as a result of damage to the normal barriers, uremia, and inappropriate antibiotic usage. Prevention of infectious complications requires close monitoring of the patient.

- Hematological: Acute renal failure leads to anemia due to decreased erythropoiesis and partly due to hemolysis, with hematocrit values between 20 and 30 percent.

Early detection of the complications warrants meticulous monitoring and helps in avoiding the development of life-threatening complications.