A detailed history and a thorough physical examination are essential to diagnose patients with rickets. History should include the gestational age of the child, details of sunlight exposure, dietary history including intake of supplements, developmental/growth history, and pertinent family history. Positive family history of skeletal abnormalities, stunted growth, alopecia, dental abnormalities, parental consanguinity may suggest a genetic cause of rickets. Physical examinations should include detailed skeletal examination (with attention to any tenderness, deformities, softening, asymmetry, and neurological abnormalities) as well as a detailed dental evaluation.

The clinical manifestations of rickets are variable based on the underlying etiology, severity, and duration of the disease.

- **Skull:**Craniotabes, which is softening of skull bone, seen in infants older than three months of age.

- **Chest:**Ricketic rosary due to the widening of the costochondral junction, pigeon chest, and Harrison’s groove (a depression at the lower side of the ribcage that occurs as the diaphragm pulls the soft ribcage at its insertion site).

- **Extremities:**The child, mainly during infancy, may present with deformities of the weight-bearing limbs, that mostly involve the rapidly growing bones. The crawling infants may present with upper limb deformities. However, when the child starts walking, the deformities are noticed in the lower limbs.

- **Spine:**Spinal column deformity and kyphosis.

- **Other musculoskeletal findings:**Gait disturbance, growth retardation, bone softening, bone pain (present as irritability), bone tenderness, a contracted pelvis that may obstruct the labor during adulthood, hypotonia, proximal myopathy, and limb fractures.

**Other manifestations**of rickets are as follows:

- Delayed dentition, and enamel hypoplasia which carries a high risk for dental caries.

- Additionally, infants with rickets may present with hypocalcemia-related signs and symptoms, including tingling, tetany, paresthesia, muscle spasms, and convulsions.

- Hydrocephalus (also referred to as rickets hydrocephalus), and benign intracranial hypertension may also be observed.