**History**

Patients often report numbness, tingling, and pain that increase at night. Weakness, clumsiness, and temperature changes also are common complaints. The thumb, second and third digits, and the radial half of the fourth digit are typically affected. Symptoms are intermittent and are associated with activities like driving, reading the newspaper, and painting. Nighttime symptoms are more specific to CTS, especially if the patient relieves symptoms by shaking the hand/wrist. Bilateral CTS is common, but the dominant hand is usually affected first. Numbness predominantly in the fifth digit or extending to the thenar eminence or dorsum of the hand should suggest other diagnoses.

**Physical**

The clinical physical exam may include testing for sensory and motor deficits and evidence of thenar wasting. There are several special tests with varying degrees of sensitivities and specificities.

**Sensory Examination**

Abnormalities in sensory modalities are usually present on the palmar aspect of the first three digits and radial one-half of the fourth digit. Sensory examination is most useful in confirming that thenar eminence, hypothenar eminence, and the dorsum of the first web space are normal.

**Motor Examination**

Wasting and weakness of first and second lumbricals, opponens pollicis, abductor pollicis brevis, and flexor pollicis brevis.

**Special Tests**

- Hoffmann-Tinel sign - Although a low sensitivity and specificity, the Hoffmann-Tinel sign is another test commonly performed. In this test the healthcare professional taps immediately over the carpal tunnel to stimulate the median nerve. Like the above tests, a positive test is when symptoms are reproduced.

- The carpal compression test - The carpal compression test is the best test. This is done by applying firm pressure directly over the carpal tunnel for 30 seconds. The test is positive when paresthesias, pain, or other symptoms are reproduced.

- Phalen sign - The Phalen test or ‘reverse prayer’ is performed by having the patient fully flex their wrists by placing dorsal surfaces of both hands for one minute. A positive test is when symptoms (numbness, tingling, pain) are reproduced.

- Reverse Phalen test - The reverse Phalen, or ‘prayer test,’ is done by having the patient extend both of their wrists by placing palmar surfaces of both hands together for one minute (as if praying). Again a positive test is with the reproduction of symptoms.

- Palpatory diagnosis - Another test is a palpatory diagnosis. In this test, the health care provider examines soft tissue over the median nerve for mechanical restriction.

- The square wrist sign - The square sign test is an evaluation to determine the risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome. The test is positive if the ratio of the thickness of the wrist divided by the width of the wrist is great than 0.7.