Diagnosis of PCP is multifactorial and may include clinical suspicion, patient risk factors, laboratory evaluations, chest radiograph, chest computed tomography (CT), sputum studies, evaluation of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or lung biopsies.Pneumocystis, contain beta-D-glucagon in their cell walls. Elevation of serum beta-D-glucagon in the setting of those with clinical signs and risk factors for pneumonia should raise suspicion for Pneumocystis infection and prompt further diagnostic evaluation. An arterial blood gas analysis should be obtained in hypoxic patients with tachycardia and signs of respiratory distress to assess the severity of their illness, and results will likely show an elevated Alveolar-arterial (A-a) oxygen gradient in the setting of PCP.

A chest radiograph will typically reveal diffuse bilateral peri-hilar interstitial infiltrates. These changes become increasingly homogenous as the disease course progresses. Other radiographic findings may include solitary or multiple nodules, which may progress to cavitary lesions, lobar infiltrates such as upper lobe lesions in patients receiving certain antimicrobial medications, and pneumothorax in some cases. If there is a clinical concern for infection with Pneumocystis and a negative chest radiograph, a chest CT should be performed and may show ground glass attenuation or cystic lesions with high sensitivity.

Since Pneumocystis cannot be cultured, definitive diagnosis requires detecting and identifying the organism by polymerase chain reaction assays of respiratory specimens, dye staining, or fluorescein antibody staining.