Formation of the hair follicle depends on successful communication between the epidermal placode cells and underlying dermal cells through coordinated signaling from biochemical pathways including Wnt, Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Ectodysplasin A (EDA), Notch, and Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP). Stages of morphogenesis can be broken down into induction, organogenesis, and cytodifferentiation.

Wnt plays a role in the induction stage and initiates a signal within mesenchymal cells which then promotes the thickening of the overlying epithelial cells to form the placode. The placode will later go on to form the hair follicle and contains LGR6+ cells. These LGR6+ cells remain in the adult hair follicle and play a continuous role in hair follicle formation after birth.

During organogenesis, epithelial cells that comprise the placode signal the underlying dermal cells to proliferate and form a dermal condensate. This newly formed dermal condensate then signals nearby epithelial cells to proliferate and grow downwards toward the dermal layer via Sonic Hedgehog signaling. Wnt/β-catenin and EDA signals are necessary for the expression of SHH receptors in the placodes and thus follicle formation. BMP signaling inhibits the formation of hair placodes and must be inhibited by Noggin for proper placode and subsequent follicle formation. Mutations that result in a lack of Noggin will result in a delay of hair follicle induction. On the other hand, overexpression of Noggin increases hair density and causes different types of hair to grow.

Cytodifferentiation begins as follicular epithelial cells envelop the dermal condensate, forming distinct dermal papillae. These newly formed dermal papillae release more morphogens and growth factors that promote the ectoderm to shape the entire hair follicle.

Organization of follicles, which includes proper positioning and spacing, is mediated by EDA-BMP signaling. Transcriptional interactions stabilize β-catenin, promoting follicle development, and proper positioning. Wnt/β-catenin signaling goes uninhibited in areas where follicle formation is desired and is blocked by an antagonist, Dickkopf-related protein 1 (DKK1), in areas where hair follicle formation would be inappropriate. The interactions between these signaling molecules lead to the patterned morphogenesis of hair placodes, subsequent follicle development, and hair growth.