The major goals in managing a contracted socket include optimization of motility and attainment of orbit and eyelid symmetry.

A mild contracted socket (Grade1/2), characterized by shallowing of the inferior fornix, can effectively be managed by securing fornix-forming sutures. The fornices may be deepened by placing mattress sutures over a silastic stent (closed method) or by operating on the lateral canthal tendon in addition to fornix reconstruction (open method). This is followed by the placement of a customized prosthesis 2 to 3 weeks following the procedure. At times, lower lid entropion, with or without lid laxity, may be seen in association with the contracted socket. For this, a Weiss procedure (transverse blepharotomy with marginal rotation) is reasonably successful. Horizontal lid shortening may be useful to address the associated laxity. Alternatively, grafts (nasal septum, auricular cartilage, sclera, hard palate, or fascia lata) may be placed for lengthening the posterior lamina.

The management of moderately (Grade 3) contracted socket, characterized by shortening all the fornices, warrants grafts' placement. Full-thickness mucous membrane grafting (MMG) is preferred over partial-thickness due to less incidence of shrinkage and is the most widely performed procedure for surface expansion of the socket.

As a rule, the harvested graft must always be 40% to 50% bigger than the anticipated area to allow for subsequent shrinkage and healing. Certain drawbacks of these grafts, such as foul-smelling discharge and occurrence of post-operative shrinkage, demand the use of alternative materials.

Severe (Grade 4/5) contracted socket is characterized by volume as well as surface loss. In such cases, where volume loss exceeds 50 percent, prosthesis alone is insufficient. A secondary orbital implant or a dermis fat graft is further required to substitute for the volume loss.

Caution is necessary to avoid the inclusion of epidermis while harvesting DFG. To minimize the risk of central ulceration, a discoid or banana-shaped graft is harvested. In special situations, such as a dry avascular socket, placement of a pedicle flap provides a vascular bed that enhances graft survival and provides additional volume to the socket. Examples include superficial temporalis fascia, retro-auricular flap, galeal flap, or thoracodorsal artery perforator.

Grade 5 contracted socket, also known as Malignant/Inoperable socket, is associated with multiple failed surgical attempts. For these recalcitrant sockets, Dortzbach and Callahan have advocated exenteration (as any further surgical intervention is likely to fail) followed by fitting a prosthesis.

As a general rule, an appropriate-sized conformer must be placed to maintain the graft against the vascular bed and should be left.