**Viral Hepatitis**

Prognosis of viral hepatitis depends on the virus, causing the infection.

Hepatitis A infection is usually a mild self-limiting illness.  Patients infected with hepatitis A virus develop lifelong immunity against subsequent infection from hepatitis A.  Overall, mortality is very low, and complications including relapse, jaundice, and fulminant liver failure are rare. Patients who are immunocompromised, the elderly, and young children are at higher risk compared to healthy adults.

Patients with hepatitis B infection are at risk of developing chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis as well as hepatocellular carcinoma as a consequence.  Fulminant hepatic failure happens in about 0.5 to 1% of the patients with hepatitis B infection.  But when there is fulminant hepatic failure, the mortality rate is about 80%. Chronic liver disease from chronic hepatitis B infection is responsible for approximately 650000 fatalities per year globally.

Patients who get infected with the hepatitis C virus end up developing a chronic infection in 50% to 60% of cases. These patients are at high risk of developing chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Chronic hepatitis C infection remains one of the leading reasons for liver transplantation. The hepatitis C related mortality rate in the United States increased till 2013 but has been declining since 2014 but remains elevated in developing countries.

Patients who have chronic hepatitis B virus infection and then get coinfected with hepatitis D virus tend to develop chronic hepatitis D infection and leads to the development of chronic hepatitis more commonly compared to patients who only chronic hepatitis B infection and a majority of those patients end up developing end-stage liver disease and cirrhosis.

Hepatitis E infection is a mild self-limiting illness like hepatitis A infection. But pregnant patients can have a high mortality rate of 15% to 25%. The exact mechanism of how it causes a high mortality rate in pregnant patients is not clear.

Most patients are asymptomatic in acute infection with normal aminotransferase levels. Fulminant hepatic failure and chronic infections are rare with hepatitis G infection. Although co-infection with HBV and HCV is common, it does not increase the severity of the disease.

**Autoimmune Hepatitis**

The prognosis of autoimmune hepatitis is directly related to the severity of liver inflammation. Patients who have severe symptoms and signs of extensive liver damage on the initial presentation have a high mortality rate and bad prognosis compared to those patients in whom the initial disease is mild. Patients who frequently relapse or do not respond to treatment also have a worse prognosis. About half of the patients who have severe autoimmune hepatitis die within five years without treatment.  Patients who respond well to the treatment initially and stay in remission have a very good prognosis, and a 10-year life expectancy is about 90%. About 70% of the children diagnosed with autoimmune hepatitis end up requiring treatment during adulthood. About 10% of patients require liver transplantation. The development of hepatocellular carcinoma is less common in patients who have cirrhosis from autoimmune hepatitis compared to those patients who have cirrhosis from other causes.

**Alcoholic Hepatitis**

The prognosis of patients who have alcoholic hepatitis depends on whether they abstain from alcohol and the degree of liver injury. Patients who abstain from alcohol strictly show improvement in liver function over months to years and liver biopsy also reveals the resolution of histologic changes. Patients who continue to drink alcohol continue to get worse with the development of cirrhosis. In these patients, a 5-year survival rate is only about 30%. Patients who have hepatic encephalopathy, coagulopathy, or jaundice, along with alcoholic hepatitis have a mortality rate of about 40%. Various prognostic scoring methods have been developed in the last two decades and include the discriminant function (DF) model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis score (GAHS), and asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) score. A discussion on these prognostic scoring methods is beyond the scope of this article.