Gout is an inflammatory arthritis that occurs in response to the deposition of MSU crystals, the end product of human purine metabolism, in joints, soft tissues, and bones. It may manifest as a gout flare (acute arthritis), chronic gouty arthritis (chronic arthritis), tophaceous gout (tophi), renal functional impairment, and urolithiasis.

The following are some complex and interacting processes responsible for the pathophysiology of gout:

- Genetic, metabolic, and other factors that result in hyperuricemia

- Metabolic, physiologic, and other characteristics are responsible for MSU crystal formation.

- The soluble inflammatory, cellular, and innate immune processes and characteristics of MSU crystals themselves promote the acute inflammatory response.

- Immune mechanisms that mediate the resolution of acute MSU crystal-induced acute inflammation

- Chronic inflammatory processes and effects of immune cells and crystals on osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and osteoclasts contribute to cartilage attrition, bone erosion, joint injury, and formation of tophi.

**Uric Acid Physiology**

Uric acid is the final product of purine metabolism in humans and higher primate species as the gene decoding the enzyme uricase is silenced by mutation. Uric acid is the most abundant natural antioxidant in the human body, the traditional role of which was believed to be to remove reactive oxygen species. However, recent studies revealed that it is not a significant factor in controlling oxidative stress in the body. It is believed to have a role in immune surveillance and maintaining blood pressure and intravascular volume. Uric acid is a weak organic acid. It exists in the ionized form at pH 7.4 and functions as monosodium urate(which is less soluble) due to the high sodium concentration. In acid fluids like urine, uric acid exists in the non-ionized form, which is less soluble even in the physiological range. This explains the presence of uric acid crystals and stones in the urinary tract in distinction to MSU.

The bulk of urate in the body is from endogenous production in the liver with a small contribution from the small intestines. The glomerulus filters nearly all urate; hence under steady-state conditions, the body pool of urate is managed through renal excretion. The urate pool is expanded in a hyperuremic state. In men, the normal urate range is from 800 to 1000 mg, and in women 500 to 1000 mg. The daily turnover of urate is between 500 to 1000 mg. Serum urate concentrations in children are lower, and during male puberty, the value increases to the adult range. Serum urate levels remain low in women of reproductive age. The difference results from the effect of estrogen on renal urate transporters, resulting in less renal urate reabsorption and increased clearance in women. In menopausal and postmenopausal women, the urate levels approach those of adult males and may be altered by hormone replacement therapies.

**Hyperuricemia**

Hyperuricemia is a crucial factor in developing gout as it can promote monosodium urate crystal nucleation and growth by reducing urate solubility. Several factors promote hyperuricemia in humans, like the genetic absence of uricase, reabsorption of 90% of filtered uric acid, and limited solubility of MSU and urate in body fluids. Overproduction and/or underexcretion of uric acid is the foundation for rising serum uric acid levels.

Hyperuricemia may be primary/idiopathic or secondary. Overproduction is seen in several diseases, toxic states, and due to medications, like acute leukemia, tumor lysis syndrome, psoriasis, etc.

**Purine Metabolism**

Purines contain nine carbon purine nuclei of fused pyrimidine and imidazole rings. Purines perform essential functions in all living cells through purine-based nucleic acids adenine, guanine, and hypoxanthine. The dietary purine contribution to the urate pool is significant. Purine removal from the diet of normal individuals for a period of 10 days reduces the urate levels by 25% and urinary uric acid excretion by 50%. But severe purine restricted diets are impractical, and diets high in fructose, meat, alcohol, and fish promote hyperuricemia.

The endogenous pathway of purine production is called the de-novo purine synthesis and involves the conversion of ribose-5-phosphate from PRPP (5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate) into nucleotide inosine monophosphate through 10 key steps. This is an energy-costly process; hence energy is saved by interconversion and salvage of purine nucleotides. The urate precursors of purine degradation are hypoxanthine and guanine. These are mostly salvaged, and the unused guanine is deaminated to xanthine. The hypoxanthine is oxidized to xanthine by xanthine oxidoreductase.

Xanthine oxidoreductase is a molybdenum-pterin and iron sulfide cluster containing flavoprotein. It exists in oxidase form that uses oxygen to convert hypoxanthine to xanthine and xanthine to urate and in a dehydrogenase form that uses NAD+. Inhibition of xanthine oxidoreductase is the most common target of urate-lowering in patients with gout.

The major steps in purine synthesis targetted by regulation are

- The synthesis of PRPP in the PRPP synthetase pathway

- The utilization of PRPP in the first step of de-novo purine synthesis

The pathway is inhibited by purine nucleotide products of purine synthesis and activated by increased PRPP. This antagonistic control mechanism malfunctions in two rare X-linked disorders—deficiency of salvage enzyme HPRT and overactivity of PRS1. Excessive ATP(adenosine triphosphate) depletion in tissue hypoxia or acute alcohol intoxication leads to decreased concentration of inhibitory nucleotides and excess urate productions.

**Renal Uric Acid Secretion**

Uric acid clearance in adults averages only 5 to 10% that of creatinine clearance, despite 100% uric acid filtration at the glomerulus. This is because 90% of the filtered uric acid is reabsorbed in the renal tubules. People with hyperuricemia due to impaired renal excretion have normal urinary urate levels due to impaired clearance of uric acid. Genomic and molecular studies have identified several transporters involved in renal uric acid clearance; two of them, GLUT9 and URAT1 (members of the organic acid transporter family), strongly affect serum urate levels.

**Glucose Transporter 9 (GLUT9)**

GLUT9 is a product of the SLC2A9 gene. It is a voltage-driven urate transporter that mediates uric acid reabsorption from tubular cells. GLUT9 exists in 2 isoforms GLUT9L on the basolateral side of the proximal renal tubular epithelium and GLUT9S on the apical side. It is also expressed in the hepatocytes and regulates serum urate concentrations by dual effects in the kidney and the liver. It also transfers glucose and fructose, which might explain the dietary influence of these substances on hyperuricemia. Mice with a knockout of GLUT9 had moderate hyperuricemia, massive hyperuricosuria, and early onset nephropathy.

**URAT1**

URAT1 is encoded by the SLC22A12 gene and is highly specific for uric acid. It affects renal uric acid transport by mediating the exchange of various anions. Mutations in SLC22A12 lead to hypouricemia, hyperuricosuria, and exercise-induced renal functional impairment. The uricosuric drugs probenecid and benzbromarone and lesinurad inhibit URAT1 and increased uric acid excretion. Other urate transporters include ABCG2, NPT1, NPT4, MRP4 (multidrug resistance protien4), etc.

**Autosomal Dominant Tubulointerstitial Kidney Disease**caused by UMOD pathogenic variants is characterized by early-onset hyperuricemia (with or without gout), hypertension, and progressive tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis leading to end-stage renal failure by the age of 40 years. This was previously described as familial juvenile hyperuricemia nephropathy and medullary cystic kidney disease. Most show a mutation in uromodulin(Tamm-Horsfall protein) which maintains the integrity of the ascending loop of Henle by forming a gel-like lattice that coats the luminal side of the tubule. Defects in the lattice alter solute fluxes, reducing Na and Cl reabsorption, leading to decreased extracellular volume and compensatory enhancement of sodium-dependent urate transport in the proximal tubule.

**Extra-renal Urate Excretion**

This is by the ABCG2 transporter in the intestines. A reduced intestinal urate excretion in ABCG2 knockout mice caused an increased serum urate, but this was partially compensated by increased renal uric acid excretion. Hence, urate overproduction hyperuricemia is a renal overload type consisting of  "extrarenal underexcretion" type and "genuine urate overproduction" subtypes.

**Urate Crystal Formation**

The formation of MSU crystals requires sustained supersaturated concentrations of urate. Crystal formation is influenced by factors like the presence of particulate seed, local cation concentrations, pH, temperature, and dehydration. Immunoglobulin G and Ig M may also aid in crystal formation and growth in patients with gout. MSU crystals formation is seen preferentially in the first metatarsophalangeal joint, midfoot, and Achilles tendon. Growing evidence shows the relation between OA and sites of MSU crystal deposition. The osteoarthritic joint, with products of cartilage degradation like chondroitin sulfate, lowers the urate solubility and promotes nucleation and growth of crystals.

**Inflammatory Response**

microscopic and imaging studies have shown the presence of urate crystals within the joints for prolonged periods without overt inflammatory reactions. Heavily crystal-laden fluids(urate milk) are sometimes found in uninflamed bursae and joints. The dense urate crystal mass in tophi sometimes reaches massive dimensions with little inflammation and symptoms till there is critical compression of the surrounding tissues. The crystals initiating inflammation are microcrystals usually shed from preexisting synovial tophi. This is supported by observing acute gout flares with rapid changes in urate concentrations. Initiation of inflammation depends on multiple factors like crystal size, the proteins and molecules coating them, and inflammatory cells encountered. MSU crystal surface binds to various proteins, lipoproteins, and lipids, including IgG.

The IgG conformational changes encourage phagocytosis by cells with Fc-y receptors. The IgG also activates the classical complement pathway. The MSU crystals directly activate both complement pathways. This promotes further opsonization by depositing the complement split product C3b on the crystals. Apolipoprotein coating on the MSU crystals counters the opsonic effects of the IgG Fc and complements. It also inhibits neutrophil stimulation. Thus the inflammatory potential of the MSU crystals is a balance between the pro and anti-inflammatory elements coating the surface. In acute gout, the predominant inflammatory cell in the synovial tissue and fluid is the neutrop[hil, which contributes to the bulk of the proinflammatory stimulus.

Synovial fluid macrophages in patients with asymptomatic tophi often contain MSU microcrystals. This indicates the absence of overt inflammation despite active engagement with phagocytes. Immortal macrophages and blood monocytes mount a vigorous response to MSU crystals compared to well-differentiated macrophages due to the release of TGF-b1. Two broad mechanisms of MSU crystal interaction with phagocytes have been studied.

1. Activation of phagocytes leading to lysosomal fusion, respiratory burst, and release of inflammatory mediators,

2. The more predominant pathway of cytosolic protein complex activation(NLRP2 inflammasome).

Most external stimuli activate inflammatory cells by a carefully coordinated cell surface signal transduction by a cascade of tyrosine kinase phosphorylation. But MSU crystals bypass and directly activate second messenger systems.

8. ACTIVATION OF NEUTROPHILS

11. REMOVAL OF CRYSTAL COATING AND PHAGOLYSOSOMAL RUPTURE, ENZYME AND MEDIATOR RELEASE

12. RESOLUTION: aggregated NET formation, cytokines TGF- beta, MC-R

and PPAR- gamma, AMPK activation.

**Termination Of The Acute Flare**

Acute gout is always self-limiting, even without medication. It resolves spontaneously in a week or two. Given the similarity in the molecular mediators of inflammation in gout and other arthropathies and the persistence of MSU crystals, this is an intriguing phenomenon. After MSU crystal ingestion, neutrophils undergo NETosis (neutrophil extracellular traps). The NETs aggregate and densely pack MSU crystals and degrade the pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-beta, TNF-alpha, IL-6, etc. The increased vascular permeability after acute synovitis allows increased entry of antiinflammatory cytokines crystal coating molecules like ApoB. This coating with ApoB and locally produced ApoE and TGF-beta inhibit neutrophil activation. Systemic anti-inflammatory mediators like melanocortins decrease joint inflammation by the MCRs(macrophage melanocortin receptors), adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase inhibits NLRP3 expression and inhibits caspase1 and IL-1beta.

**Advanced Gout**

Tophi are deposits of MSU crystals encompassing granulomatous inflammation. They are nests of crystals with a corona zone of differentiated macrophages and multinucleated giant cells surrounded by a fibrous layer. Proinflammatory cytokines like IL-1 and TNF-alpha are expressed within the corona. Aggregated NETs are also part of the tophus. The tophus is a dynamic chronic inflammatory response to MSU crystal deposition that is complex and organized. Tophi are most often found in periarticular, articular, and subcutaneous areas, including cartilage, bone, joints, tendons, and skin, rich in proteoglycan. The tissue reaction to tophus is generally chronic inflammation and involves both adaptive and innate immunity. Few patients with tophaceous gout also present with chronic gouty arthritis (chronic synovitis). There is a close relationship between MSU crystal deposits and the development of cartilage and bone erosions.

Tophi contribute to joint damage and bone erosion in gout.

The double-contoured ultrasound sign is seen in the superficial articular cartilage in patients with chronic gout and represents urate deposits. Urate crystals degrade cartilage matrix by inducing nitric oxide generation and expression of matrix metalloprotease 3. Hence, joints with persistent crystals have ongoing progressive damage in the absence of acute flares.