**History**

The general symptoms of encopresis have been shown variably in children. The providers should always keep in mind the possibility of underlying organic causes as well. In general, encopresis is a clinical diagnosis that is primarily based on symptoms in the absence of red flag symptoms, and most patients do not need further testing.

The provider should perform a comprehensive assessment with an extensive medical history, including the history of rectal or anal surgery due to possible malformation or congenital disabilities. The age of onset, the characteristic features of stool, including size, frequency, consistency, and presence of blood or defecation problems, are the essential part of the assessment. The consistency and amount of stool, in addition to the frequency of the episodes either during day time or night time, should be assessed. Watery encopresis may be perceived as enuresis by parents at times. Clinical providers should determine the possible local or systemic symptoms such as poor appetite, stomachache, increased temperature, nausea, weight gain problem, and other psychiatric presentations.

The patient may present with diurnal or nocturnal enuresis and other urinary infections in children with chronic constipation and soiling problem.

**Physical Examination**

A detailed physical examination is one of the essential steps in the assessment. During the abdominal examination, the provider would be able to obtain vital information about the severity of the fecal impaction and gas accumulation.