Food does not affect the absorption and metabolism of enalapril; therefore, administration can be irrespective of food intake. The oral solution is available in 1 mg/ml concentration, and tablets are available in 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, or 20 mg strength. Typical adult dosing regimens are once or twice daily, depending on the indication.

**Hypertension**

- The recommended initial dose of enalapril in patients not on diuretics is 5 mg once a day, and the dose needs to be adjusted according to the patient's blood pressure. The normal dosage range is 10 to 40 mg per day. When patients are treated once daily, the antihypertensive effect may diminish toward the end of the dosing interval, then twice-daily administration, or an increase in total once-daily dosage.

- Concomitant diuretic: If blood pressure is uncontrolled with enalapril maleate alone, a diuretic may be added. In patients currently being treated with a diuretic, symptomatic hypotension may occur following the first dose of enalapril maleate.

- 
              
- Before beginning treatment with enalapril, consider discontinuing diuretic medicine for two to three days. After that, if the patient's blood pressure is not controlled with enalapril alone, diuretic therapy can be resumed.
              
              
- If the diuretic cannot be discontinued, an initial dose of 2.5 mg should be used under medical supervision for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour.

- Concomitant potassium supplements, potassium salt substitutes, or potassium-sparing diuretics: Co-administration of enalapril may increase serum potassium levels.

**Heart Failure**

- Enalapril is usually used in combination with diuretics and digitalis to treat symptomatic heart failure. The recommended initial dose of enalapril maleate is 2.5 mg, and observe the patient for at least 2 hours for symptomatic hypotension. Then, taper up to a maximum of 20 mg twice a day as tolerated by the patient over a few days or weeks.

**Asymptomatic Left Ventricular Dysfunction**

- In the clinical trial, patients were started on 2.5 mg twice daily and titrated as tolerated to the targeted maximum daily dose of 20 mg in divided daily doses.

**Speicific Patient Population**

**Pregnant Women:**When a patient is pregnant, discontinue enalapril right away. Using enalapril in pregnancy can cause fetal injury and/or death. There are reports of ACE inhibitors causing severe renal and other problems during the second and third trimesters.

**Breastfeeding Women:**Enalapril maleate and enalaprilat are detected in human breast milk. Because of the potential serious adverse reactions in breastfed infants, discontinue breastfeeding or discontinue enalapril maleate, taking into account the risk-benefit of using enalapril.

**Pediatric Hypertensive Patients:**Enalapril is not recommended in neonates and pediatric patients with GFR <30 mL/min/1.73m2, as no data are available.

**Patients with Hypertension and Renal Impairment:**If creatinine clearance <30 mL/min (SeCr>3 mg/dL), start at dose 2.5 mg once a day. If needed, titrate upward until blood pressure is under control or to the maximum of a total of 40 mg per day.

**Patients with Heart Failure and Renal Impairment or Hyponatremia:**Patients with heart failure whose serum creatinine is more than 1.6 mg/dl or have serum sodium LT 130 mEq/L, enalapril should be started at 2.5 mg daily under close medical supervision. The dose can be increased to 2.5 mg twice per day, then 5 mg twice per day, and higher as needed, usually after every fourth day or more. The dose is increased only if there is no excessive hypotension or significant deterioration of renal function when adjusting. The allowed maximum daily dose is 40 mg.