History can vary dramatically from patient to patient. Patients with partial defects may have an incomplete expression of the disorder. Patients with complete expression may have serious and life-threatening complications at presentation. It is pertinent to note that patients with this condition may not necessarily have all of the symptoms discussed here.

**Abdominal Wall Defects**

May present as ectopia cordis, where the heart is partially or completely displaced out of the thoracic cavity uncovered by the abdominal wall. This is frequently associated with the pentalogy of Cantrell but isn't always present. Omphalocele, where abdominal contents are protruding through the ventral abdominal wall covered by a thin membrane, is another common presentation. Abdominal diastasis (a wide separation of abdominal muscles) and gastroschisis (a protrusion of abdominal contents through the abdominal wall without any covering) are other less frequent but important presentations.

**Sternal Defects**

May present with a complete absence of the xiphoid to a complete absence of the sternum. The sternum may have a cleft or be shorter than normal.

**Diaphragmatic Defects**

Diaphragmatic hernia where a hole in the diaphragm leads to abdominal contents protrusion into the thoracic cavity. Clinically, it can present on chest X-rays as bowel contents in the thoracic cavity. Bowel sounds can also be heard on auscultation of the chest.

**Pericardial Defects**

Pericardial effusion is found in some cases, although relatively less severe and defects in pericardium do not present an immediate threat to life. It can present with muffled heart sound on cardiac auscultation.

**Cardiac Defects**

Atrial septal defects, ventricle septal defects, left ventricular diverticulum, dextrocardia, pulmonary stenosis, and tetralogy of Fallot have all been associated with this disease. The clinical picture may include dyspnea, cyanosis, and cardiac murmur.