The procerus muscle is of importance in cosmetic and surgical procedures. The procerus and the larger glabellar complex are a frequent target for botulinum toxin injection to ease or prevent skin wrinkles. Botulinum toxin is a protein that inhibits the release of acetylcholine into the neuromuscular junction, thus preventing muscle contraction. Therefore, injection of botulinum toxin into the glabella (including the procerus muscle) will paralyze its function, preventing cutaneous furrows and associated wrinkling. The anatomy of the facial arterial supply is of greater importance regarding the use of fillers. Fillers are injectable products comprising hyaluronic acid, poly-L lactic acid, calcium hydroxylapatite, or polymethylmethacrylate that help fill in wrinkles or "plump up" skin for cosmetic purposes. The injection of these fillers directly into an artery can cause injection necrosis. Injection necrosis is uncommon, but the glabella is one of the most common sites where it will occur.

The function of the procerus muscle and associated glabellar complex is a useful tool during a routine physical exam. Physicians can test the muscles of facial expression to ensure the facial nerve is grossly intact. Instructing the patient to pull their eyebrows down as if making an expression of anger will show intact facial nerve innervation and procerus muscle function. In pediatrics, examination of the glabella can help to recognize dysmorphic facies, such as those seen in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome is a developmental disorder involving chromosome 4 with dysmorphic facial features described as a "Greek warrior helmet" that includes a prominent glabella.