The diabetic foot differs from a normal foot in several ways. Changes to the diabetic foot include musculoskeletal, dermatologic, vascular, and neurological etiologies.

In the musculoskeletal system, a decrease in intrinsic musculature, limited joint mobility, changes in foot type, and ankle equinus, and others all occur in the diabetic foot.

Limited joint mobility of the first metatarsophalangeal joint (hallux limitus) is often present in patients with diabetes, which can be caused by a thickening of the Achilles tendon and plantar fascia. This thickening of the plantar fascia and Achilles tendon leads to a more rigid foot type, increased pes planus, and possible unsteadiness of gait.

The pedal musculature becomes disorganized and infiltrated with adipose tissue as a result of long-standing diabetes. Intrinsic pedal muscles become weaker than extrinsic muscles resulting in foot deformities such as hammertoes or claw toe deformities.

Hammertoes and claw toes along with hallux limitus correlated with increased risk for ulcer occurrence. Bus et al. studied elevated plantar pressures in patients with diabetes with hammer and claw toes and found that plantar metatarsal head pressures significantly increased with increasing toe deformity. They noted that there is a transfer of load from distal to proximal in such toe deformities, with possible distal fat pad displacement as a mechanism.

Searle et al. found that patients with diabetes have a high rate of ankle equinus, defined as less than 5 degrees of ankle dorsiflexion. This condition has correlations with increased forefoot pressure and tissue breakdown, both barefoot and with shoegear.

Dermatologic integrity is one of the most important functions of human skin, but as a result of chronic diabetes, many changes put this critical organ at risk. Autonomic dysfunction as a result of diabetes decreases perspiration in the foot, which leads to increased fissuring and xerosis.

Repetitive stress and pressure to one area, in conjunction with neuropathy, causes inflammation and ulceration. Plantar skin tissue thickness decrease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus with neuropathy compared to non-neuropathic patients with diabetes, adding to the increased risk for ulceration.

Blood flow to the lower extremity is also an area where diabetes can affect the foot and ankle.

Three main arteries and their branches supply the six angiosomes of the foot and ankle. The posterior tibial artery originates from the popliteal artery and supplies the plantar foot. The peroneal artery originates from the posterior tibial artery and supplies the anterolateral ankle and rearfoot. The anterior tibial artery originates from the popliteal artery and continues into the foot as the dorsalis pedis artery. It supplies the anterior ankle and dorsal foot.

Patients with diabetes have an increased risk of developing peripheral arterial disease (PAD). PAD is the atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower extremities. While over half of patients can be asymptomatic, some patients may experience such symptoms as intermittent claudication (aching in lower extremities with activity and relieved with rest) and rest pain, or in more severe cases tissue loss and gangrene.

Neurologically, the foot receives innervation from five main nerves and their branches: the tibial, superficial peroneal, deep peroneal, sural, and saphenous nerves. The tibial nerve originates from the sciatic nerve and divides into the medial and lateral plantar nerves, which further divide into the digital nerves. The tibial nerve provides motor innervation to the posterior lower leg muscles and sensory innervations to the plantar foot and heel. The superficial peroneal nerve (SPN) originates from the common peroneal nerve and branches into the medial and intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerves. The SPN innervates the peroneus longus and brevis muscles and also provides the sensory function to the anterior lower leg and dorsal foot and toes (except for the first webspace). The deep peroneal nerve originates from the common peroneal nerve. It has motor innervations to the anterior compartment muscles and sensory innervations to the first web space. The sural nerve forms from the tibial nerve and peroneal nerve, and it provides sensory innervation to the posterior lateral lower leg and posterior-lateral foot. The saphenous nerve originates from the femoral nerve and provides sensory innervation to the medial-distal leg, ankle, and foot.

A neurological manifestation of diabetes is diabetic neuropathy.

Diabetic peripheral neuropathy usually starts distally in the toes and progresses proximally. With progression, the patient may start to notice decreased sensation in their upper extremities in a stocking-glove distribution. Symptoms may worsen at night during sleep. Muscle weakness may also develop later in the disease. The exact pathogenesis of diabetic peripheral neuropathy is still the subject of research; however, a major suspect in this process may be chronic hyperglycemia with related metabolic changes leading to a combination of direct axonal injury and nerve ischemia.

A dreaded complication of uncontrolled diabetes and peripheral neuropathy is Charcot neuroarthropathy (CN).  This condition is likely the result of both neurovascular changes (i.e., arteriovenous shunting causing increased blood flow and increased bone resorption) and micro-trauma.

Patients with Charcot foot have a 17% chance annually to develop ulceration. The lower extremity amputation risk for CN patients who have ulceration is 12 times higher compared to patients who have Charcot foot without ulceration.