Managing patients with chronic heart failure requires close multidisciplinary collaborative efforts of emergency physicians, hospitalists, general cardiologists, advanced cardiovascular imaging specialists, nuclear cardiologists, radiologists, interventional cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, and nurses.

Acutely decompensated patients generally present in the emergency room and are initially seen by emergency physicians and get admitted to floors under a hospitalist or in CCU under a general cardiologist, where the patients are started on appropriate medications, including diuretics, inotropes, and vasopressors. Advanced cardiovascular imaging physicians, radiologists, and nuclear cardiologists are responsible for interpreting cardiac imaging and viability study.

If substantial viability is present, an interventional cardiologist or a cardiothoracic surgeon should be consulted for PCI or CABG. A general cardiologist follows the patient in the clinic. When medical therapy is used, the pharmacist should provide input regarding the drugs chosen, verify dosing, perm medication reconciliation, and can counsel the patients on their medications.

Nurses are essential in medicating patients, monitoring telemetry, vitals, fluid, and volume status while inpatient, counseling about dietary and lifestyle modification, following them up in heart failure clinics, and monitoring them during cardiac rehabilitation sessions. Nurses must be empowered to bring any concerns to the attention of the clinicians, and their suggestions must be received as those of a colleague. This type of open communication model is crucial for interprofessional care to succeed.