Patients with STP may present with a range of symptoms from mild swelling and pain of a superficial vein to septic shock, depending on the length of time and location of the infected thrombus.

As the majority of cases are due to peripheral vein involvement, those patients may present with a fever higher than 100.4 F along with erythema and tenderness along the course of the vein as well as purulent drainage at the catheter insertion site. Swelling of the extremity as well as frank purulent material from the vein has been reported.

Some patients may have associated hypoxemia, respiratory distress, and chest pain due to septic emboli to the lungs. Septic pulmonary embolism is rare but has been reported and should be considered in a patient with an extrapulmonary source of infection in the setting of bacteremia and an associated thrombus.

In the case of jugular vein STP, the patients may present with fever, localized throat or neck pain, dysphagia, trismus, neck swelling or induration over the jugular vein, along with the sternocleidomastoid muscle, or over the angle of the jaw. Additionally, ulcerations, a pseudomembrane, or erythema may be visualized in the oropharynx of a patient with jugular vein STP. Lemierre's syndrome can also present with post septal cellulitis, sinusitis, or dental pain from a dental infection.

Most patients presenting with pylephlebitis exhibit a fever with abdominal pain; however, nausea, vomiting, and jaundice is rare. Some may present with hypotension, tachycardia, and severe sepsis. Septic emboli may additionally travel to joints or bones, resulting in septic arthritis or osteomyelitis - in which case the patient may complain of joint pains or body aches (e.g., in addition to fever, malaise, and night sweats).

Patients with STP of the pelvic veins can present in one of two ways. With ovarian vein thrombophlebitis, there is usually fever and abdominal pain localized to the side of the affected vessel, with tenderness present. The pain may be described as radiating to the groin or the upper abdomen and as constant pain.