Selenium displays several different mechanisms of action. Many of the various effects of selenium involve the incorporation of selenium into different proteins to create selenoproteins.

Selenium exerts its biological functions via molecules called selenoproteins, containing the amino acid selenocysteine. The human genome encodes 25 selenoproteins.

- Glutathione peroxidases - this family of enzymes catalyzes the reduction of organic hyperoxides and hydrogen peroxide.

- Thioredoxin reductase - This enzyme functions to form reduced thioredoxin, which serves as a source of electrons for enzymes that play a role in making DNA from RNA precursors.

- Deiodinase enzymes - These enzymes activate and deactivate various thyroid hormones and hormonal metabolites. There has been speculation that selenium supplementation can help prevent Hashimoto thyroiditis by reducing thyroid peroxidase antibodies, but data remains equivocal.

Selenium serves as a cofactor for glutathione peroxidase and helps minimize oxidative damage through cellular metabolism.

The requirement of selenium in the endocrine system is defined by its role in making active thyroid hormone. The mineral interacts with iodothyronine deiodinase, an enzyme that transforms inactive thyroid hormone (T4) into active thyroid hormone (T3).

As a dermatologic treatment, selenium in the form of selenium sulfide plays an alternative role with several suggestive mechanisms. In the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis, dandruff, and tinea versicolor, selenium sulfide acts as an anti-pityrosporum agent that inhibits the growth of the fungus.