WDs develop in male and female embryos and contribute to their renal development. In males, however, exposure to adequate amounts of androgens is critical for WD development of the male internal genitalia. The differentiated male gonad must function in utero to support typical WD development. Thus, in females, the gonads differentiate into ovaries, and the lack of Leydig cell-secreted testosterone results in the gradual regression of the WDs. However, small WD inclusions or remnants may persist in females. For instance, the paraurethral (or Skene glands) have long been suggested to be developmentally homologous with the WD-derived male prostate. In addition, a visible remnant of the WD-derived mesonephric tubules called the epoophoron may be present in females. An elongate remnant of the WD-derived mesonephric tubules may also persist as a Gartner duct or cyst within the lateral vaginal wall. These lesions are benign and not life-threatening.

Some disorders may arise as a result of improper development of WDs. For instance, congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens, which is distinguished by the nonexistence of the body and tail of the epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicles, accounts for 1 to 2% of male infertility cases.

Severe mutations in the androgen receptor (AD) could also cause complete androgen insensitivity syndrome, where patients typically present with female external genitalia.in vivo but not to reduced androgen concentrations in the external genitalia.

17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency is another WD-related disorder. Patients with this condition have impaired conversion of androstenedione to testosterone and usually have female external genitalia at birth

Patients with 5alpha-reductase deficiency also have mild to severe undervirilization of the external genitalia at birth, since testosterone is not converted effectively into dihydrotestosterone in utero. However, the development of WDs is normal given that WD development of the male reproductive organs depends on testosterone, which is present at normal or high concentrations in these patients.

LH receptor mutations could also result in Leydig cell hypoplasia and a variety of disorders of sex development.