The pathophysiology of HF is complex and includes structural, neurohumoral, cellular, and molecular mechanisms activation to maintain physiologic functioning (maladaptation, myocyte hypertrophy, myocyte death/apoptosis/regeneration, and remodeling).

HFpEF has the same pathophysiologic processes as HFrEF but in response to increased ventricular stiffness and altered relaxation than CO in HFrEF. This stiffness and altered relaxation cause concentric LVH (instead of eccentric LVH as in HFrEF) and shift the pressure-volume curve to the left.

HF (HFrEF, HFpEF, and HFmrEF) causes activation of neurohumoral systems to maintain perfusion of vital organs: sympathetic nervous systems (SNS), renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), antidiuretic hormone, and other vasoactive substances (brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), nitric oxide, and endothelin). HF causes decreased carotid baroreceptor response, which in turn increases sympathetic nervous activity (SNS) and leads to increased cardiac contractility and heart rate, vasoconstriction, and increased afterload. Activation of RAAS in response to low renal perfusion from HF causes salt/water retention and increases preload. RASS activation increases angiotensin II, which leads to vasoconstriction and more salt and water retention, which further stress the ventricular wall and cause dilatation (remodeling) and worsening ventricular function, and further HF. Those compensatory mechanisms cause negative remodeling of the heart (inflammation, apoptosis, hypertrophy, and fibrosis) and worsening left ventricular function.