After consulting with nephrology and poison control, the healthcare professionals decided to give the patient activated charcoal via nasogastric tube and immediate hemodialysis. During his hospital stay, he developed a toxic encephalopathy with left upper and lower extremity weakness that completely resolved as caffeine levels trended down. His serum caffeine improved to 33 micrograms/mL after a single hemodialysis treatment and his caffeine level was 8 micrograms/mL at 24 hours. The patient returned to baseline after only one dialysis treatment and he was discharged to an inpatient psychiatric facility 2 days after ingestion.

Physical exam findings characteristic for caffeine toxicity include fever, tachycardia

Routine serum laboratory evaluations can be useful in drug overdose cases, especially in the setting of unstable vital signs, seizures, or altered sensorium. Venous blood gas determination may demonstrate anion gap metabolic acidosis

An electrocardiogram may demonstrate tachycardia, ST-segment depressions, or T-wave inversions.

Serum caffeine levels can guide prognosis and therapy. Since caffeine is rapidly and nearly completely (up to 90%) absorbed by the stomach with peak plasma concentrations occurring within 20 to 40 minutes, toxic levels can be reached quickly

Fatal caffeine overdose is relatively uncommon and treatment data is limited to case reports and series.

The primary treatment for minor caffeine ingestion is supportive. Hydration may be oral in minor cases, yet severe cases benefit from intravenous (IV) hydration. Beta-blockade with esmolol is useful for tachycardia.

Activated charcoal

Hemodialysis has been effective in severe, life-threatening caffeine ingestions.

Imminent cardiac arrest in caffeine toxicity should prompt intravenous lipid emulsion therapy