# Introduction

The glabella is a median elevation between two superciliary arches. Glabella is present just above the nasion- an intersection of internasal and frontonasal suture. The skin covering the glabella is known as glabellar skin, which is also the source of redundant thick skin commonly used for reconstruction of the upper nasal dorsum and medial canthal area.

# Structure and Function

The glabella is a bony point present on the frontal bone between two superciliary arches; Superciliary arches are the prominent bony part just above the medial one-third of the supraorbital margins.

Procerus, corrugator supercilii, depressor supercilii, orbicularis oculi, and frontalis fibers combinedly make glabellar complex.

# Embryology

In the fourth week of embryological life, five facial primordia appear around the stomodeum (a frontonasal prominence, paired maxillary prominence, and paired mandibular prominence). Glabella and frontal bone develop from the frontal part of the frontonasal prominence.

The fetal skull shows suture in the middle of the frontal bone known as a metopic suture. The metopic suture generally fuses at the age of one year; sometimes, it persists even after the age of one year. Remnants of the interfrontal (metopic) sutures remain as the glabella.

The muscles of the glabellar complex develop from the second pharyngeal arch.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The glabella is the bony landmark present in the outer table of the frontal bone in the middle of the superciliary arches; the glabella receives blood supply from the diploic veins present between the outer and inner table of the frontal bone. Arteries supplying the skin and muscles over the glabella gives branches to glabella also.

Supraorbital and the supratrochlear arteries (branches of the ophthalmic artery) supply forehead and medial canthal area.

The superficial vertical branch of the supraorbital artery anastomoses with the supratrochlear artery and the frontal branch of the superficial temporal artery in the forehead. The superficial branches of the supraorbital artery course superficially within the subcutaneous layer.  Supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries anastomose with the angular artery at the medial angle of the eye to form an arterial arcade.

The glabella is drained by meningeal veins, supratrochlear and supraorbital vein. The supratrochlear and supraorbital veins join near the medial canthus to form the angular vein, which descends deep into the nasolabial fold. At the inferior border of the nose, it joins the superior labial vein to become the facial vein, which crosses the body of the mandible. Facial vein unites with the anterior division of the retromandibular vein to form the common facial vein, which ultimately drains in the internal jugular vein.

The glabella and glabellar complex drain into the preauricular and deep parotid lymph nodes.

# Nerves

The sensory nerve supply of the skin over the glabella is from the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve and its branches. The frontal nerve (branch of the ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve) divides into supratrochlear and supraorbital nerves. The supratrochlear nerve exits the orbit between the pulley of the superior oblique muscle and supraorbital foramen, passes under the corrugator muscles to supply the skin of the glabella, medial forehead, upper eyelid, and medial conjunctiva.

The motor nerve supply of the glabellar complex muscles is by the facial nerve. The facial nerve exits the stylomastoid foramen to enter the parotid gland and divides into temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical branches. The temporal branch of the facial nerve crosses the zygomatic arch, and lateral orbital rim to reach the frontalis muscle. The innervation of the corrugator muscles is via the temporal and zygomatic branches of the facial nerve. Procerus muscle may receive supply by the temporal, zygomatic, or deep buccal branch of the facial nerve. The zygomatic or the upper buccal division sends a nerve cranially along the side of the nose to innervate the nasalis, followed by the procerus and corrugator.

# Muscles

The glabellar complex consists of the medial brow depressors: corrugator supercilii, depressor supercilii, procerus, and the medial fibers of orbicularis oculi muscles; In some cases, nasalis fibers contribute to form the glabellar complex.

Paired corrugator supercilii, known as brow depressor, pulls the brow medially and inferiorly to produce the vertical glabellar lines.

The procerus is a small thin pyramidal muscle. It originates from the junction of the inferior portion of the nasal bone and upper lateral cartilage. Procerus ascends superiorly to insert into the glabella. Procerus becomes confluent with the frontalis along the medial canthus. This brow depressor is implicated in the formation of horizontal nasal root creases.

The depressor supercilii appears in between the orbicularis oculi and corrugators. It originates at the medial orbital rim near the lacrimal bone and inserts onto the medial portion of the orbit into the dermis of the medial eyebrow, just inferior to the insertion of the corrugator.

# Physiologic Variants

The bony glabella does not have a significant difference between males and females, but glabella shows a significant difference between races.

Soft tissue thickness over glabella increases as the advancement of age and body mass index.

Corrugator supercilii muscle shows five different patterns rectangular shaped, corrugator supercilii with three bellies, corrugator supercilii with duplicate muscle, irregular flat, and hypoblastic type. Corrugator supercilii with frontalis muscle creates six different types of verticle lines on the forehead.

Variation in shapes of procerus muscle affects forehead lines. Nerve supply to the corrugator supercilii varies among individuals.

There have been some cases where the supratrochlear artery was absent. Another notable variation is when the supratrochlear artery pierces the frontalis muscle posteriorly in the middle third division of forehead and ascend superiorly on the periosteal level.

# Surgical Considerations

Glabellar skin has a profuse blood supply and enough mobility, because of this characteristic it is used frequently to repair external nasal defects.

The nasal glabellar rotation flap, initially described by Gillies and later modified by Reiger, has evolved into a choice flap for nasal defects.

# Clinical Significance

**Glabella lines or glabellar rhytids** are the short vertical skin wrinkles between the eyebrows, over the glabella. They are often the first wrinkles to show on the forehead. Glabellar rhytids are usually intermittent and are most prominent when angered or perplexed.

Glabellar rhytids appear deep due to the thick skin of the glabella compared to the crows' feet (wrinkles at the lateral end of the eyes).

**Glabellar tap reflex**is one of the primitive reflexes; tapping the glabella elicits blinking that normally disappear after 4 to 5 taps.****Some works have reported enhanced glabellar tap reflex in patients with anterior cerebral artery infarction.