In general, the initial treatment of heat illness involves stopping the activity and moving the individual to a cool environment, as all of these conditions will benefit from cooling.

- Heat edema: elevation of the affected limbs and compression garments can help with dependent swelling. There is no role for diuretic medications for heat edema.

- Heat rash/miliaria: a staple of treatment includes the avoidance of tight-fitting clothing. Symptoms are treatable with topical lotions like calamine or steroids of mid-potency like triamcinolone 0.1% cream, which will also help with inflammation. If there is any concern for bacterial superinfection, as may be seen in the pustulosa form or the development of impetigo, topical antibiotics should be considered with selection towards those with adequate staphylococcal coverage like mupirocin.

- Heat cramps: The patient should cease physical activity and initiate oral rehydration. Rest and massage or passive stretching of the muscle groups have also been demonstrated to be helpful. Additional treatment with medications, including diazepam, magnesium, or calcium, is not effective.

- Heat syncope: the treatment also includes replacement of fluid losses with a preference towards oral rehydration over parenteral rehydration. Supine positioning with leg elevation above the level of the heart can also be helpful. Orthostatic vital sign measurements can be considered an adjunct to monitor for adequate replacement in addition to the resolution of symptoms during positional changes.

- Heat stress, exhaustion, and injury: more aggressive measures at cooling should occur, including lukewarm water sprayed over the skin with forced air conduction to promote evaporation and consideration towards parenteral rehydration if the patient cannot tolerate oral rehydration due to symptoms or degree of injury. Further, the correction of electrolyte and divalent disturbances may also require intervention.

There is no role for antipyretics or muscle relaxants like dantrolene in heat illness.

More dramatic measures are necessary if the patient has symptoms and signs consistent with heatstroke; the management of heatstroke is beyond the scope of this article.