**Types of Reflux**

- Acidic: pH < 4

- Weakly acidic: pH 4 to 7

- Weakly alkaline: pH >7

**Causes**

**Insufficient Acid Suppression**

- Medication-related factors

- Poor compliance with PPI timing (i.e., not taking PPI 30-60 minutes before breakfast as instructed), or poor medication adherence.
- Certain populations of people who have CYP2C19 mutations could be slow or rapid metabolizers of PPIs, which could ultimately affect the duration of action. Rapid metabolizers could classify into the group with “PPI failure.”

- Residual acid reflux

- Research has noted residual acid reflux in some patients despite being on PPI therapy. However, some patients respond better to twice daily therapy rather than once-daily therapy. In a retrospective study done on 135 patients with typical GERD symptoms refractory to once or twice daily PPI therapy, results were abnormal in 31% and 4%, respectively.

- Weakly acidic or alkaline reflux
- Usually occurs in the postprandial period due to transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation occurring more often following meal-induced gastric fundus distension.
- Individuals on PPI therapy - the PPI reduces the acidity level in the stomach; however, the patient continues to have reflux due to structural and motility abnormalities. 
- Individuals off PPI therapy - usually occur when the food contents buffer gastric acid in the postprandial period, and there is transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxation.

**Reflux Hypersensitivity**

- The diagnosis is made when all of the Rome IV criteria are met for the last three months with symptomatic onset at least six months before the diagnosis

- 
              
- Retrosternal symptoms including heartburn or chest pain
              
              
- Normal endoscopy and eosinophilic esophagitis has been ruled out as a cause 
              
              
- Absence of major esophageal motor disorders
              
              
- Reflux events trigger symptoms despite normal acid exposure on pH or pH-impedance monitoring.

**Functional Heartburn**

- The diagnosis is made when all of the Rome IV criteria listed below are met for the last three months with symptomatic onset at least six months before diagnosis and at a frequency of at least twice per week.

- 
              
- Burning retrosternal discomfort or pain
              
              
- No symptom relief despite optimal anti-secretory therapy
              
              
- Absence of evidence that GERD or eosinophilic esophagitis is the cause of the symptoms
              
              
- Lack of major esophageal motor disorders (achalasia, esophagogastric junction outflow obstruction, distal esophageal spasm, jackhammer esophagus, absent contractility)

**Alternative Diagnosis**

- Achalasia

- Eosinophilic esophagitis

- Pill-induced esophagitis

- Gastroparesis

- Stricture

- Malignancy