An acutely dislocated shoulder demands timely closed reduction. Delaying reduction over 24 hours increases the risk of unstable reductions, muscle spasm, neurovascular compromise.

**Kocher Method**

The Kocher method was originally described in 1870. The patient is supine with the elbow flexed to 90 degrees. The arm is then externally rotated until resistance is met. The clinician then adducts and internally rotates the shoulder until reduction is felt. This technique does not involve traction. Modifications to this technique include additional traction.

**Milch Technique**

The patient is supine. The clinician holds the wrist or elbow and applies axial traction while externally rotating and abducting the arm.

**Spaso Technique**

Described in 1998, this technique involves traction and external rotation. The patient is supine, and the shoulder forward flexed to 90 degrees. The physician applies vertical axial traction and then external rotation.

Traction and Countertraction: This method requires an assistant to provide counter-traction. The patient is supine with a sheet wrapped around the thorax to be held by an assistant on the contralateral side. The clinician applies in-line axial traction to the affected arm while the assistant provides counter-traction.

**FAst, REliable, and Safe (FARES) Method**

The patient is supine. Axial traction is applied with the arm in a neutral position. Gentle anterior-posterior oscillating movements (such as seen with handshaking) is applied as the arm is brought into abduction and external rotation.

**Boss-Holzach-Matter Self-Assisted Technique**

This is a self-reduction technique. The patient is seated with the ipsilateral knee flexed to 90 degrees. The patient is then asked to interlace both hands around the knee. The patient then leans back until their arms are fully extended while instructed to shrug their shoulders forward. Marcano-Fernandez et al. found this method to be as effective and less painful compared to the Spaso technique with the added benefit of patient education.

Upon successful closed reduction, perform a post-procedural exam, obtain confirmatory post-reduction radiographs, and immobilize the shoulder in a sling.