One of the difficult aspects of diagnosing linitis plastica; is the fact that the disease is infiltrating the submucosa and sparing the mucosa; thus, superficial biopsies taken during diagnostic upper gastrointestinal endoscopy may result inconclusive. Recently the role of endoscopic ultrasound proved to be important in the diagnosis of LP cases, as the ultrasound will determine the submucosal thickening and infiltration along with assessing the regional lymph node size/architecture and infiltration of the adjacent structures.

The accuracy of EUS in LP ranges from 64 to 92% in the diagnosis of the T stage and 50 to 90% in the diagnosis of the N stage.

Types of biopsies used are brush cytology and superficial biopsy in the case of regular upper endoscopy and fine-needle biopsy from the EUS. Fine-needle aspiration/biopsy can be performed from enlarged lymph nodes.

High-resolution computed tomography CT scan with contrast is the gold standard for initial diagnosis to detect deep gastric wall thickening in the submucosa and muscle layer, also to detect peritoneal, liver, and lymph node metastasis, thus staging of the disease, and remove any doubt by eliminating other possible differential diagnoses. Also, it could be helpful in early detection of the disease as false-negative biopsies in LP may reach 30% due to unscathed superficial mucosa in the early stages of the disease. Delayed-phase enhancement after injection of the contrast is diagnostic to LP lesion. MRI could be an alternative, equally efficient diagnostic measure if CT is contraindicated or not feasible.

Peritoneal lavage by laparoscopy is diagnostic in the case of peritoneal carcinomatosis. CEA and CA19-9 could be elevated and might help with the prognosis, but they lack sensitivity and specificity for LP in serum, although they might be more beneficial in peritoneal lavage in peritoneal metastasis and lymph node invasion, supporting the role of adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment.