**Periapical Cyst**

Periapical cysts are inflammatory cysts. Clinically, the involved tooth is non-vital due to either a history of or extensive dental caries and/or trauma. Radiographically, periapical cysts present as a unilocular radiolucency at the apex of the tooth demonstrating well-defined borders, which may be corticated.

**Residual Cyst**

Clinically, the patient is partially edentulous, as the offending tooth was previously extracted. Residual cysts are similar in radiographic appearance to periapical cysts; however, they are not associated with a tooth. Consequently, it is essential to inquire about the patient's previous dental history.

**Paradental Cyst**

Detailed clinical and radiographic evaluations are critical in identifying these cysts. They are associated most often with an erupted mandibular first molar or partially impacted mandibular third molar. Clinically, erythema, edema of the marginal gingival tissue, prudence discharge, and a deep probing depth are noted. The patient may have a history of pericoronitis. Radiographically, they present as a pericoronal, well-demarcated unilocular radiolucency at the tooth's buccal, mesial, or distal aspects.

**Dentigerous Cyst**

Dentigerous cysts are commonly associated with an impacted tooth (eruption delay or partially erupted). It is essential to obtain radiographs to evaluate. Clinically, a dentigerous cyst is asymptomatic unless it is inflamed. Radiographically, dentigerous cysts appear as well-demarcated, unilocular radiolucency located at the cementoenamel junction of the tooth. They may appear radiographically similar to an OKC or ameloblastoma.

**Eruption Cyst**

Eruption cysts are diagnosed clinically; however, they should be confirmed with radiographic imaging. Examination will determine whether the cyst causing the delayed eruption is associated with a deciduous or permanent tooth. The overlying gingival tissue has edema, a bluish hue, and/or a translucent appearance.

**Lateral Periodontal Cyst (LPC)**

Clinically, involved teeth are vital and may appear to be displaced or demonstrate associated mobility. They may also present with alveolar expansion—buccally or lingually. The interproximal gingival mass is immovable and firm, without erythema or signs of infection. Similar to other odontogenic cysts, LPCs are commonly an incidental radiographic finding and are usually painless. Radiographically, they are a well-demarcated unilocular radiolucency located interproximally between two adjacent roots. A variant of LPC, the botryoid (grape-like) odontogenic cyst, presents in the same location; however, it appears as a multilocular/multicystic radiolucency.

**Odontogenic Keratocyst**

Approximately 25 to 40% of odontogenic keratocysts are associated with an impacted tooth.[10]. Clinically, the patient may have delayed tooth eruption, and thus it is important to obtain diagnostic radiographs to evaluate. OKCs are frequently asymptomatic as they expand in an anterior-posterior direction with little to no buccolingual expansion. Larger OKCs may present with pain, intraoral edema, trismus, sensory deficits, infection, and drainage. Radiographically, OKCs have varied presentations ranging from a well-demarcated unilocular lesion with smooth borders to a unilocular lesion with a scalloped border to a multilocular radiolucency.

**Orthokeratinizing Odontogenic Cyst**

Orthokeratinizing odontogenic cyst should not be mistaken for a variant of OKC. It is commonly associated with an impacted tooth, and thus clinically, a patient may experience delayed tooth eruption. It is important to obtain radiographs to evaluate impacted teeth. Radiographically, orthokeratinizing odontogenic cysts present as a well-demarcated unilocular radiolucency usually seen in the posterior mandible region.

**Glandular Odontogenic Cyst**

Clinically, erupted teeth in association with glandular odontogenic cysts are often associated may have mobility or displacement. Additionally, there may also be swelling, alveolar expansion, pain, or neurosensory deficit. Radiographically, GOCs may present as a unilocular or multilocular radiolucency with well-demarcated borders crossing the midline. They are aggressive, usually resulting in root displacement and resorption.