The complications of aortic valve repair stem from inadequate repair itself in addition to other early procedural complications as well as delayed complications. As mentioned, aortic valve repair requires a certain degree of expertise to select appropriate patients for the appropriate procedures. However, even with that, certain complications from inadequate repair of the original valvular defect may persist.

**Early Complications:**Usually, due to a technical error.

- **Low Coaptation:**Inadequate valvular coaptation seen during intra-operative TEE or post-operative transesophageal echocardiogram should encourage the surgeon to continue the procedure and further plicate the cusps to prevent AI due to poor coaptation.

- **Residual Prolapse:**Any residual prolapse after completing the valve repair surgery either due to the surgical process or primary prolapse not related to surgery should be fixed prior to finishing the procedure.

- **Cusp Perforation and Missed Fenestration:**During manipulation of the valvular cusps, an iatrogenic perforation that happens should be immediately repaired. Fenestration in the valve, if large, should also be repaired prior to completing the procedure.

- **Patch Dehiscence:**In some cases, when a pericardial patch is used in the reimplantation of the aortic valve and aortic root, dehiscence of the patch may happen in the early phase of recovery necessitating a reoperation and fixation of the patch.

- **Rupture of the Anterior Leaflet of Mitral Valve:**Due to close proximity of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve's base, an inadvertent perforation may lead to mitral regurgitation. This should be fixed in order to prevent hemodynamic compromise related to mitral insufficiency.

- **Hematomas:**Localized bleeding at the site of repair may lead to hematomas which, if small, usually reabsorb in few days.

- **Complications Related to Subcommissural Annuloplasties (SCA):**SCA can lead to disruption of the aortic valve apparatus at the subvalvular level and, in addition, fistulas formation and pseudoaneurysms. All these are severe complications that require fixation either during the index procedure or may require reoperation.

**Delayed Complications:**These are the complications that are encountered months to years after the valve replacement and are listed as follows:

- **Late-onset Persistent Aortic Insufficiency:**Even with a successful procedure, some patients may end up having a small prolapse or mild mal-coaptation of the valve that may progress over the course of years to become thermodynamically significant. Similarly, gradual dilation of the aortic root can lead to progressive AI over the course of months or years.

- **Endocarditis:**Rarely endocarditis of the repaired valve has been reported in the literature.

- **Bleeding:**Though rare, bleeding in patients with aortic valve repair is noticed late after surgery. The mechanism is not clearly known.

- **Thromboembolism:**Late-onset thromboembolic events are rarely reported in these patients as well.

- **Progressive Valve Fibrosis and Calcification:**Attempts to repair type III AI may be initially successful but can eventually lead to further fibrosis and calcification of the valve.