The histologic finding found in early cases is premature desquamation of inner root sheath (PDIRS), but it is not specific to central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia as it is also present in other primary scarring alopecia, where the follicle is damaged due to severe inflammation. However, when slightly inflamed or non-inflamed follicles demonstrate features of PDIRS, then it is suggestive of CCCA. Early histologic changes show perifollicular lymphocytic infiltrate with perifollicular fibroplasia. These inflammatory infiltrates typically extend from lower follicular infundibulum to the upper part of the isthmus. Few cases present with a reduction of terminal hair follicles. Later stages are associated with follicular epithelium destruction and retention of fragments of hair shaft along with granulomatous inflammation. This is followed by follicular epithelium being replaced by connective tissue, and tufting/polytrichia of hair follicles (fusion of infundibulum). Histologically, it resembles the early stages of folliculitis keloidalis (FK) and advanced stage of lichen planopilaris.

Lichen planopilaris presents with superficial perifollicular fibrosis, infundibular inflammation, and destruction that leads to free hair shafts in the dermis, which is similar to central centrifugal alopecia, but it is differentiated by the presence of vacuolar lichenoid dermatitis with epidermal cytoid bodies and peri-infundibular hypergranulosis. There may also be dyskeratosis with perifollicular lymphocytic inflammation. In frontal fibrosing alopecia, there is a gradual progressive hair follicles loss with lymphohistiocytic infiltration and lamellar fibrosis around the isthmus and lower infundibulum.