Rho(D) immune globulin is a preparation of human IgG containing antibodies against the Rho(D) antigen of the red cell. Rho(D) immune globulin is used for the prevention of Rh hemolytic disease of the newborn. Administration of Rho(D) immune globulin to Rho(D) negative mothers at the time of antigen exposure, such as the birth of a Rho(D) positive child, blocks the primary immune response to the foreign cells. Therefore, maternal antibodies to Rh-positive cells are not produced in subsequent pregnancies, and hemolytic disease of the neonate is averted.

RhoGAM should be administered at 28 weeks since it has a half-life of about 12 weeks and covers the mother until term or 40 weeks, and postpartum if the neonate is Rh-positive. A standard dose of RhoGAM (0.3 mg) will eradicate 15 mL of fetal RBCs. This dose is adequate for a routine pregnancy. In cases of antepartum bleeding, abdominal trauma, amniocentesis, or placental abruption where more blood is transferred from the fetus to the mother than normal, the standard 0.3 mg dose of RhoGAM may not be sufficient. A Kleihauer-Betke test that determines the amount of fetal RBCs in the maternal circulation should be performed. If the amount of fetal RBCs is more than can be eliminated by the single RhoGAM dose, additional dosages must be given.

Cordocentesis and measurement of fetal hemoglobin are used to assess the severity of anemia when MCA dopplers are elevated. Fetal hemoglobin is two standard deviations below the mean value for gestational age. A hemoglobin level of more than 7 g/dL below the normal mean for gestational age or hydrops (actual hemoglobin level of less than 5 g/dL). A hematocrit of less than 30% also can be used as the threshold for fetal transfusion.