Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia clinically resembles:

- **Female pattern hair loss**: It is a form of non-scarring alopecia occurring after menopause or at puberty, associated with hyperandrogenism. The key feature to differentiate it from CCCA is the absence of scarring and the presence of visible follicular openings.

- **Lichen planopilaris**: It is a type of scarring alopecia, which is also indistinguishable in some cases. In contrast to central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, lichen planopilaris presents with perifollicular erythema and follicular keratosis. Frontal fibrosing alopecia is another form of lichen planopilaris. It is characterized by facial papules and slowly progressive scarring alopecia of the scalp. It also affects the eyelashes, eyebrows, and other body parts.

- **Tinea capitis:**It is a fungal infective condition of the scalp and is differentiated by Wood's lamp examination, which emits bright green fluorescence withMicrosporum and faint blue fluorescence with Trichophyton schoenleinii species. It presents both scarring and non-scarring alopecia.

- **Discoid lupus erythematosus**: It is a form of scarring alopecia that usually affects the scalp. It appears as erythematous scaly plaques with follicular plugging along with pigmentary changes. The histological findings differentiate it from CCCA. Histopathology shows perivascular and peri adnexal lymphohistiocytic infiltrate and interface dermatitis.

- **Pseudopelade of Brocq:**It usually affects middle-aged and older women. It commonly presents as irregular patches of hair loss that usually begins at the vertex. The bald areas look like 'footprints in the snow.' Histopathology of the lesion shows thin epidermis with sclerotic dermis and streamers of fibrosis that goes up to the fat layer.