Acute appendicitis follows pathogenesis similar to that of other hollow viscous organs and is thought to be most often caused by obstruction. A fecalith, or sometimes a gallstone, tumor, or worms obstructs the appendiceal orifice, causing increased intraluminal pressure and compromised venous outflow. In the young, obstruction is more often caused by lymphoid hyperplasia. The appendix receives its blood supply from the appendicular artery, which is an end artery. As intraluminal pressure exceeds the perfusion pressure, ischemic injury results, encouraging bacterial overgrowth and triggering an inflammatory response. This becomes a surgical emergency because perforation of the inflamed appendix can leak bacterial contents into the abdominal cavity.

As the appendiceal wall becomes inflamed, visceral afferent fibers are stimulated. These fibers enter the spinal cord at T8-T10, producing the classic diffuse periumbilical pain and nausea seen at the onset of appendicitis. As inflammation progresses, the parietal peritoneum is irritated, stimulating somatic nerve fibers and producing more localized pain. The localization depends on the position of the tip of the appendix. For example, a retrocecal appendix can produce right flank pain. Extending the patient’s right hip can elicit this pain. Pain produced by stretching the iliopsoas muscle due to hip extension with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position is known as “psoas sign.” Another classic finding in acute appendicitis is McBurney’s sign. This is elicited by palpation of the abdominal wall at the McBurney's point(two-thirds the distance from the umbilicus to the right anterior superior iliac spine) when pain is elicited. Unfortunately, these signs and symptoms are not always present, making clinical diagnosis difficult. The clinical picture often includes nausea, vomiting, low-grade fever, and a slightly elevated white count.

In addition to acute appendicitis, cancer of the appendix is another clinical concern. The most common of these is a carcinoid tumor. This neoplasm often forms a 2 cm to 3 cm mass at the distal tip. Carcinoid tumors are of neuroendocrine origin and can secrete serotonin or other vasoactive substances. Carcinoid syndrome can arise as a result and produce symptoms such as flushing, diarrhea, wheezing, or right-sided valvular heart disease. Because most of these arise in the distal one-third, they rarely cause an obstruction and can remain asymptomatic. However, 10% of neuroendocrine tumors arise at the base of the appendix and can cause appendicitis.

Appendiceal adenocarcinoma is another possible neoplasm of the appendix; its clinical presentation is often indistinguishable from that of acute appendicitis as it also causes obstructive pathology. It is often seen in the elderly and treatment involves a surgical approach involving either a simple appendectomy or a right colectomy.