**Parts of the Stomach**

- Fundus: Most superior portion abutting the left hemidiaphragm and the spleen

- Cardia: Just distal to the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ)

- Body: Largest component ending distally at the incisura angularis along the lesser curvature

- Antrum: Comprises the distal 25% to 30% of the stomach

- Pylorus: Connects the stomach to the first portion of the duodenum

**Ligaments**

- Gastrohepatic (lesser omentum): Contains vagal fibers to the liver and a replaced left hepatic artery when present (up to 10% incidence)

- Gastrocolic: Greater omentum attaching the inferior aspect of the stomach to the transverse colon

- Gastrosplenic: Contains the proximal left gastroepiploic artery and the short gastric arteries

**Blood Supply**

The blood is supplied from the celiac trunk and superior mesenteric artery.

**Four Major Arteries**

- Left gastric artery: Arises directly from the celiac trunk, largest of the 4 arteries, gives off ascending and descending branches, when present; it is the origin of the aberrant left hepatic artery, supplies the lesser curvature.

- Right gastric artery: Arises from the proper hepatic artery (after the takeoff of the GDA)  and forms an anastomotic arcade with the left gastric artery along the lesser curvature

- Left gastroepiploic artery: Arises from the splenic artery; supplies the greater curvature of the stomach

- Right gastroepiploic artery: Arises from the gastroduodenal artery, forms an anastomotic arcade with the left gastroepiploic artery along the greater curvature of the stomach

**Innervation**

**Vagus Nerves**

These are branches above the esophageal hiatus that form the left (anterior) and right (posterior) LARP vagal trunks.

- Anterior trunk: Gives rise to the branches that provide innervation to the hepatobiliary system and continue along the lesser curvature as the anterior nerve of Latarjet

- Posterior trunk: Sends branches to the celiac plexus and continues along the posterior aspect of the lesser curvature as the posterior nerve of Latarjet.

- 
              
- Criminal nerve of Grassi: The first branch of the posterior trunk innervates the gastric fundus. Failure to divide this nerve during an acid-reducing surgery can lead to recurrent ulcers.
              
              
- Crow's foot: The most distal branches of the anterior and posterior trunks provide innervation to the antro-pyloric region. These branches are spared in a highly selective vagotomy (HSV)
              
              
- Parasympathetics are vagally mediated using acetylcholine as the primary neurotransmitter.

**Physiology**

The relevant physiology revolves around the mechanisms relating to stomach acid secretion. Intraluminal gastric acid is released by the parietal cells, mainly located in the body of the stomach. Parietal cells are stimulated via 3 mechanisms: gastrin, acetylcholine, and histamine. All 3 mechanisms activate the hydrogen-potassium ATPase-releasing hydrogen ion into the stomach lumen. Gastrin is secreted by the G cells that are mainly located in the stomach antrum and pylorus. Acetylcholine is released in response to parasympathetic stimulation, which travels in the fibers of the vagus nerves. Histamine is released by the enterochromaffin-like cells.

**Acid Secreting Phases**

Cephalic: This phase is vagally mediated in response to smell, taste, and thought of food. It accounts for 30% of total acid production. It is the shortest of the 3 phases and is the scientific basis of the Sham diet following surgery.

Gastric: This phase begins once food enters the stomach. It is stimulated by proximal stomach distension (vagally mediated). It is absent in patients with a vagotomy. The gastric phase is stimulated by amino acids and peptides, leading to G cell activation. It accounts for 60% of total acid production.

Intestinal: This phase is mediated by hormonal release from small bowel mucosa in response to luminal chime. It accounts for 10% of total acid production.

**Types of Vagotomy**

**Truncal Vagotomy**

A truncal vagotomy is the division of the anterior and posterior trunks 4-cm proximal to the GEJ.

- Removes the acetylcholine-mediated secretion of acid from parietal cells

- Results in the accelerated emptying of liquids due to the removal of the vagally mediated receptive relaxation of the gastric fundus

- Decreases the emptying of solid due to the removal of the vagally medially relaxation of the pylorus

- Requires a draining procedure (TV + D) to increase the emptying of solids (pyloroplasty)

- It can be combined with antrectomy to suppress acid secretion further and also serves as the drainage procedure (TV + A)

**Selective Vagotomy**

Selective Vagotomy is the division of the anterior and posterior branches distal to the branching of the hepatobiliary and celiac branches.

- Requires a drainage procedure (SV + D)

- Can be combined with antrectomy to suppress acid secretion further and also serve as the drainage procedure (SV + A)

**Highly Selective Vagotomy (HSV, Parietal Cell Vagotomy, Proximal Vagotomy)**

Division of the fibers supplying the parietal cell of the fundus and body, preserving the “crow's foot” fibers that innervate the antrum and pylorus, thus eliminating the need for a draining procedure.