The complications involved with tricuspid valve repair, whether surgical or transcutaneous, are generalized to any valvular procedure of the heart. Following complications can occur after tricuspid valve repair:

- Perioperative bleeding and resulting blood products transfusion-related complications

- Arrhythmias and heart blocks

- Heart failure

- Stroke

- Infections of the surgical site and/or the valve prosthesis

- Sepsis

- Pulmonary complications e.g., pneumonia, embolisms

- Renal failure (higher risk in transcatheter procedures with pre-existing renal disease due to dye use)

- Drug reactions

- Prosthetic valve malfunction

The tricuspid valve has been considered a "forgotten" valve due to hesitation in treating sole tricuspid lesions in the past. Surgical mortality of tricuspid valve replacement is 3-4 times higher, compared to other single valve open procedures. Severe tricuspid regurgitation is associated with a poor prognosis, independent of age, biventricular function, and RV size. Most of the tricuspid valve repair procedures are performed in conjunction with the left-sided cardiac procedure.

The current gold standard for surgical repair is ring annuloplasty with an incomplete semi-rigid annuloplasty ring, but some centers perform the modified bicuspidisation when the annulus is not severely dilated. Since a very small fraction of patients is considered surgical candidates, there has been a renewed interest in developing percutaneous transcatheter devices for tricuspid regurgitation. Percutaneous techniques are likely to increase in the future due to improved technology and increased awareness of tricuspid regurgitation effects on the long-term outcomes.