Pathophysiological processes related to GAGs are very broad in range due to the ubiquitous nature of GAGs in the body. This section will describe how GAGs are involved in the pathophysiology of various infectious processes as well as a group of rare genetic diseases known as Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) related to the metabolism of GAGs.

**Infection**

GAGs are very important to the infectious processes of various viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitic pathogens. The mechanisms by which these pathogens utilize GAGs to promote virulence vary based on the unique GAGs expressed in each organ system.

An intact skin epithelium is arguably the body’s most important defense against infection by providing a physical barrier composed of thick layers of dead keratinocytes. When this outer layer of skin is compromised, pathogens can then invade and proliferate to cause infection using GAGs. Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCV) is a double-stranded DNA virus that makes use of HS and CS on dermal cell surfaces to bind and invade host cells to cause infection.

Group A Streptococci (GAS, Streptococcus pyogenes) are Gram-positive bacteria that represent another mechanism by which pathogens use GAGs to promote virulence. GAS utilizes a capsule composed of HA GAGs to evade host immune defenses by molecular mimicry. Due to the abundance of HA already present in the dermis and epidermis, the HA capsule of GAS prevents recognition and subsequent phagocytosis by host leukocytes.Candida, Staphylococcus Aureus, and Leishmania.

**Mucopolysaccharidoses**

Mucopolysaccharidoses comprise a group of rare genetic diseases characterized by a deficiency of lysosomal enzymes required for the metabolism of GAGs.

Initial diagnostic steps of mucopolysaccharidoses following clinical suspicion include urinary GAG and enzyme assays. Confirmatory testing for mucopolysaccharidosis is via molecular diagnosis. Previously, treatment for mucopolysaccharidoses had its basis around symptom management. However, both enzyme replacement therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation have been successfully used to treat certain subgroups of mucopolysaccharidosis.