**Accessory Ossicles**

There are numerous accessory ossicles of the foot and ankle that can cause or can be confused for pathology. The os trigonum is posterior to the talus and best seen on lateral radiographs. It results from the failure of fusion of the lateral tubercle of the posterior process, an unfused Stieda process. It is reportedly present in about 7 to 25% of the population. It can be associated with posterior ankle impingement, a cause of posterior ankle pain most commonly presenting in ballet dancers and soccer players. During plantar flexion, the os trigonum can get trapped between the calcaneus and talus.

The os peroneum is a sesamoid bone lateral to the cuboid in the peroneus longus tendon and has a prevalence of up to 30%. It is located within the peroneus longus tendon as it extends beneath the cuboid. Pain associated with the os peroneum can be secondary to fracture, avascular necrosis, chronic repetitive trauma, or contusion. Fractures of the os peroneum may be confused for a bipartite os peroneum. A fractured os peroneum can also correlate with peroneus longus tendon rupture.; this can be appreciated on radiographs when the osseous fragments demonstrate separation by more than a few millimeters.

The os naviculare lies along the medial aspect of the midfoot adjacent to the navicular bone. There are three types. Type 1 is a small well-corticated ossified sesamoid bone in the distal posterior tibialis tendon. Type 2 is triangular or semi-spherical shaped and has fibrocartilaginous bridging the pseudoarticulation or synchondrosis to the navicular tuberosity. Type 3 is a prominent navicular tuberosity, also referred to as cornuate navicular.  Symptoms may arise from the type 2 ossicle due to shear stresses across the synchondrosis with the navicular. When symptomatic and not responsive to conservative treatment, the os naviculare is excisable, Kinder procedure.

The os intermetatarsum is a pyramidal shaped ossicle that lies between the base of the first and second metatarsal bones along the dorsal aspect of the foot. It is based seen on AP and lateral views of the foot. It can sometimes be mistaken for the fleck sign of a Lisfranc injury. While generally an asymptomatic normal variant, it can also be associated with compression of the deep peroneal nerve.

**Coalitions**

Tarsal coalitions are the abnormal fusion of at least two bones. They are thought to arise from primitive mesenchymal segmentation abnormalities and may be fibrous or osseous. Taloncalcaneal and calcaneonavicular joint coalitions represent about 90% of all coalitions. Calcanoenavicular coalitions are best seen radiographically on internal oblique views of the foot; a bony bridge is present in an osseous coalition and close proximity of the bones with irregular cortical surfaces seen in fibrous coalition. On the lateral view, calcaneonavicular coalition is visible as an elongation of the anterior process of the calcaneus referred to as the "anteater sign." The middle facet is most commonly affected in talocalcaneal coalition. Talocalcaneal coalition appears as the "C" sign seen on lateral radiographs. The "C" sign is from osseous bridging of the talus and the sustentaculum. Talocalcaneal coalitions can often be challenging to identify on standard radiographs.

**Bipartite Bones**

Incomplete fusion of ossification centers may result in bipartite bones. Bipartite medial cuneiforms are rare, appearing in approximately 0.3% of the population. The bipartition may be partial or complete, and in many cases, the segments are bound together by cartilage or fibrocartilage. A bipartite medial cuneiform is divided into dorsal and plantar portions by a horizontal synchondrosis. This horizontal division plane gives the "E sign" on sagittal MR images. Bipartite sesamoids are more common and can be mistaken for fractures. These are most commonly encountered involving the os peroneum and hallux sesamoids. Sesamoid fractures can be difficult to distinguish from bipartite morphology. Fractures tend to have jagged, irregular margins, while bipartite sesamoids will have smooth sclerotic margins.