**Approach to the Patient**

The approach to a patient depends upon the etiology of foot drop and the nature of the compressive lesion. Based on the evaluation and diagnostic findings, many options exist.

**Surgical Options**

In trauma cases, for nerve transection, nerve reconstruction should take place within 72 hours of injury. Primary nerve repair techniques, autologous nerve grafts are usually performed.

For complete nerve compression, necrolysis and nerve decompression should be performed. Return to function has been reported in about 97%.

In cases of significant nerve dysfunction, nerve or tendon transfers may be required.

For the other etiologies, treatment is initially conservative because there may be a chance of partial or complete resolution of symptoms spontaneously overtime.

**Conservative Management**

This includes physical therapy and or splinting and pharmacological therapy to manage pain. The goals of conservative management are to stabilize the gait, prevention of falls and contractures. Physical therapy focuses on stretching and strengthening muscles. Electrical stimulation techniques of the weekend dorsi flexors have shown promise. A home exercise program should be an integral part of therapy- specifically to maintain the strength and range of motion of muscle groups that are working in the prevention of flexion contracture.

Splinting is utilized to minimize contractures. For complete nerve palsies with insufficient recovery, an ankle-foot orthosis (AFO) to prevent further plantarflexion should be ordered. Sufficient education and training should be included to assist in the proper usage and maintenance of the brace.

For patients with numbness, instructions for skincare to prevent abrasions and ulcerations are a significant part of management and are often coordinated with the orthotist fabricating the AFO.

For pain management, topical analgesics, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, membrane stabilizers, and opioids can be used.  But are not likely to result in clinical recovery.

Follow up electrodiagnostic studies to reassess the situation, looking for reinnervation should also be part of the treatment planning.