The mechanism of action of OM3FAs to lower triglycerides (FDA approved use) is still not fully known but is thought to lower triglycerides by suppressing lipogenic gene expression, increasing beta-oxidation of fatty acids, increasing the expression of lipo-protein-lipase (LPL), and influencing total body lipid accretion.

OM3FAs suppress lipogenic gene expression by decreasing the expression of sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c, inhibiting phosphatidic acid phosphatase, and acyl-CoA:1,2-diacylglycerol acyltransferase (NGAT). Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBP's) are membrane-bound enzymes that, when cleaved, travel to the nucleus to transcribe enzymes involved in cholesterol, LDL, and fatty acid synthesis. When a diet is high in omega-3 fatty acids, the SREBPs (particularly 1c) are not activated because of negative feedback inhibition and lowers SREBP synthesis and the cholesterol synthesizing enzymes that it regulates; FPP synthase (farnesyl diphosphate synthase) and HMG-CoA reductase (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase).

Beta oxidation is the biological pathway used in the body to break down fat and converts it into energy.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is an extracellular enzyme found on the endothelium of vascular tissue that functions to remove triacylglycerol components of chylomicrons, low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) in the blood.

OM3FAs are also believed to reduce high triglycerides by influencing total body lipid accretion. Several studies have found that prolonged use of OM3FAs for more than six weeks can increase the body's metabolic rate and decrease total body fat.

Additional mechanisms of action appear to exist for OM3FAs that explain the beneficial effects on the brain, brain development, cancer, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, irritable bowel disease, and the cardiovascular system outside of triglyceride regulation. Most of these effects are attributed to OM3FAs' anti-inflammatory actions. Omega-3 Fatty Acids have been shown to modulate several inflammatory pathways such as

- Inhibition of leukocyte chemotaxis

- Inhibitions of adhesion molecule expression (like leukocyte-endothelial adhesive interactions)

- Inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) activity and its subsequent eicosanoid production, like leukotrienes and prostaglandins from arachidonic acid

- Inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6)

- Increase production of inflammation resolving resolvins, maresins, lipoxins, and protectins

- Inhibition of pro-inflammatory transcription nuclear factor kappa B (nuclear factor-kB) activation

- Activation of anti-inflammatory transcription factor NR1C3

- Activation of PPARs

- Activation of G protein-coupled receptor GPR120

- Altering phospholipid fatty acid composition

- Disrupting lipid rafts

Although many cancers are helped by OM3FAs anti-inflammatory effect and non-small-cell lung cancer tumor growth has shown to decrease by inhibiting acetyl-CoA carboxylase (decreasing fatty acid production), other antineoplastic mechanisms of OM3FAs have been shown to be beneficial for other cancers, such as breast cancer, colorectal cancer, leukemia, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, esophageal cancer, prostate cancer, head and neck cancer, as well as lung cancer.

OM3FAs have a stabilizing and protecting effect for certain tissues with high-fat content, like neural and retinal tissue.  Alzheimer disease, dementia, and cognitive function are improved by OM3FAs ability to maintain cell membrane integrity of neural tissues because DHA is an essential component of the brain's phospholipid membranes.

OM3FAs have some cardioprotective effects that help protect against heart failure in congestive heart failure (CHF) patients. OM3FAs, specifically DHA, decrease mitochondrial oxygen consumption without reducing power generation for the ventricles by altering the mitochondrial membrane phospholipid composition, protecting the heart from tiring.

It should be noted that numerous studies continue to determine the exact mechanisms by which OM3FAs have a pharmacological effect. Many studies with conflicting data continue to challenge our current understanding of how OM3FAs can help other conditions beyond hypertriglyceridemia.