Certain conditions may mimic optic atrophy and have to be ruled out. Some of these conditions include the following:

- Optic nerve pit: These are congenital anomalies characterized by a greyish round or oval depression, usually on the temporal aspect of the optic nerve head. Serous macular detachments develop in nearly half of the cases.

- Myelinated nerve fibers: Optic nerve myelination usually stops at the level of the lamina cribrosa. However, myelination extends into the retina following the nerve fiber bundles in certain individuals. Clinically they appear as feathery white patches that may obscure the disc margin and vessels. Visual field examination will show the enlargement of the blind spot.

- Optic disc drusen: These are usually calcific deposits within the substance of the optic nerve head. They are bilateral in around 75% of the individuals. Usually asymptomatic, they may present with the occasional blurring of vision. In pediatric age-group drusen are buried within the disc and appear as pseudo-papilledema. In adult life, they get exposed, enlarge, and calcify. Later they may regress, leaving a pale disc. There is the filling of the optic cup, anomalous branching vasculature emanating from the central core and hyaline bodies on the surface. Drusen also demonstrate fundus autofluorescence.

- Optic nerve hypoplasia: It is a common optic nerve anomaly. The disc appears notably small due to the lack of axons passing through the optic nerve head.

- Brighter-than-normal luminosity: Using excessive illumination from the ophthalmoscope or slit-lamp causes the disc to appear pale.