Congenital Toxoplasmosis has wide-ranging clinical manifestations from being completely asymptomatic at birth to severe neurological and ocular disease. The majority of the infants (about 75%) with congenital toxoplasmosis have no apparent clinical manifestations at birth. Identification usually takes place during routine newborn and maternal screening done in certain countries. They demonstrate neurological (cerebral calcifications) or ophthalmologic (retinal scars) abnormalities. In a limited percentage of patients, it can lead to spontaneous abortion, premature or stillbirth.

Term newborns usually present with a milder form of the disease with symptoms such as hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy. In comparison, preterm newborns exhibit severe symptoms.

The classic triad of chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, and cerebral calcifications presents in a limited number of infected newborns. The symptoms are generally severe and clinically apparent when the mother acquires the infection in the first trimester and does not receive any treatment. Some severely affected may die in utero or a few days after birth. The signs and symptoms in severe disease include

- Neurological manifestations such as micro or macrocephaly, seizures, nystagmus, hydrocephalus, cerebral calcifications, meningoencephalitis.

- Ophthalmologic manifestations such as chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, retinochoroiditis, strabismus.

- Small for gestational age

- Hepatosplenomegaly

- Generalized lymphadenopathy

- Jaundice

- Thrombocytopenia, anemia, petechiae

- Maculopapular rash

The infants with mild or subclinical infection are at risk for late sequelae such as:

- Recurring chorioretinitis resulting in vision loss

- Motor delays

- Learning disorders

- Intellectual disability

- Hearing loss

- Endocrine abnormalities due to disruption of hypothalamus and pituitary gland

At present, newborn screening for congenital toxoplasmosis is performed only in Massachusetts and New Hampshire.