# Continuing Education Activity

In Curtis Lester Mendelson’s original 1946 description of his namesake syndrome, chemical pneumonitis was described in young and healthy obstetrical patients following aspiration of gastric acid under anesthesia. The standard use of regional anesthesia for most laboring women and increased awareness among anesthesia providers regarding the high risk of aspiration and potential difficult airway management in parturients has increased the safety in this population. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of Mendelson syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of Mendelson syndrome.
- Describe the presentation of a patient with Mendelson syndrome.
- Summarize the treatment options for Mendelson syndrome.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients with Mendelson syndrome.

# Introduction

In Curtis Lester Mendelson’s original 1946 description of his namesake syndrome, chemical pneumonitis was described in young and healthy obstetrical patients following aspiration of gastric acid under anesthesia.

Mendelson’s study reviewed the aspiration of gastric contents among 44000 pregnancies at the New York Lying-In Hospital from 1932 to 1945. His paper has two parts: a clinical report and an animal model. “Mendelson syndrome” was initially described as aspiration of gastric contents causing a chemical pneumonitis characterized by fever, cyanosis, hypoxia, pulmonary edema, and potential death. Among the patients studied, there were 66 cases of aspiration (0.15%) and two deaths (0.0045%). Both patients tragically died following suffocation from solid food aspiration of full meals that were ingested six and eight hours before delivery, respectively. The remaining 64 patients experienced aspiration of liquid material, and they often went unrecognized with complete recovery.

Mendelson replicated the gastric acid in the respiratory distress syndrome he witnessed in human patients through his animal model. He placed both neutralized and untreated hydrochloric acid and vomitus from pregnant women into the respiratory tracts of rabbits. Mendelson found that during labor, there is prolonged retention of solids and liquids in parturients’ stomachs, and aspiration commonly occurs after abolishing laryngeal reflexes. During Mendelson’s time, the induction of general anesthesia was not limited to parturients undergoing a cesarean section but was also the method for spontaneous or operative vaginal deliveries. 21% of aspiration cases were among women who delivered via cesarean section, while 79% of women were undergoing general anesthesia for vaginal deliveries. The general anesthetic at this time consisted of a nonspecific mixture of gas, oxygen, and ether. The airway was left unsecured during delivery as parturients were subjected to mask induction and maintenance with an opaque black rubber mask. Following aspiration, the initial clinical course was severe including massive atelectasis with cyanosis, dyspnea, mediastinal shift, and radiographic signs of lung injury. Despite this, the 64 nonfatal cases were almost all liquid aspirations with radiographic resolution within seven days and clinical recovery within 36 hours without the use of antibiotic treatment.

Mendelson’s study led to several recommendations that still are in use in the obstetric population to this day. Pregnant women are treated as though they have a “full stomach” regardless of their last meal, and inhalational anesthesia without intubation is strictly avoided. Opaque rubber masks that can conceal regurgitation and vomitus have been replaced with clear plastic masks and ingestion of solid food has been discouraged during labor. Two American anesthesiologists, Paleul Flagg, and James Miller suggested that experienced anesthesiologists could help avoid the complications that Mendelson described. Miller reported over 26000 deliveries at Hartford Hospital with no mortality secondary to asphyxia, partially attributed to expert anesthesiology staff.

Although Mendelson’s contributions to obstetric anesthesia should not be understated, modern obstetrics has evolved considerably since then. During the last thirty years, aspiration in pregnant women has markedly declined, primarily due to advances in obstetrical anesthesia. The standard use of regional anesthesia for most laboring women and increased awareness among anesthesia providers regarding the high risk of aspiration and potential difficult airway management in parturients has increased the safety in this population. Care has also improved by advances in difficult airway management devices including video laryngoscopes, endotracheal tube introducers, optical stylets, and flexible endoscopes. The routine utilization of pulse oximetry, capnography, and difficult airway algorithms have also helped to mitigate the risks associated with general anesthesia in parturients.

# Etiology

There are specific physiologic changes of pregnancy that increase aspiration risk in this population. Minute ventilation, oxygen consumption, and carbon dioxide production are increased in early pregnancy, while the gravid uterus displaces the diaphragm upward in late pregnancy, substantially reducing functional residual capacity. Cardiac output, heart rate, stroke volume and circulating blood volume are all increased during pregnancy. The gravid uterus increases intra-abdominal pressure, predisposing patients to reflux. Progesterone-mediated relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) and prolonged gastric emptying time increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease and aspiration of gastric contents during general anesthesia.

Chemical pneumonitis is more likely following the aspiration of gastric contents if pH is less than 2.5 and volume is at least 0.3 mL/kg body weight. The basis of these calculations is a 1974 study by Roberts and Shirley following direct placement of acid into a Rhesus monkey’s right mainstem bronchus.

Clear liquids are permissible during labor based on findings by William Beaumont, a military surgeon, who treated an individual with a gunshot wound to the stomach who had developed a gastric fistula. This injury allowed him to discern gastric emptying time for liquids versus solids. Beaumont stated that liquids pass through the stomach shortly after arrival, and gastric emptying of liquids is an exponential process; the rate of emptying is based upon the amount that remains in the stomach. The rate of emptying of solids is constant and starts an hour after the meal: about half reaches the duodenum within a few hours.

# Epidemiology

Pulmonary aspiration rates have significantly declined over the last 30 years. In a 1990 to 2003 review of closed obstetric anesthesia claims, Davies et al. reported that the incidence of aspiration declined from 4.2% to 0.46%.

Mhyre et al. used the nationwide inpatient sample from 1998 to 2011 to evaluate the etiology and outcome of maternal cardiac arrest for hospitalization for labor, and their findings implicated aspiration in 7.1% of cases.

# Pathophysiology

Animal models have been used to study the pathophysiology of aspiration pneumonitis - those afflicted with gastric reflux may experience episodes of recurrent pneumonitis, often accompanied by pulmonary fibrosis.

During pregnancy, chemical pneumonitis is more likely due to the plethora of anatomic and physiologic changes that are present. Almost all parturients have a gastric pH of less than 2.5, and greater than 60% of them have gastric volumes greater than 25 mL.

In a 2009 review by Djabatey et al., 1 in every 150 obstetrical patients is difficult to intubate, and 1 in every 280 patients is a failed intubation, as compared to 1 in 2230 failed intubations in the general population.Staphylococcus aureus, anaerobic or gram-negative bacteria) particulate matter, liquids, or gastric acid.

# History and Physical

Mendelson syndrome may mimic pulmonary edema in its presentation with an acute onset following aspiration. Patients present with dyspnea, cough, fever, and profuse frothy pink sputum. Symptoms may be indolent or can progress to pulmonary necrosis with lung abscess or empyema. On physical examination the patient is tachypneic, having tachycardia and crackles on auscultation of chest mostly on the right lower part which is the most dependant area for the aspirated contents.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of Mendelson syndrome depends upon clinical history, including a witnessed aspiration, risk factors, and characteristic chest radiography findings, although X-rays may initially be negative. Radiographic films may reveal irregular densities in the dependent pulmonary segments, primarily on the right side, which is at greater risk of aspiration due to the larger diameter and more vertical orientation of the right mainstem bronchus. Pulse oximetry can show oxygen desaturation and tachycardia. A computed tomography scan of the chest can reveal consolidation.

# Treatment / Management

Although the best treatment should be primarily preventative, aspiration should be recognized and managed swiftly to curb dangerous sequelae. The patient should be in the Trendelenburg position, and the oropharynx suctioned. If the patient exhibits signs of hypoxia and diminished airway reflexes, swift intubation should follow. After an endotracheal tube is secured, a soft suction catheter should be passed to prevent the dislodgement of aspirated material further into the lung with positive pressure ventilation. In the case of aspiration of particulate matter, bronchoscopy and pulmonary lavage may prove useful. Mechanical ventilation and intensive care unit admission may be appropriate depending on the patient’s clinical status. Prophylactic antibiotics should not be utilized even in patients with radiographic findings of an infiltrate until the patient’s clinical condition warrants their use.

Prevention is via specific recommendations from the American society of anesthesiology (ASA). A modest amount of oral intake of clear liquids may be allowed for uncomplicated laboring patients up to two hours before anesthetic induction. While the volume of liquid ingested is unimportant, the presence of particulate matter is of significance in terms of aspiration risk. Solid foods are to be avoided in laboring patients and those with additional risk factors including diabetes, morbid obesity, and a difficult airway. For patients undergoing elective surgery, patients should fast for 6 or 8 hours depending on the fat content of the meal. Excessive sedation and some antipsychotic medications should be avoided as they can increase aspiration risk.

Medication prophylaxis is used routinely for parturients to mitigate the risks of aspiration pneumonitis. Clear nonparticulate antacids such as sodium citrate 15 to 30 mL orally every 3 hours maintain gastric pH greater than 2.5. Histamine receptor-2 antagonists such as ranitidine aid in reducing gastric acid volume and increasing pH. Prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide reduce gastric volume, increase LES tone and reduce peripartum nausea and vomiting.

# Differential Diagnosis

Mendelson syndrome mimics the presentation of many other disorders which should be ruled out. These include:

- Foreign body aspiration

- Near drowning

- Barium aspiration

- Acute exogenous lipoid pneumonia

- Chronic exogenous lipoid pneumonia

- Necrotizing pneumonia

- Aspiration pneumonia secondary to periodontal disease

- Pulmonary abscess status post laryngectomy

- Aspiration bronchiolitis

- Obliterative bronchiolitis

- Bronchitis

- Tuberculosis

- COPD/emphysema

- Adult epiglottitis

- Mycoplasma pneumonia

- Viral pneumonia

# Prognosis

The prognosis of Mendelson syndrome depends upon the comorbid disease, the severity of aspiration, complications, and the patient's underlying health status. In Mendelson's 1946 original series, 66 obstetric patients aspirated gastric acid during their anesthetic, and almost all had a complete clinical recovery. Subsequent studies have included elderly patients with the comorbid disease, with a reported mortality rate of 30 to 62%, as chemical pneumonitis can lead to ARDS. The mortality rate for chemical pneumonitis can be up to 70%. If pneumonia develops and does not receive prompt treatment, it can lead to the development of a lung abscess or a bronchopleural fistula. The mortality rate for empyema that complicates aspiration pneumonia is approximately 20%, while that of uncomplicated pneumonia is about 5%. An animal model of mice with aspiration pneumonitis suggested that they are more susceptible to subsequent respiratory infections.

# Complications

Mendelson syndrome can lead to serious complications and these include:

- Bacterial pneumonia

- Lung abscess

- Airway obstruction

- Bronchopleural fistula

- Respiratory failure

- Acute respiratory distress syndrome

- Pleural effusion

- Empyema

- Shock

- Sepsis

# Deterrence and Patient Education

A modest amount of oral intake of clear liquids may be allowed for uncomplicated laboring patients up to two hours before anesthetic induction. While the volume of liquid ingested is unimportant, the presence of particulate matter is of significance in terms of aspiration risk. Laboring patients are to avoid solid foods, especially those with additional risk factors including diabetes, morbid obesity, and a difficult airway. Patients should fast for 6 or 8 hours before undergoing elective surgery depending on the meal's fat content. Excessive sedation and some antipsychotic medications should be avoided as they can increase aspiration risk.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Mendelson syndrome is best managed and prevented by an interprofessional team that includes an anesthesiologist, anesthesia nurse, intensivist, pulmonologist, obstetrician, and a nursing team with specialized pulmonary and obstetric training. Because the disorder has high morbidity and mortality, it is best prevented. Prevention is via specific recommendations from the ASA. A modest amount of oral intake of clear liquids may be allowed for uncomplicated laboring patients up to two hours before anesthetic induction. While the volume of liquid ingested is unimportant, the presence of particulate matter is of significance in terms of aspiration risk. Laboring patients are to avoid solid foods, and those with additional risk factors including diabetes, morbid obesity, and a difficult airway. Patients should fast for 6 or 8 hours before undergoing elective surgery depending on the meal's fat content. Excessive sedation and some antipsychotic medications should be avoided as they can increase aspiration risk. The nurses and pharmacists should work with the providers to carefully manage sedation to avoid this disease process and improve outcomes. A cooperative team environment of double-checking doses and careful monitoring will minimize the risk.

The outlook for patients with Mendelson syndrome remains guarded. Despite optimal treatment, there are still reports of mortality rates of close to 30%.