After fertilization of the sperm and ovum, four cell division leads to a morula (16 cells). Around the fourth day after fertilization, the morula enters the uterus as a blastocyst. The blastocyst divides into trophoblast and embryoblast. About 6 to 7 days later, the differentiating blastocyst implants into the uterine decidua. Then, the trophoblast further divides into the syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast; together, these compose the fetal component of the placenta. These two cell types lay on either side of villi. The cytotrophoblast resides on the inner layer of the chorionic villi. Syncytiotrophoblasts are multinucleated cells that are located on the outer layer of the chorionic villi. In between the syncytiotrophoblast layer, lacunae form to serve as a direct connection to the maternal blood. The remaining cells surrounding the lacunae, called trabeculae, penetrate deep into the uterine wall and, later, develop into the villous trees of the placenta. The maternal blood supply lies in the decidua basalis of the endometrium, which constitutes the maternal component of the placenta.

As the pregnancy progresses, the villous cytotrophoblast slowly disappears from the chorionic villi. Additionally, the villi structure develops to reduce the distance between the maternal blood and fetal vessels — this change benefits maternal-fetal-exchanges. By the end of a pregnancy, five types of villi comprise the placenta: mesenchymal villi, immature intermediate villi, stem villi, mature intermediate villi, and terminal villi. From the mesenchymal villi and immature intermediate villi, about three to five mature intermediate villi grow from the stem villous, and ten to twelve branches of the terminal villi grow from the mature intermediate villi. These villi help communication between the chorionic plate and decidua. Most of the villi float freely in the intervillous space while other villi attach to the decidua as structural stability for the placenta.

- Mesenchymal villi play a significant role early in the first trimester as the most primitive type of villi. The villi are mostly filled with mesenchymal cells and with poorly developed villi. Mesenchymal cells will later differentiate into a variety of other cells including the following: endothelial cells, blood cells, macrophages, myofibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts.

- Immature intermediate villi are prevalent in the mid-first trimester. These reticular structures contain fluid as well as macrophages called Hofbauer cells. Between the stroma, small arterioles and venules start to develop.

- Stem villi appear condensed with collagen fibers during the mid-first trimester. Additionally, there are few fibroblasts and macrophages as well as muscularized arteries and veins in the villi.

- Mature intermediate villi, in mid-gestation, are bundles of connective tissue with numerous peripheral capillaries as well as some small terminal arterioles and collecting venules.

- Terminal villi mainly function during the late second trimester through the early third trimester. These villi have no stroma and predominantly contain sinusoidal capillaries.