**Anterior Triangle**

A thorough understanding of anatomy is essential to avoiding injury when performing operations in this area. Meticulous care is necessary to maintain the integrity of many fine and critical structures and to avoid unintended consequences. The carotid endarterectomy is a common operation to alleviate significant stenosis of the internal carotid artery. Caution must be taken in the approach, as the roots of the ansa cervicalis run on the anterior and lateral surfaces of the carotid sheath. The carotid sinus and carotid branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve are also susceptible to injury during the endarterectomy. Inadvertent or excessive stimulation of either structure may result in profound intraoperative bradycardia and hypotension, while damage may result in a diminished or completely absent baroreceptor reflex.  Injury to the vagus nerve can result in permanent or temporary dysphagia, hoarseness aspiration.

Thyroid and parathyroid surgery also require dissection of the anterior triangle as these structures lie within the pretracheal layer of the deep cervical fascia. The strap muscles must be delicately retracted or divided using electrocautery to visualize the thyroid gland adequately. The neurovascular structures of the thyroid and parathyroid glands are deep to the strap muscles. The surgeon must pay particular attention to the superior laryngeal artery and nerve near the superior pole of the thyroid. The superior thyroid artery must be ligated distal to the branch point of the superior laryngeal artery; otherwise, the vascular supply of the larynx could become compromised. Though not as severe as recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, injury to the superior laryngeal nerve may result in mild voice changes such as hoarseness or voice fatigue.

**Posterior Triangle**

Operations requiring dissection of the posterior triangle, the surgeon needs to be aware and careful as the spinal accessory nerve is at risk for injury. Due to the potential for permanent damage, it is often necessary to perform intraoperative nerve mapping via direct stimulation to avoid nerve injury. Injury to the spinal accessory nerve within the posterior triangle may result in weakness of shoulder elevation or arm abduction and permanent pain because the innervation to the trapezius becomes disrupted. The sternocleidomastoid is typically spared because its the spinal accessory nerve supplies its motor branches more proximally.

The cutaneous branches of the cervical plexus are also relevant for anesthetic purposes. A bilateral superficial cervical plexus block can provide analgesia for procedures such as thyroidectomy, parathyroidectomy, and carotid endarterectomy. To perform a bilateral superficial cervical plexus block, the clinician inserts a needle along the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid just deep to the superficial fascia, and local anesthetic floods the region where the nerves emerge from the investing fascia. The patient may be asked to rotate his or her head to the contralateral side, which allows for easy visualization of the sternocleidomastoid. The clinician can perform this procedure with or without ultrasound guidance.