**Benign or Non-progressive Pubertal Variants**

Benign pubertal variants represent cases of early secondary sexual development that are not progressive, have normal height velocity, and are not associated with an underlying pathological process. Most of these variants require no treatment apart from reassurance and close monitoring for signs of pubertal progression, bone age, and acceleration in height velocity.

Variants under this category include:

- **Premature thelarche**is isolated breast development in young girls without the development of other secondary sexual characteristics. This condition is usually seen in girls younger than six to eight years. Breast development in premature thelarche often does not progress beyond tanner stage 3. The presence of normal height velocity, normal bone age, and absence of other secondary sexual characteristics differentiate this condition from precocious pseudopuberty.

- **Premature pubarche**is the isolated development of pubic and axillary hair before the ages of eight years in girls and nine years in boys. This condition may be associated with a mild elevation in dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and mild advancement in bone age. Patients with premature pubarche require close monitoring as it may be the initial sign of precocious pseudopuberty. Signs of virilization, growth acceleration, and significant advancement in bone age in these patients should prompt a workup for congenital adrenal hyperplasia or virilizing adrenal tumors.

- **Benign prepubertal vaginal bleeding**is the presence of isolated prepubertal vaginal bleeding that resolves spontaneously. The diagnosis of this condition requires the exclusion of other causes of vaginal bleeding, such as sexual abuse, foreign body, or local trauma. The absence of other secondary sexual characteristics, a normal pelvic ultrasound, and prepubertal gonadotropin levels differentiate this condition from precocious puberty.

**Central Precocious Puberty**

Central precocious puberty occurs due to premature activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis and can be idiopathic, genetic, or due to central nervous system lesions. Unlike peripheral precocious puberty, patients with central precocious puberty tend to follow the normal sequence of secondary sexual development. They may also have neurological signs or visual changes. Central precocious puberty is gonadotropin independent and is associated with elevated levels of the follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Central precocious puberty can be confirmed by a basal LH concentration of > 0.3 IU/L or an elevation of LH in response to GnRH stimulation test.