Managing perioperatively the patient receiving anticoagulation therapy is the responsibility across all disciplines of the healthcare team. First, it is the responsibility of the nurse to ensure the information on anticoagulation therapy and diagnoses is correct for the patient upon admission for preoperative testing/physical exam. During the preoperative visit, the surgeon and anesthesiologist in charge then have the responsibility of ensuring this information is correct and then deciding how the patient will be managed perioperatively. Once that decision is made, it is the responsibility of the physician to explain this information in detail, the nurse to review this before discharge, and finally, the pharmacist to answer any questions and/or reiterate this information.

On the day of surgery, operative nurses, physicians, and pharmacy personnel have their usual duties of ensuring the patient receives appropriate operative care per protocol for the procedure. Postoperatively, the physician has the responsibility of placing orders for either continuing to hold to administering the anticoagulation agent, depending on the drug and the patient scenario. However, it is the duty of the recovery room and hospitalization floor nurses to re-check each prescription before administration according to the diagnoses of the patient. Additionally, pharmacy personnel will be in charge of review the pharmacological conciliation of the patient.

Finally, it will be time for the patient to be discharged. The physician will be responsible for writing discharge orders, which may consist of continuing the same anticoagulation regimen that was prescribed preoperatively, changes to the dosage, or even holding medication for some time. Such orders will again be checked by pharmacy personnel. In general, it is the responsibility of the nurse to ensure that discharge instructions are received and understood by the patient, thus completing the interdisciplinary care circle for the patient receiving anticoagulation perioperatively. Only by working as an interprofessional team can the morbidity and mortality related to anticoagulation treatments and physicians errors be diminished. [Level 5]