Healthcare providers should obtain a detailed history of the accident. Often factors such as a rollover crash, ejection outside the car, or seat belt usage can give significant information on the severity and type of spinal cord injury that should be expected. The presence of intoxication is essential information as it could confuse the physical exam findings on presentation. It is important to understand that the energy necessary to produce a spinal cord injury during a traumatic event is very high, and patients should be thoroughly examined for other tissue and organ injury. A full spinal examination should include a motor and a sensory exam. Motor activity and strength decrease in the skeletal muscles and the internal organs like the bowel and bladder. This decrease leads to constipation and urinary retention. It is of utmost importance to record an ASIA score (American Spinal Injury Association) as prognostic long-term expectations can be made with fair accuracy before discussing with the family and the patient. While evaluating the patient, assume their spine is unstable and take all the necessary precautions to keep it stable until final imaging is obtained and stability is established.

Usually, high spinal cord injuries result in transient spinal shock, with an absence of all spinal reflexes and muscle tone. In the recovery phase of the injury, however, reflexes recover and increase in amplitude, reaching a hyper-reflexive state. Other clinical features likely to be present during the assessment of patients with spinal shock include autonomic dysfunction. This autonomic dysfunction is called neurogenic shock, which is a component of spinal shock. A reduction in sympathetic tone in the blood vessels is noted with spinal shock resulting in a profound drop in blood pressure. The parasympathetic system remains functioning, leading to an unopposed parasympathetic drive which results in notable bradycardia. When the heart rate is slow enough to compromise cardiac output, intravenous atropine or glycopyrronium should be administered.