MR Imaging is a procedure, without the use of x-rays and "ionizing" radiation for obtaining comprehensive images of tissues and organs throughout the human body. In contrast to CT that uses x-ray beams, MRI employs a high strength main magnetic field, magnetic field gradients, radio waves, and a computer to generate images that show if there is a disease process, or pathological condition and an injury present.

During an MRI procedure, the patient is positioned inside of the large, cylinder-shaped magnet that is open at both ends, called the MR scanner. The high strength main magnetic field aligns mobile hydrogen protons that exist in most tissues of human body. A specific radio wave frequency was applied to cause these mobile protons to produce signals that would be picked up by receiver coils associated with the MR scanner. The collected signals are specifically characterized by using the gradient magnetic fields, and with the aid of computer software and processing, images of tissues are created as the field-of-view "slices" that could be visualized and evaluated for pathologies.

There is no known tissue damage produced by the electromagnetic fields of the MRI, nor causes pain during an examination. MRI scanner does make loud knocking, tapping, and other noises, which can be characterized as rhythmic musical sounds during the patient’s procedure. These noises could be attenuated by using earplugs. During the patient’s scanner procedure and with the aid of an intercommunication system, the patient will be monitored, communicated with, and the patient will be able to speak with the MR scanner operator or MRI technologist by other means.

To help improve the visualization of normal and abnormal tissues seen on the MR images, Gadolinium-based, MRI contrast agent, would be injected into a hand or wrist vein, during some MRI studies. In Contrast with iodinated contrast agents used in computed tomography (CT) and x-ray studies, gadolinium-based MRI contrast agents, do not contain iodine. Hence, would rarely cause an adverse effect or allergic reaction. However, if patients have a history of a kidney transplant, kidney disease, kidney failure, liver disease, those patients should inform the Radiologist and/or MRI technologist before the administration of gadolinium-based, MRI contrast agents. If the patients are not sure about their allergic reaction status, patients are advised and encouraged to discuss these issues with the Radiologist and/or MRI technologist before the MRI procedure.