The parents may be concerned about the abnormal location of the urethral meatus of male infants. As the meatus is often stenosed, it may cause narrowing and splaying of the urinary stream and wetting of the undergarments during micturition. There may be a difficulty in micturition in the standing position. Posterior hypospadias may be associated with cryptorchidism and bifid scrotum, giving the impression of ambiguous genitalia. The curvature of the penis can be the presenting feature, particularly in adults, and this is more pronounced during erection. This can cause difficulty in sexual intercourse and failure to deposit the semen in the vagina, leading to infertility. Hypospadias is classified according to the position of the urethral meatus into three categories which include anterior hypospadias where the location is glandular (under the surface of the glans penis), coronal (at the corona glandis), or subcoronal (at the junction of the corona and the body of the penis). This is the commonest variety.

In middle hypospadias, the location of the meatus is distal penile, midshaft penile, or proximal penile. In posterior hypospadias, the location is penoscrotal (at the junction of the penis and the scrotum), scrotal (between the two halves of the scrotum), or perineal (at the perineum, associated with bifid scrotum).

However, the definite classification is possible only during surgery, taking into account the size of the penis, the glans, and the urethral plate, the degree of penile curvature, the division of the corpus spongiosum, and associated scrotal anomalies.