When treating a patient, information gathered by any means can crucially guide and direct care. Many initial encounters with patients will include asking the patient's medical history, while subsequent visits may only require a review of the medical history and possibly an update with any changes. Obtaining a medical history can reveal the relevant chronic illnesses and other prior disease states for which the patient may not be under treatment but may have had lasting effects on the patient's health. The medical history may also direct differential diagnoses.

In general, a medical history includes an inquiry into the patient's medical history, past surgical history, family medical history, social history, allergies, and medications the patient is taking or may have recently stopped taking.

A complete medical history includes a more in-depth inquiry into the patient's medical issues which includes all diseases and illnesses currently being treated, and those which have had any residual effects on the patient's health. A surgical history to include all invasive procedures the patient has undergone. Family history is another aspect of the patient's medical history with potential indicators of genetic predisposition to disease. Social history is a broad category of the patient's medical history but may include the patients smoking or other tobacco use, alcohol and drug history and should also include other aspects of the patient's health including spiritual, mental, relationship status, occupation, hobbies, and sexual activity or pertinent sexual habits. These may require further questioning if there is a concern for health risk or any relationship to the acute disease state.

Patient allergies are a crucial aspect of history gathering as this may have potentially life-threatening consequences. It is critical to always ask clearly if the patient has any medication allergies and if they do, clarify the reaction they had to the medication.

Medication history is also important as patients take more and more medications and drug-drug interactions must be avoided.

Other areas of the history may be obtained on a case-by-case basis. Age and gender will often guide the interviewer in when to obtain these further histories. Parents of infants should be asked about complications of the pregnancy, delivery, and prematurity. Also, parents of pediatric patients should be asked about the immunization status of the patient. Immunization status for adults and geriatric patients is often relevant. With more vaccination options, this may become a standardized aspect of history taking by practitioners.

Asking female patient's age-appropriate questions about their last menstrual period and their pregnancy history to include gravidity and parity should be common practice. According to the patient's age, further questions about menarche and menopause may be appropriate as part of the medical history.