In order to diagnose ADHD, it is very important to take a relevant history of the concerned individual. ADHD is diagnosed in children based upon their history, where the children face difficulty in at least 6 of the 9 symptoms as mentioned in DSM 5. Inattentive symptoms include: not paying close attention to tasks, missing small details, rushing through tasks, not seeming to listen when spoken to, difficulty organizing things, not finishing work, dislikes or avoids tasks that take sustained mental effort, losing thins, or being forgetful. Hyperactive symptoms include: fidgeting, feeling like an "internal motor" is always going, leaving their seat, climbing on things, being loud, blurting out answers, talking excessively or out of turn, having trouble waiting their turn, interrupts, or intrudes on others. These symptoms must be present in multiple settings.

In adults, however, these core symptoms may be missing, and they may manifest as other problems such as procrastination, mood instability, and low self-esteem. They will likely be more impulsive in nature or inattentive, as the hyperactivity symptoms can be better controlled. The symptoms of inattention or hyperactivity will likely be elicited when doing a proper history of childhood but may have been missed.

ADHD interferes with functioning and development. This can be included in adults who do not work and is often dismissed in this population. For example, a stay-at-home mom may have difficulty getting her children to school on time, organizing her home, paying attention while driving, etc., which affects her functioning and daily life even though she is not at work or school. It is important to take this into consideration when making a diagnosis.

Different scales are used to measure the problems that patients with ADHD are suffering from. One such example is the Brown Attention Deficit Disorder Scale which includes common areas that these individuals face difficulty in and can be used in adults to identify the disorder. For children, the Vanderbilt ADHD scale is often used as it has both a teacher and parent component. A physical examination, on the other hand, is not as useful in the diagnosis of ADHD, but it can still be used to exclude medical causes such as thyroid problems. It could also help to identify any medical issue that could thereby direct the treatment options. For example, individuals with hypertension may not opt for stimulants as a treatment option.