The prevalence of keratoconjunctivitis varies widely according to the underlying cause, which is also influenced by age, environment, and genetics. Some estimates suggest as many as 6 million people annually in the United States present to a healthcare provider with signs and symptoms of conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis.

Of all patients presenting with conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis, allergic causes account for the majority of cases, affecting up to 40% of the population. Under the umbrella of allergic etiology, VKC most often occurs in school-aged children, with a peak incidence at ages 4 to 7 years old. It should be noted, however, that it can present as early as 5 months or as late as the third or fourth decades of life. There is a predilection for young males who reside in a dry and hot climate; especially in West Africa, the Mediterranean basin, Middle East, India, and South America. It is less common in North America and Western Europe.

Among infectious etiologies, bacterial conjunctivitis is more common in the pediatric population and may be responsible for approximately 50% of cases. Viral is by far the most common despite the patient's age, with estimates of up to 75%. The majority of viral infections – up to 90% - are secondary to adenovirus; other viral agents include enterovirus, herpes simplex, and herpes zoster.

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca has been identified as a growing public health concern, as it affects as many as 17% of women and 11% of men in the United States. Some studies suggest this is a gross underestimate as many patients will self-treat without seeing a healthcare provider. These rates are much higher in subgroups of patients who also carry autoimmune diagnoses such as Sjogren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, sarcoidosis, and scleroderma, among others. Prevalence of disease also increases in dry climates.

Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis is a relatively rare condition with a female to male predominance of approximately 3 to 1. Age of presentation ranges from 20 to 60 years of age. There is no documentation of a racial predilection. There is an association with thyroid dysfunction as well as keratoconjunctivitis sicca.