Cardiac dominance plays an essential role in cardiac surgery, particularly coronary artery bypass grafting. Determination of cardiac dominance is through cardiac catheterization which involves insertion of a catheter into the ostium of the left main coronary artery, and the right coronary and injection of radiocontrast dye to allow visualization of coronary arteries.  In coronary artery bypass grafting procedure, precise knowledge of patient-specific coronary anatomy is crucial; this is because the surgeon must identify which vessels are suitable to receive the distal anastomosis of the venous graft. For occlusion of the right or left coronary artery, the posterior descending artery may be the choice if suitable dependent on its patency. The venous conduit is then sutured into a portion of the right coronary artery that is distal to the occlusion.

There have been a large number of studies conducted to determine the significance of cardiac dominance on patient outcome and pathology. One study revealed that patients with left coronary dominance have a reduced prognosis in surgical myocardial revascularization. The exact reason remains undetermined, but speculation is that there is an association with collateral circulation seen in right heart dominant patients that is absent in left heart dominant subjects.

Left heart dominance was described to be a high-risk feature for percutaneous coronary intervention as well.  Left heart dominant patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention have higher in-hospital mortality and more likely to present with symptoms of heart failure, cardiogenic shock, or cardiac arrest.

Left heart dominance in patients undergoing aortic valve replacement for severe aortic stenosis was also shown to be an independent risk factor. There appears to be an increased prevalence of left heart dominance in patients undergoing aortic valve replacement and that the left main coronary artery is significantly shorter than those seen in right heart dominant patients; this may be evidence of a developmental relationship seen in left heart dominant patients between the left main coronary artery and aortic valve. In one study, patients with left dominant coronary circulation were determined to suffer a significantly higher rate of perioperative myocardial infarction compared to right heart dominant or codominant patients.

These studies and trials highlight the significance of determining dominance in coronary artery anatomy within multiple aspects of treating cardiac pathology. The increased risk seems to correlate with left heart dominant circulation, but more research has to be done to determine if different strategies need to be implemented to ensure better outcomes.