Patients with fever usually exhibit warm, flushed skin, tachycardia, involuntary muscular contractions or rigors, and sweating or night sweats. Piloerection and positioning of the body to minimize exposed surface area are also seen. Occasionally these signs are absent or minimal, and dry, cold skin or extremities are detected despite a significant rise in core temperature.

- Fever occurs when either endogenous or exogenous pyrogens cause an elevation in the body's thermoregulatory set-point. In hyperthermia, the set-point is unaltered, and the body temperature becomes elevated in an uncontrolled fashion due to exogenous heat exposure or endogenous heat production.

- Hyperpyrexia is the term for exceptionally high fever (greater than 41 C), which can occur in patients with severe infections. Hyperpyrexia may also be seen in patients with CNS hemorrhages and is associated with a poor outcome.

- Inhibitors of cyclooxygenases, for example, aspirin and acetaminophen, can help reduce fever.

- Observation of a pattern of fever can be helpful in certain conditions. For example, a fever that occurs every 48 to 72 hours occurs in certain types of malaria, and a fever that occurs predominately in the evening is typical of tuberculosis.

- The everyday highs and lows of typical temperatures are emphasized in many fevers. However, these variations might be turned around in typhoid fever and disseminated tuberculosis. Temperature-pulse dissociation occurs in typhoid fever, brucellosis, leptospirosis, some medication-prompted fevers, and factitious fever. In healthy individuals, the temperature-pulse relationship is directly proportional, with an expansion in the pulse of 4.4 beats/minute for each 1 degree C (2.44 beats/minute for each 1 degree F) increase in core temperature.

- During infections, fever may not be observed in babies, older adults, patients with chronic kidney disease, or patients taking corticosteroids; instead, hypothermia may be present.

**The Most Common Causes of Fever in the Clinical Setting**

- Sepsis accounts for up to 74% of fever in hospitalized patients.

- Malignancy, tissue ischemia, and drug reactions account for most of the remainder of the fevers seen in the hospitalized setting.

- Rare causes of fever include neurogenic fever and fevers associated with endocrinopathy.