The endoderm gives rise to the epithelial layer of the lungs, while the mesoderm gives rise to the connective tissue. Lung development subdivides into five distinct stages: embryonic (weeks 4 to 7), pseudo glandular (week 5 to 7), canalicular (week 16 to 25), saccular (week 26 to birth), and alveolar (week 36 to8 years).

**Embryonic Stage:**Development of the lungs begins in the fourth week: lung buds stem from the distal end of the respiratory diverticulum. The respiratory diverticulum forms from the ventral foregut. The two lung buds further divide into two bronchial buds. In week five, bronchial buds branch off into main (primary) bronchi. By the end of the embryonic stage, lobar (secondary) and segmental (tertiary) bronchi have also branched off. Simultaneously, two pulmonary arteries grow from the sixth aortic arch, which will later form a vascular plexus.

**Pseudoglandular Stage:**Between week five and sixteen, terminal bronchioles and surrounding capillary network forms. After the terminal bronchi mark the end of the development for the conducting zone and the beginning of the respiratory zone, which includes the respiratory bronchioles and alveolar sacs. Moreover, mesenchymal cells differentiate into cartilage and smooth muscle cells. Smooth muscle cells, as well as fibroblasts, chondrocytes, and endothelial cells, are known to produce elastin.

**Canalicular Stage:**Respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and a stronger capillary network develop between weeks sixteen and twenty-five. Alveolar ducts support the growth of lung parenchyma that acts as the site for gas exchange. Additionally, airways develop during this stage, and pneumocytes (type 1 and 2) develop at twenty weeks.

**Saccular Stage:**Alveolar ducts branch off into terminal sacs between week twenty-six and birth. The increase of fetal cortisol during this stage also leads to maturation of lungs (tissue remodeling and cell differentiation) as well as synthesis and secretion of surfactant. More specifically, the maturation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a critical event that leads to proper lung compliance. During ECM maturation, stability takes place through elastin and collagen cross-linking.

**Alveolar Stage:**Alveoli continue to develop and proliferate after birth to about eight years of age.

The lung divides into two lobes on the left and three lobes on the right, which are visible on gross anatomy.