**Structural overview
**

The right coronary artery finds its origin from the aorta immediately above the right (coronary) semilunar cusp of the aortic valve. It follows a course between the pulmonary trunk and right atrium in the right atrioventricular groove and curves around the acute angle of the heart. The major branches of the right coronary artery include the sinoatrial (SA) nodal branch, the right (acute) marginal branch, the posterior interventricular branch (commonly referred to as the posterior descending artery, PDA), and the posterolateral branch.

The posterior interventricular and posterolateral arteries branch from the right coronary artery in about 70% of the population.

**Histology
**

The coronary arteries are composed of three layers: tunica intima, tunica media, and tunica adventitia.

The tunica intima is the lining inside the vessels comprised of the endothelium, sub-endothelium, and internal elastic lamina. Simple squamous cells make up the inner-most layer, which functions not only as a barrier allowing blood to flow smoothly but also for pinocytosis, diapedesis, and secretions into the lumen or back into the smooth muscle to produce nitrous oxide (NO). A break in any part of the endothelial lining exposes blood to the subendothelial layer which starts the clotting mechanism. Discontinuity of the simple squamous endothelium can initiate the process of atherosclerosis, where fat buildup causes the endothelium to rip or tear, which initiates the formation of a clot, and leads to plaque buildup. Underneath the sub-endothelium is a thick internal elastic lamina.

The tunica media is the name given the middle layer of the vessels, comprised of layers of smooth muscle cells arrayed in a hexagonal pattern to allow for better contractility.

The tunica adventitia is an outer connective tissue layer supporting the vessel itself and is formed of loose connective tissue (fibroblasts, collagen), vessels, and nerves. Vasa vasorum are vessels that supply larger vessels, and vasomotor nerves (nervi vascularis) support vessel contraction.

**Functional overview
**

Approximately 5% of cardiac output supplies the heart muscle through the coronary arteries.

**Blood flow
**

A linear relationship exists between myocardial oxygen consumption and coronary blood flow. At rest, the heart receives 250-300 ml/min of total blood flow. This increases to 1,000-2,000 ml/min during exercise. Control of heart vessels relies mainly on local metabolic control from adenosine released from myocardial cells. During exercise, the energy demands of the heart increase, and more adenosine is produced, which leads to vasodilation and higher flow rates to meet the requirements of the heart. Coronary arteries also have a high abundance of ß2 adrenergic receptors, which result in vasodilation when stimulated.

Although both arteries branch from the aorta with the same blood pressure, the left, and right coronary arteries exhibit different blood rates. The left coronary flow occurs mostly during diastole when the myocardium is relaxed, and pressure in the coronary artery is higher than the left ventricle. In systole, the pressure in the left atrium is nearly the same as the aortic pressure, so little flow or even a mild reversal of flow may occur (known as the “throttle effect”). This is the primary mechanism for why flow in the left coronary artery is dependent on diastole, but the other factors that contribute to this include the blood vessels coursing from the epicardium to the endocardium getting squeezed during systole, and eddy currents in the sinus of Valsalva during systole decreasing flow to the coronary arteries. In contrast, flow in the right coronary arteries is not diastole-dependent. This is because pressures generated in the right heart are relatively lower, so the pressure inside the right coronary arteries will be higher than the pressure in the walls of the heart even both systole and diastole, which will produce a more uniform rate of flow.