A nasopharyngeal airway device (NPA) is a hollow plastic or soft rubber tubes that a healthcare provider can utilize to assist with patient oxygenation and ventilation in patients who are difficult to oxygenate or ventilate via bag mask ventilation, for example. NPAs are passed into the nose and through to the posterior pharynx. NPAs do not cause patients to gag and are, therefore, the best airway adjunct in an awake patient and a better choice in a semiconscious patient that may not tolerate an oropharyngeal airway due to the gag reflex. NPAs are also helpful when a patient's mouth is difficult to open or access, for example, in cases of trismus or angioedema. While NPAs are airway adjuncts for ventilation and oxygenation in patients who are difficult to ventilate and oxygenate, they only act as a bridge to either a secure airway via endotracheal or nasotracheal (NT) intubation or to assist the patient until the patient is stable and able to breathe independently. This activity describes the indications and contraindications for nasopharyngeal airways and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients requiring them.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the technique for placing a nasopharyngeal airway.
- Describe the equipment required to place a nasopharyngeal airway.
- Outline the complications associated with nasopharyngeal airways. 
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients requiring a nasopharyngeal airway.