**Systemic Scleroderma**

Treatment aims to relieve symptoms and to slow disease progression. No treatment can cure the disease. Therapeutic strategies should have their basis on a person’s symptoms and the need to prevent complications. The use of different immunosuppressive drugs remains disappointing. Immunosuppressive therapy is reserved for diffuse SSc of recent diagnosis (less than 3 to 5 years) and patients with progressive PID. Its basis is on induction with cyclophosphamide then a relay by mycophenolate mofetil.

The treatment of Raynaud's phenomenon is with calcium channel blockers. Protection against cold and smoking cessation are essential preventive measures. Patients should avoid drugs that worsen RP, in particular, beta-blockers (even as eye drops). In severe forms with trophic disorders, intravenous iloprost is a possible option. Bosentan has demonstrated efficacy in secondary prevention of digital ulcers.

The treatment of esophageal involvement is with prokinetic agents and proton pump inhibitors. Treatment of diarrhea related to microbial overgrowth is with an antibiotic such as amoxicillin, norfloxacin or sulfonamides.

ACE inhibitors have a significant place in the treatment of renal crisis but they are not recommended as prevention.

As for other forms of PAH, scleroderma-associated PAH may be treated with drugs designed to relax the walls of the pulmonary arteries, or vasodilation. Oxygen therapy and anticoagulants may be useful. Diuretics can help reduce swelling.

Corticosteroids may be useful in certain inflammatory manifestations of the disease as inflammatory joint manifestations and inflammatory myopathies.

**Localized scleroderma**

Topical corticosteroids are the main treatment for plaque morphea. Generalized morphea may be treated with combination therapy of systemic steroids and methotrexate or with phototherapy. Linear scleroderma of the face or limbs generally requires the combination of systemic corticosteroids and methotrexate to avoid functional and/or esthetic disabilities.