The management of malignancy is complex, as cancer can develop from innumerable sources, and each type having unique patterns of growth and or metastatic progression. Different malignancies have a propensity to metastasize to different tissues, and thus each may respond differently to various treatment strategies. Nearly half of the patients diagnosed with malignancies will undergo radiation treatment, and almost half of those receive some form of palliative radiotherapy. Therefore, practitioners need to have a basic understanding of the principles of palliative radiation therapy to appropriately counsel and guide patients through what is undoubtedly a difficult time in their life.

Patients who require palliative radiation therapy to the spinal cord must be treated by an interprofessional healthcare team with a familiarity with the complexities of palliative cancer treatment. Radiation oncologists should lead the way in the particulars of palliative spine radiotherapy in conjunction with medical clinicians, oncology nurses,  and all associated healthcare staff. An orthopedic or neurosurgical spine specialist should be involved to assess the stability of the spine using methods discussed in order to determine if surgical stabilization is indicated for an individual patient. Finally, surgical and medical oncologists can serve in an advisory role for all adjunct treatments to maximize patient outcomes. This interprofessional healthcare model will optimize patient outcomes when using radiation palliation therapy on spinal tumors while minimizing potential adverse events. [Level 5]