On the third day, the amount of breastmilk taken by the infant is about 300–400 ml/24 hours, and on the fifth day 500–800 ml. It averages at about 800 ml/day during the first 6 months. Infants who are breastfed according to their appetite are only able to empty out 70% of the available milk. The general composition of breast milk changes with time according to the need of the baby. When each nursing session begins, the foremilk satisfies the baby's thirst due to the high content. The hindmilk is more abundant in fat to provide the calories-dense nutrition a baby requires. Breast milk is required for postnatal intestinal function, immune ontogeny, and brain development.

There is extensive data supporting that breast milk is significantly superior to formula feeds and animal milk in preventing infections, such as Otitis media, lower respiratory tract infections, RSV bronchiolitis, sudden infant death syndrome, necrotizing enterocolitis, etc. It also reduces the propensity to develop obesity, allergy, asthma, wheezing, atopy, atopic dermatitis, eczema, celiac disease, Crohn’s disease, Diabetes mellitus type 1, Diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, acute lymphocytic leukemia, and acute myelogenous leukemia.

The fat in breastmilk is necessary for growth regulation, inflammatory responses, immune function, vision, cognitive development, and motor systems in newborns.

The lactose in the milk aids in the absorption of minerals and calcium.

The concentration of protein in breast milk is lower than in animal milk. Higher protein content overloads the immature kidneys with waste nitrogen products. Compared to formulas, human breast milk contains higher whey protein levels, making digestion easier for the newborns. Infant formulas are high in casein whereas the cow’s milk contains only 18% whey out of total protein content. Furthermore, various whey proteins provide different functions necessary for the newborn. For example, immunoglobulin A antibody coats the gut surface and destroys bacteria. The lactoferrin and lysozymes help the immune system against pathogenic bacteria.Bile-salt stimulated lipase present in breast milk assists in the complete digestion of fat in the small intestine

Vitamins and minerals play a critical role in the development of the newborn. They are necessary for enzymatic functions and constitute the building blocks of many molecular substances. However, vitamin D and K are not present in breast milk and require external supplementation. Iron is also essential to a newborn to prevent anemia.

**Colostrum**

It is the special yellowish milk only secreted in the first 2–3 days after the birth of the baby, in small amounts (about 30–60 ml/day). It is abundant in white blood cells and antibodies, especially IgA, to fight off the pathogens and contains about 20 specific antibodies against E.coli, Salmonella, Rotavirus, Candida, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Cryptosporidium, H.pylori, etc. It contains a higher proportion of protein, minerals, and fat-soluble vitamins (A, E, and K) than ordinary breast milk. Vitamin A is required to protect the eyes and form epithelium. It contains multiple growth factors. Insulin-like growth factors 1 and 2 are the most commonly found growth factors in colostrum. The epidermal growth factor is also present and it forms the intestinal lining needed to absorb the nutrients. It is vital for the neonate to be fed on colostrum and nothing else at this time. The composition of colostrum can be altered by maternal conditions such as eclampsia, diabetes, and anemia.