**Chest X-ray**

Posteroanterior and lateral views are needed to rule out underlying respiratory pathologies, clues to any associated congenital heart disease. If a vascular ring is present, the anterior bowing trachea is noted on the lateral radiograph.

**Computed Tomography or Magnetic Resonance Angiography**

These provide advanced imaging of the vascular ring in three-dimensional perspective leading to better visualization and localization

Advantages of CTA: better visualization of airways. Disadvantage of CTA: radiation exposure

Advantages of MRA: no radiation. Disadvantage of MRA: prolonged testing needing sedation/anesthesia

**Echocardiography**

Echocardiography at the hands of an experienced technician can detect vascular anomalies.

Advantage of echocardiogram: Noninvasive, readily available, no radiation exposure. Disadvantage of echocardiogram: Cannot identify atretic segments and can also be affected due to poor acoustic windows

**Bronchoscopy**

Bronchoscopy is not useful in the identification of vascular rings. It is done in certain institutes preoperatively to determine the level of compression to help in endotracheal tube placement. It also helps in some cases to rule out other causes of upper airway obstruction and is part of the work up carried by a pulmonary specialist.

**Barium Swallow**

This is not superior to CTA and MRA, and has no longer used in the evaluation of suspected vascular rings. Posterior indentation of the esophagus indicates a vascular ring. Precise identification of the anatomy of the vascular ring is not possible. Anterior indentation indicates a pulmonary vascular sling.