# Introduction

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a hormone secreted from the right atrium in response to atrial stretch from hypervolemia as well as in response to hypertension. Since its discovery in the early 1980s, there have subsequent discoveries of other natriuretic peptides, including brain or B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP). ANP and BNP are predominately produced by cardiomyocytes, while CNP is found more in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

ANP was first discovered in 1981 by Adolfo J de Bold.

ANP acts to increase the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) within the kidney by dilating the afferent arterioles and constricting the efferent arterioles.

There have also been more recent associations made between ANP and lipid metabolism

Adiponectin is an adipokine secreted by adipose tissue. Adiponectin has regulating effects on glucose and lipid metabolism resulting in increasing insulin sensitivity, reductions in both plasma glucose and free fatty acid (FFA) levels, as well as anti-inflammatory effects.

Additionally, there is evidence to suggest that there is a genetic component to the natriuretic peptides and their receptors. ANP and BNP are both encoded by natriuretic peptide precursors A and B (NPPA & NPPB), respectively, t found on chromosome 1.

Another variant that studied is rs5068. This particular variant demonstrated in a large sample study to result in higher ANP levels, lower blood pressures, reduced C-reactive protein levels, as well as increased amount of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels.

# Testing Procedures

The measurement of BNP and NT-pro-BNP are both accepted assays for the diagnosis and management of heart failure. This test is via a standard blood draw.

An assay for the mid-regional pro-ANP (MR-pro-ANP) is available and appears to have utility in the diagnosis and management of heart failure since it is more stable than ANP.

# Interfering Factors

Again, ANP is not routinely measured. However, in the setting of BNP and NT-proBNP testing, comorbid conditions such as anemia, Type 2 diabetes, kidney disease, obesity, and acute coronary syndrome can affect the levels.

# Clinical Significance

ANP exerts its effects by increasing the amounts of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) circulating in target tissues.

BNP has since become clinically useful in the diagnosis of heart failure. Further, the PARADIGM trial in 2014 compared angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNi) with enalapril in patients with heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction.

To further support this theory, we know that poorly controlled hypertension can lead to left ventricular hypertrophy and, ultimately, to heart failure. The heart failure can be with either a preserved or a reduced ejection fraction. Hypertension, itself, can result from sodium retention along with overactivation of RAAS and the sympathetic nervous system.

Studies have also determined that there is an inverse relationship between aldosterone and ANP so that patients with lower ANP levels actually have higher aldosterone levels, and therefore are more likely to be hypertensive.

With these correlations in mind, it stands to reason that a therapy mimicking the actions of ANP would be beneficial in the treatment of hypertension. Unfortunately, ANP has a very short half-life of only 2 to 5 minutes.

A few examples of these synthetic natriuretic peptides are anaritide and carperitide, which are forms of ANP. Carperitide actually received approval for use in Japan in 1995 for the treatment of patients with acute decompensated heart failure.

As it pertains to lipid metabolism, as described above, this is an area of ongoing research. The discoveries that the natriuretic peptides play a role in lipid mobilization within human white adipose tissue, skeletal muscle fat oxidation, and dissipation of energy in brown adipose tissue all point to the fact that the natriuretic peptides are possibly associated with glucose homeostasis, fatty acid metabolism, and insulin sensitivity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As discussed above, there continue to be many new discoveries with regards to atrial natriuretic peptide. We have discovered its effects on the vasculature, on the kidney, and lipolysis, among others. Each of these has a wide range of impacts on various pathologies, from hypertension to heart failure to even metabolic syndrome. In addition to continued studies into ANP, an interdisciplinary approach is also necessary to help tackle these disorders. From nurses checking vitals and drawing labs to pharmacists helping to dose future therapeutic regimens to physicians understanding the physiology behind ANP, it will require a team effort.