**Cholestyramine Primary Indications**

- Used for patient treatment of primary hypercholesterolemia. The reduction in LDL Cholesterol by the resin is dose-dependent. A dose of 8-12 gram of Cholestyramine is associated with a 12% to 18% reduction in LDL-Cholesterol. One to two weeks is adequate to attain maximal LDL-Cholesterol reduction. A maximal dose of cholestyramine (24 gram) may reduce LDL cholesterol by as much as 25%. However, this will also lead to gastrointestinal side effects, which are often not well tolerated.

- Pruritus can occur in patients with cholestatic disease and incomplete biliary obstruction. Cholestyramine, in doses of 4 grams, one to three times daily, is effective in 80% of the cases.

**Other Clinical Applications**

- Cholestyramine has been shown to decrease cardiovascular mortality and morbidity by 19% compared to placebo in patients with hypercholesterolemia as per the Lipid Research Clinic Coronary Primary Prevention Trial. Per the trial, the reduction in total cholesterol and LDL levels correlates to the decrease in the risk of coronary artery disease.

- A randomized, double-blind crossover study with 21 patients performed by Garg et al. showed that cholestyramine had a glucose-lowering effect when used in individuals with dyslipidemia and type 2 Diabetes mellitus. The study showed a 13% decrease in plasma glucose levels in patients after using 8 grams of cholestyramine twice daily for six weeks.

- Cholestyramine can be used in patients with bile-acid diarrhea or choleretic enteropathy due to limited ileal disease or resection. Diarrhea develops in these patients because of the stimulation of active chloride secretion by bile acids in the colon. However, cholestyramine is not helpful in patients with extensive ileal disease and/or resection presenting with fatty acid diarrhea. In extensive ileal disease or resection, the body cannot produce sufficient quantities of bile acid to compensate for the increased loss due to extensive bowel loss, leading to impaired micelle formation and steatorrhea.

- Studies and case reports show the effectiveness of cholestyramine as an adjunct therapy to antithyroid medications for refractory thyrotoxicosis, leading to a more rapid reduction in serum thyroid hormone levels. However, the effect of cholestyramine is confined to a short period, and the long-term efficacy of the drug remains unclear.

- The inhibition of enterohepatic circulation by cholestyramine makes it an effective drug in the management of hyperthyroidism due to thyroiditis and factitious thyroid hormone use.