Clinical features of avian influenza infection are generally only known in patients requiring hospitalization. Because routine testing for avian influenza is not often necessary unless a patient presents with more severe symptoms, there is little evidence for clinical features or the prevalence of milder infections. Most patients who end up hospitalized present anywhere from 2 to 4 days after exposure but can begin over a week after transmission as well.

Most patients present with symptoms consistent with a flu-like viral illness. In these patients, especially during a known avian influenza outbreak, a thorough history is necessary to evaluate for clues that the illness is due to avian influenza. Additionally, in patients with bird contact and uncharacteristically severe viral symptoms (encephalopathy or organ failure), higher suspicion should be had for avian influenza virus (AIV) infection. Patients that work in the poultry or culinary industries have frequent contact with birds and have greater opportunity to contact the active virus. Most patients with AIV infection have had contact with poultry.

Different strains of the avian influenza virus appear to have different characteristic presentations. H5N1, for instance, usually has a presentation that includes fever and lower respiratory tract symptoms and occasionally a prodrome of non-bloody, non-inflammatory diarrhea. Other avian influenza viruses have other characteristic symptoms. H7N9 and other LPAI strains may more commonly be associated with conjunctivitis.

Regardless of characteristic symptoms, if there is a current outbreak, a patient presenting with avian influenza is most likely to have the same strain as other infected patients in the area have.