Laser photocoagulation is performed as an OPD (outpatient department) procedure. Maintaining proper glycemic control and taking care of other associated systemic illnesses are necessary. There are chances of worsening macular edema and moderate vision reduction after pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP). If that happens, the patient should report to the retinal surgeon for documentation and for planning a further line of management.

It is common to have an acute spike of IOP after intravitreal injections for a few hours. It usually returns to normal within 3-6 hours. It may be prudent to routinely use a single tablet of acetazolamide 250 mg stat after intravitreal injection. After intravitreal injections, patients should be called for follow-up the next day; then, according to the stability of the ocular condition, follow-up at regular intervals should be planned. Sequential OCT and/or OCTA parameters are assessed in each follow-up visit, and depending on their findings, further management with repeat injections, observation, and/or switching to laser /vitrectomy surgery is planned.

**Post-operative Care**

After surgery, the eye is patched. After the patch is removed, the eye is cleaned, and topical administration of medications like antibiotics with steroid eye drops and cycloplegic eye drops are started. After injecting gases like sf6/c3f8 or silicone oil, there are chances of IOP rise post-operatively, which needs to be managed with appropriate antiglaucoma medications. Patients can then be called for regular, timely follow-ups to screen their post-operative outcomes. If silicone oil tamponade is done, the patient should be explained the need for a mandatory second surgery to remove oil.