**Fractures**

The talar neck has less trabecular bone than the head and body and is relatively weak. The most common mechanism of fracture is via forced dorsiflexion, and the first case series was described in WWI fighter pilots, termed aviator astragalus; 100 years later, they occur mostly from motor vehicle collisions or falls. Talar neck fractures classify according to the Hawkins-Canale system, and there is a strong correlation with fracture classification and avascular necrosis.

Lateral talar process fractures are uncommon but may be radiographically occult. The most common mechanism is forced inversion and dorsiflexion and is more common in snowboarders. They commonly present as continued lateral ankle pain located about 1cm inferior and anterior to the fibula. These injuries are frequently misdiagnosed as ligament sprains. Radiographically, the symmetric V shape of the calcaneus demonstrates distortion on the lateral view in cases of a displaced fracture. Though there are several classification systems, McCrory-Bladin is the most common. Non-displaced fractures receive conservative management, and ORIF is used to manage fractures with >2 mm displacement.

Calcaneal fractures are historically devastating injuries and are the most common of the tarsal fractures. Fractures occur with increased axial loading and divide into intraarticular and extraarticular fractures. About three-fourths of calcaneal fractures are intraarticular. The intraarticular fracture results in a shear fracture that involves the posterior facet and the compression line fracture that is from wedging of the anterolateral talar process into the angle of Gissane. Extraarticular fractures involve the anterior process, mid-calcaneus (body, sustentaculum tali, peroneal tubercle, and lateral process) and the posterior calcaneus. CT is the preferred modality for characterizing calcaneal fractures, especially for characterizing the extent of involvement of the posterior subtalar joint. Calcaneal fractures are also associated with thoracolumbar spine fractures. Screening for a coexisting back injury is critical clinically. In the setting of back pain, thoracolumbar CT imaging is indicated.

Lisfranc injuries are fracture-dislocation injuries of the tarsometatarsal joints. The Lisfranc ligament complex is made of three bands, the dorsal oblique, plantar oblique, and the interosseous fibers that bind the second metatarsal base to the medial cuneiform. Though the interosseous fibers are the most important, if two of the three bands are disrupted, the second TMT joint is unstable. The injury is relatively common in sports such as football, basketball, and gymnastics. The mechanism is an axial loading of the plantarflexed foot.  Patients present with dorsal midfoot swelling and vague midfoot pain. Weight-bearing radiographs are more sensitive, but findings may be subtle such as the "fleck" sign, which is the result of an osseous avulsion fracture. Other radiographic findings include dorsal midfoot soft tissue swelling and widening of the space between the base of the first and second metatarsal bones. Lisfranc injuries can be classified as divergent or homolateral, based on the direction of displacement of the metatarsal bones. Radiographic assessment for Lisfranc injuries should include scrutiny of the alignment of the tarsometatarsal joints, which were described in more detail above.

Bone lesions can categorize as aggressive or non-aggressive based on their pattern of destruction. The Lodwick-Madewell grading system is a method for classifying the aggressiveness of a lesion and has significant prognostic/pathologic concordance. Important imaging features to assess include margins, cortical disruption, associated soft tissue mass, and endosteal scalloping. If a lesion is well-circumscribed with a thin sclerotic margin, it is likely benign. However, if a lesion has a wide zone of transition, poorly defined margins, or cortical disruption, it is highly suspicious for an aggressive process such as malignancy or infection.

Osteonecrosis is the ischemic death of bone and is commonly referred to as avascular necrosis (AVN). Common causes include trauma, corticosteroids, alcoholism, sickle cell disease, and collagen vascular diseases. Some specific areas are worthy of mention. Freiberg infraction involves the metatarsal heads, approximately 68% in the second metatarsal, and approximately 28% in the third metatarsal.  Radiographically it may appear as mottled sclerosis, with or with subchondral collapse of the metatarsal head. Freiberg's is more common in women and thought to be secondary to high heeled shoes.

Gout is a metabolic disease that results in monosodium urate crystal deposition. The lower extremities are most frequently involved, classically the great toe where it is called podagra. Osseous erosions can occur anywhere on a bone but are most common intra- and para-articularly.  Acute episodes generally resolve in a few days without treatment. Early gout may be radiographically occult, but as the disease progresses, marginal joint erosions with overhanging margins develop. Soft tissue masses termed tophi can be present secondary to uric acid deposition in the soft tissues. Soft tissue tophi are "pseudolesions," which can be mistaken for a malignant process. Generally, the clinical presentation and existence of erosions on images help to arrive and the correct diagnosis and thereby eliminating unnecessary tissue sampling.

Metatarsal stress injuries are common in military recruits, runners, and ballet dancers. Other conditions that alter weight-bearing, such as hallux valgus or low arches, also increase the risk of stress injuries. Additionally, metabolic disorders or vitamin deficiencies may predispose to fractures. Fatigue fractures are caused by repeated stress on healthy bone, and insufficiency fractures are caused by repeated stress on the abnormally weakened bone. These types of injuries are frequently radiographically occult until periosteal reaction or sclerosis is present indicative of the healing process. MR and nuclear medicine bone scans are more sensitive than radiographs and are obtainable if patients fail conservative management. Common locations in the foot and ankle include the calcaneal tuberosity, talar head (subchondral), navicular, the base of the first and fifth metatarsal bones, and the diaphysis to the neck of the second to fourth metatarsal bones.

Sesamoiditis can occur secondary to repetitive injury, fall from heights, or stepping on uneven surfaces. It is best characterized by MR imaging with increased STIR signal but normal T1. The surrounding soft tissues are often inflamed. Osteomyelitis of the foot most often results from penetrating injury or ulceration and is most common in diabetic patients. Radiographs may show osseous destruction but may be negative in early osteomyelitis, and MR imaging is more sensitive. MR imaging of osteomyelitis shows decreased T1 and increased STIR signal.