Patients with contraindications to simvastatin pharmacotherapy include those with active liver disease, including those who have elevated hepatic enzymes, pregnancy, and women who may become pregnant or who are breastfeeding. Concomitant use with certain medications (see above) is also a contraindication with simvastatin, and drug profiles should undergo a careful review prior to initiation.

Pregnancy is a known secondary cause of dyslipidemia, leading to a potential increase in triglyceride and LDL-C concentrations. Statin therapy is contraindicated during pregnancy resulting in limited options for dyslipidemia treatment during pregnancy. Alternative treatment options are necessary to treat elevated concentrations during pregnancy to minimize associated complications such as hypertriglyceridemia related to acute pancreatitis. Pregnancy has been delayed or avoided in reported cases to avoid the possible complications from untreated dyslipidemia.

Although rare, a serious complication of statin therapy is liver toxicity with elevated levels of transaminases. Due to a potential increase in liver enzymes, patients with active liver disease and pre-existing elevated transaminases are excluded from simvastatin therapy. Simvastatin can transiently increase transaminase concentrations within the first few months of treatment. These subsequently return to baseline. The clinician should monitor liver function and enzymes while their patients are on simvastatin pharmacotherapy.

Contraindicated drugs for concomitant use with simvastatin include atazanavir, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, gemfibrozil, ritonavir, and azole antifungals. This is not an exhaustive list, and complete medication reconciliation is recommended, as with any drug regimen.