Numerous diseases happen due to improper amino acid composition within a protein. Here are a few examples:

**Huntington Disease**

A CAG trinucleotide repeat disorder causes HD in the HTT gene on chromosome 4. Normally, the CAG segment is repeated 10-35 times in the gene.

**Sickle Cell Anemia**

The genetic defect of SCA is found within the beta globulin gene. Both the normal and mutated protein products consist of 147 amino acids. However, the mutated beta globulin protein has a single-base substitution (point mutation) at the sixth amino acid in the chain. In the sickle cell gene, GTG (the codon for valine) replaces the normal GAG codon (for glutamic acid).

**Cystic Fibrosis**

In this disease, there is a mutation on the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator) gene on chromosome 7. The CFTR gene is used to create the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. Two types of base-pair mutations account for the majority of mutated alleles: F508 del and G551D.

Disease-causing mutations within the CFTR gene alter the protein structure, thus impairing chloride ion transport. Normally, this protein transports chloride ions in and out of cells that produce saliva, sweat, tears, mucus, and digestive enzymes. Due to the impaired chloride ion transport, cells that line the passageways of the pancreas, lungs, and other organs start producing abnormally thick and sticky mucus. In turn, the abnormal mucus production obstructs the airways and glands. CF symptoms include salty sweat/salty-tasting skin, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, chronic pneumonia, lung fibrosis, obstructive azoospermia, and accumulation of thick, sticky mucus.