Historically, many therapeutic modalities have been used to treat epithelial downgrowth. These include surgical interventions such as iridectomy, vitrectomy, cautery, penetrating keratoplasty, cryotherapy, photocoagulation, and mechanical debridement. Medical treatments historically include radiation, alcohol, steroids, and antibiotics. Many of these are no longer used due to complications or high recurrence rates.

Cryotherapy, for example, can be used to eliminate epithelium if localized to the posterior cornea, drainage angle, or ciliary body.

Transcorneal photocoagulation with an argon laser is typically used for the cystic form of epithelial downgrowth, but in rare cases, has shown effectiveness in treating the diffuse form.

Intracameral injection of antimetabolites such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and Mitomycin-C (MMC) have also been reported as potentially effective treatments for epithelial downgrowth.

Mitomycin C (MMC) is a DNA cross-linking antineoplastic agent which also inhibits RNA and protein synthesis. It has been hypothesized that applying MMC in the cystic form of epithelial downgrowth damages the epithelial cells that secrete cyst fluid, leading to regression of the cyst.

Lambert et al. reported a case of recurrent epithelial downgrowth refractory to membrane peeling, endolaser photocoagulation, and 5-FU injection that was treated successfully with intravitreal methotrexate (400 mcg/0.1mL).

More aggressive surgical procedures for epithelial downgrowth vary greatly in technique and rates of success and depend on the location and structures affected. In some situations, epithelial cysts can be treated more conservatively, which may be recommended in children to preserve intraocular structures and manage amblyopia. One such technique consists of the viscodissection of the cyst with the aspiration of cyst contents and photocoagulation.

To prevent epithelial downgrowth, a meticulous approximation of wound edges and attention to incisions intraoperatively and postoperatively are crucial. Wound leaks should also be evaluated and repaired when applicable.