**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

**Tooth Fractures**

The classification of dental fractures is dependent upon the tissues involved.

Enamel infractions are the least worrisome and involve microcracks isolated to the enamel. The tooth structure is preserved, and patients are usually asymptomatic. The enamel abnormalities are visualized by transillumination of the teeth during the physical exam. In contrast, enamel fractures involve more substantial damage to the enamel, yet they still do not involve the dentin or pulp layers.

Both classifications have a normal response to pulp vitality tests and tooth mobility testing; however, radiographs of enamel fractures will demonstrate the degree of enamel loss, while enamel infractions will have normal imaging.

Enamel-dentin fractures extend through the enamel and into the dentin without exposing the pulp layer. Enamel-dentin fractures with pulp exposure are more complex in that the fracture extends to the pulp layer, and the pulp is visible on physical exam.

For enamel-dentin fractures, the physical exam will usually demonstrate a vital tooth without sensitivity to percussion and normal mobility testing. In contrast, enamel-dentin fractures that extend to the pulp will clinically be sensitive to applied pressure and temperature testing, yet the pulp is generally viable unless there is a concomitant luxation injury.

Crown-root fractures extend from the tooth’s crown toward its apex and involve the cementoenamel junction overlying the root. The pulp may or may not be involved. The degree of apical involvement is difficult to visualize as the apex of the tooth is below the gingival margin; however, the tooth will likely be mobile, and the patient will also complain of sensitivity to percussion or pressure.

Root fractures involve the cementum, dentin, and pulp. Again, the fracture is below the gingival margin and can be difficult to visualize during the physical exam. However, there may be clinical gingival bleeding, percussion pain, and crown mobility.

**Tooth Luxations**

In the setting of dental trauma, a physical exam demonstrating a tooth with abnormal loosening is consistent with tooth subluxation. If a tooth is found to be displaced out of its alveolar socket in an incisal/axial direction, it is considered to be an extrusive luxation. This is in contrast to an intrusive luxation which involves the displacement of the tooth apically into the alveolar bone. Lateral luxations consist of a tooth displaced in any lateral direction and are commonly associated with fractures involving the alveolar socket wall.

Tooth subluxations are often tender to light touch and percussion, have increased mobility without displacement and may have minimal gingival bleeding. Because there can be transient pulp damage, pulp sensitivity testing may initially be negative. If obtained, radiographs are generally normal.

With extrusive luxations, the tooth appears elongated incisally or displaced in the direction of the crown. The tooth will have increased mobility and negative pulp sensitivity tests. On radiographs, the tooth will have an increased periodontal ligament space apically and appear displaced incisally compared to the adjacent non-injured teeth.

With intrusive luxations, the tooth will appear to be displaced apically into the alveolar bone. Because the tooth is displaced within the alveolar bone, it will be immobile and likely negatively respond to pulp sensitivity testing. On radiographs, the tooth will have a partially diminished or completely absent periodontal ligament space and appear to be displaced apically compared to the adjacent non-injured teeth.

With lateral luxations, the tooth can be displaced in any lateral direction, further described as buccal, lingual, mesial, and distal directions. Lateral luxations are often associated with an alveolar bony fracture which can entrap the tooth’s root making mobility testing results variable. Radiographs will demonstrate a widened periodontal ligament space which may only be seen if additional horizontal views are obtained.

As it takes a significant amount of force to cause an extrusive, intrusive, or lateral tooth luxation, a thorough examination of the oral cavity should be performed to evaluate for other traumatic injuries, including lacerations, gingival contusions, and mandibular or midface fractures. Radiographs may be useful for assessing the exact positioning of the tooth and will also aid in identifying the extent of the injury.

**Tooth Avulsion**

In the setting of dental trauma, a physical exam demonstrating a missing tooth from its alveolar socket is consistent with a tooth avulsion. It is essential to obtain history regarding the length of time since the tooth was avulsed, whether the involved dentition is a primary or secondary tooth, whether the patient or family has kept the tooth, and what medium (if any) the tooth has been stored in.

A thorough examination of the oral cavity involves assessing for any other traumatic injuries, including lacerations, gingival contusions, and mandibular or midface fractures. The tooth socket should be evaluated for the presence of tooth fragments (i.e., a sign of dental intrusion) or other foreign bodies that may prevent tooth replantation. If the avulsed tooth is not found, the healthcare provider should consider that the patient may have aspirated or swallowed it and should evaluate for pulmonary versus gastrointestinal foreign body location with radiographs.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Identifying dental infections is often straightforward and obvious from the history and physical examination—most patients with early dental infections present with complaints of localized pain or swelling.

Patients with reversible pulpitis usually present with a severe toothache exacerbated by temperature changes; as the pulp vitality further deteriorates into irreversible pulpitis and pulp necrosis, dental pain becomes more constant. As pulp necrosis develops, the tooth becomes discolored and can become yellow, gray, brown, or black in appearance.

Those with periodontitis experience gingival pain, bleeding after brushing their teeth, as well as halitosis. Furthermore, gingival inflammation is present during the oral examination. Usually, patients are known to have deep periodontal pockets (4 -12 mm) though these are often not able to be measured during an acute infection.

Patients with necrotizing periodontal disease also present with severe pain and halitosis. However, they often report a rapid onset on systems, and the periodontal attachment can be destroyed in just a few days.

Periapical abscesses usually have a palpable swelling at the base of the tooth.

Pericoronitis is associated most often with third molar eruptions, and patients complain of pain in the posterior mandible or maxilla. Inspection reveals a fully erupted or partially erupted tooth with surrounding gingival tissue that is erythematous and inflamed.

More serious facial and deep neck, mediastinal, or brain infections can arise from untreated dental infections and have more complicated and serious presentations.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-procedural Bleeding**

Immediately after a tooth extraction, bleeding commonly occurs. Normal postoperative bleeding is most often described as a slow ooze, and clot formation generally occurs within several minutes, and the majority of the bleeding should resolve within 30 minutes. It is common for patients to experience minimal oozing and blood-tinged saliva for up to 8 hours after the extraction.

Post-extraction bleeding can be further classified into primary, reactionary, and secondary prolonged bleeding. Primary prolonged bleeding occurs during and immediately after the extraction procedure. In this scenario, the provider will notice the patient’s mouth actively filling with blood following the removal of a hemostatic dressing. Reactionary prolonged bleeding occurs several hours after the dental extraction.

Patients with reactionary prolonged bleeding are more likely to be on anticoagulation therapy, have a systemic illness, or have a congenital coagulopathy. Secondary prolonged bleeding generally occurs one week after the extraction and is rarely encountered in dental practice. Secondary infections are the likely etiology of prolonged secondary bleeding. Primary prolonged bleeding is more likely to respond to local treatment measures such as pressure packs and hemostatic agents, whereas reactionary prolonged bleeding may require a systemic intervention.

Post-extraction bleeding may also result in local oral hematoma development, which would be apparent on the patient’s physical exam. The hematomas may expand over time resulting in airway compromise, and any hematomas should be monitored frequently for progression.

In the event of a traumatic extraction, the provider should perform a thorough physical exam to evaluate for any lacerations or other soft tissue damage that would require repair.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

Patients with alveolar osteitis generally present one to five days after a dental extraction with severe pain at the extraction socket. This pain can radiate in the trigeminal nerve distribution and is unrelieved by oral analgesics.

The physical exam will demonstrate expected postoperative changes with a partial or complete loss of the blood clot within the alveolar socket. Though it can be difficult to appreciate on visual inspection, exposed alveolar bone is the classic physical exam finding of alveolar osteitis.