The spinal cord study is one of the most complex yet quite a fascinating part of the nervous system. Its complex connections, the development defects, the lesions, and clinical presentation are quite overwhelming and warrants a better understanding of its anatomical and physiological nature. This topic has received extensive study and revealed many minute details. But it quite acknowledgeable that still a lot is unknown, and discussing these details is beyond this article.

The spinal cord is an integral aspect of the central nervous system, which is cylindrical and elongated in structure. It is one of the most important contents of the vertebral canal. It presents as an extension of the lower part of the brain stem, i.e., the medulla oblongata. It begins at the first cervical vertebra level and ends at the first lumbar vertebra in an adult.

Like the brain, the very delicate and sensitive spinal cord has strong protection from a strong bony-cage formed by the vertebral arch and body of the vertebras. Together they form a long spinal column (spinal cavity) within which the spinal cord will be present. The spinal cord houses millions of neurons, and their bundled fibers are running as tracts that are either ascending or descending.

The spinal cord gives rise to 31 pairs of spinal nerves, which supply mainly the trunk and the limbs. These spinal nerves are mixed nerves having a motor component that helps control all the limbs' voluntary muscles and trunk. They also have a sensory component that helps in receiving the sensory information from these areas. Hence, it is crucial to understand the basic anatomy for better interpretation of the clinical presentation and its pathology in any spinal cord lesion.