Albendazole is an FDA-approved medication for the treatment of a variety of parasitic worm infections. Albendazole is an antihelminthic medication with numerous indications such as cystic hydatid disease of the liver, lung, and peritoneum resulting from the larval form of the dog tapeworm, Echinococcus granulosus. Albendazole also has approval for treating parenchymal neurocysticercosis secondary to active lesions caused by infection with larval forms of the pork tapeworm, Taenia solium. It can also be a valuable agent for the treatment of pinworm disease caused by Enterobius vermicularis.

Albendazole is used to treat Trichuriasis (Trichuris trichiuria), Filiariasis, Ascariasis (Ascaris lumbricoides), and metronidazole-resistant Giardiasis (Giardia
duodenalis).

Finally, it can be prescribed as a treatment for Trichinosis (Trichinella spiralis), hookworms (Ancylostoma
sp. and Necator sp.), and Strongyloidiasis (Strongyloides stercoralis).

Albendazole has also been the topic of recent investigation as a potential anticancer agent due to its limited toxicity to normal cells but high toxicity to both tumor and parasitic cells.

Albendazole and mebendazole have demonstrated anticancer properties in vitro and in animal models. Both have demonstrated anticancer properties against the following solid tumor cancers: breast, head and neck, colorectal, melanoma, ovary, and prostate. There is also limited clinical data on albendazole and mebendazole’s anticancer properties. Neutropenia is a limiting side effect of prolonged high dose albendazole pharmacotherapy. Mebendazole appears less likely to cause neutropenia.

Keller L. et al. conducted double-blind, randomized controlled trials on the effectiveness of albendazole-ivermectin versus albendazole-placebo in the treatment of Trichuris trichiura. The patients, ages 6 to 60, were from Lao People's Democratic Republic (Laos) and Tanzania (Pemba Island). In Laos, 466 patients received the combination of albendazole-ivermectin, and 413 patients received albendazole-placebo treatment. In Tanzania, 558 patients received the combination of albendazole-ivermectin, and 515 patients received albendazole-placebo treatment. Patients were assessed at six months and twelve months post-treatment. A minimum of one stool specimen was collected from each patient who underwent Kato-Katz assessment, and helminth egg reduction rates, reinfection rates, and cure rates were determined. Patients who were helminth positive after six months received additional treatment. The helminth egg reduction rates in patients from Laos at six months were 99 vs. 79.6 % in albendazole-ivermectin versus albendazole-placebo, respectively. The cure rates were 65.8 vs. 13.4% in albendazole-ivermectin versus albendazole-placebo, respectively. The helminth egg reduction rates in patients from Tanzania at six months were 84.9 vs. 21.2% in albendazole-ivermectin versus albendazole-placebo, respectively. The cure rates were 17.8 vs. 1.4% in albendazole-ivermectin versus albendazole-placebo, respectively. The reinfection rate was 10% in Laos and 100% in Tanzania at twelve months for the albendazole-placebo cohort. Keller L. et al. concluded that albendazole-ivermectin treatment was superior to albendazole-placebo treatment regarding Trichuris trichiura egg reduction rates, reinfection rates, and cure rates.