Meniscal injuries are one of the most common reasons for arthroscopy of the knee. Since the lateral meniscus is more mobile than the medial meniscus, it is the less commonly injured of the two menisci. Acute traumatic meniscal injuries typically occur with axial loading in conjunction with knee rotation; whereas, chronic degenerative tears are more common in older adults with a history of arthritis of the knee. Meniscus tears are the most common tear associated with ACL injuries, with the lateral meniscus affected more often than the medial side. Patients with a meniscal tear will usually present with joint line tenderness and effusion. The McMurray test is the most commonly used physical exam test to evaluate for a torn meniscus, and MRI is the imaging modality of choice for diagnosis and monitoring.

Meniscal tears can be treated non-operatively or through surgical repair or meniscectomy. The most appropriate treatment depends on both patient factors, such as age and co-morbidities, as well as characteristics of the tear. Due to degenerative complications that occur with total meniscectomy, surgical repair is the ideal treatment modality for the long-term health and stability of the joint. Recent evidence has shown that older patients that have degenerative tears without mechanical symptoms can be effectively managed non-operatively with a structured physical therapy program. Even if these patients eventually require meniscectomy, the delay in surgical management also delays the degenerative complications associated with meniscectomy, and patients still achieve functional outcomes similar to if they had initially had surgical treatment. In younger patients, the ability to repair the meniscus depends on the location of the tear. Since just the peripheral third of the meniscus is well vascularized, only tears in this area, and sometimes the middle third, are expected to heal with surgical repair. Tears that involve deep avascular zones of the meniscus must receive treatment with partial meniscectomy as the lack of blood supply will prevent appropriate healing if attempting a repair. Recently, efforts to encourage bleeding in the avascular zones to aid with healing have shown promise in cases where a surgeon attempted a surgical repair on meniscal tears involving tissue with little or no blood supply.