A D&C removes tissue from the endometrial cavity. In a nonpregnant patient, the endometrial lining is sampled and sent for pathological evaluation. Current recommendations for endometrial sampling include hysteroscopy with directed endometrial sampling.

Anatomically the cervix is the lower part of the uterus. The cervix protrudes into the vaginal lumen and is visible on speculum examination. The external cervical os opens into the endocervical canal, which extends proximally to the level of the internal cervical os. The endocervical canal is contiguous with the endometrial cavity. The external and internal cervical ossa are narrower than the endocervical canal; dilation of these openings is often needed to accommodate the instruments used in a D&C.

In the absence of pregnancy, the endometrium has 2 distinct histophysiologic layers; the stratum basalis and the stratum functionalis. The goal of a D&C in a nonpregnant patient is the removal of the stratum functionalis. Removal of this endometrial layer does not affect the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis and does not affect ovulation or future menses.

During pregnancy, the endometrium is highly modified into a specialized tissue, the decidua, divided into 3 layers. The decidua basalis is where the blastocyst implantation occurs, and the basal plate is formed. When performing a D&C on a pregnant patient to remove the products of conception from the endometrial cavity, care must be taken to avoid removing tissue beyond the decidua basalis, as removal of that tissue can predispose to the formation of endometrial adhesions.