Morphine is an opioid administered for acute and chronic pain conditions. The advantage of intrathecal (IT) morphine over intravenous (IV), oral (PO), or transdermal (TD) opiates is due to its delivery into the subarachnoid space with direct access to opiate receptors and ion channels. Administration may be as a bolus, an infusion, or a combination of the two. Intrathecally administered morphine must be preservative-free, sterile, nonpyrogenic, and free of antioxidants and other potentially neurotoxic additives. When drawing up intrathecal morphine from a glass vial, a filter needle is necessary as small glass particles can be catastrophic to neural tissue when administered into the intrathecal space.

Changing the route of morphine administration from systemic to intrathecal requires close attention to dosing as the potency of the morphine is dramatically enhanced by intrathecal delivery. The recommended bolus dose for intraoperative and postoperative analgesia is 0.1 to 0.2 mg intrathecally. The recommended starting dose of intrathecal morphine continuous infusion is 0.1 to 1.0 mg per day in patients without tolerance to opioids and variable dosing in those who have developed tolerance to high doses of oral agents.

**Clinical Uses of Intrathecal Morphine**

- Labor analgesia

- Perioperative analgesia for intra-abdominal, intra-thoracic, and orthopedic surgery of the lower extremities

- Perioperative analgesia for Cesarean section

- Severe chronic pain in patients who have not obtained adequate analgesia from more conservative therapies

Typically, intrathecal morphine is more likely to benefit patients with nociceptive or neuropathic pain that is well localized and responsive to systemic opioids. This pain may or may not be cancer-related. One benefit of intrathecal delivery is since it bypasses first-pass metabolism and the blood-brain barrier by working directly at the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, morphine can achieve an analgesic effect at a lower dose and with potentially less systemic side effects than with large dose oral opioids.