The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is a measure of personality type based on the work of psychologist Carl Jung. Isabel Myers developed the MBTI during the Second World War to facilitate better working relationships between health care professionals, particularly nurses.

The indicator operationalizes these preferences with a series of questions that indicate the individual's propensity towards one end of a dipole in four different categories: energy, perceiving, judging, and orientation. Energy encompasses the scale of extraversion to introversion. Those tending towards extraversion direct their attention to external experiences and actions, deriving energy from those around them. Those tending towards introversion direct their attention towards inner thoughts and ideas, acquiring energy from solitude. Perceiving describes how individuals prefer to intake information on the scale of sensing versus intuitive types. Sensing types prefer to gather information using the five senses. They require gathering facts before understanding general ideas and patterns. Intuitive types prefer to rely on instincts and view problems from the "big picture" perspective, realizing general patterns before identifying constituent facts. Judging categorizes how individuals prefer to make decisions on a scale of thinking to feeling. Thinkers rely on logic and facts, while feelers rely on seeking harmony in resolving an issue. Finally, orientation applies to the preferred lifestyle on the scale of judging to perceiving. Those preferring judgment tend towards an orderly, decisive, and settled lifestyle, while those who prefer a more flexible, unpredictable existence align towards the perceiving type.

With the combinations of two poles in four different categories, a total of sixteen personality types are possible. The representation of these types is with four letters indicating the individual's propensity in each category. For example, someone tending towards extraversion in energy, intuition in perceiving, thinking in judging, and perceiving in orientation, would have the personality type ENTP.

The goal of Myers-Briggs typology is to increase awareness of oneself as well as others and advance through Jung's process of "individuation." This process is describable as the integration, differentiation, and development of one's traits and skills.