The crucial components of the female anatomy in understanding ART are the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and uterus. The ovaries are the third component of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis (HPO), which is a complex feedback loop that controls the female menstrual cycle. The ovaries are the female gonads, paired oval-shaped structures that embryologically derive from the mesonephric ridge before descending in the pelvis. The ovaries are where oocytes mature and develop. Production of estradiol and progesterone also derive from the ovary. The ovaries have two peritoneal attachments – the ovarian ligament and the suspensory ligament of the ovary. The ovarian ligament attaches the ovary to the uterus. The suspensory ligament of the ovary attaches the ovary to the pelvic sidewall and contains the neurovascular supply to the ovary. Understanding this anatomy is important in understanding the transvaginal approach to oocyte retrieval.

The uterus responds to the fluctuating hormones produced by the HPO axis. It lies in the pelvis, between the bladder and rectum. It consists of the corpus (the body of the uterus) and the cervix, which connects the uterus to the vagina. The uterine body consists of three layers – the perimetrium, myometrium, and endometrium. The endometrium is composed of two layers, the functionality, and the basalis. The functionalis layer undergoes cyclical hormonal changes to prepare for implantation with each menstrual cycle. Increasing estrogen levels during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle results in endometrial glandular proliferation. During the luteal phase, progesterone levels rise, causing the endometrium to undergo secretory changes. If an embryo does not implant during the cycle, estrogen and progesterone levels fall, resulting in degradation of the functionalis layer, which then sloughs off with menses.

The fallopian tubes are muscular tubes that extend on both sides laterally from the uterus towards the ovaries.  They aid in the transfer of the ovum to the uterus, often with fertilization happening within the tube itself. The tubes aid in this transfer by sweeping up the ovum at their fimbriated ends, with smooth muscle contractions and ciliated columnar epithelial cells transferring the ovum or embryo to the uterus where it can implant if fertilized.