This scale can assist healthcare workers in determining outcomes. It can help assess the increased risk of falls and further help prevent complications such as fractures or infections that can commonly occur after falls, especially in the elderly.

Impaired balance leads to a decreased quality of life and inability or difficulty to carry out activities of daily living. It can also lead to an increased risk of falls.

The total score after performing the test determines the predicted risk of falls. Overall, total scores below 45 are associated with a higher risk of falls. An individual with a history of falls and a total score below 51 is highly predictive of falls. A score of less than 40 is associated almost with a 100% fall risk.

Furthermore, the test can allow practitioners to assess the need for an assistive device for ambulation, such as a cane, walker, or wheelchair. A total score of 0-20 reflects mobility by wheelchair, 21 to 40 walking with assistance, and a score of 41 to 56 walking independently.

As with neurological conditions, studies have supported using the Berg Balance Scale for lower extremity amputees. There is a high risk of falls in individuals with amputations, with studies showing more than 50% of amputees experiencing falls within the prior 12 months. The results of the Berg testing have been shown to be comparable to the ones when testing for neurological conditions affecting balance.  However, at times they may present with lower scores than expected as prosthetic devices, if present, can interfere with results, especially if there is no proper control of the prosthetic yet.

It is important to consider an individual's risk of fall, as it has been shown that it can lead to lower scores on the scale.