Sexual development in mammals occurs in two sequential stages: the initial phase of sex determination followed by sex differentiation.

A multitude of genes plays an important role in orchestrating this complex sequence of events. A detailed review of these genes is beyond the scope of this article. However, an overview of the most important genetic factors is provided below.

1. SRY gene: the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome is the chief regulator of male sex differentiation; expression causes translation of SRY protein, which mediated testicular development.

2.SOX9 gene: expression of this gene follows the SRY gene and is responsible for the differentiation of Sertoli cells.

3. NR5A1/SF-1: The steroidogenic factor gene codes an important transcription factor involved in male development and steroid biosynthesis.

4. DHH gene: The desert hedgehog gene plays a role in testicular differentiation.

5. DAX/NROB1: Considered as an anti testis factor up-regulated in the ovary.

6.WT1: Codes a transcription factor involved in renal and gonadal development, mutation results in various congenital syndromes of abnormal genitourinary development.

7. Wnt4 and Wnt 7a: Wnt 4 suppresses male sexual differentiation and ovarian androgen production.

A mutation in any of these above genes may lead to the development of DSD. A loss of genes involved in male sexual development can lead to an undervirilized male or 46 XY with a female phenotype.

A finely balanced hormonal milieu is required for normal sexual development; testosterone is necessary to stabilize the Wolffian ducts, while secretion of anti-Mullerian factors is essential for the regression of Mullerian ducts.

The male external genitalia requires the presence of dihydrotestosterone for normal phenotypic development. The deficiency of this hormone or resistance may lead to undervirilized genitalia. Exposure of female genitalia to excess androgens leads to virilization, which may be due to excess production or exogenous exposure.

Aromatase deficiency is characterized by reduced levels of estrogen and increased levels of testosterone. This is seen in 46,XX females with ambiguous genitalia. They often have normal internal reproductive organs.