There are many barriers to safe liberation from mechanical ventilation.

**Critical Steps in the Weaning and Extubation Process**

- Induction of Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation (IMV) after confirming the patient's readiness.

- Spontaneous breathing trial (SBT) for at least 30 minutes.

- Cuff-leak test.

The most critical component in the weaning process is appropriately determining the patient's readiness to initiate the weaning process.

**Examining Readiness to Wean From Mechanical Ventilation**

Despite the known hazards associated with prolonged mechanical ventilation, many patients remain unnecessarily intubated for more extended periods than needed. This knowledge stems from the fact that patients who accidentally self-extubate have a 31-78% risk of reintubation. That means the same patient population has a 22-69% chance of successfully weaning off mechanical ventilation. Even the most experienced clinicians may underestimate a patient's readiness for ventilator weaning.

This is why major critical care societies strongly encourage the implementation of protocols for daily sedation interruption and spontaneous breathing trials. However, before a patient is considered for ventilator weaning, the following questions are well worth considering to ensure maximum chances of successful ventilator weaning:

- Has the disease process that led to mechanical ventilation resolved or improved?

- Is the patient hemodynamically stable? Absence of shock or requirement for pressors or significant arrhythmias

- Is the patient adequately oxygenated? (Fraction of inspired oxygen <50% and/or low PEEP requirements)

- Is the patient adequately awake and communicative? (absence of encephalopathy, agitation, or overtly altered mental status)

Note that the presence of any of the above parameters doesn't guarantee weaning failure. The opposite also holds true. Because clinical judgment may sometimes over or underestimate a patient's readiness, a need for objective measures exists. Those indices should ideally be easily measurable and widely applicable.

Some suggested indices correlate directly with ventilatory parameters, such as minute ventilation (VE) or vital capacity(VC). Other indices correlate with the degree of oxygen requirements, such as the ratio of arterial to alveolar oxygen ratio (Pao2/PAo2), the ratio of arterial oxygen to the fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) ratio, or the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (A-a gradient). Also, some parameters examine respiratory muscle strength, such as maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP).

There are so many indices **because**none of them is perfect. There is a wide degree of variability in the performance of the above tests, and their predictive value is far from optimal. The reason being is that these indices only measure one aspect of the respiratory function, while the weaning process is complex and multifactorial.

**Rapid Shallow Breathing Index (RSBI)**

Defined as the ratio of respiratory rate (f) to tidal volume (VT), initially described by Yang and Tobin 1991. Their trial found that RSBI <105 correlated with weaning success, while a score >105 correlated with weaning failure.

Diaphragmatic rapid shallow breathing index comprising:

- Diaphragmatic excursion rapid shallow breathing index (DE-RSBI)

- Respiratory rate [RR]/DE) and the

- Diaphragm thickening fraction rapid shallow breathing index (DTF-RSBI, RR/DT showed a higher predictability value compared to RSBI alone.

**Adjuncts to Predict and Facilitate Safe Weaning**

- Diaphragmatic ultrasound to assess Diaphragm thickening fraction (DTF).

- Assessment of Airway occlusion pressure (P0.1), central venous-to-arterial pO2 gradient, and central venous oxygen saturation during SBT.

- Daily sedation interruption (DSI) facilitates weaning.

- An early rise in CVP after starting an SBT has a high risk of extubation failure.

- The frailty index is also crucial.

- Diaphragm EMG.

- Extubation predictive score (ExPreS) score of ≥59 points has an OR of 23.07 for safe extubation.

- Machine learning.

- Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP).

- Mechanical Ventilation-Respiratory Distress Observation Scale (MV-RDOS.)