After the induction of anesthesia and the appropriate lines and tubes have been secured, the patient is positioned supine with the head turned to the right. The preparation area is wide and includes the neck, the right, and the left chest, and the entire abdomen. The abdominal portions start with either a chevron or midline incision. The abdomen is explored, and metastatic disease is sought if done for cancer. Any abnormality is addressed. The colon is mobilized away from the stomach protecting the gastroepiploic vessels. The stomach is elevated, and the left gastric artery is divided. Care is taken to protect the right gastroepiploic artery as that is the vessel to keep the conduit alive. The lesser omentum is cleared, protecting the arcade on the lesser and greater curves of the stomach. The short gastric vessels are taken to hiatus. The distal esophagus and stomach are freed from the surrounding tissues.

A generous Kocher maneuver is done to mobilize the pyloric end as it should approach the level of the hiatus or xiphoid. All nodal bearing tissue around the stomach should be taken with the specimen. The hiatus is bluntly enlarged to four fingerbreadths to allow the surgeon's hand to enter the mediastinum. The surgeon then frees the posterior surface of the esophagus from the spine, followed by the anterior surface from the pericardium. On either side of the esophagus is the segmental blood vessel supply from the aorta. These small vessels are cauterized or sealed, or just torn. The vessels will bleed a little then stop with time. The esophagus is encircled and dissected bluntly staying on the esophagus at all times. The extent is to the thoracic inlet.

While the surgeon's hand and arm are in the chest, careful attention to the blood pressure and arrhythmias needs to be paid. If the blood pressure drops or if arrhythmias develop, the hand and arm must be removed to allow the heart time to fill and recover. Once the heart recovers, then continued dissection is done. Either with another team at the neck, or at this time, the cervical exposure needs to be made. The anterior cervical incision is placed anterior to the sternocleidomastoid and carried down to encircle the esophagus. Care must be taken to identify and preserve the recurrent laryngeal nerves and the thoracic duct. Once the esophagus is encircled in the neck, blunt dissection is used to gain access to the superior mediastinum. With one hand in the chest and one in the neck, then the surgeon's fingers should meet, and the esophagus should be completely mobile. The esophagus is divided in the neck, and a drain is connected to the distal esophagus, which is then pulled into the abdomen.

The gastric tube is created by stapling from the fundus across the cardia to the lesser curve of the stomach so that the apical most reach of the stomach is with the fundus. The specimen can be removed with the nodal tissue en bloc. The drain is then attached to the fundus, and with gentle traction on the drain in the neck, the stomach is fed into the chest through the thoracic inlet to the neck. Care should be taken here not to rotate the axis of the stomach. Once the location of the stomach is confirmed in the appropriate orientation, cervical anastomosis is performed. This can be either hand-sewn or stapled per the surgeon's choice. The stomach can be anchored to the cervical prespinal fascia to reduce tension on the anastomosis.

The closed suction drain is placed near the anastomosis, and the cervical incision is closed in layers. The abdomen is re-assessed, and determination for a jejunal feeding tube is made. The nasogastric tube should be confirmed in the stomach, and if a jejunal feeding tube is needed, it is placed distal to the ligament of Treitz. The decision for a pyloromyotomy or pyloroplasty needs to be made as well. If the surgeon deems this necessary, either pyloric drainage procedure can be done. In a classic transhiatal esophagectomy, a pyloroplasty about 2 cm in size is done, and a feeding jejunostomy is placed as well. The abdomen is then closed.