Interprofessional teamwork and communication provide increased odds of success for all patients, especially those undergoing cancer treatments. Oncologists should thoroughly evaluate the patient and select an appropriate treatment regimen based on guidelines and patient-specific factors. For example, in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer, tamoxifen may not be appropriate. This is where the services and input of an oncology-specialized pharmacist can prove invaluable. Other clinicians, including mid-level practitioners, who treat the patient need to be made aware of the patient's tamoxifen therapy, so they can factor that into their own treatment regimens for other conditions and be alert to potential adverse events or treatment failure,

Oncology nurses should be aware of the more severe adverse effects tamoxifen may cause and look out for them in their patients, reporting concerns to the interprofessional clinical team. Pharmacists should assist the clinical team by examining the patient’s current and complete drug regimen and ensuring no interactions exist with their other medications, as tamoxifen has many. All interprofessional team members need to provide patient counseling and answer patient questions since an informed patient will be more compliant and be able to self-report potential issues as they arise. These are just a few examples, and roles tend to overlap in many different professions, but every healthcare professional provides a vital role that, in turn, benefits the patient greatly through improved therapeutic outcomes and minimizing of adverse events. [Level 5]