The stage of the Eales disease determines the management. Management options include - observation, medical therapy, laser photocoagulation, and vitreoretinal surgery. Both eyes of the patient may have different stages of the disease, so more than one mode of treatment modalities may be required.

**Observation**

Patients who do not have active peripheral vasculitis should be kept under observation with follow-ups at 6 to 12 monthly intervals. Those with a new vitreous hemorrhage with an attached retina need to be reviewed after every 2 to 6 weeks. Such vitreous hemorrhages usually clear in about 6 weeks.

**Medical Therapy**

Steroids (systemic and/or periocular) are the first line and mainstay of treatment in the inflammatory stages.

Oral prednisolone is given in the dose of 1 mg/kg body weight and is tapered by 5 to 10 mg per week, over a duration of 6-8 weeks. A maintenance dose of 15 to 20 mg per day for a duration of up to 2 months may be needed in some patients. Generally, response to corticosteroids is extremely good in Eales disease. Thus, Eales disease seldom requires cyclosporine and other immunosuppressive drugs. Cyclosporine or azathioprine may be required in patients who have unacceptable side effects due to systemic corticosteroids or do not respond to them.

In some cases, systemic therapy may be much less effective, and in order to halt the disease progression and for reducing the recurrence, an intravitreal sustained-release dexamethasone implant may be needed in such cases.

Cases with vitreous hemorrhage, precluding a view of the fundus, require serial follow-ups with B-scan ultrasound 2 to 6 weekly to rule out retinal detachment, which needs urgent surgery. The role of vitamin C and E in fighting oxidative stress is controversial.**Laser Photocoagulation**It is the treatment of choice in Eales disease with the proliferative stage.

Optic disc neovascularization mandates the need for pan-retinal Photocoagulation. Some minor complications may arise because of laser photocoagulation. Retinal hemorrhages may occur in some cases with very high laser power, but major bleeding is rarely seen if the selection of laser parameters is done properly. Retinal gliosis due to regressing new vessels following laser may lead to contraction and may give rise to complications, like retinal tear resulting in retinal detachment. The laser is not advised in the active inflammatory stage since there are chances of worsening macular edema or inflammation after the laser. After the inflammation has subsided with medications/ subtenon or intravitreal steroids, laser photocoagulation may be done.

**Surgery**

Pars plana vitrectomy is indicated in cases with persistent vitreous hemorrhage with/without retinal detachment(tractional/rhegmatogenous/combined).

However, with recent advances and the safety of vitreoretinal surgery, some surgeons may plan earlier interventions depending on the patient's visual demand. Early vitrectomy may be considered in cases of extensive vitreous membranes, epimacular membranes, or tractional retinal detachment. Vitreous surgery may be straightforward if a complete posterior vitreous detachment is present beforehand. Vitrectomy clears the vitreous opacities and allows the evaluation of the fundus. Laser photocoagulation may be done using an endolaser or by an indirect laser delivery system. Compared to proliferative diabetic retinopathy, vitrectomy in Eales disease is easier. Posterior vitreous detachment and clearing of subhyaloid blood are required. After vitrectomy, epimacular membranes may be peeled off. After vitrectomy in Eales disease, visual results are generally very good.

**Anterior retinal cryoablation (ARC)**Primary ARC can be done in neovascular glaucoma where the visual prognosis is poor and in cases with hazy ocular media, which may be due to cataracts, after cataracts or vitreous hemorrhage, and in cases with a small non-dilating pupil. With current advances, laser photocoagulation has almost replaced ARC in most cases.