Diagnosis of ulcerative colitis is made clinically with supportive findings on endoscopy, biopsy, and by negative stool examination for infectious causes. Because colonic infection can produce clinical findings indistinguishable from idiopathic ulcerative colitis, microbiologic studies for bacterial infection and parasitic infestation should be included in the initial evaluation.

Radiologic examinations are not critical for the diagnosis but may be useful. Patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis may show a "stove-pipe" sign on double-contrast barium enema (DCBE).

Colonoscopy or proctosigmoidoscopy might reveal loss of typical vascular pattern, granularity, friability, and ulceration which involve the distal rectum and proceed proximally in a symmetric, continuous, and circumferential pattern. The disease can range from isolated to the rectum and sigmoid colon (proctitis) to disease of the entire colon (pancolitis). Population-based studies show that, upon presentation, proctitis is found in 30% to 60% of patients, left-sided colitis is found in 16% to 45%, and pancolitis is found in 14% to 35%.

Laboratory evaluation will usually reveal an increase in inflammatory factors (ESR, CRP, leukocytosis), especially during an acute flare. Regardless of disease stage, 60% to 70% of ulcerative colitis patients are positive for perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA). P-ANCA is also found in a small number of patients with Crohn disease. In addition to P-ANCA, anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) are found in both Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis but are more prevalent in Crohn disease, therefore testing for both P-ANCA and ASCA has some utility in distinguishing types. Testing for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) can also be helpful in ulcerative colitis as higher levels can indicate a flare.

Testing for fecal calprotectin also has some utility in the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis, though it is nonspecific. Fecal calprotectin correlates with increased neutrophils in the intestine and therefore can be helpful in ruling out inflammatory bowel disease. Studies show that less than 1% of patients with low fecal calprotectin are likely to suffer from inflammatory bowel disease.

An endoscopy (colonoscopy) must be done at some point which will reveal:

- Fragile mucosa

- Granular mucosa

- Loss of vascular pattern

- Presence of erosions and pseudopolyposis

Multiple biopsies should be obtained to confirm the diagnosis.

When a diagnosis of ulcerative colitis is made, the most common classification system used to determine the extent and severity of the disease is the Montreal classification system. Extent (E) is determined by endoscopic evaluation and includes E1 (Proctitis), E2 (left-sided or distal colitis), and E3 (pancolitis). Symptoms and systemic findings determine severity (S). It ranges from S0 (remission) to S3 (severe).