Vision loss in neuroretinitis is usually unilateral but can be bilateral. The first presentation is with disc swelling of any degree. This may or may not be associated with flame hemorrhages at the disc. Other features such as very severe swelling or retinal vascular occlusion should prompt the physician to consider other disease processes.  Subretinal and intraretinal fluid may be noted in the peripapillary region, which can be missed but seen on optical coherence tomography (OCT).  Fluid from the optic disc tracks directly into the outer nuclear-plexiform layers of the retina and accumulates in the subretinal space giving rise in some cases to a focal macular detachment of the neurosensory retina.

Vision is often reduced and can range between 20/20 to light perception and can tend to be worse in CSD-NR and recurrent-idiopathic neuroretinitis.

A mild to moderate relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) is seen in many cases, and in particular, around two-thirds of CSD-NR. However, the absence or presence of an RAPD does not include or rule out neuroretinitis. Posterior vitreous cells can also be seen, alluding to the inflammatory nature of the disease.

Careful history-taking is essential, and one must inquire about any preceding flu-like prodrome, but also around the risk factors for Lyme disease (tick bite and erythema migrans), sexually transmitted infections, as well as risk factors for tuberculosis.  As with every neuro-ophthalmic case, a detailed systemic review and travel history must also be carried out.