Lurasidone is clinically beneficial in treating patients with schizophrenia and bipolar depression. Approximately 80% of the patients with schizophrenia achieve optimal response on 40 to 80 mg of lurasidone per day. Lurasidone is effective in treating depressive symptoms in schizophrenic patients; this is very important as the depressed mood correlates with suicide in these patients.

Patients with bipolar depression achieved an optimal clinical response at 20 to 60 mg of lurasidone per day. Lurasidone has minimal metabolic side effects but demonstrates akathisia, somnolence, sedation, and extrapyramidal side effects. These can be minimized by prescribing the right dose and administration of the medication in the evenings. Although lurasidone has no significant prolongation of the QTC interval, most sudden cardiac deaths in patients receiving atypical antipsychotics are dose-dependent. Careful monitoring is required when prescribing high doses of lurasidone. Lurasidone offers the convenience of once-daily dosing; this is especially important for patients suffering from complex mental illnesses. It is imperative that healthcare workers, including pharmacists, assist the team by counseling the patients to take this medication with food at all times, at least 350 calories, to increase absorption. To strictly follow these dietary guidelines may be challenging for some. The issue with absorption may resolve if the formulation of the tablet changes to water-soluble.

In acute schizophrenia, lurasidone was found to be similar to quetiapine but not superior to risperidone in 12-month studies. Limited data are available on lurasidone’s efficacy in bipolar depression. In 2014, two randomized double-blinded clinical trials (PREVAIL) showed promising results in decreasing MADRS (Montgomery- Asberg Depression Rating Scale) and GCI-BP (Clinical Global Impressions Scale for use in bipolar illness ) scores, as monotherapy and adjunctive to lithium or valproate.

There is a lack of data on the safety and efficacy of lurasidone use in elderly and pregnant/postpartum women. Clinical data on the safety and efficacy of lurasidone in schizophrenia reveals minimal adverse effects. More high-quality, long-term randomized control clinical trials need to be conducted to establish the safety and efficacy of lurasidone in bipolar depression.

Lurasidone requires the input of a healthcare team for therapy to be most effective. The prescribing clinician will, of course, initiate therapy based on their clinical judgment. Nursing staff can assist in counseling the patient on dosing and administration, monitoring treatment progress on subsequent visits, and letting the prescriber know if there are any issues to address. The pharmacist should check carefully for drug-drug interactions, especially in light of lurasidone's CYP450 metabolism, verify dosing, and providing additional patient counseling when the patient comes to pick up the medication. Nursing should be vigilant in monitoring during followup visits, answer any patient questions regarding therapy and report their findings to the managing clinician. Therapy optimization can only occur with the involvement of an interprofessional healthcare team, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all communicating together to ensure optimal therapeutic results. [Level 5]