**Interscalene Brachial Plexus Block**

- Place the ultrasound probe in the supraclavicular fossa in a transverse orientation, aimed caudad relative to the thoracic cavity, to visualize the brachial plexus near the subclavian artery. Once identified, follow the plexus cephalad; it is found in the interscalene groove.

- At the interscalene groove, the plexus is typically seen as multiple anechoic circular structures with a "stoplight" appearance. Typically, the topmost structure is C5, while the middle and lower structures are both divisions of C6.

- Use the color Doppler to identify any vascular structures in the needle path.

- Insert a block needle in-plane from posterior to anterior and lateral to medial toward the interscalene groove. Be cautious not to advance the needle between any of the hypoechoic nerve roots.

- Once the needle tip is in the groove, confirm the tip is not intravascular by negative aspiration.

- Inject 1 mL to 2 mL of a local anesthetic to verify tip placement and spread of local anesthetic into the interscalene groove, causing spread around the nerve roots.

- Once the placement is confirmed, repeat incremental injection and negative aspiration until an adequate spread of local anesthetic has occurred. Typically the volume is between 10 mL to 30 mL.

**Superior Trunk Block**

- Place the ultrasound probe in the supraclavicular fossa in a transverse orientation, aimed caudad relative to the thoracic cavity, to visualize the brachial plexus near the subclavian artery. Once identified, follow the plexus cephalad, where it is found in the interscalene groove.

- Scan caudad, following the C5 and C6 roots to where they appear joined as the superior trunk. Ideally, this location should be proximal to where the suprascapular nerve branches.

- Identify the dorsal scapular nerve as it courses through the middle scalene muscle to avoid it during needle passage.

- Use the color Doppler to identify any vascular structures in the needle path.

- Insert a block needle in-plane from posterior to anterior and lateral to medial toward the superior trunk.

- Once the needle tip is deep relative to the superior trunk, confirm it is not intravascular by negative aspiration.

- Inject 1 mL to 2 mL of a local anesthetic to verify tip placement and spread of local anesthetic adjacent to the superior trunk.

- Once the placement is confirmed, repeat incremental injection and negative aspiration until an adequate spread of local anesthetic has occurred. Typically this volume is about 10 mL.

**Supraclavicular Brachial Plexus Block**

- Place the ultrasound probe in the supraclavicular fossa in a transverse orientation, aimed caudad relative to the thoracic cavity, to visualize the brachial plexus near the subclavian artery.

- Visualize the visceral and parietal pleurae interface, seen as "lung sliding" on ultrasound. Additionally, visualize the first rib as a hyperechoic line with a dropout artifact deep relative to itself. The plexus and subclavian artery should be visualized overlying the first rib. This allows the first rib to be used as a bony backstop, decreasing the risk of pneumothorax. Rotating the lateral edge of the probe more posteriorly may aid in obtaining this window.

- Insert a block needle in-plane from posterior to anterior and lateral to medial, aiming for the deep portion of the brachial plexus where it overlies the first rib.

- Confirm negative aspiration, then inject a small amount of local anesthetic to raise the plexus of the first rib.

- Advance the needle along the first rib to the anterior aspect of the plexus, adjacent to the subclavian artery. This is called the "corner pocket." It is essential to completely cover this area for a successful block.

- Confirm negative aspiration, then inject another 1 mL to 2 mL of the local anesthetic. Repeat until about 10 mL has been injected deep relative to the plexus.

- Retract the needle to the skin, then readvance at a shallow angle, guiding the needle to the superficial aspect of the brachial plexus.

- Confirm negative aspiration, then inject 1 mL to 2 mL of local anesthetic superficial to the plexus. Repeat until about 10mL has been injected superficially relative to the plexus.

**Infraclavicular Brachial Plexus Block via the Traditional Approach**

- Place the ultrasound probe in the deltopectoral groove with the probe marker facing cephalad. The probe should be just caudad to the clavicle.

- Identify the axillary artery and vein deep to the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles. The vein is usually found lateral to the artery and is compressible and non-pulsatile. Doppler may be used to aid in identification.

- Using the color Doppler, identify the thoracoacromial artery and cephalic vein, as these may be within the needle path.

- The brachial plexus has split at this level into the lateral, posterior, and medial cords, typically found at 9, 6, and 3 o'clock, respectively. However, they are not always visible and need not be visualized for a successful block.

- Insert a block needle in-plane from cephalad to caudad and medial to lateral, starting just the caudad to the clavicle and aiming for the lateral aspect of the axillary artery. The needle trajectory is often quite steep, which may limit needle visualization.

- Aim the needle toward the 6 o'clock position deep relative to the axillary artery.

- Confirm negative aspiration, then inject 1 mL to 2 mL of a local anesthetic to visualize the spread of the local anesthetic deep relative to the artery.

- Repeat step six until the adequate spread of local anesthetic has been achieved. This is visualized as a 'U'-shaped spread of anesthetic along the lateral, posterior, and medial aspects of the axillary artery. Typically, a volume of 20 mL to 30 mL is required.

**Infraclavicular Brachial Plexus Block via the Retrograde Approach**

- Proceed with steps one to three of the traditional approach above.

- Starting just cephalad and posterior to the clavicle, insert a block needle in-plane from medial to lateral with the needle trajectory parallel to the ultrasound probe. Having the superior edge of the ultrasound probe slightly overlying the clavicle may help in orientation and needle guidance.

- Visualize the needle passing under the clavicle and parallel to the probe. Aim toward the 6 o'clock position deep to the axillary artery.

- Confirm negative aspiration, then inject 1 mL to 2 mL of a local anesthetic to visualize the spread of the local anesthetic deep relative to the artery.

- Repeat step 4 until the adequate spread of local anesthetic has been achieved. This is visualized as a 'U'-shaped spread of anesthetic along the lateral, posterior, and medial aspects of the axillary artery. Typically, a volume of 20 mL to 30 mL is required.

**Axillary Brachial Plexus Block**

- Place the ultrasound probe in a transverse orientation in the axilla at the site where the pectoralis major inserts onto the humerus.

- Scan distally and proximally to visualize the axillary artery, vein, and nerves surrounding the artery.

- The ideal ultrasound window should contain the musculocutaneous nerve seen piercing coracobrachialis and the teres major fasciotendinous insertion onto the humerus seen deep in the axillary artery.

- Color Doppler should be used to identify surrounding vasculature, as this area is highly vascular.

- Insert a block needle in-plane from anterior to posterior, parallel to the ultrasound probe.

- Advance the needle toward the musculocutaneous nerve (MCN).

- Confirm negative aspiration, then repeatedly inject 1 mL to 2 mL aliquots until adequate spread around the MCN is achieved.

- Retract and redirect the needle deep relative to the axillary artery.

- Confirm negative aspiration, then repeatedly inject 1 mL to 2 mL aliquots until adequate spread around the posterior aspect of the axillary artery is achieved.

- If the spread around the artery is inadequate, advance the needle under the artery toward the medial aspect and repeat step 9.

- Retract and redirect the needle superficial to the axillary artery.

- Repeat step nine to ensure the circumferential spread of the local anesthetic.

- An optional step to block the intercostobrachial nerve is to retract the needle to the skin and readvance between the skin and the muscle/fascia layer superficial to the axillary artery and plexus.