Prior to any airway reconstruction, the nature and severity of the stenosis are confirmed with a formal airway evaluation, including direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy by the Otolaryngologist. This is typically performed in conjunction with gastroenterology and pulmonology, with esophagogastroduodenoscopy and flexible bronchoscopy/bronchoalveolar lavage as indicated, to ensure the health of the shared aerodigestive tract.

If reconstruction is considered following formal airway evaluation and the patient’s clinical condition allows it, imaging is usually performed to help plan the surgical procedure and confirm findings. A high-resolution CT (HRCT) scan with contrast of the neck and chest will help define the stenotic segment as well as define any cardiopulmonary abnormalities that need to be addressed. CT angiogram and MRI are sometimes helpful depending on the nature and etiology of the pathology.

With recent advances in 3-D printing and rapid prototyping, many institutions are also beginning to utilize this technology both in preoperative planning and intraoperative repair. Patient-specific 3-D models can be designed and printed rather quickly and cost-effectively from HRCT scans. In theory, this allows surgical teams to define the stenosis better, manipulate it preoperatively to test concepts and techniques, and improve confidence intraoperatively. There are also reports of patient-specific bioresorbable implants being utilized to address difficult tracheobronchial stenoses with good preliminary data.