# Introduction

Scientists who sought to understand the spinal venous system thought of it as the fourth venous system, the other three systems being the portal, caval, and the pulmonary venous systems. The spinal venous system consists of a network of valveless veins grouped into three intercommunicating drainage systems that empty into extra spinal veins, ultimately returning venous blood to the heart. Since the system is valveless, spinal venous drainage is influenced by gravity, body position, intraabdominal, and intrathoracic pressure. Knowledge of this system equips clinicians to diagnose and treat pathology that results from its failure.

# Structure and Function

The spinal venous system consists of the intrinsic, extrinsic, and extradural systems. During IVC occlusion, the spinal venous system can serve as a collateral drainage system due to its connection with both pelvic and cranial veins.

# Embryology

The development of spinal cord veins begins around week 4 of gestation with the common cardinal vein, along with the right and left anterior and posterior cardinal veins. Paired supracardinal and subcardinal veins develop inferior to the common cardinal vein. Simultaneously, the paravertebral plexus forms around the developing spinal cord, and the cardinal veins connect to the paravertebral plexus via transverse intersegmental veins. Several transverse intersegmental veins form from the cardinal veins along its length. In the mature fetus, the transverse intersegmental veins in the cervical area become the vertebral veins, the right supracardinal vein persists as the azygos vein, and the left supracardinal becomes the hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins. The anterior cardinal veins become the internal and external jugular veins, while the right posterior cardinal vein becomes the arch of the azygos in the mature fetus. With the regression of the cardinal veins, the paravertebral plexus drains into the ascending lumbar and azygos veins. Several anastomoses also form during development, and the azygos veins connect to the common iliac via the ascending lumbar and subcostal veins.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The intrinsic venous system refers to the collecting veins within the spinal cord parenchyma and further divides into central and peripheral drainage systems. In the central region of the cord, blood is drained centrifugally via numerous sulcal veins located both ventrally and dorsally. Ventral sulcal veins drain the medial portion of the anterior horn, the anterior commissure, and the white matter of the anterior funiculus.

The pial venous network, radicular veins, as well as longitudinally oriented anterior and posterior spinal veins, comprise the extrinsic system of the spinal cord, which collects blood from radial and sulcal veins. The usually paired anterior spinal veins course from the medulla oblongata to the filum terminale. While the anterior spinal veins are typically in pairs in the cervical and thoracic regions, they become a single vessel in the lumbar area. It is located within the anteriomedian fissure and runs anteromedially, alongside the anterior spinal artery. The posterior median spinal vein begins at the conus medularis and can extend the length of the cord, usually within the posterior median fissure. It is often a single vessel but can be paired or even form a plexus.

The vertebral venous plexus, also called the Batson plexus refers to veins located extradurally within the spinal canal (internal plexus), surrounding the vertebral column (external plexus) as well as horizontal basivertebral veins that run through the vertebral bodies (basivertebral plexus).

Intervertebral veins of the cervical cord empty into the vertebral, deep cervical, and jugular veins. Those of the thoracic cord drain into the hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins on the left, and the azygos vein on the right. Intervertebral veins draining the lumbar region empty into the azygos and ascending lumbar veins.

# Nerves

Pathology within the spinal venous system can cause ischemic myelopathy via venous hemorrhage or venous obstruction.

- Venous hemorrhage directly into the cord can result from trauma or vascular malformations, and ultimately disrupts the normal functioning of the parenchyma. Intrathecal hypertension can result from cord hemorrhage with consequent venous engorgement and rupture of the internal vertebral venous plexus.

- Venous occlusion due to emboli or thrombus from sepsis or malignancy or occlusion of the vertebral venous plexus during decompression sickness can also cause ischemic myelopathy.

- Additionally, spinal stenosis and intervertebral disc herniation can cause radiculopathy via venous obstruction of radicular veins with consequent dilation of the veins and compression of nearby nerve roots.

# Muscles

Cord compression can cause both upper motor neuron and lower motor neuron disease. Compression involving descending motor pathways and motor nerve roots can affect lower motor neurons that could result in flaccid paralysis of the muscles innervated if there is no prompt identification and correction of the underlying cause.

# Physiologic Variants

Numerous variations exist throughout the spinal venous system.

- Variations of intramedullary veins:

Venous angiomas, also called developmental venous anomalies are normal variants of intramedullary spinal veins and appear to correlate with cavernous malformations.

- Variations of the anterior spinal vein:

There is considerable variability in the course that the anterior spinal vein takes in becoming the vein of the filum terminale. It has been shown to deviate from the conus medullaris and course along a sacral or lumbar nerve root.

- Variations of the posterior spinal veins:

The position, course, and anastomotic pattern of the posterior spinal veins show considerable variability. It is usually a single vessel near the conus, but it can be paired or form a plexus called the posterior venous plexus.

- Variation of radicular veins:

While 60% of radicular veins exit the dura with the nerve root, 40% exit through different foramina between adjacent spinal nerves.

# Surgical Considerations

The great anterior radiculomedullary vein (GARV) due to its large size (diameter up to 2 mm) and location in the thoracolumbar region, may be confused with the artery of Adamkiewicz. However, the key to the differentiation of these two vessels is that the artery of Adamkiewicz often has a very sharp ‘hairpin’ configuration at its junction with the longitudinal spinal veins of the extrinsic venous system, while the GARV forms a less acute angle described as a ‘coat hook’ configuration.

# Clinical Significance

Spinal venous pathology can be due to vascular, neoplastic, or infectious etiologies.

The presence of a spinal epidural abscess usually results in congestion within the internal vertebral venous plexus. This enlarged venous plexus can mechanically compress the spinal cord resulting in myelopathy. Sepsis can also occur by way of the vertebral plexus. Also, since direct connections exist between the pelvis, the Batson plexus, and cranial venous sinuses, emboli and malignancies can disseminate via this hematogenous route.

The most common pathologies involving the spinal venous system are arteriovenous fistula (AVF) and arteriovenous malformation (AVM), of which there are four types. Myelopathy can result from several mechanisms depending on the location and classification of the lesion. Possible mechanisms include hemorrhage into the cord parenchyma or mass effect from hemorrhage, vascular steal, venous hypertension, and congestion. The typical result of all these mechanisms is venous outflow obstruction and compressive myelopathy. Other vascular lesions include aneurysms and neoplastic vascular lesions such as hemangioblastomas and cavernous malformations.

Type 1 Arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) are called dural AVFs and occur when a surface spinal cord vein directly receives blood from a nearby radicular artery. This vascular lesion consists of a single vessel, is located on the dura

Type 2 Intramedullary AVMs are usually found in younger patients and most commonly in the thoracolumbar (70%) and cervical cord (30%). Lesions are located intradurally within the spinal cord parenchyma and usually consist of a medullary artery draining into a nidus. Flow is high, which may cause arterial steal from adjacent spinal cord segments. Patients often present with hemorrhage into the spinal cord, resulting in damage via mass effect, vascular steal, or venous hypertension. The rate of hemorrhage is similar to cerebral AVMs - 4% annually and 10% if a prior bleed has occurred. They are considered the true AVMs of the spine and are similar to cerebral AVMs.

Type 3 AVMs are called juvenile AVMs. They involved both intradural and extradural areas simultaneously, such as the spinal cord parenchyma, the vertebrae, and paraspinal muscles. This malformation is large, and the nidus usually receives blood from several arteries that enlarges the vein. Hemorrhage presents in 33% of cases, and 50% of patients have associated aneurysms. The annual hemorrhage rate is 2.1%. Patients may present with symptoms of venous congestion, mass effect, and arterial steal syndrome. These AVMs are called Cobb syndrome when the complete somite is involved.

Type 4 AVMs are called intradural-perimedullary AVFs. These are direct shunts between the pial venous plexus and arteries on the surface of the spinal cord, which results in a dilated aneurysmal venous pouch.

# Other Issues

In addition to ensuring the preservation of spinal cord blood flow following surgery for AVFs obliteration, it is essential to accurately identify all the arterialized veins that drain the fistula and to achieve complete interruption of the fistula as recurrence can cause progressive myelopathy.

Multiple sclerosis patients have demonstrated chronic internal jugular, vertebral, and azygos vein obstruction, which causes congestion in the spinal venous system. It is still uncertain if this chronic cerebral venous insufficiency plays any role in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis.