Patients presenting with myotonia will generally first be seen by a primary care physician in either a clinical environment or an emergency department. At the initial presentation, the focus should be on excluding more acute and severe mimics of the myotonic disorders listed here. Providers should examine electrolyte levels, renal function, thyroid function, and other systems as needed depending on patient presentation. Once more common disorders have been ruled out, and the physician is relatively confident in the diagnosis of a myotonic disorder, the patient can be sent to a neurologist for further workup and evaluation. The interprofessional team will improve timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment. [Level 5]

Upon presentation to the neurology clinic, the patient should be considered for electrodiagnostic workup, including an electromyogram (EMG) or genetic testing, if myotonia is suspected as the most likely diagnosis. If positive, the patient should be given trigger avoidance information and perhaps a trial of mexiletine as appropriate for the specific diagnosed condition. The specialist should refer to other specialists if additional systems are involved or to physical therapy for the management of the myotonia itself.

Physical therapists can help patients with myotonia develop an exercise plan that helps avoid known or suspected triggers while preserving as much exercise capacity as possible. Given the relatively limited data on myotonia, this may be a trial and error process.

Nurses can be aware of the common triggers for myotonic disorders, including cold temperature common in hospital and clinical environments. Familiarity with this disorder will also help the healthcare team not mistakenly conclude that the patient is malingering or presenting with a psychiatric illness.