For an open technique, the patient positioning is supine with arms abducted to 90 degrees. The patient should undergo prepping from the nipples to the knees. The CFA, superficial, and deep femoral arteries bilaterally are isolated through bilateral groin incisions. It is essential to be sure that the distal portions of the vessels are soft, so they are suitable for clamping. Aortic exposure is typically through a midline incision (transperitoneal approach); however, some prefer a retroperitoneal approach or transverse incision. The retroperitoneum is entered, typically infracolically and after the duodenum is mobilized to the right. The aorta gets dissected below the level of the renal arteries. Most try to remain to the right of the inferior mesenteric vein to avoid violation of the left mesocolon. The renal vein can be mobilized by ligation of its tributaries. Exposure of the aorta needs to be taken down to the level of the inferior mesenteric artery. Tunnels within the retroperitoneum, posterior to the ureters are carried down to the groin incisions. On the left side, the tunnel is often brought posterior to the inferior mesenteric artery to help with keeping the graft isolated from the left mesocolon.

The limbs of the graft are then flushed with heparinized saline, clamped and passed through the tunnels into the groin incisions. Clamps are applied to the CFA, and an arteriotomy is made, sometimes down to the level of the profunda, thus requiring a profundaplasty. Endarterectomy follows, if necessary. The graft is anastomosed to the CFA in an end-to-side running manner usually with 4-0 or 5-0 permanent suture. Before completion of the anastomosis, usual backbleeding, forward bleeding and flushing are employed. The opposite femoral artery is done similarly. Blood flow is restored to the CFA, then profunda femoris, and lastly the superficial femoral artery. However, before unclamping, anesthesia should be notified because of the expected hypotension with reperfusion. The retroperitoneum should be closed in layers to adequately omit the graft from the GI tract. If unable to sufficiently close the retroperitoneum, then an omental flap should be created.

The end-to-end anastomosis is preferred because it allows the graft to lie flatter and thus may lessen the chance of future aortoenteric fistula. This method also better allows for retrograde perfusion into the inferior mesenteric artery. However, in cases where there is bilateral external iliac artery occlusion, an end-to-side or formal reconstruction of one of the IIA is needed to ensure blood flow delivery to the pelvis.

There are also laparoscopic approaches, but this is not a widely utilized technique at this point.