Chloroquine phosphate is the preferred agent if the infection is considered uncomplicated and is caused by chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum and works by inhibiting parasite growth by concentrating within the parasite acid vesicles, thereby raising internal pH. Hydroxychloroquine is also an acceptable first-line treatment of chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum and has a similar mechanism of action as chloroquine phosphate.

Primaquine phosphate is utilized as an add-on agent to either chloroquine phosphate or hydroxychloroquine when infections are caused by P. vivax or P. ovale with chloroquine sensitivity. This medication works by eliminating the hypnozoites that remain dormant in the patient’s liver, which reduces the risk of patient relapse.

Atovaquone-proguanil is utilized in infections caused by P. falciparum with chloroquine resistance. This combination product acts as an antimalarial as atovaquone selectively inhibits parasite mitochondrial electron transport, and proguanil inhibits dihydrofolate reductase disrupting deoxythymidylate synthesis.

Artemether-lumefantrine is an alternative first-line option for the treatment of malaria caused by chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. The proposed mechanism of action for both agents is to inhibit nucleic acid and protein synthesis.

Quinine sulfate plus doxycycline, tetracycline, or clindamycin is a second-line option for treating malaria caused by chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum. Quinine intercalates into DNA, disrupting the parasites' replication and transcription to exert its antimalarial effects.

For the treatment of uncomplicated chloroquine-resistant P. vivax, there are three options considered to have equal efficacy.

- Quinine sulfate plus doxycycline or tetracycline plus primaquine phosphate

- Atovaquone-proguanil plus primaquine phosphate

- Mefloquine plus primaquine phosphate

- 
              
- Mefloquine’s antimalarial effects are similar to quinine sulfate’s effects listed above.

Quinidine gluconate is the drug of choice for suspected severe malaria because it is the only parenterally available antimalarial drug. Severe malaria is characterized by the presence of parasites in the blood and any of the following conditions: altered mental status, seizures, respiratory distress, circulatory collapse, renal failure, anemia, thrombocytopenia, liver failure, and acidosis. The most common causative agent of severe malaria is P. falciparum. Quinidine gluconate acts primarily as an intraerythrocytic schizonticide, with little effect upon sporozoites or upon pre-erythrocytic parasites. Quinidine is gametocidal to P. vivax and P. malariae, but not to P. falciparum. Clindamycin, doxycycline, or tetracycline should be added to quinidine therapy when treating severe malaria in either IV or oral form, depending on the patient's clinical condition.