Blood donation for transfusion is a vital step in the management of many clinical problems, with the two primary indications being anemia and acute blood loss. Blood donation itself is also used to primarily treat a small subset of medical conditions. At the beginning of the 20th century, Karl Landsteiner identified ABO blood groups, at which time blood typing of individuals was only beginning to be adopted as a universally standard practice.

Concerted efforts to develop a means of storing and transferring blood to meet the war-time demands led to several discoveries. One, clotting was inhibited by adding citrate to the donated blood.

Allogeneic and autologous blood transfusion have many indications. More than 108 million units of red blood cells are transfused annually worldwide,

Another indication for blood donation is preparation for surgery; this is an example of autologous donation. Patients preparing for surgery who are foreseen to need intraoperative or postoperative red blood cell transfusion may be directed by their surgeon or treating physician to donate blood at least 72 hours before their surgery date to have on hand for autologous transfusion during the operation or postoperatively. The patient must have adequate hemoglobin (see contraindications section below for these parameters), and the donated unit is only allowed for autologous donation. Patients with suspected bacteremia or with at-risk related conditions are contraindicated for autologous donation. The autologous donation was a widely used practice in the 1980s to 1990s due to the increased fear of transfusion-transmitted HIV and hepatitis C infections.

Another way to donate blood is through the donation of umbilical cord blood. Cord blood has a much higher percentage of hematopoietic stem cells than non-cord blood and as such is an excellent source for hematopoeitic stem cell transplantation. Cord blood is collected at the time of delivery and processed and stored in blood banks that are specifically designed for cord blood for use at a later time.