# Introduction

Performance-based assessment is consistent with outcomes-based education,

# Function

Over the past two decades, simulation in general and standardized patient methodology specifically, have been utilized as techniques in medical education to teach and assess competent patient-centered care.

Standardized or simulated patients have been part of the assessment of medical learners since the 1960s when neurologist Howard Barrows introduced this educational modality to evaluate clinical skills of 3rd-year clerkship students

# Curriculum Development

Importantly, widespread adoption and uptake of standardized patients in summative and formative CSAs and OSCEs at the undergraduate medical education (UGME) and graduate medical education (GME) level behoove medical educators to adhere to standards of best practice in SP methodology in curriculum development. The Association of Standardized Patient Educators (ASPE) was created in 2001 to promote standards of best practice related to SP methodology in medical education and beyond. From 2013 to 2017, to ensure quality, safety, and accountability, standards were developed by SP educator experts in the field, and five domains were identified to guide the application of this methodology validly and reliably. The ASPE SOBP design was for application in collaboration with the International Nursing Association for Clinical Simulation and Learning (INACSL) Standards of Best Practice: Simulation.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical significance of standardized patient assessment of medical learners is via the application of both formative and summative assessments.  Formative assessments, including CSAs and OSCEs, provide developmentally appropriate teaching of clinical skills and competency in the delivery of safe and effective patient-centered care. Summative assessments, such as Step 2 Clinical Skills, are valid and reliable high stakes exams.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional education became a mandated Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME) accreditation standard in 2013 and opportunities exist in UGME to apply innovative simulation educational strategies to enhance knowledge, skills, attitudes, and patient outcomes.