**Genetic Factors**

- Connective tissue disorders that weaken artery walls

- Polycystic kidney disease

- Arteriovenous malformations

- History of an aneurysm in a two or more fist degree family members

**Other Factors**

- Untreated high blood pressure

- Cigarette smoking

- Drug abuse, including cocaine and amphetamines, which via their toxidrome, increases blood pressure extremely. Intravenous drug abuse can cause infectious mycotic aneurysms.

- Heavy alcohol intake

- Heavy caffeine intake

**Less Common**

- Head trauma

- Infection in the arterial wall from bacteremia - mycotic aneurysms

**Risk Factors for Aneurysm Rupture**

- Smoking- not only can smoking promote the development of cerebral aneurysms, but it can also lead to their growth and rupture.

- High blood pressure- chronic damage to arteries leads to weakness forming aneurysm and making them more likely to rupture.

- Size- larger aneurysms rupture with greater frequency than small ones.

- Location- posterior circulation including posterior communicating artery (PCOM), posterior cerebral artery (PCA), and vertebrobasilar artery are more common

- Growth- if aneurysms grow during a surveillance period, despite a small size, they are at an increased risk of rupture.

- Family history- if there is a family history, there is a higher risk of rupture.

- Irregular shape, multilobed, daughter sac, blebs

Those with previous ruptures or intracranial bleeds are at the highest risk of cerebral artery aneurysm rupture.