Isoproterenol is administered intravenously via an infusion pump. Note that adult intravenous infusion is expressed as mcg/minutes. In contrast, the pediatric infusion is expressed in mcg/kg/minute.

**Available Forms**

- Brand and generic: 0.2 mg/mL (1 mL, 5mL)

**Adult Dosage**

**Bradydysrhythmias, AV Nodal Block**

- 2 to 10 mcg/minute titrated to desired effect

**Adam-Stokes Attacks**

- 2 to 20 mcg/minute IV; Start at 5 mcg/minute IV

**Brugada Syndrome (off-label)**

- Bolus 1 to 2 mcg followed by 0.15 to 0.3 mcg/minute for 24 hours

**Cardiogenic Shock (off-label)**

- 2 to 20 mcg/minute continuous infusion

**Provocation of Syncope During Tilt Table Testing (off-label)**

- 1 mcg/minute, initially, then increase based on the desired response; max dose of 5 mcg/minute

**Provocation of Ventricular Arrhythmias in Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (off-label)**

- 45 mcg/minute for 3 minutes, then evaluate rhythm

**Refractory Torsades de Pointes (off-label)**

- 2 to 10 mcg/minute continuous infusion titrated to patient response

**Pediatric Dosage**

**Bradycardia, AV Nodal Block**

- 0.05 to 0.5 mcg/kg/minute IV, adjusted to desired effect; the max dosage is 2 mcg/kg/minute

**Neonatal Dosage**

**Bradycardia**

- 0.05 to 1 mcg/kg/minute continuous infusion titrated to effect

**Pharmacokinetics**

Isoproterenol is immediately active upon infusion. Its half-life is 2.5 to 5 minutes. Conjugation in hepatic and pulmonary tissues is the major method of metabolism. Excretion occurs via urine in the form of sulfate conjugates.

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding**

The use of isoproterenol during pregnancy has not been evaluated. The presence of isoproterenol in breast milk is presently unknown.

**Renal and Hepatic Dosing**

Renal and hepatic dosing is undefined.