Determining the severity and clinical stage of the infection helps guide therapy and improves outcomes. The most common clinical subtype of onychomycosis is distal lateral subungual onychomycosis(DSLO). It presents as partial distal onycholysis with subungual hyperkeratosis or crumbling. Much less common is white superficial onychomycosis (WSO), which appears as white chalky deposits on the surface of the affected nail plate. It can be easily scraped away with a curette or rotary burr. The rarest subtype is proximal subungual onychomycosis (PSO), which develops overlying the nail matrix. It has been associated with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and may be hematogenously spread. In the endonyx subtype, the interior of the nail plate is infected first, and the key feature of subungual hyperkeratosis of the nail bed is not evident. Total dystrophic onychomycosis (TDO) refers to the most advanced form of all sub-types. TDO is a later severe stage of the chronic subungual dermatophyte infection that may take 10 to 15 years to develop. There is significant subungual hyperkeratosis and destruction of abnormal nail plate and ridging of the nail bed. It is not only the most difficult stage to clear but also the type with the highest risk of developing subungual ulcerations, secondary bacterial infection and precipitating gangrene in patients with impaired peripheral circulation.

It is important to know that almost half of abnormal appearing toenails are not actually mycotic, so mycological testing is important to establish an accurate diagnosis. This is especially important if systemic therapy is planned. The traditional potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet mount preparation of subungual debris is only 60% sensitive but cannot identify the species. However, if the KOH is positive, it can separate dermatophytes from saprophytes. Currently, the most sensitive test (95%) is a pathologist interpreted nail clip biopsy that has been stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) plus Grocott methenamine silver. Today, a mycologist is required to interpret fungal culture testing. Fungal cultures are very specific but not very sensitive (60%). Fungal cultures grow slowly, adding weeks and cost to the workup.

Fungal culture or PCR is required to speciate on the cause of the infection. They are useful to help determine the source of the infection in atypical cases or when one suspects a primary saprophytic infection. To confirm this suspicion, two subsequent cultures of the same saprophytic mold should be obtained before concluding that the saprophyte is the primary pathogen and not a contaminant. PCR improves the species-specific detection of dermatophytes 20% over fungal cultures alone.

Dermoscopy can clinically diagnose onychomycosis. It also can readily differentiate between onychomycosis and nail dystrophy. The presence of subungual short spikes and longitudinal striae indicates onychomycosis, while transverse onycholysis is consistent with micro traumatic nail dystrophy.