Leflunomide is an FDA-approved medication indicated for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Managing the treatment of patients prescribed leflunomide requires excellent communication between the patient and professional healthcare providers. These providers need to function as an interprofessional team to include a primary care physician, a rheumatologist, a nurse, and a pharmacist. The primary care physicians and rheumatologists necessitate excellent patient rapport, so the patient fully understands the importance of medication compliance and education on the treatment and illness. It is vital to be engaged in the patient's care, so relapses, remissions, and disability do not occur long term.

The primary care and specialist should be familiar with leflunomide, its implications, and adverse effects. The patients prescribed leflunomide need routine checkups to observe if the medication is in an optimal range and the patient is not experiencing elevation in liver enzymes. Collective decision-making and interprofessional communication are necessary elements to enhance patient-centered care and achieve the desired outcome. Without the proper care and communication of an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, the risk of adverse events and leflunomide toxicity, including drug-induced hepatitis, drug-induced pneumonitis, pancytopenia, and harm to the fetus during pregnancy, is highly likely. An interprofessional healthcare team working across disciplinary lines providing an integrated, evidence-based strategy to patients receiving treatment with leflunomide will help deliver the best possible outcomes.