The mechanism of action of PAF is complicated because of the wide variety of processes it mediates.

Products of phosphatidylinositol metabolism, diacylglycerol (DAG), and inositol triphosphate (IP3) enhance the action of protein kinase C (PKC). DAG directly stimulates PKC and IP3 indirectly through calcium by opening intracellular calcium channels in the endoplasmic reticulum. PKC activation leads to many responses, such as the release of arachidonic acid, eicosanoid production, and phosphorylation of protein tyrosine. Metabolites of arachidonic acids can also open membrane calcium channels. In addition to activating PKC, intracellular calcium can also activate intracellular contractile proteins, phospholipase A2 (PLA2), and many other proteins as well. Activation of PLA2 results in the synthesis of prostaglandins, thromboxane A2, leukotrienes, and other inflammatory mediators. These inflammatory mediators are involved in leukocyte activation, chemotaxis, aggregation of cells and platelets, and generation of reactive oxygen species.

The function of PKC is dependent on the cell type. It can activate regulatory protein through phosphorylation and play a role in regulating surface PAF receptors.

Another downstream effect of PAF is the activation of the nuclear factor kappa-beta (NF-kB). NF-kB is a transcriptional factor that controls DNA transcription, cytokine production, and apoptosis. In leukocytes, it is a transcriptional factor for immediate-early genes, including monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).

PAF also activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade in some tissues such as corneal epithelium and brain.