The prognosis of Fournier gangrene is multifactorial.

A study published in 1995 by Laor et al. showed that the development of the Fournier Gangrene Severity Index (FGSI) is useful in determining prognosis in patients suffering from the disease.

A patient's age, as well as the extent of tissue involvement, also determines the prognosis. Patient prognosis declines with advancing age. A larger degree of tissue involvement is similarly associated with a worse prognosis. The Uludag FGSI (UFGSI) scoring system involving both of these factors was developed in 2010 by Yilmazlar et al. Using this newly developed scoring system, a score greater than 9 was associated with a 94% likelihood of death while a score less than 9 correlated with an 81% probability of survival.

The sAPGAR, surgical APGAR score, and the ACCI, age-adjusted Charleston Comorbidity Index, are two general surgical scoring systems that can be used to determine the prognosis of the patient's suffering from Fournier gangrene. ACCI is a prognostic classification system based on assigning points to 19 different comorbidities, with each comorbidity assigned a score of 1, 2, 3, or 6. Higher scores are associated with increased mortality risk. sAPGAR is used to calculate complications in postoperative patients. The score's basis is estimated blood, lowest mean arterial pressure, and lowest heart rate. The lower the sAPGAR score, the higher the risk of complication. While not specific to Fournier gangrene, both sAPGAR and ACCI are roughly equivalent to the FGSI and UFGSI in determining patient outcomes.

The time of onset of the disease to surgical treatment is key as patients who present earlier in the course of the disease process and receive prompt, emergent surgical debridement has better outcomes.