**Specific Cardiac Lesions and Management**

**Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA)**

It connects the pulmonary trunk with the descending aorta distal to the left subclavian artery. It is a simple shunt with very little or no pressure gradient across the duct. The shunting of blood depends upon the ratio of pulmonary vascular resistance to systemic vascular resistance. Initially, PDA is managed conservatively by modest fluid restriction and the use of positive end-expiratory pressure. Pharmacological treatment with indomethacin is recommended if conservative measures fail during the first week of life.

Surgically PDA is closed either by left thoracotomy or video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). PDA closure devices are being employed and approved by Food and Drug Administration. A patient's immobility dramatically facilitates this procedure, usually done under general anesthesia in uncooperative children. If the repair is delayed, the patients may present with pulmonary hypertension and ventricular dysfunction.

The anesthetic management goals for a patient with patent ductus arteriosus are summarised in the table below.

**Atrial Septal Defect**

A complete atrioventricular septal defect is the absence of ventricular and atrial septum segments. It is present in the region of the absent atrioventricular(AV) valves, and the development of the AV valves is also impaired. This cardiac defect results in a sizeable left-to-right shunt—the shunt increases in the first week of life when the pulmonary resistance drops.

There is a risk of heart failure when the pulmonary resistance drops after 2–8 weeks of life. The situation is complicated due to (mainly systemic) AV valve insufficiency. AVSD is frequently associated with Trisomy 21 and is initially treated with avoidance of excess oxygen and pharmacological treatment of heart failure. The patient undergoes corrective surgery at 4-6 months, possibly earlier, if conservative treatment remains unsuccessful.

**Ventricular Septal Defect**

Among all congenital heart defects, VSD is the most common. It has an incidence of 1.5 to 3 per 1000 term infants and 4.5-7 per 1000 pre-term infants. It is usually associated with chromosomal syndromes, which include trisomy 13, 18, and 21. Anatomically a ventricular septal defect (VSD) is an opening in the ventricular septum that allows communication between the right and left ventricle.

Its location classifies it into a subpulmonary or supracristal defect, membranous or perimembranous defect, conoventricular defect, inlet or canal type defect, and muscular defect. Physiologically it is a simple shunt, and the size of the defect determines the magnitude of shunting. Minor defects may be closed with cardiac catheterization; however, significant defects are usually closed with a patch surgically.

Patients with unrepaired VSD may present for non-cardiac surgery with pulmonary hypertension and ventricular dysfunction later in life.

**Truncus Arteriosus**

This cardiac defect comprises only one single vessel arising from the heart. It supplies systemic and pulmonary circulation and the coronaries. These neonates already have clinical signs of heart failure at birth due to excessive blood flow into the pulmonary circulation. The goals of initial management are;

- Restrictive use of oxygen administration as it lowers pulmonary resistance and increases blood flow to the pulmonary circulation

- Heart failure treatment: diuretics, possibly catecholamines (dobutamine) or phosphodiesterase inhibitor (milrinone), afterload reducer (ACE inhibitor, possibly sodium nitroprusside)

- Prostaglandin E1 infusion: initial dose 50 to 100 ng/kg/min

The definitive corrective procedure is the Rastelli procedure, generally performed within the first weeks of life.

**Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return**

This cardiac defect is characterized by drainage of all pulmonary veins into the systemic venous system, and the oxygenated blood reaches the right atrium. A right-to-left shunt at the atrial level is necessary for survival for perfusion of the systemic circulation.

The condition with a total anomalous pulmonary venous return without obstruction has a hemodynamic situation similar to a significant atrial septal defect. It is initially managed by;

- Oxygen administration

- Intubation and ventilation

- Attempts to lower peripheral vascular resistance with hyperventilation, target pH 7.45 to 7.5, increase oxygen administration and inhale NO or prostacyclin IV.

- Diuretics and catecholamines for low cardiac output

This is an absolute cardiac surgery emergency without any delay. Sometimes dilatation with or without stent implantation can relieve the stenosis of the pulmonary vein in some instances so that the surgical repair can be performed after the patient is stabilized.

If surgical correction is not possible immediately, the Rashkind maneuver, an interventional catheter balloon atrial septostomy, may be considered.

**Left Ventricular Outflow Tract Obstruction**

The neonates born with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction may have either critical aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, or an interrupted aortic arch. Their initial management is standard:

- Shock management, including intubation and ventilation

- Prostaglandin E1: initial dose 50 to 100 ng/kg/min

- Oxygen: avoid excessive administration; use PEEP to improve oxygenation

- Use diuretics to lower preload and pulmonary edema

- Use catecholamines depending on blood pressure and myocardial function.

- Assess by ECHO and reduce afterload

- Aim for moderate metabolic acidosis (target pH 7.35)

- Restrictive fluid therapy

Further management is prompt transfer to a pediatric congenital heart disease center and stabilizing the patient. Later palliative and surgical correction surgery is planned accordingly.

**Coarctation of Aorta**

In coarctation of the aorta, the patient's lower half body is supplied with deoxygenated blood via the patent ductus arteriosus by the pulmonary artery. With the closure of the ductus arteriosus, there is dramatic hypoperfusion of the body distal to the aortic isthmus. The left ventricle suddenly contracts against the obstruction, followed by decompensation. There is an association with other cardiac defects, e.g., bicuspid aortic valve or VSD. These patients with critical coarctation of the aorta are immediately transferred to a pediatric cardiac center for surgical repair after stabilizing the hemodynamics.

In unique case scenarios, balloon dilation by primary interventional catheterization or a coronary stent is performed to stabilize the patient due to poor condition or necrotizing enterocolitis.

**Tetralogy of Fallot**

This cardiac defect combines a large VSD, an overriding aorta, pulmonary stenosis, and right ventricle hypertrophy. The grade of cyanosis depends on the extent of the right ventricle outflow obstruction. In most cases, the right outflow obstruction is mild at birth but becomes significant during the first weeks of life.

These children may develop hypercyanotic spells, also known as tet spells, due to a sudden increase in the obstruction of the right outflow tract either due to agitation or a sharp drop in peripheral vascular resistance, which may occur after feeding.

Management of a hypoxic-hypercyanotic spell includes:

- Sedation with ketamine or opiates, benzodiazepines

- Oxygen application

- Increase peripheral systemic resistance by

- Jack-knife position- pressing the child's flexed knee against the chest
- Infusion of vasoconstrictors to increase peripheral vascular resistance
- generous volume bolus (e.g., 20 to 50 ml/kg)

- Compensation for metabolic acidosis by buffering

- Beta-blockers

The patient should be transferred to a pediatric cardiac center as soon as the diagnosis is made. In most cases, patients undergo interventional procedures, including balloon dilatation of the pulmonary valve, stenting of the right ventricle outflow tract, and stenting of PDA that can improve the hemodynamic situation, except for a few cases where early surgical correction is required today.

In certain exceptional conditions, a palliative procedure of an aortopulmonary shunt is first placed to ensure lung perfusion.

**Transposition of Great Arteries**

The transposition of great arteries (TGA) consists of a parallel connection between pulmonary and systemic circulation. The systemic blood is pumped back into the aorta, and the pulmonary blood is pumped back to the pulmonary artery. Survival is possible if there are shunts between the two circulatory systems, at the atrial level, e.g., patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect, and at the ventricular level, presence of ventricle septal defect.

The patent ductus arteriosus has a favorable effect as it increases lung perfusion leading to increased left atrial pressure and volume load, causing an increase in a left-right shunt so that oxygenated blood can reach the systemic circulation.

Patients with TGA are often treated with oxygen application that indirectly reduces pulmonary resistance and thus increases pulmonary perfusion. It increases atrial pressure and volume load. An attempt to improve mixed venous saturation should be made in "poor mixers." Cyanosis is usually less pronounced with a significant ventricular septal defect (VSD). The initial management of TGA includes

- Prostaglandin E1 infusion: initial starting dosage 50 ng/kg/min

- Volume therapy

- Mild metabolic alkalosis (pH 7.45 to 7.5, lowers pulmonary resistance)

- Oxygen application for severe cyanosis in neonates (caution: induces closure of the ductus arteriosus)

- Avoid intubation, mechanical ventilation, and muscle relaxation

- Consider using milrinone to improve cardiac output and thus mixed venous saturation

- Treat anemia to improve oxygenation

A bedside Rashkind maneuver, an interventional catheter balloon atrial septostomy, is done for a restricted atrial shunt as soon as possible.

**Tricuspid Atresia**

In this cardiac defect, there is no continuity between the right atrium and right ventricle; instead, the right atrium drains into the left atrium through a right-to-left shunt at the atrial level. The tricuspid atresia has various forms that depend on obstructing the right ventricle outflow tract or pulmonary valve. The right ventricle is hypoplastic and is perfused by the left ventricle through a VSD. The oxygen saturation is the same in the aorta and the pulmonary artery because of the complete mixing of the blood.

In the case of high-grade stenosis or atresia of the pulmonary artery, perfusion of the lungs is dependent on patent ductus arteriosus. In the absence of pulmonary artery stenosis or atresia, congestive heart failure may develop later, which is much less common.

- Anticongestive treatment with diuretics, milrinone, and rarely catecholamines

- Restrictive oxygen therapy

- Restrictive volume therapy

Early transfer to a pediatric cardiac center for further management should be done. For a restrictive atrial shunt, the Rashkind maneuver is performed. For inadequate pulmonary perfusion, a palliative aortopulmonary shunt is usually placed. The separation of circulations is performed later by performing the Fontan procedure.

**Ebstein's Anomaly**

It is characterized by apical displacement of the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle with moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation. It also causes decreased blood flow from the right ventricle into the pulmonary artery leading to the right atrium dilatation. It is usually asymptomatic in the neonatal period, and cyanosis occurs due to a right-to-left shunt at the atrial level. In addition to this, pulmonary function is grossly affected due to lung compression. This cardiac defect is often associated with Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome (WPW). The initial management includes

- Management of congestive heart failure with catecholamines and diuretics

- Supraventricular tachycardia is managed with vagal maneuvers, antiarrhythmic, and cardioversion

The surgical repair of the Ebstein anomaly should be done as soon as possible during the neonatal period as the prognosis is poor with congestive heart failure. The goal of surgical repair is a reconstruction of the tricuspid valve and closure of ASD. In case of reduced lung perfusion, an aortopulmonary shunt is placed.

Sometimes, the Fontan procedure is the only option in case of a hypoplastic right ventricle.