UV radiation greatly affects the skin, causing aging, sunburns, precancerous and cancerous lesions, and immunosuppression.

Photoprotection involves both primary and secondary protective factors. Primary factors are sunscreens; these include physical barriers that reflect and scatter light and chemical barriers that absorb light. Secondary factors include antioxidants, osmolytes, and DNA repair enzymes, which help to limit skin damage by disturbing the photochemical cascade that occurs with UV sunlight.

Chemical sunscreens are known as organic sunscreens. Their mechanism of action is based on their chemical structure involving an aromatic compound conjugated with a carbonyl group. This structure allows high-energy UV rays to be absorbed, causing the molecule to achieve an excited state. As the molecule returns to the ground state, it will release the lower energy of longer wavelengths. The specific range of wavelength a sunscreen absorbs will vary. Chemical sunscreens consist of UVA and UVB blockers. UVB filters absorb the entire spectrum of UVB radiation (290 to 320 nm). UVA filters do not cover the entire spectrum of UVA radiation. Uva radiation is divided into UVA I (340 to 400 nm) and UVA II (320 to 340nm). Broad-spectrum sunscreens absorb UV radiation from both the UVA and UVB portions.

**UVB Blockers**

- Aminobenzoates

- Cinnamates

- Salicylates

- Octocrylene

- Ensulizole

- Camphor derivatives

Aminobenzoates are the most potent UVB absorber but do not absorb UVA. Their use has declined due to para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) sensitivity. PABA is a very effective UVB filter; however, it was reportedly the most common photoallergen and contact allergen. For this reason, it has limited use in sunscreen. Padimate O is the most commonly used PABA derivative; it has a good safety profile and is an effective UVB filter.

Cinnamates have replaced PABA as the next most potent UVB absorber and include octinoxate (OMC) and cinoxate.

Salicylates are used in high concentrations as they are weak UVB absorbers. They are also used to increase the effect of other UVB filters. Two salicylates that are FDA listed are homosalate and octisalate. They function to decrease the photodegradation of other UV filters, such as oxybenzone and avobenzone. A water-soluble salicylate is trolamine salicylate.

Octocrylene is a very safe chemical associated with a decreased likelihood of irritation, phototoxicity, and photoallergic potential.

Ensulizole is a pure UVB filter and does nothing that affects UVA. It is a water-soluble compound commonly used in cosmetics for a lighter, less oily feel.

Camphor derivatives are not FDA-listed but are moderately effective UVB filters. A camphor derivative that is also a broad UVA filter is terephthalyidene dicamphor sulfonic acid.

**UVA Blockers**

- Benzophenones

- Anthranilates

- Avobenzones

- Ecamsule

Typical benzophenones absorb mostly UVB; however, oxybenzone is considered a broad spectrum absorber as it can absorb UVA II as well.

Anthranilates are very weak UVB and UVA filters and are less effective than benzophenones. As a result, clinicians rarely use them.

Avobenzones are considered broad-spectrum and have high efficacy against UVA I (>380 nm); however, they are very photo-unstable and lose from 50% to 90% of their particles after 1 hour of UV exposure. There are also reports that they degrade the UV filter octinoxate. UV absorbers such as octocrylene, benzophenones, salicylates, camphor derivatives, and micronized zinc oxide or titanium dioxide are used in combination to increase photostability.

Ecamsule contains terephthalyidene dicamphor sulfonic acid, a very photostable product that is water-resistant with low systemic absorption. In animal studies, it prevented UVA-induced photoaging.

Broad-spectrum sunscreens include methylene-bis-benzotriazolyl tetramethylbutylphenol (MBBT) and bis- ethylhexyloxyphenol methoxyphenyl triazine (BEMT). MBBT is advantageous as it is a large molecule that decreases the likelihood of systemic absorption or endocrine effects. It works as a combination of organic and inorganic filters, ultimately absorbing, scattering, and reflecting UV radiation. It decreases UVA transmission more than UVB. BEMT also does not affect the endocrine system and is photostable.

The mechanism of action of a physical sunscreen has its basis on the reflection and scattering of UV light in much the same way as clothing. The reflective properties determine the effectiveness of the sunscreens. These properties include the reflective index, the size of the particles, the film thickness, and the dispersion of the base—the higher the reflective index, the better the UV filter. Decreasing the size of the particles to a micronized form (10 to 50 nm) is more cosmetically appealing but leads to the protection of shorter wavelengths and increases the risk of systemic absorption.

Microfine zinc oxide protects against a wide range of UVA, including UVA 1 (340 to 400 nm). It is very photostable and does not react with other UV filters. It is more effective than titanium dioxide for UVA protection; however, it is less efficient against UVB radiation.

Microfine titanium dioxide protects against UVA 2 (315 to 340 nm) and UVB but does not protect against UVA 1, as does zinc oxide.

As mentioned above, secondary photoprotection includes antioxidants, osmolytes, and DNA-repair enzymes, which help to limit skin damage by disturbing the photochemical cascade that occurs with UV sunlight. The mechanism of action of antioxidants is to reduce the reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced from UVA radiation. Naturally, these ROS become neutralized by antioxidants found naturally within the body, such as superoxide dismutase and catalase. These enzymes can become saturated within an overproduction of reactive oxygen species, resulting in a deficiency of antioxidants and damage to proteins and DNA. Topical antioxidants function from within the cell to decrease the shortage of antioxidants and can remain active for several days after application.

Many sunscreens include antioxidants such as vitamin C, vitamin E, silymarin, and green tea polyphenols. Vitamin C acts to protect against UV- damage, which results in sunburn and erythema.

Osmolytes are small molecules that stabilize the cell in stressful conditions by regulating hydration. Taurine and ectoine are osmolytes that protect against many UV effects and are components in many sunscreens.