The uniqueness of corneal lacerations for each patient leads to many ways to repair them. Each case is a puzzle, which the surgeon must complete. Some surgeons find joy in this, while others find it distressful. Despite your perspective and approach, the goal is to create a watertight closure by sealing the cornea without incorporating the intraocular contents, restoring the integrity of the globe, and preventing further damage to the cornea or other parts of the eye.

**Anesthesia:**Anesthesia management for corneal laceration repair varies from topical to general.****

**Suspected corneal laceration:**If unable to confirm a corneal laceration in the emergency room or clinic, transport the patient to the operating room for an exam under anesthesia and possible surgical repair.

**Partial-thickness corneal laceration:**Carefully debride partial-thickness lacerations. After debridement, perform a Seidel test to ensure that the laceration is still partial thickness. If the Seidel test is positive, it is a full-thickness laceration and follows the procedures below. If negative, use a contact lens or fibrin glue to help it heal and treat similar to a corneal abrasion.

**Culture/Debride Laceration:**Culture the wound carefully to avoid prolapsing intraocular tissue or pressure on the globe. The culture results can be beneficial if a patient develops an infection. Only the surgeon performing the repair should debride the tissue because improper debridement can further damage the eye. Excise necrotic tissue and reposit the remaining tissue into the eye. Remove any visible foreign bodies or debris.****

**Full-thickness corneal laceration less than 2 mm:**Use cyanoacrylate or fibrin glue, amniotic membrane, or bandage contact lenses. However, if a watertight closure cannot be completed, suturing is required.

**Full-thickness corneal laceration greater than 2 mm:**This size of laceration usually requires sutures and should be repaired in the operating room.

Evaluate the laceration and plan before passing a suture. Drawing out the repair organizes the surgical approach. Once a plan is in place, start suturing. The needle should enter the cornea perpendicular to the tissue when passing a suture. One method is to hold one side of the corneal wound at a 45-degree angle and enter the tissue at 45 degrees. Rotate the wrist following the needle curvature and come out the other side of the wound perpendicular to the tissue. Tie the suture with a slip knot, 2-1-1, or 3-1-1, and then cut the loose ends. The smaller the knot, the easier it is to bury.

Sutures should be passed at 90% depth in the stroma because too shallow can lead to posterior wound gape. Full-thickness passes can become a track for microorganisms to enter the eye.

When determining the placement of a second suture, remember the compression zones, which are triangular extensions from the suture, to ensure there are no gaps.

Long sutures will have a large zone of compression compared to shorter sutures. Long sutures should be passed in the periphery to steepen the cornea centrally and seal the wound. Centrally the sutures are in the visual axis. Placing short sutures centrally with minimal suture tension will reduce astigmatism and prevent excess scarring.

**Managing Tissue Prolapse**

Following the pressure gradient, the iris and vitreous will prolapse through a corneal laceration until closure. It is important to avoid incorporating the tissue into the closure. There are several methods for managing prolapsed tissue. One strategy is to create a paracentesis away from the wound with a surgical blade and inject a viscoelastic. Use a cyclodialysis spatula to pull the iris back into the eye through a sweeping motion. Repositioning the intraocular tissue may be necessary throughout the suturing process. Accidental pressure on the globe when passing a suture or gaping the wound with instruments tends to protrude more tissue. If the patient is phakic, it is paramount to protect the lens and avoid violating the capsule.

The following are general guidelines for various scenarios—drawings depicted in the attached figure highlight each situation.

**Oblique laceration:**The suture will be an equal distance at the posterior part of the wound, but anteriorly will look displaced to one side. Avoid tension over the shallow side of the wound when tying the suture.****

**Linear laceration:**Start suture placement in the center of the laceration and then bisect the halves until sealed.

**Gaping laceration:**Place the initial suture at the ends of the wound and then zip it up, keeping tissue out of the closure.

**Angled laceration:**The initial suture can be placed at the apex, then suture the sides as separate linear lacerations.

**Stellate laceration:**These closures can be challenging. A purse-string suture is placed centrally, either at the beginning or end of the closure, to help seal it. Interrupted sutures close the remaining aspects of the laceration.

**Corneoscleral laceration:**Place the initial suture at the limbus. This alignment is critical to repairing the cornea and scleral aspects. The limbus is usually the most identifiable tissue during the repair because of the contrast between the cornea and sclera. After closing the limbus, focus on the corneal aspect first and then the sclera to avoid tissue prolapse.

**Tissue loss:**When tissue is absent, a patch graft can create a watertight closure. There are various techniques for a patch graft that incorporate amniotic membrane, allograft tissue, or gamma-irradiated cornea.

**Finishing up**

Once the corneal laceration repair is complete, test it for a leak with surgical spears or a fluorescein strip. If a leak is present, continue to suture or add adjuncts such as cyanoacrylate or fibrin glue, amniotic membrane, or contact lens. Ensure all knots are buried, ideally away from the visual axis.

A combination of intracameral, subconjunctival, topical, intravenous, and oral antibiotics decreases the risk of infections after the repair.

Patch the eye with surgical eye pads and cover it with a rigid eye shield.