Trials related to iNPH:

1. Study of Idiopathic Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus on Neurological Improvement (SINPHONI-1) (2010)

Specific features in MRI brain that suggest features of iNPH as identified in this study were:

- Tight high convexity and medial subarachnoid spaces with ventriculomegaly

- Disproportionately enlarged subarachnoid space hydrocephalus (DESH).

Patients having the above-said features showed high responsiveness to ventriculoperitoneal shunt surgery

2. SINPHONI-2 (2015)

The findings favored lumboperitoneal shunt surgery (LPS) in patients with iNPH. But the study suggested that larger studies are needed to consider LPS as a first-line treatment for iNPH.

3. Shunt Valves plus shunt Assistant versus Shunt valves alone for controlling Overdrainage in idiopathic Normal pressure hydrocephalus in Adults (SVASONA)(2013)

The study favored the use of the gravitational valve in patients undergoing VPS for iNPH.  Implanting such valves rather than other types of valves will avoid one additional over-drainage complication in about every third patient.

4. A double-blind, randomized trial on the clinical effectiveness of different shunt valve settings in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (2016)

The study concluded that:

- There was no difference in outcome if the valve pressure gets gradually reduced from 20 to 4 cm H2O and if it is set at a fixed value of 12 cm H2O.

- Irrespective of the pressure setting in the valve, improvement after VPS was evident only within three months.

5. Efficacy and safety of programmable compared with fixed anti-siphon devices for treating idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH) in adults - SYGRAVA: study protocol for a randomized trial (2018)

This study is the initial randomized trial comparing the drainage related complication rates of programmable vs. fixed anti-siphon devices (ASDs) in patients with iNPH; this is an on-going trial.

6. A randomized trial of high and low-pressure level settings on an adjustable ventriculoperitoneal shunt valve for iNPH: results of the Dutch evaluation programme Strata shunt (DEPSS) trial (2013)

The trial noted the following findings:

- To treat iNPH, a programmable shunt preset at a high opening pressure is better.

- The initial high pressure should be lowered until clinical improvement occurs or radiological features of shunt over-drainage occurs.

7. A randomized controlled dual-center trial on shunt complications in idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus treated with gradually reduced or "fixed" pressure valve settings (2014)v:

There was no difference in the shunt- or overdrainage-related complications if the valve pressure was gradually lowered to a mean of 7 cm H2O and a fixed valve setting at a mean of 13 cm H2O, but the former one was associated with a significantly better outcome.

8. Dutch Normal-Pressure Hydrocephalus Study (1998): a randomized comparison of low- and medium-pressure shunts

The use of low-pressure valve (LPV) shunt was associated with a better outcome compared to the use of medium pressure shunt, although most differences were not statistically significant. The study concluded that iNPH treatment is better with an LPV shunt.

Endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) vs. VPS in the treatment of iNPH:

There is only one randomized trial comparing endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) with VPS using a non-programmable valve for iNPH. But the evidence from this study was inconclusive. Clinicians should be aware of the limitations of the evidence.

Recently suggested neurosurgical practice guidelines for determining whether or not to shunt a patient with iNPH include the following

- If the CSF opening pressure is high, it should prompt investigation to identify a secondary cause of NPH.

- If there is a good clinical response after a 40-mL to 50-mL (high-volume) lumbar tap, it suggests that there can be a potential benefit after VPS.

- If the patient does not respond to a high-volume tap, extended lumbar drainage (ELD) may be an option for further evaluation.

- There is no substantial predictive value for MRI CSF flow studies.

The standard treatment of iNPH is the implantation of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt with an adjustable valve. Lumboperitoneal shunts have also had extensive use.

ETV is used only in those cases with a locally confined, infratentorial, extraventricular obstruction to CSF flow. Such an obstruction is usually characterized by a protrusion of the lamina terminalis and the floor of the third ventricle into the adjacent basal cisterns.

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and serial drainage lumbar punctures have a role only in non-surgical candidates.