The function of health screening is to assess the likelihood that an asymptomatic individual has a particular disease, with the goal of preventing illness or death from that disease. There are several characteristics of a good screening test.

- Diseases that are good candidates for screening are those that are prevalent in the population and cause significant morbidity and mortality. In the United States, heart disease and lung cancer are good examples. In contrast, trypanosomiasis might be a good target for screening in Tanzania, but not in the United States.

- The disease must have an asymptomatic period during which treatment will reduce morbidity and mortality significantly more than waiting until symptoms develop. Congenital hypothyroidism and cervical cancer are good examples. In contrast, chest x-rays as a screening test for lung cancer were discontinued because of failure to demonstrate the value of early diagnosis.

- The screening test should have the highest possible sensitivity (few false-negative results) and specificity (few false-positive results). The ideal screening test will be 100% sensitive and 100% specific, identifying all patients with the disease and falsely diagnosing none. Unfortunately, no ideal test exists. For example, PSA screening for prostate cancer has a very high false-positive rate, as well as the very real possibility of diagnosing an indolent disease that may never cause symptoms.

- The screening test should also be inexpensive, readily available, safe, and easy.  Many current screening tests are less than ideal. Ask anyone who has had a colonoscopy for colon cancer screening or a low-dose helical CT scan for lung cancer screening. These tests are expensive, inconvenient, and not universally available.

- Effective treatment for the disease in question should be available at a reasonable cost. Why screen for a disease for which there is no real treatment?