**Perioperative Hypothermia**

General and regional anesthesia produce hypothermia which is the most common perioperative thermal disturbance. Volatile anesthetics promote heat loss through vasodilation and direct impairment of hypothalamic thermoregulation. Opioids contribute by depressing sympathetic tone and therefore reducing the ability to thermoregulate via vasoconstriction. Hypothalamic depression results in an increased interthreshold range between the temperatures at which the thermoregulatory system induces a response to cold or heat. An increased interthreshold range results in a reduced ability to adjust to the increased heat loss from drug-induced vasodilation. Due to the effect of hypothermia on drug metabolism, an important clinical consideration is the reduction of the minimum alveolar concentration of the volatile anesthetics by 5% for each degree C below normal.

Three phases of temperature decline following induction of general anesthesia:

- Phase 1

- Within the first 30 minutes
- Redistribution of body heat to the skin from the core
- The greatest decline in temperature mediated by radiation

- Phase 2

- Approximately 1 hour
- Core temperature decreases linearly at a slower rate

- Phase 3

- Approximately 3 to 5 hours
- Heat loss equals heat production
- Thermoregulation restored

Due to the previously mentioned consequences of hypothermia, precautions in the perioperative setting against heat loss are essential. These include temperature monitoring, prewarming, maintaining an OR temperature of lower than 24 degrees C during induction, patient positioning with extremities tucked when possible, and warming of IV fluids.

**Heat Stroke**

Heat stroke is an emergent clinical condition that requires immediate removal of the patient from the heat, ATLS protocol activation, and implementation of cooling measures while awaiting transportation. External cooling methods include evaporative cooling with misting water on the patient’s skin while fanning warm air. Immersion in an ice bath or application of ice packs on the axilla, groin, neck, and head are also effective. Considerations when performing immersive cooling include induction of shivering when the skin cools below 30 C and difficulty in accessing the patient if the cold water induces reflexive bradycardia. Internal cooling methods include gastric, bladder, and rectal lavage or even cardiopulmonary bypass. Cooling measures should terminate when the core temperature is 38 degrees C.

The pathophysiology of heatstroke involves the insufficiency of the body’s heat loss mechanisms. At extremes of heat, the body relies on evaporative cooling because an insufficient thermal gradient exists between the skin and environment to facilitate conduction or radiation. However, if the humidity is also extremely high, evaporation is also limited. The amount of work exerted in a given environment is another contributor to heat stroke risk. For example, when a person is doing heavy work, the environmental temperature can be as low as 29.4 degrees C to cause heat stroke. Therefore, heat stroke results from an unfavorable balance of environmental temperature, humidity, and level of physical work. One can avoid heat stroke with appropriate precautions and care is necessary with exposure to hotter climates.