The major hallmark of presentation of Angelman syndrome (AS) is characterized by movement and balance disorder (ataxia), speech deficits (absent or minimal), psychomotor delay, inappropriate paroxysms of laughter with hand flapping (happy puppet), and seizures.

**Psychomotor Delay**

Developmental delay can be seen by six months of age. Microcephaly presents before three years of age; however, it is not present in all cases. It is more common in the deletion subtype of AS.

**Characteristic Behavior**

AS patients have a unique behavioral phenotype. They have a happy demeanor with inappropriate and excessive laughter, often showing tremulous movements of limbs with hand flapping. They are easily distracted as they have a short attention span, and this leads to poor concentration. They also are easily excitable.

**Seizures**

When they are three years of age, 80% of the patients have seizures, with abnormal EEGs, with spike even when there is no seizure activity (akinetic seizure). Seizures are described to improve during puberty but recur in adulthood.

**Sleep Problems**

AS patients may also have sleep problems. Total sleep time may be decreased with nighttime awakenings.

**Other Findings**

- Protruding tongue

- Tongue thrusting; suck/swallowing disorders

- Feeding problems during infancy

- Truncal hypotonia

- Prognathism

- Wide mouth, widely spaced teeth

- Frequent drooling

- Excessive chewing/mouthing behaviors

- Strabismus

- Hypopigmented—light skin, hair, and eye color

- compared with the family (seen only in the deletion cases)

- Hyperactive lower extremity deep tendon reflexes

- Wide-based gait with pronated or valgus-positioned ankles

- Uplifted, flexed arm position especially during walking

- Increased sensitivity to heat

- Sleep disturbances

- Attraction to/fascination with water

- Abnormal food-related behaviors

- Obesity (in childhood)

- Scoliosis

With aging in Individuals with Angelman syndrome, hyperactivity decreases due to increased muscle rigidity, sleep becomes better, and concentration improves. Some AS patients develop obesity in adulthood.