The sphincter of Oddi possesses a complex intrinsic set of neural innervation. Currently, two ganglionated plexuses are recognized:

- Myenteric plexus, which lies between the sphincter's muscular layers

- Submucosal plexus

There have also been a few subpopulations discovered in animal models that helped the understanding of the intrinsic innervation of the sphincter of Oddi. One of these described subpopulations was in guinea pigs and was found to be immunoreactive to choline acetyltransferase and served to provide an excitatory effect, thereby increasing the sphincter of Oddi tone. Researchers also found a second, smaller subset of neurons in the sphincter of Oddi that was immunoreactive to nitric oxide (NO) synthase and expressed vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY).

As opposed to the intrinsic neural innervation of the sphincter of Oddi, its extrinsic innervation is not very well understood but is thought to display characteristics similar to that of most of the biliary tract. This neurology includes parasympathetic nervous system innervation originating from the vagus nerve and sympathetic nervous system innervation originating from the superior mesenteric ganglion following the inferior pancreatic duodenal artery.

The sphincter of Oddi is also thought to be part of bidirectional signaling pathways. There seems to be a bidirectional connection between the sphincter of Oddi and the gallbladder; the electrical activity of the gallbladder has been shown to inhibit the sphincter of Oddi contraction reflexively. Similar to the aforementioned bidirectional system, there also exists evidence of a subpopulation of neurons demonstrating bidirectional signaling between the duodenum and sphincter of Oddi ganglia as part of an excitatory cholinergic pathway.