Brow ptosis is almost always acquired. Congenital brow ptosis is rare and occurs when there is an underdevelopment of the facial nerve and/or the mimetic muscles.

Cases of acquired brow ptosis may arise in a variety of ways:

- Age-related: This is the most common form and is associated with changes in the soft tissues of the brow. Increased laxity of the connective tissue, skin, and frontalis muscle initially leads to drooping in the lateral third of the eyebrow and may progress to ptosis of the medial two-thirds if left untreated.

- Traumatic: Damage to the intracranial, intratemporal, or extratemporal facial nerve can result in ptosis of the brow. A hemifacial palsy will result if the damage is anywhere between the facial nerve nucleus proximally and the pes anserinus distally. Damage specific to the frontal branch will denervate the ipsilateral frontalis muscle and parts of the corrugator supercilii, procerus, and orbicularis oculi muscles.

- Myogenic: Myopathy specific to the facial musculature and systemic myopathy can contribute to brow ptosis via atrophy or denervation of the frontalis muscle. Examples of these conditions include myasthenia gravis, myotonic dystrophy, and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy.

- Infectious: Ramsay Hunt syndrome is a reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus that leads to facial paralysis and a herpetic rash of the ear canal, auricle, scalp, or oropharyngeal mucous membranes. This condition causes an ipsilateral facial palsy that includes brow ptosis.

- Spasm-induced: Congenital or acquired spasms of the orbicularis oculi can pull the brow down and away from its anatomic position, eventually causing a permanent change. Examples include blepharospasm and hemifacial spasm.

- Neoplastic: Neoplasms of, or infiltrating into, the facial nerve affect its function and cause brow ptosis. Some of the most common include cancer of the overlying skin, like melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma, or more proximal masses, like acoustic neuromas.

- Iatrogenic: Operations in the area of the brow pose a significant risk to the innervation and structural integrity of the brow. Overall, the procedures that pose the highest risk for postoperative facial nerve palsy are temporal artery biopsy, acoustic neuroma resection, and temporomandibular joint procedures. Operations to improve brow and overall facial cosmesis, such as endoscopic and open facelift procedures, can cause facial nerve palsy and exacerbate the problem they attempted to correct, but this occurs in less than 1% of procedures. Botulinum toxin injection also carries a risk of brow ptosis; overzealous or misplaced injections effectively denervate the brow elevators.