Surgical excision is the mainstay of treatment for localized soft tissue sarcomas. Intramuscular tumors should have a compartmental en-bloc excision, and in this scenario, no additional radiation therapy would be indicated. If there is extracompartmental growth, or if the tumor does not reach the origin or insertion of the muscle, a wide-surgical resection would be appropriate, with the goal of obtaining tumor-free margins. Two centimeters of margin is generally recommended; however, there is a paucity of definitive evidence for the best safety margin. Surrounding structures such as nerves and vascular structures must always be taken into account.

For tumors that are high grade and larger than 5 cm, adjuvant radiation therapy is highly recommended. If clear margins are not obtained, reoperation is the most appropriate next step in management.

The utility of chemotherapy in the management of soft tissue sarcomas is unclear and, therefore, not generally recommended in standard treatment. Additionally, fibrosarcomas tend to form a co-resistance to drugs such as vincristine, vinblastine, and etoposide after the use of the first-line agent doxorubicin. Therefore, only patients with high-stage fibrosarcomas that require chemotherapy should be treated with anthracyclines as the first-line treatment. The addition of actinomycin D and ifosfamide may increase the response to treatment. That being said, an improvement in survival has only been demonstrated in 4-11% of sarcoma patients treated with standard chemotherapy.

Finally, intra-tumoral injections of matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors such as TIMP-1-GPI fusion protein has been shown to lead to a decreased tumor mass and growth. Furthermore, injection shows inhibition of cell migration as well as increased tumor cell apoptosis.