A high-fiber diet has the following health benefits:

- Bowel movement: Insoluble fiber maintains bowel movements. They absorb water and softens the stool. Soft stool is easier to pass, thus preventing constipation. They also add bulk to the stools hence prevent the formation of loose stools.

- Improved bowel health: High fiber diet prevents the formation or worsening of hemorrhoids and diverticular disease, which presents as outpouchings in the colon walls.

- Studies have shown that a high-fiber diet decreases the risk of colorectal cancer.

- Cholesterol-lowering effects: Soluble fibers bind to cholesterol molecules in the small intestine and prevent their absorption. The cholesterol-lowering properties of soluble fibers help to prevent coronary heart disease.

- Postprandial glucose and insulin levels: Soluble fibers slow the absorption and digestion of carbohydrates and lower insulin demand in the body, thereby stabilizing postprandial glucose levels.

- Improved satiety and weight loss: Soluble fibers make the stomach contents viscous and prolong gastric emptying time. Studies have shown this to help reduce weight, improve BMI, lower body fat, and waist-to-hip ratio.

- Cancer prevention: Some studies have shown that soluble fibers such as pectin have antioxidant properties and lower the risk of other types of cancer, including breast cancer.

- Helps to live longer: Fiber intake is associated with decreased prevalence of diabetes type 2, coronary heart disease, stroke, and improved immune function.