**Thoracic Outlet Syndrome**

Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) occurs secondary to direct or indirect mechanical compression of the subclavian vessels and/or the brachial plexus between the clavicle, scalene muscles, and the first rib. The most common presenting clinical symptoms include fatigue, pain, and paresthesias affecting the upper extremity. Dynamic, postural-based symptoms can often make the diagnosis somewhat challenging. The latter occurs secondary to neurovascular compression and when the upper extremity is brought to increasing levels of overhead elevation. TOS can be suspected in patients reporting the aforementioned symptoms, and further suggestions of TOS as a diagnosis include the presence of a cervical rib (0.5% of the population).

There have been case reports of various forms of TOS occurring secondary to a hypertrophic anterior scalene muscle.

**Neck Mass Dissections**

Tumor formation can form within the scalene muscle; one particular type is known as myopericytoma. This tumor is very rare, and it is often necessary to remove it surgically. Surgical dissection for tumor/mass removal includes intramuscular dissection to either marginally or radically resects the tumor bed. Another example of a tumor is myxoma, a rare mesenchymal tumor of the head and neck. More frequently, benign tumors are found, such as fibromatosis within the muscle, which also is often surgically removed. You can perform biopsies on the lymph nodes of the scalene muscles to check the type of tumor. In some cases, splenectomies can be performed to create space for extracting deeper tumors, such as a cervical schwannoma. Finally, mass effects can occur secondary to direct trauma with a resultant intramuscular hemangioma.

**Nerve Blocks and Catheter Considerations**

Nerve blocks and nerve catheters are becoming increasingly important as the healthcare system continues to shift toward more outpatient-based procedures.