In recent times, there is increasing evidence of inhalational and/or cutaneous exposure to PTX after handling PTX contaminated soft corals. Coral toxicity due to palytoxin depends on the duration of exposure, the route of exposure, and the distance from the location where the coral was being handled. The patient may seek medical attention minutes to hours after the maintenance of home aquaria. A detailed history regarding patient activity before the symptoms and also patient hobbies and occupation would yield useful information.

The patient usually describes an event of handling corals, mostly by pouring boiling water and scrubbing coral out of the rocks. The resultant vapor exposure may present with symptoms. Most common presentations are:

Respiratory system

- Rhinorrhoea

- Cough

- Dyspnea

Musculoskeletal System

- Weakness

- Myalgia

- Muscle cramps

- Rhabdomyolysis

Nervous System

- Paresthesia

- Convulsions

- Dizziness

- Numbness

- Restlessness

Other systemic symptoms

- Fever

- Nausea/vomiting

- Tachycardia

- Hypotension

Handling of corals with intact or damaged skin for a prolonged period may result in dermal absorption of the toxin and present with:

- Local (edema, erythema, pruritus)

- Perioral paresthesia

- Dysgeusia

- Other non-specific systemic symptoms.

Instances of ocular contamination result in symptoms of keratoconjunctivitis and are non-specific. It includes severe ocular pain, red eye, decreased visual acuity, photophobia, foreign body sensation, and metallic taste.

The patient may present with severe respiratory distress and cyanosis, which can result in progressive respiratory failure and death.