The severity and the cause of the SAN injury would be important factors in determining whether the treatment is surgical, such as re-anastomosis and nerve grafting, or nonsurgical, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), nerve stimulation, and local/ regional nerve blocking and physical therapy and rehabilitation. Immediate therapy should be considered for severe presentation, such as penetrating traumas and iatrogenic injuries. Generally, two options for treatment are available, medical and surgical. The approach to managing accessory nerve injury and resulting trapezius muscle deformity is an interprofessional approach that revolves around conservative care, physical therapy, and surgical treatment.

**Medical Treatment**

Indications for medical management include:

- Serial clinical evaluation showing improved shoulder function

- Electrical regeneration on EMG or clinical improvement

- Mild and subjective symptoms, such as pain; and mild scapulohumeral dysfunction

Short-term options for the relief of shoulder pain and improved function are:

- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

- Regional nerve blocks with local anesthetics (requiring frequent repeat injections)

- Transcutaneous nerve stimulation

These options are unfeasible for long-term management.

**Rehabilitation**

Physical and occupational therapy are useful ways of providing significant functional benefits. Rehabilitation aims to gradually promote a wide passive ROM and active motion to avoid the development of shoulder dysfunction because of adhesive capsulitis.

- Do not carry heavyweights on the affected side.

- Hook the thumb or put the whole affected hand in the pocket of pants which can give significant relief.

- Use an arm sling that could help with pain, but this can turn out to be counterproductive as it can hamper the function of the affected arm.

Orthoses have also been used for rehabilitation. In one study, orthosis was observed to be associated with improvement. Despite this improvement in pain and function, the active shoulder abduction only improved by 5 to 25 degrees; therefore, this improvement should not be confused with the return of trapezial function.

**Physical Therapy**

Physical therapy (PT) is an essential part of recovery from shoulder dysfunction secondary to spinal accessory nerve injury. It becomes crucial for patients who refuse or are unsuitable for surgical treatment. PT aims to sustain passive ROM around the shoulder. This helps avoid stiffness of the shoulder joint that may result from malalignment and adhesive capsulitis. A study observed two groups, the PT group (with physical therapy) and the non-PT group (without physical therapy).

Eventually, aggressive PT is critical to the long-term maintenance of shoulder function and alleviating pain. Serial EMG and clinical examinations are useful in monitoring SAN function. However, early surgical treatment yields the best outcomes.

**Surgical Therapy**

When there is no apparent nerve injury or resection, the decision to carry out the surgical intervention should only be made after serial assessments following the initial injury fail to show spontaneous recovery in trapezial function and confirm persisting neurologic deficits. Indications for surgical intervention are the following:

- Dense paralysis

- Absence of EMG or clinical improvement on sequential assessments

- Troubling subjective symptoms, such as pain or severe scapulohumeral malfunction

- Intraoperative spotting of a nerve-in-continuity that fails to show contractions on direct stimulation

The surgical interventions are as follows:

- Neurolysis

- Primary nerve anastomosis

- Cable graft, such as autograft, biosynthetic nerve guide, or Neurotube

- Eden-Lange muscle transfer

Although serial examinations may distinguish patients who are suitable for surgical intervention from those who could be managed conservatively. In a patient with an obvious spinal accessory nerve transaction, urgent reconstruction is recommended. In the cases of trapezius muscle palsy in the presence or absence of a history of neck dissection, the surgeon must establish the length of time from the onset of symptoms. The Eden-Lange muscle transfer is recommended for patients with spontaneous trapezius palsy or where the patient has been symptomatic for more than 20 months.