Contrast agents for fluoroscopy can be generally administered in three fashions: enteric, intravascular, or direct injection.  Enteric administration typically favors barium suspensions, but whenever there is a concern for potential bowel leak, iodinated agents such as diatrizoate are utilized as they are not associated with the inflammation or adhesions that can occur in the peritoneal space with barium suspensions. Fluoroscopy accompanied by enteric contrast media allows for direct visualization of various forms of pathology, such as those affecting swallowing mechanics and stenosis of various portions of the gastrointestinal tract. Anaphylactoid reaction to enteric administration of contrast media is exceedingly rare compared to other methods of administration.

Intravascular injection of contrast media under fluoroscopic guidance is primarily utilized for catheter-directed angiography.  The intravascular injection can be performed either intravenously or intraarterially, depending on the focus of the imaging study.  Higher flows of contrast media of up to 30 mL/second are required for sufficient visualization of target vessels; thus, viscosity plays an important role in intra-arterial fluoroscopy requiring contrast media to be warmed to 37 degrees Celsius to obtain adequate flow rates. Higher iodine concentrations are preferred for intraarterial angiography for more complete opacification of vessels. Intravenous administration of contrast media under fluoroscopy is less frequently performed.  Intravenous contrast administration is typically reserved for CT scanning, although intravenous angiography under fluoroscopic guidance may still be beneficial in select scenarios. Intravascular injection of contrast media imposes the most risk for an anaphylactoid or contrast-induced nephropathy reaction.

Direct contrast injection can be performed via injection by a percutaneous needle such as for arthrography or myelography but may also be performed via injection through an indwelling catheter such as with cystography or sinography. Injection of contrast via direct methods can help guide therapeutic steroid injection, such as facet joint injections or epidural steroid injections, or stent placement, such as in cystography. Contrast reactions associated with direct injection are generally confined to local adverse reactions such as swelling and rash.

The contrast media is slowly reabsorbed from these types of injections and is not believed to cause significant adverse effects on the kidney when administered appropriately. A concern with direct injection of contrast media under fluoroscopic guidance is intravascular uptake by surrounding tissues, essentially converting a non-intravascular injection into an intravascular one. Regardless, the astute clinician should presume an injection may have intravascular uptake, potentially compromising a patient with nephropathy.