The enteroendocrine cells responsible for synthesizing and secreting GI hormones derive from pluripotent intestinal stem cells in the intestinal crypts. As these stem cells move up the crypt-villus axis, they express specific transcription factors that give rise to absorptive enterocytes or cells of secretory lineages (Paneth cells, goblet cells, and enteroendocrine cells). The sequential expression of three basic loop helix loop (bHLH) transcription factors (Math1, Neurogenin3, and NeuroD1) is involved in specifying the enteroendocrine cell lineage. Math1 expression specifies cells that are fated for the secretory progenitor lineage and segregates them from the absorptive enterocyte lineage. Subsequent expression of Neurogenin3 represents a secretory progenitor cell that has initiated differentiation into the endocrine cell lineage. Lastly, NeuroD1 expression induces cell cycle arrest and commits a cell to an enteroendocrine fate.

In addition to the bHLH transcription factors, numerous paired and homeodomain genes, including Isl-1, Pdx1, Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2, Pax4, and Pax6, are involved in differentiation of enteroendocrine cells into the distinct subtypes of hormone-secreting cells scattered throughout the GI tract. These subpopulations include G cells, I cells, S cells, K cells, Mo cells, L cells, and D cells, which are primarily responsible for secreting gastrin, CCK, secretin, GIP, motilin, GLP-1, and somatostatin, respectively. Interestingly, many subtypes of enteroendocrine cells are able to secrete multiple hormones, but the expression of hormonal genes is controlled by location in the GI tract.

Gastrointestinal hormones are composed of polypeptides that can divide into two structurally homologous families that include the hormones responsible for a majority of regulation of GI function. The first hormone family consists of gastrin and CCK because both hormones share an identical 5 C-terminal amino acid sequence, also known as “pentagastrin.” This sequence includes the tetrapeptide that is minimally required for gastrin activity but is only about one-sixth as potent as the entire 17-amino acid gastrin peptide. Gastrin also exists in a 34-amino acid form called “big” gastrin which gets secreted during the inter-digestive period. During meal ingestion, the 17-amino acid form of gastrin, also called “little” gastrin, is secreted. Although each form of gastrin has its own distinct biosynthetic pathway, the mediation of the action of both gastrin peptides is via binding of cholecystokinin (CCK-2) receptors. The other member of the gastrin family, CCK, is a 33-amino acid peptide that includes the pentagastrin sequence and the C-terminal tetrapeptide sequence necessary for minimal gastrin activity; this enables CCK to demonstrate activity on gastrin (CCK-2) receptors, although it mediates a very weak stimulation of gastric acid secretion. Furthermore, the minimally active fragment for CCK activity is its C-terminal heptapeptide, which acts on CCK-1 receptors to mediate gallbladder contraction. Gastrin can also act on the CCK-1 receptor, but each hormone is more potent at its own receptor than those of its homolog.

The second hormone family consists of secretin, glucagon, GLP-1, and GIP. Secretin has 27 amino acids and is structurally similar to glucagon, which has 29 amino acids. However, in contrast with the gastrin-CCK family, all amino acids in the polypeptide are necessary for biological activity, and these two polypeptides only share 14 common amino acids. Glucagon derives from a 180-amino acid precursor peptide called proglucagon, which undergoes tissue-specific post-translation processing to produce different peptides in different cell types. Proglucagon is cleaved to form glucagon in the pancreas, while in the intestines, proglucagon undergoes processing to produce a 30-amino acid peptide called GLP-1. GIP is 42 amino acids long but only shares nine amino acids with secretin and 16 amino acids with glucagon.