LGCCs are documented in correlation with the pathophysiology of several neurologic disorders. How they are involved can be related to their function in the CNS as outlined above. GABA-A receptors serve as modulators of motor control, cognition, and memory; defects of those functions are features in these disorders. Glycine receptors follow in a similar fashion, exhibiting effects in spinal cord signaling dysfunction.

**For GABA-A Receptors**

- Parkinson's disease – a common neurodegenerative disorder that manifests as active tremor, muscle rigidity, and ataxia; results from the accumulation of alpha-synuclein particles, aka Lewy bodies, that cause neuronal cell death. This process is prevalent within the basal ganglia, causing loss of various signaling paths including those mediated by GABA-A receptors which contribute to loss of motor control seen in this disease.

- Huntington disease – an autosomal dominant disorder known to result from hereditary (CAG)n repeat expansions within exon 1 of the huntingtin (htt) gene of Cr. 4, this manifests as a progressive decline in motor function as involuntary jerking (chorea) and muscle dystonia, as well as cognitive impairments. Reduced GABA-A receptor density and decreased GABA signaling within the striatum and cerebral cortex have been documented, resulting in an overall reduction of neuronal inhibitory signaling.

- Alzheimer's disease – as stated above, originally thought to result from an imbalance of dopaminergic and cholinergic signaling within the striatum, hippocampus, and cerebral cortex due to neuronal cell death from neurofibrillary tangles and beta-amyloid plaques. The condition manifests as a progressive decline of cognition, memory, and ability to perform activities of daily living. Many studies remain equivocal on the exact involvement of GABA in this disease process, with some suggesting decreased concentrations of GABA due to dysfunctional synthesis, others suggesting a loss of GABA-A receptors within areas of the cerebral cortex. More studies will need to be done in this area to elicit GABA’s role in pathogenesis.

**For glycine Receptors**

- Hyperekplexia – neurological disorder marked by generalized hypertonia, excessive startle response to tactile or acoustic stimuli, and nocturnal myoclonus; caused by several genetic loss-of-function mutations in glycine receptors and reduced glycine signaling within the CNS. Studies suggest that these patients exhibit increased pain sensitivity as well, though more research must be done to document the correlation of this finding.

- Autism – common neurodevelopmental condition with polygenic etiology; marked by a spectrum of varying degrees of developmental and cognitive delay with associated challenges in speech and social awareness. Suggestions of glycine’s role in the embryonic development of individuals with autism relate to a specific set of glycine receptors that contain an alpha-2 subunit. These receptors are thought to promote the generation of excitatory neuron pathways in early development, and that a microdeletion of the gene that codes for this glycine receptor is implicated in the development of autism. More study will be necessary to clarify glycine’s role in this developmental process.