As the presentation can be variable from asymptomatic hematuria, sterile pyuria, or proteinuria, to symptomatic anemia with features of chronic kidney disease or acute presentations of urinary tract infection, evaluation needs to be broad and extensive. This may delay the diagnosis of the disease. A routine urinary examination might not be helpful due to the lack of physical signs and symptoms in early cases. The most useful initial diagnostic test to evaluate for analgesic nephropathy is a urinary protein to urinary creatinine ratio.

Basic investigations include routine serum studies with a complete metabolic profile and complete blood count. An ultrasound of the abdomen, especially of the kidneys and the urinary bladder, can be useful to rule out other causes of nephropathy such as obstruction or infection. Computed tomography (CT) scan imaging is the most valuable noninvasive diagnostic test to evaluate for analgesic nephropathy.

Renal biopsy is the gold standard diagnostic test but is not always appropriate due to its invasive nature and the risk of complications.

A non-enhanced CT of the abdomen is preferred. It can show features suggestive of analgesic nephropathy, which include a decrease in renal mass, renal scarring, reduction in renal volume with irregular renal surfaces, and/or papillary calcifications. It can also show features of parenchymal thinning.

Pyelograms are not useful in the diagnosis and can even be harmful because contrast exposure to the renal parenchyma can worsen the renal injury.

As the most frequent abnormality detected is papillary necrosis, clinicians need to rule out alternative causes of the same presentation, covered in differentials area of this topic.