A detailed clinical history regarding the onset and duration of symptoms, travel history, exposure to people with COVID-19 infection, underlying preexisting medical conditions, and drug history should be elicited by treating providers. Patients with typical clinical signs suspicious of COVID-19 such as fever, cough, sore throat, loss of taste or smell, malaise, and myalgias should be promptly tested for SARS-CoV-2. Besides symptomatic patients, patients with atypical symptoms of COVID-19 or anyone with known high-risk exposure to SARS-CoV-2 should be tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection even in the absence of symptoms.

**Diagnostic Testing In COVID-19**

**Molecular Testing**

- The standard diagnostic mode of testing is testing a nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid using a real-time PCR assay. Commercial PCR assays have been validated by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) with emergency use authorizations (EUAs) for the qualitative detection of nucleic acid from SARS-CoV-2 from specimens obtained from nasopharyngeal swabs as well as other sites such as oropharyngeal, anterior/mid-turbinate nasal swabs, nasopharyngeal aspirates, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and saliva. The collection of BAL samples should only be performed in mechanically ventilated patients as lower respiratory tract samples seem to remain positive for a more extended period.

- The sensitivity of PCR testing is dependent on multiple factors that include the adequacy of the specimen, technical specimen collection, time from exposure, and specimen source.

- SARS-CoV-2 antigen tests are less sensitive but have a faster turnaround time compared to molecular PCR testing.

**Serology Testing**

- An antibody test can evaluate for the presence of antibodies that occurs as a result of infection. Antibody tests play an important role in broad-based surveillance of COVID-19, and many commercial manufactured antibody testing kits are available to evaluate the presence of antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 are available.

- Despite the numerous antibody tests designed to date, serologic testing has limitations in specificity and sensitivity, and results from different tests vary. However, an antibody test with a specificity higher than 99% and a sensitivity of 96% has been developed by the CDC, which can identify past SARS-CoV-2 infection.

- Antibody testing may be instrumental in broad-based surveillance of COVID-19 and evaluate the immunity conferred from infection or vaccination. There is currently ongoing research to determine quantitative and qualitative aspects of antibodies regarding protection from future SARS-CoV-2 infection and the duration of the protection.

**Other Laboratory Assessment**

- Complete blood count (CBC), a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) that includes testing for renal and liver function, and a coagulation panel should be performed in all hospitalized patients.

- Additional tests such as testing for inflammatory markers such as ESR, C-reactive protein (CRP), ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, D-dimer, and procalcitonin can be considered in hospitalized patients. However, their prognostic significance in COVID-19 is not clear.

**Imaging Modalities**

Considering this viral illness commonly manifests itself as pneumonia, radiological imaging has a fundamental role in the diagnostic process, management, and follow-up. Imaging studies may include chest x-ray, lung ultrasound, or chest computed tomography (CT). There are no guidelines available regarding the timing and choice of pulmonary imaging studies in patients with COVID-19, and the type of imaging should be considered based on clinical evaluation.

**Chest X-ray**

- Standard radiographic examination (X-ray) of the chest has a low sensitivity in identifying early lung changes; it can be completely normal in the initial stages of the disease.

- In the more advanced stages of infection, the chest X-ray examination commonly shows bilateral multifocal alveolar opacities, which tend to confluence up to the complete opacity of the lung. Pleural effusion can also be demonstrated.

**Chest Computed Tomography (CT)**

- The American College of Radiology recommends against Chest CT's routine use as an initial imaging study or screening.

- Given its high sensitivity, chest computed tomography (CT), particularly high-resolution CT (HRCT), is the diagnostic method of choice in evaluating COVID-19 pneumonia, particularly when associated with disease progression.

- Several non-specific findings and radiologic patterns can be found on Chest CT. Most of these findings may also be observed in other lung infections, such as Influenza A (H1N1), CMV, SARS, MERS, streptococcus, and Chlamydia, Mycoplasma.

- The most common CT findings in COVID-19 are multifocal bilateral "ground or ground glass" (GG) areas associated with consolidation areas with patchy distribution, mainly peripheral/subpleural, and greater involvement of the posterior region's lower lobes. The "crazy paving" pattern can also be observed.

- This latter finding is characterized by GG areas with superimposed interlobular septal thickening and intralobular septal thickening. It is a non-specific finding that can be detected in different conditions.

- Other notable findings include the "reversed halo sign," a focal area of GG delimited by a peripheral ring with consolidation, and the findings of cavitations, calcifications, lymphadenopathies, and pleural effusion.

**Lung Ultrasound**

Ultrasonographic examination of the lung allows evaluating the progression of the disease, from a focal interstitial pattern up to a "white lung" with evidence of subpleural consolidations. Considering its noninvasive nature and zero risks of radiation, it is a useful diagnostic modality for patient follow-up and assists in determining the setting of mechanical ventilation and prone positioning. The main sonographic features are:

- Pleural lines: appear often thickened, irregular, and discontinuous until it almost seems erratic; subpleural lesions can be seen as small patchy consolidations or nodules.

- B lines: They are often motionless, coalescent, and cascade and can flow up to the square of "white lung."

- Thickenings: They are most evident in the posterior and bilateral fields, especially in the lower fields; the dynamic air bronchogram within the consolidation is a manifestation of disease evolution.

- Perilesional pleural effusion

In summary, during the course of the illness, it is possible to identify the first phase with focal areas of fixed B lines followed by a phase of numerical increase of the lines B up to the white lung with small subpleural thickening, which progresses further until there is evidence of posterior consolidations.