Factors linked with an increased risk of gastric cancer include nutritional factors such as high-salt (salt-preserved food), N-nitroso compounds consumption (dietary source), smoking, a low vitamin A and C diet, consuming large amounts of smoked or cured foods, a deficit of refrigerated foods, and contaminated drinking water. High body mass index (BMI), increased calorie consumption, gastroesophageal reflux, and smoking are associated with an increased risk of adenocarcinomas of the distal esophagus, proximal stomach, and junction. Occupational exposure to rubber manufacturing, tin mining, metal processing, and coal also increases the risk. Helicobacter pylori infection has an attributable risk of 46% to 63%, while Epstein-Barr virus infection is an estimated 5% to 10% worldwide. Radiation exposure and prior gastric surgery also have been implicated as risk factors.

Diverse meta-analysis has shown that high consumption of fiber (relative risk (RR) 0.58 95% CI 0.49-0.67), fruits (RR 0.90, 95% CI 0.83-0.98 and vegetables (RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.88-1.06) have a probable protective benefit against gastric cancer. Aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been associated with a lower risk of cancer of the gastroesophageal junction and other gastrointestinal tumors (HR 0.79 for each year of NSAID use). Alcohol consumption has not been demonstrated as a risk factor, and in fact, some data suggest daily wine intake may be protective despite insufficient evidence. Chronic “iatrogenic” histamine-2-receptor antagonist or proton pump inhibitor has not been associated with gastric cancer.

Host factors include type A blood with an approximate 20% more gastric cancer cases than in blood groups O, B, or AB and are particularly associated with the diffuse type. Pernicious anemia, an autoimmune chronic atrophic gastritis, has up to six-fold increased risk of intestinal-type gastric cancer. Benign gastric ulcers, hypertrophic gastropathy, and gastric polyps are risk factors associated with an increased risk of stomach cancer.

Most gastric cancers are sporadic, but 5% to 10% of cases have a family history of gastric cancer. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC), gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS), and familial intestinal gastric cancer (FIGC) are three major syndromes accounting for up to 3% to 5% of hereditary familial gastric cancer. Other hereditary cancer syndromes are:

- Hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC 13% lifetime risk, predominantly intestinal type)

- Familial adenomatous syndrome (FAP, 10% risk)

- Peutz Jeghers syndrome (PJS, 29% risk)

- Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS, 21%)

- Li-Fraumeni syndrome

- Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome

- Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) or hamartoma tumor (Cowden's) syndrome.

However, all these are rare causes of gastric cancer. It is recommended to follow screening guidelines on hereditary syndromes associated with gastric cancer according to their risk. Certain polymorphisms have been associated with gastric cancer. Carriers of IL-1B-511*T/*T or IL-1B-511*T/*C that are up-regulated by H. pylori infection could cause a pro-inflammation and acid inhibition leading to malignancy. Intestinal-type gastric carcinogenesis may have overexpressed oncogenes (K-ras and c-met) or tumor suppressors (TP53, APC, TTF, and CDKN1B,p27); although, not consistently present.

For cancer research, the World Health Organization has classified H. pylori as a definite gastric carcinogen and likewise concluded a positive association between the consumption of processed meat and stomach cancer.