Fires can cause high numbers of casualties should many people be around the fire and inhale its smoke. Smoke asphyxiation is the biggest health concern associated with fires, and rapid management is crucial for the survival and reduction of long-term sequelae. In the acute phase, the upper respiratory tract edema can quickly close the airway, so monitoring for signs of respiratory distress, shock, poor blood oxygenation, and altered mental status is important to determine if establishing an airway is necessary.

With a secured airway, 100% oxygen is commonly given because of the carbon monoxide poisoning associated with smoke inhalation. Carbon monoxide has a high affinity for hemoglobin, so maximum oxygen concentrations are required to out-compete the carbon monoxide for binding to hemoglobin. This is a crucial step to reduce the long-term neurologic sequelae associated with poor neural tissue oxygenation. For cyanide poisoning, hydroxocobalamin can be used as an antidote. Further management strategies include N-acetylcysteine administration due to the elevated levels of reactive oxygen species that contribute to the pulmonary damage. To address the massive bronchoconstriction associated with smoke asphyxiation, nebulized beta-2 agonists and muscarinic antagonists may be used.

Burn management involves cooling and cleaning the burn. Prophylactic antibiotics are not indicated but could be used in high-risk burns, but dressings with ointments are commonly used to promote healing.

More extensive burns can greatly increase the metabolic rate in the patient, so proper nutrition is important in the early stages of healing. The damage to the skin compromises the ability of the patient to maintain body temperature homeostasis, so increasing the temperature in the room is important to maintain their body temperature at a normal level to prevent enzymatic and tissue dysfunction and reduce fluid loss to evaporation.

Within the healthcare system, fires involving patients are rare but happen in higher-risk situations like respiratory tract surgeries. These patients are being ventilated with oxygen while under anesthesia during the procedure. The use of an electrocautery device during the surgery completes the triad necessary for a fire—tissue as a fuel source, oxygen as the oxidizer, and cautery as the source of ignition. A handful of reports have been published on this event involving a fire being ignited within the patient's respiratory tract, resulting in tissue damage.