The differential diagnosis for a patient presenting with localized pain in the area of the pes anserine bursa is significantly broad and forms the main body of the topic.

- **Infectious pathologies**such as septic bursitis or osteomyelitis.

- **Gouty**changes to the bursa.

- **Medial meniscus**injuries and lesions or medial compartment osteoarthritis: both pathologies would present with medial joint line pain symptoms and signs, whereas symptoms from pes anserinus bursitis are more inferomedial.

- **L3-L4 radiculopathy:**This is most likely will be associated with lumbar pain with no tenderness to palpation of the anserine bursa.

- **Medial collateral ligament injuries or lesions:**history of trauma and Stress maneuvers with or without resultant instability or laxity would differentiate this etiology.

- In the setting of trauma, proximal tibia stress fracture from repetitive sports activities. Or in cases of intraarticular fractures, lipohemarthrosis may develop in the bursa. Also, free bodies that develop in the joint can migrate to the bursa.

- **Other bursae inflammation,**such as suprapatellar bursitis, should be in the differential diagnosis. The suprapatellar bursa is located in the midline between the prefemoral and suprapatellar fat pad and usually communicates with the knee joint apart from cases where suprapatellar plica is present. Prepatellar bursitis: this bursa is situated between the patella and the skin and would be encountered in people involved in more kneeling. Superficial infrapatellar bursitis: this bursa is located anterior to the patellar tendon and inferior to the subcutaneous fat or deep infrapatellar bursitis: this bursa is located deep to the distal patellar tendon and anterior to the proximal tibia. All suprapatellar, infrapatellar, and prepatellar bursae can be clearly visualized in the sagittal sequences of the MRI.
- Also, semimembranosus bursitis, also known as semimembranosustibial collateral ligament bursitis and this bursa lies between superficial and deep layers of the medial collateral ligament at the anterosuperior aspect of the semimembranosus tendon. Hemorrhagic bursitis can develop following trauma or could be related to Osgood-Schlatter disease. Bursal fluid is a physiological finding as a result of overloading the extensor tendons in athletic individuals, especially long-distance runners and jumpers, and hence the challenge in the diagnosis.
- As bursitis around the knee mentioned, others such as iliotibial bursitis: this bursa lies in the distal portion of the iliotibial band close to Gerdy's tubercle and proximal lateral tibia. An overload secondary to varus stress can result in iliotibial tendonitis and bursitis. However, this presents with pain in the anterolateral knee and can mimic lateral meniscus injuries or pathologies.

- **Knee cysts**are also part of the differential diagnosis, such as Baker's cyst, otherwise known as a popliteal cyst or gastrocnemius-semimembranosus recess. This bursa is communicated with the synovium and lies between the medial head of the gastrocnemius and semimembranosus muscles. It can be easily differentiated from other knee cysts due to its peculiar anatomical location. Bimodal age distribution (4 to 7) and (35 to 70) has been reported in the literature for Baker's cysts. It can be asymptomatic or large enough to compress the popliteal vein and cause deep vein thrombosis, or it can rupture acutely and present with a clinical picture similar to deep vein thrombosis.

- **Meniscal cysts**(cysts of the semilunar fibrocartilage): results from fluid extrusion into the parameniscal soft tissue secondary to a meniscal tear. Usually presents with pain, palpable mass, and occasionally locking. Meniscal cysts are more commonly medial than lateral and tend to recur after aspiration or excision unless the meniscal pathology is treated.

- **Ganglions**(intra-articular synovial cysts) can be in the joint capsule, periarticular ligament, or synovial tendon sheath. The absence of meniscal pathology would exclude meniscal cysts from ganglion differential.**Synovial osteochondromatosis**is characterized by intraarticular cartilaginous bodies with synovial metaplasia.

- **Spontaneous osteonecrosis of the medial tibial plateau**can also be among the differential diagnosis; however, this can be excluded radiologically.

- **Masses and space-occupying lesions,**either benign, such as lipoma, hemangioma, giant cell tumor, myelolipoma, para-articular chondroma or osteochondroma, or synovial hemangioma. Or infectious such conditions as tuberculosis. Or even malignant tumors commonly detected in the knee, such as fibrous histiocytoma, liposarcoma, and synovial sarcoma.

Added to the long list are: the varicose popliteal vein, popliteal aneurysm, and secular dilation of the popliteal vein can occasionally be a consequence of trauma. Less urgent pathology to include in the differential for pes anserine bursitis includes fat pad tenderness in overweight patients or fibromyalgia. In fibromyalgia patients, the pain is typically more symmetric and bilateral. Popliteal varicose vein, popliteal aneurysm, and secular dilation of the popliteal vein could all be due to trauma. Others include Osgood-Schlatter disease, dissecting osteochondritis, patellar tendinitis, synovial plica, muscle pain, patellofemoral syndrome, recurring patellar subluxation, patellar chondromalacia, lesion of the infrapatellar fat pad, patellar dysplasia, bi- or multipartite patella, or patellar fracture. Frequently, pain in the anserine region is part of the fibromyalgia syndrome.