Most of the symptomatic presentations of LDH are short-lived and resolve within six to eight weeks; therefore, it is usually initially managed conservatively unless red flag symptoms are present, raising suspicion for emergent conditions such as progressive neurologic deficit or cauda equina syndrome. Conservative and surgical treatment have recently demonstrated equivalent outcomes in the medium and long term. However, other studies have shown an improved outcome in the surgically treated groups as it may result in faster relief of symptoms and improvement in the quality of life. There is no literature on an absolute non-operative versus operative criterion, yet there are relative indications for urgent surgical intervention in patients presenting with red flags. The ultimate decision regarding the treatment type of non-emergent LDH is based on the doctor-patient discussion in light of the evaluation, duration of symptoms, and patient’s wishes.

**Conservative Medical/Interventional Treatment**

This approach is the initial management of choice in patients presenting with symptoms of acute lumbar disc herniation. Primary care practitioners can begin the treatment with a short course of rest if indicated, appropriate patient education, recommendations of physical exercises, and prescribing pain medications and physical therapy. In most cases, the symptoms will improve within a few weeks; thus, physical therapy is not recommended before three weeks of the onset of symptoms. Pain management could start with moderate nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication; if unresponsive, opioids analgesics are the next step. However, the risks and side effects of opioids should be taken into consideration and discussed with the patient, and they should be prescribed for the shortest duration possible. If symptoms persist beyond six weeks, transforaminal or interlaminar epidural steroid injections may be considered for short term (2 to 4 weeks) pain relief in some patients with LDH and radiculopathy. It is recommended to use contrast-enhanced fluoroscopy to provide more accurate delivery of the epidural steroid injections. Medical and interventional treatment improves functional outcomes in most LDH with radiculopathy not warranting surgical intervention.

**Surgical Treatment**

As always, surgical treatment is the final resort, yet discectomy and laminotomy performed to treat radiculopathy caused by LDH is still a commonly performed procedure with roughly 180,000 to 200,000 cases annually in the United States. Surgical intervention is the suggestion for patients with persistent disabling symptoms who do not respond to conservative and medical management. The decision to operate within six months to a year in a patient whose symptoms warrant a surgical intervention is associated with faster recovery and improved long-term outcomes.

There are several methods of performing the surgical intervention, including an open approach and a minimally invasive approach. The open approach is the open microsurgical discectomy. The minimally invasive approach in spinal surgery has seen increased utilization in the past two decades. It can be done with small incisions and tube access. It can divide into two main technologies, endoscopic and microsurgical. There are different approach strategies, whereby the surgical team chooses the approach based on the morphology and location of the herniated disc. When compared to open discectomy, minimally invasive procedures correlate with decreased operative time, less blood loss, and no difference in complications, reoperation rates, or wound infections. However, there is no difference in long-term patient-centered outcomes between open and minimally invasive surgeries.

Total lumbar disc replacement has been used as an alternative to lumbar fusion for degenerative disc disease.