In neonates with a cleft lip the three major concerns are:

- Difficulties with feeding

- Risk of aspiration

- Airway obstruction

Treatment of patients with cleft lip deformity is a long-term commitment. Medical treatment will largely focus on requirements from any concomitant congenital abnormalities and based on nutritional needs. Within the first few weeks to months of life, NAM can be employed with assistance from an orthodontist. This involves the creation of an orthodontic appliance that molds a protruding premaxillary segment and alveolar process into a more favorable position. This allows for repositioning of the alveolar segments, medialization of the alar base, and columellar lengthening, which allows for easier surgical repair of cleft lip and nasal cleft deformity down the line. These require frequent adjustments by the orthodontist. Other treatment adjuncts that assist with decreasing the severity/width of the cleft early on are lip taping (often performed in patients with less severe clefts) and lip adhesion (an approximation of the cleft lip edges without changing lip landmarks or disturbing tissue required for definitive closure, often used in patients with wide clefts who are poor NAM candidates for social or geographic reasons).

Surgical intervention for initial cleft lip usually occurs at 3 to 5 months of age. A good rule of thumb in deciding the age at which is it safe to perform primary cleft lip repair is the "Rule of 10s.” If the infant is ten weeks old, 10 pounds, and hemoglobin has reached 10mg/dL, surgical repair should be safe if no other comorbidities preclude it. There are many accepted surgical techniques for primary repair of unilateral (Millard repair rotation advancement, Fisher repair, and Mohler repair) and bilateral (Mulliken repair) cleft lips, and the surgical details are out of the scope of this article. However, common goals in all repairs are to re-establish a competent orbicularis oris muscle, lengthen the philtrum and lip, and minimize visible scarring. In primary cleft repair, some surgeons perform gingivoperiosteoplasty, which involved the elevation of the mucoperiosteal flaps along an alveolar segment with wide-undermining to promote bone growth along the periosteum, but this is not a universal practice.

Postoperatively, these patients are followed by multiple specialties from infancy into adulthood. Concomitant cleft palate repair is ideally performed from 9 to 12 months followed by close speech evaluation and follow up at 2 to 3 years of age to rule out any concomitant issues with swallowing or speech. A concomitant cleft palate can result in speech and swallowing issues as a result of anatomic abnormalities that result from the inability of the soft palate to rise against the posterior pharyngeal wall and separate the nasopharynx from the oropharynx (referred to as velopharyngeal insufficiency). Alveolar bone grafting, generally using cancellous bone from the iliac crest to close the alveolar gap is performed at 7 to 9 years of age per the discretion of the orthodontist when the permanent maxillary canines erupt. Following this, surgeries with ear, nose, and throat specialist or plastic surgeon for correction of nasal cleft deformity and scar revisions as well as orthodontics are done at various ages depending on the patient's needs. Final evaluation at the age of skeletal maturity, generally from 16 to 18 years of age, will evaluate the need for orthognathic surgery to create different pattern osteotomies in the mandible or midface/maxilla to correct various skeletal abnormalities associated with cleft lip deformity.