Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism can be caused by a single adenoma, multiple adenomas, or multi-gland hyperplasia of the parathyroids, just as in the classical type of primary hyperparathyroidism (cPHPT). Several studies have shown an increased incidence of multi-gland adenomas in nPHPT.

Normocalcemic secondary hyperparathyroidism can be caused by a vitamin D deficiency, renal failure, intestinal malabsorption syndromes, bariatric surgery, long-term reduced dietary calcium intake, renal calcium leak, and idiopathic hypercalciuria. The most common cause is end-stage renal disease which causes reduced vitamin D activation leading to lower intestinal calcium absorption resulting in hypocalcemia which induces severe secondary hyperparathyroidism. Serum phosphorus is also elevated. Treatment of hyperparathyroidism in end-stage renal disease usually includes vitamin D supplements (sufficient to maintain at least 20 ng/ml), phosphate binders, and calcimimetics to reduce the PTH levels. Parathyroid surgery is sometimes necessary for severe or refractory cases.

Other causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism include anticonvulsants, bisphosphonates, celiac disease, denosumab, diuretics (thiazides), and lithium. Drug-related secondary hyperparathyroidism can be verified by stopping the drug for several months and rechecking the PTH level. If the PTH was elevated due to a drug, it should normalize when the medication is withheld. If PTH remains elevated, then some other cause is responsible.

Rao et al. first proposed a biphasic progression of hyperparathyroidism in 1988. They suggested that parathyroid hormone levels are elevated during the initial phase, but serum calcium remains within normal parameters. This first phase is generally asymptomatic and was not identified as a precursor or early form of hyperparathyroidism until recently.