Recommend lifestyle changes to all patients. Weight-bearing physical activity and exercise that improves balance, such as yoga and tai chi, should be encouraged. Treatment should be offered to help with both smoking and alcohol cessation. Recommend calcium and Vitamin D3 to all patients, and patients who are vitamin D deficient should have a treatment that raises their levels to be normal.

Patients with a t-score of negative 2.5 or less should receive treatment. It is also indicated for patients with osteopenia (t-score between negative 1 and negative 2.5) who score on the osteoporosis risk assessment test as having a 3% or higher risk of hip fracture. Patients with a personal history of a fragility fracture can be treated without further testing.

There are multiple pharmacologic treatments available. These agents work through either antiresorptive or anabolic means. In women with known osteoporosis, the recommendations are to start treatment with risedronate, alendronate, zoledronic acid, or denosumab to reduce the risk of fracture. These treatments reduce fracture both at vertebral and non-vertebral sites. Bazedoxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator combined with conjugated estrogen, has been approved by the FDA for the prevention of osteoporosis but not for treatment.

Men should be offered bisphosphonates as first-line therapy.

If patients do not tolerate these medications, they can try other medications such as teriparatide. Medications that have only been shown to reduce vertebral fractures, such as raloxifene and ibandronate, should be reserved for patients who cannot tolerate any previously mentioned medications. For both groups, any secondary cause should be treated. The use of combination therapy of teriparatide and a bisphosphonate or teriparatide and denosumab in patients with severe osteoporosis and hip and vertebral fractures is worth consideration.

There are no randomized studies regarding monitoring of treatment with follow-up dual X-ray absorptiometry scans. Several studies show that women had reduced fractures with treatment independent of follow-up bone mineral density.

Recommendations for duration depend on the specific type of medication used for treatment. Some agents, such as teriparatide or hormonal-based therapy, need immediate follow-up treatment with another agent, or bone mass is lost quickly after discontinuation. There is an ongoing debate about bisphosphonates, with studies underway to determine if drug holidays after five years of therapy or continuous therapy are of most benefit to reduce the fracture.

**Pharmacotherapy Options**

Pharmacotherapy agents work through either anti-resorptive or anabolic means. Bisphosphonates are the most commonly prescribed medication class. These drugs are divided into non-nitrogen and nitrogen-containing compounds. The latter are considered first-line therapy. The nitrogen-containing compounds inhibit farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase and ultimately inhibit osteoclast resorption and induce osteocyte apoptosis. Common agents include:

- Alendronate may reduce the rate of hip, spine, and wrist fractures by 50%

- Risedronate may reduce vertebral and nonvertebral fractures by 40% over three years

- IV zoledronic acid reduces the rate of spine fractures by 70% and hip fractures by 40% over three years

**Other Medication Classes**

- Conjugated estrogen-progestin hormone replacement (HRT)

- Estrogen-only replacement (ERT)

- Salmon calcitonin

- Selective estrogen receptor modulators (raloxifene) - raloxifene is an agonist to estrogen receptors on bone and reduces osteoclast resorption.

- Anabolic (teriparatide) - Teriparatide is a recombinant form of parathyroid hormone (PTH) that stimulates osteoblasts to produce more bone. Teriparatide is now FDA-approved for osteoporosis treatment in males and females.

- RANKL inhibitors (denosumab) - Denosumab is a monoclonal Ig2 that targets RANKL and inhibits its ability to bind to RANK, and results in the inhibition of osteoclast activation

**Treatment and Follow-up Considerations**

Treatment duration varies depending on the class of medication utilized. Agents such as teriparatide and hormonal-based therapy require immediate follow-up treatment with another agent upon stopping the medication; otherwise, bone mass is rapidly lost. Clinicians also must remain cautious against the prolonged use of uninterrupted bisphosphonate therapy beyond a 3- to 5-year period. Patients should also be made aware of these potentially morbid adverse events, and they should be counseled to seek immediate care if they are experiencing any symptoms of thigh discomfort.

Any patient on bisphosphonates for any given time period and presenting with mild thigh discomfort should have the following treatment workup:

- Educate on the risks of and immediately stop all weight-bearing activity

- Obtain full-length femur and hip radiographs. Thigh pain may be indicative of an impending pathologic, atypical femur fracture. Attention should be directed to the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal regions of the femur, particularly the lateral cortex, which often demonstrates evidence of periosteal reaction

- Immediately discontinue bisphosphonate use

- Refer to an orthopedic surgeon for prophylactic surgical fixation