In children with suspected cholestasis, PFIC should be considered after ruling out more common causes of cholestasis. Various algorithms exist that can help guide decision making. Initial evaluation often begins with laboratory studies, including a complete metabolic panel, which can demonstrate elevations in bilirubin. A pivotal decision-making step occurs with ultrasonography. If dilated bile ducts are observed, than extrahepatic causes of cholestasis should be ruled out. However, if normal bile ducts are observed, then acquiring a gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) can be obtained. If there is a normal activity of GGT and the patient has pruritis, it can be due to PFIC1, PFIC2, BRIC or either from drug toxicity or Hepatitis A. However, if patients have elevated GGT levels, then the next step is often a liver biopsy to determine if there is ductal proliferation that is observed. If ductal proliferation is present and cholangiography demonstrated normal bile ducts, the patient may have either PFIC3 or autoimmune cholangitis.

Although the above is an algorithmic approach in the evaluation of patients with observed cholestasis, the diagnosis of PFIC is a difficult one to confirm. A multi-modal approach is often required. Radiographically speaking, ultrasound is the only required modality, although computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are often utilized as well. Liver biopsy is crucial in the diagnosis. Patients with PFIC can have significant changes at the histologic level. PFIC1 often exhibits an absence of ductal proliferation, and metaplasia of hepatocytes is typically observed. PFIC2 is similar to PFIC1, however, there is more disruption of hepatocellular architecture seen in PFIC2 tissue samples. PFIC3, unlike PFIC1 and PFIC2, will exhibit ductal proliferation with portal fibrosis. In addition to the above histologic findings, these tissue samples can be sent in for immunochemical staining.

Analysis of biliary lipid levels is another part of the workup of the condition. Given the nature of various mutations seen amongst PFIC patients, the concentration of bile salts also differ. Patients with PFIC1 seem to exhibit mild reductions in bile salt concentrations with levels often between 3-8 mM. The lowest concentrations, often <1mM, are seen in patients with PFIC2, whereas patients with PFIC3 typically exhibit normal levels.

Lastly, molecular analysis exists as a means of determining and identifying such defects as well.