The gastrocnemius muscle is a biarticular muscle that originates on the posterior aspect of the femur along the medial and lateral condyles, forming both medial and lateral heads. Deep to it is the soleus muscle, which originates on the posterior surface of the fibula and medial border of the tibia. Together, both muscles form the superficial posterior compartment of the leg. Distally, these two muscles coalesce to form the common Achilles tendon, which inserts on the middle part of the posterior surface of the calcaneus. The tendon turns 90 degrees medially on its path towards the heel.

Contraction of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles translates a force through Achilles tendon, causing plantar flexion of the foot; this allows for lower limb locomotion and propulsion in actions such as walking, running, and jumping. During these motions, the Achilles tendon is subject to the highest loads in the body, with tensile loads up to ten times the body's weight.

Specific characteristics of the Achilles tendon allows for these actions. The Achilles consists mainly of type II fast-twitch fibers, and its elasticity allows for rapid propulsion. The tendon is composed primarily of type I collagen and elastin, with the former being responsible for the strength of the tendon. Spiralization of the tendon fibers allow for concentrated stress and may confer a mechanical advantage. Lastly, the Achilles tendon does not have a true synovial sheath but instead is surrounded by a paratenon. The paratenon is made up of a loose connective tissue sheath surrounding the entire tendon and can stretch to 2 to 3 cm with movement to allow for the greatest possible gliding action.