In children who have asthma or in whom asthma is suspected, a full history and physical exam should be performed, with a focus on the components discussed above.

**Making the Diagnosis of Asthma**

A diagnosis of asthma should be a consideration when any of the following indicators are present:

- Recurrent episodes of cough, wheezing, difficulty breathing, or chest tightness

- Symptoms that occur at night or disrupt sleep

- Symptoms that appear to be triggered by upper respiratory tract infections, exercise, exposure to animals, dust, mold, tobacco smoke, aerosols, changes in weather, stress, strong emotional expression, or menses

In children who are at least five years of age and adults, pre- and post-bronchodilator spirometry can help confirm the diagnosis.

Baseline spirometry provides the following information FVC (Forced vital capacity), FEV1 ( forced expiratory volume at 1 second),  FEV1/FVC, and F25-75 (the difference between the forced expiratory volume at 25% and 75%). Assessment of the bronchodilator response begins with the baseline spirometry followed by the administration of a short-acting bronchodilator (most commonly, albuterol 2 to 4 puffs in adults and older children). According to the ATS/ERS guidelines, reversibility is deemed significant when there is a greater than 12 % improvement from baseline or an increase of over 200 ml in FEV1.

Peak flow meters are for monitoring asthma. A decline of 20 to 30% or more from the patient's personal best may be indicative of an impending or current exacerbation. A peak flow of less than 40% of their best is indicative of severe exacerbation.

**Provocation Testing**

Further testing may be indicated in patients with a high pretest probability of asthma, meaning the patient displays typical symptoms like coughing, wheezing, or dyspnea, but normal spirometry testing and equivocal or no response to bronchodilators.

**Exercise Testing**

- Exercise-induced asthma may be diagnosed via exercise testing. The patient is monitored on a treadmill and has serial spirometry performed. The test is positive if there is a reduction in FEV1 greater than 15% from baseline.

**Methacholine Challenge**

- Methacholine is a drug that acts on acetylcholine receptors and causes transient narrowing of airways by inducing bronchoconstriction. The test is positive if there is a reduction in FEV1 greater than 20% from baseline. A normal test is adequate to rule out asthma, though the methacholine challenge may be falsely positive.

**Allergy Testing**

-  Inhalant allergens, likey molds, pollens, dander, and dust mites, are common triggers in patients with asthma. Allergy testing should be administered in patients with persistent asthma, though it may be considered in those with intermittent asthma. Microarray testing for IgE can further elucidate allergy triggers.

**Acute Exacerbation**

Children who present for an acute exacerbation should have a full set of vitals collected. Overall clinical appearance should determine whether they should escalate to a higher level of care. Asthma exacerbations are diagnosed clinically and do not require laboratory or imaging studies routinely; it is appropriate to begin treatment.

It is appropriate to consider a chest X-ray in the following setting:

- First wheezing episode

- Asymmetric lung findings

- Unexplained fever

- Symptoms continue to worsen despite treatment

- The patient is critically ill

A chest x-ray may reveal hyperinflated lungs and interstitial prominence. If there is any focal consolidation, the patient should also receive treatment for pneumonia.

Other laboratory studies, including ABG, may also be considered in patients if symptoms continue to worsen despite treatment or the patient is critically ill; however, initial therapy with nebulizers should not be delayed.