The pathogenesis of postpartum depression is currently unknown. It has been suggested that genetics, hormonal and psychological, and social life stressors play a role in the development of PPD.

The role of reproductive hormones in depressive behavior suggests neuroendocrine pathophysiology for PPD. There is ample data to advocate that changes in the reproductive hormones stimulate the dysregulation of these hormones in sensitive women. The pathophysiology of PPD can be caused by alterations of multiple biological and endocrine systems, for example, the immunological system, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA), and lactogenic hormones. The Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA) is known to be involved in the disease process of post-partum depression. The HPA axis causes the release of cortisol in trauma and stress, and if the HPA axis function is not normal, then the response decreases the release of catecholamines leading to a poor stress response. HPA-releasing hormones increase during pregnancy and remain elevated up to 12 weeks after childbirth.

The rapid changes in reproductive hormones like estradiol and progesterone following delivery can be a potential stressor in susceptible women, and these changes can lead to the onset of depressive symptoms. Oxytocin and prolactin also play an important role in the pathogenesis of PPD. These hormones regulate the milk let-down reflex as well as the synthesis of breast milk. It is often observed that failure to lactate and the onset of PPD occur at the same time. Low levels of oxytocin are particularly observed in PPD and unwanted early weaning. During the third trimester, lower levels of oxytocin are associated with increased depressive symptoms during pregnancy and following delivery.