The radiological imaging also reveals specific characteristic markers associated with each herniation subtypes.

There is an effacement of the ipsilateral lateral horn with a displacement of septum pellucidum in subfalcine herniation, which is followed by progressive compression and obliteration of the basal cisterns along with hydrocephalus resulting from brain torsion. The uncal herniation causes widening of the ipsilateral cerebellopontine cisterns with the obliteration of the contralateral cerebellopontine cisterns.

The central herniation leads to complete obliteration of peri-mesencephalic and peri-medullary cisterns, truncated brainstem along with the presence of Duret hemorrhage. The upward herniation variant will lead to flattened quadrigeminal cisterns, 'spinning top' appearance of the midbrain, and associated hydrocephalus.

The imaging will also reveal characteristic infarction along with the vascular territory of compressed vessels. In terminal stages with global infarction, there will be a white cerebellar sign as well.

The cerebral auto-regulation becomes disrupted; thereby, the cerebral blood flow becomes pressure passive. The compliance of the brain diminishes with a fall in its compensatory reserve.

The ICP pressure waves show characteristic Lundberg A (plateau waves peaking to 50 mmHg and persisting for 5 to 20 minutes) and B waves (rhythmic oscillations occurring every 1 to 2 minutes peaking up to 20 to 30 mm Hg) with progressive ICP elevation.

ICP waveform shows a dicrotic wave (P2) higher than the percussion (P1) and the tidal wave (P3).