Severe dehydration or established anuria is a contraindication for any type of diuretic. Patients with known hypersensitivity to any of the diuretic agents are contraindicated to receive the same drug. Diuretics are contraindicated in severe electrolyte derangement and should not be administered until a detected electrolyte abnormality is corrected.

Loop and thiazide diuretics are contraindicated in patients already diagnosed with gout.

Loop diuretics (except ethacrynic acid), thiazide diuretics, and CAIs are all sulfonamide derivatives and were generally regarded as contraindicated in sulfa-allergy patients. Recent evidence suggests otherwise, and several reports of instances of uneventful use of sulfa-diuretic use in documented sulfa-allergy patients exist. In conclusion, only a low risk of cross-allergenicity between sulfonamide antibiotics and sulfonamide non-antibiotics and diuretics can be prescribed with caution in sulfa-allergic patients. Notwithstanding, documented allergy to any of the sulfonamide diuretic agents themselves should be considered an absolute contraindication, and for sulfonamide non-antibiotics, it is a relative contraindication.

Loop diuretics are contraindicated in patients with hypokalemia (only to be administered after correction), severe hyponatremia, hypotension, azotemia, oliguria/anuria, and hepatic coma. It is also contraindicated in any situation where fluid depletion is foreseen, such as surgery. Furosemide and bumetanide are pregnancy category C, while torsemide is category B and relatively safe in pregnancy.

Thiazide diuretics induce hyperglycemia, but are these agents contraindicated in hypertensive patients for the risk of new-onset diabetes or worsening of preexisting diabetes? Thiazides are of crucial importance as first-line therapy in patients with hypertension, a condition treated primarily to reduce the high risk of CV mortality. To compare the two important drugs in this class, chlorthalidone (thiazide-like diuretic) has demonstrated superiority to hydrochlorothiazide (thiazide-type diuretic) in reducing systolic BP levels and in achieving target BP values. Also, in comparison to other anti-hypertensives, chlorthalidone has been repeatedly shown in various clinical trials to greatly reduce the risk of adverse CV events. Also, chlorthalidone has been shown to cause the fewest clinical events of diabetes in contrast to any other anti-hypertensive. In a hypertensive population with preexisting diabetes, the salutary anti-hypertensive effects of low-dose (12.5 mg) chlorthalidone outweigh the risk of glucose intolerance and will particularly benefit young non-obese patients. The 2018 ESC guidelines on hypertension give the highest class I recommendation for the use of thiazide/thiazide-like diuretics along with a RAS blocker in the treatment of diabetics with hypertension.

Guidelines advised against the use of thiazides in patients with severe stage 4 or stage 5 CKD (see Table 2), though recent reports are in favor of its use as anti-hypertensive (even if GFR less than 30 mL/min) as the BP-lowering mechanism of thiazides are not related to their diuretic function in the kidney. Nevertheless, thiazides are contraindicated when the diuresis is the predominant action required in patients with CKD, where loop diuretics are preferred. The only exception is metolazone, a thiazide diuretic that can be used for diuresis in CKD.

K+-sparing diuretics are contraindicated in hyperkalemia (K+ levels more than 5 mEq/L) until the underlying pathology is corrected. PSDs are contraindicated in advanced renal failure or CKD as these patients are at risk of hyperkalemia; this is particularly true when GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m^2 corresponding to CKD stages 4 and 5.

In hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis (see adverse effects), acetazolamide is contraindicated, and extreme caution should be exercised in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease when considering acetazolamide for treatment.

The kidneys primarily excrete mannitol, and in patients with renal impairment, it should be used with caution as it can cause osmotic nephropathy.

**Drug-interactions**

Salicylates can displace acetazolamide from plasma protein, thereby causing an increase in free acetazolamide in the plasma leading to toxicity secondary to RBC carbonic anhydrase inhibition. Acetazolamide should not be used to alkalinize urine following salicylate overdose since it may worsen metabolic acidosis.

Prostaglandins are involved in the modulation of systemic and renal vasodilation, GFR, RAAS, water, and salt secretion. Their blockade by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in a patient with hypertension could suppress the effects of antihypertensive medications, including diuretics. NSAIDs are not very influential in regulating renal functions under normal circumstances, but they can blunt the natriuretic response, reduce GFR and suppress renin production when used along with loop or thiazide diuretics and can cause acute renal failure.

The ototoxic ability of loop diuretics can become potentiated with other ototoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides or platinum-containing chemotherapeutic compounds.

Diuretic-induced hypokalemia can increase the risk of digitalis-induced arrhythmia.

Bendroflumethiazide can cause calcium retention, and care is necessary when administered along with calcium supplements or vitamin D.

RAAS inhibiting agents like ACEIs, ARBs, beta-blockers, NSAIDs, or aliskiren can result in a small amount of potassium retention, and their concomitant use with PSDs may cause hyperkalemia and hence a relative contraindication.