The CN0 is located on the ventral surface of the human brain. Its plexiform fibers appear to run in proximity to CNI, the olfactory nerve. CN0 rests on the anterior surface of the brain in the region of the olfactory trigone and courses anteriorly on the medial surface of the olfactory tract and bulb. Medially, it forms a plexus of fibers closely associated with the olfactory stria (medial to the anterior perforated space), from where it enters the brain independently (Figure 1). Its structural composition consists of numerous smaller strands that branch and anastomose, elaborating an elongated plexus (plexiform). Its bilateral bundle of unmyelinated nerve fibers is most evident in human fetal stages. However, it is also seen in adult brains.****Its fascicles can be seen within the subarachnoid space covering the gyri recti surface of the frontal lobe.

In humans and a wide range of other species, the physiology of reproductive hormones is under the regulatory control of the HPG axis, and GnRH plays a pivotal role. The latter is released from the hypothalamus upon the appropriate neuronal induction. Once GnRH is released from the hypothalamic neurons, it potentiates the synthesis and releases gonadotropins, a subset of hormones known as luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the adenohypophysis. This, in turn, regulates the production and secretion of the sex steroid hormones (e.g., estrogens, testosterone) that will ultimately command the sexual behaviors governing the biology of our reproduction.