**Hand Hygiene**

The most common path of pathogen transmission is the hands.

- Hand washing is washing hands with regular soap and water.

- Antiseptic hand washing is washing hands with an antiseptic-containing soap, like triclosan or chlorhexidine.

- Alcohol hand rub refers to using a waterless agent containing 60% to 95% ethanol or isopropanol alcohol-containing preparation. This should not be a substitute for regular hand wash.

- Surgical antisepsis is an antiseptic hand wash performed preoperatively by surgical personnel.

**When Should Hand Hygiene be Performed?**

- Before and after treating each patient (before putting on personal protective equipment and after removing it).

- After touching objects contaminated with body fluids with bare hands (blood, saliva, oral and respiratory secretions).

- Before touching wrapped or unwrapped sterile instruments.

- Before placing gloves for a surgical procedure (surgical antisepsis).

- When cleaning: after washing instruments, cleaning dental devices, and finishing decontamination tasks.

- Before leaving the dental office.

**Personal Protection**

**Immunization**

Dental healthcare workers are at risk of common vaccine-preventable infections. The goal of immunization is to reduce the risk of acquiring a disease. All clinical personnel must receive immunization against hepatitis B within ten days of patient contact.

Furthermore, immunization for common vaccine-preventable conditions is strongly recommended, including:

- Varicella (if seronegative).

- Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) (if non-immune).

- Pertussis (whooping cough).

- Viral influenza (required every year to cover new).

**Personal Protective Equipment**

Personal protective equipment (PPE) or protective barriers are essential components of standard precautions. PPE protects from sprays or spatters potentially containing infectious agents.****They include 1) masks, 2) gloves, 3) protective clothing, and 4) protective eyewear.

**Masks**

Masks protect the operator's nasal and buccal mucosa and the skin of the face and neck from splatters. But they do not protect from aerosols. Masks must be tightly fitted to the face to improve their function.****Masks are single-use; a new mask must be used with each patient.

The filtration capacity of masks must be considered. Filtration effectiveness starts to decrease after 20 minutes of wearing due to moisture; therefore, masks must be changed during lengthy procedures if it is noticeably moistened. Wearing masks at all times also prevents the contamination of environmental surfaces with the operator's respiratory secretions.

**Gloves**

Wearing gloves is not a replacement for washing hands; hands must be washed before gloving and after de-gloving. Gloves must be replaced if they experience any breakage, cut, or puncture.

Wedding rings may be kept if the skin underneath is washed and dried. Sweat underneath the glove containing skin microbes accumulates after wearing them for an extended period.

**Protective Clothing**

Scrubs are usually used as the everyday uniform in dental practice. An appropriate layer (usually a disposable or reusable gown) must be used on scrubs when providing dental treatment. This gown should have short sleeves for non-surgical treatment and long sleeves for surgical procedures. Short sleeves allow the washing of the forearms simultaneously with hand hygiene. Long sleeves are used for surgical procedures because the gown is sterile. The protective layer used in the clinical area must be removed before moving to non-clinical areas, e.g., when taking a lunch break or leaving the clinic. Another option is wearing street clothes underneath the scrubs and removing the scrubs before moving to non-clinical zones.

Protective gowns should be worn when the procedure carries a risk of contamination with significant body fluids or blood - aerosol-generating procedures.****These gowns have long sleeves, which become contaminated during treatment and complicate hand hygiene, and therefore must be changed after every patient.

Footwear must be closed to protect from sharp injuries when objects are accidentally dropped; non-slip and easy to clean.

**Protective Eyewear**

Eyewear protects the eyes from penetrating injuries, projectiles, splattering, or spraying with body fluids. Eye protection is essential during scaling, when using rotary devices, cleaning instruments, and cutting or working with wire. Protective eyewear must have side shields. Reading glasses provide insufficient coverage to the orbit to prevent injury and contamination.

Face shields are recommended when the procedure is expected to generate significant aerosols or splatters.

**How to Remove PPE**

It is essential to remove the PPE appropriately to avoid contact and contamination with blood and body secretions. PPE must be removed in the following order:

- **Gloves**must be removed first, ensuring the hands do not become contaminated. The gloves are left inside out. Hands must be washed if they become contaminated before moving to the next step.

- The **disposable apron or gown**is removed next by breaking the strap that goes in the neck. The apron must be touched only from the inside, gathered together, and disposed of.

- The **mask**is removed without touching its external surface by lifting it over the ears or pulling and breaking the straps.

- **Protective eyewear**must be removed without touching the outer surfaces.

- **Hand hygiene**must be performed after removing all PPE.

**Management of Sharps**

A medical sharp is any object with the possibility of cutting, picking, or causing injury. The most common examples of sharps are needles and scalpel blades; however, other objects, like matrix bands, endodontic files, and wires, could also cause percutaneous injuries and must be managed appropriately.

Disposable sharps must be placed in a puncture-resistant (rigid) container located as close as possible to the area where they are being used.

Methods to prevent a sharp injury (percutaneous injury) include applying work practice and engineering controls. Engineering controls include:

- Needle recapping devices.

- Self-sheathing needles and scalpels.

- Rigid containers for sharps disposal.

Work practice controls refer to good clinical practices, including:

- Avoid passing unsheathed needles between personnel.

- Avoid recapping needles with a one-hand technique.

- Restrict the use of fingers during anesthesia administration.

**Cleaning and Disinfection**

Mechanical cleaning is preferred over manual cleaning of instruments before sterilization. This is because mechanical cleaning is more efficient and decreases the risk of percutaneous injuries and exposure to blood.

Manual cleaning is, therefore, discouraged. But if done, it must be carried out in a designated sink prefilled with lukewarm water and specific detergent for cleaning instruments. Hot water cannot be used since it promotes the coagulation of proteins, and cold water solidifies lipids, complicating the removal of debris from the instruments. The instruments must be cleaned with a long-handled brush while kept low and under the water in the sink. After cleaning, instruments must be rinsed with warm or hot water - hot water accelerates the drying of instruments - and then inspected under a magnifier device and appropriate light.

All equipment that can be removed from the dental unit should be sterilized, including the handpieces. X-ray equipment, lights, and the dental chair must be disinfected with chemical agents.

Handpieces are considered semi-critical devices. They should be heat sterilized between patients. It is difficult for chemical germicides to reach the internal parts of the handpieces, which is why they should be heat sterilized.

Disinfectants like 0.1-0.5% sodium hypochlorite, 62 to 71% ethanol, or 2% glutaraldehyde can be used to disinfect surfaces like door handles, chairs, desks, elevators, and bathrooms.

Clinical contact surfaces must be covered with protective barriers and changed after each patient. The immersion of instruments in sodium hypochlorite can also be used for disinfection reasons before sterilization.

**Methods of Sterilization**

The purpose of sterilization is to destroy all active microorganisms, including bacterial spores, from instruments. The most common sterilization methods in dentistry are steam under pressure and dry heat sterilization. But other less common methods are available, including unsaturated chemical vapor pressure sterilization and ethylene oxide sterilization.

**Steam Pressure Sterilization (Autoclave)**

Sterilization using steam under pressure (autoclave) is the most popular method in dentistry. It is practical and rapid, and the sterilization efficacy can be verified. Autoclave sterilization uses high temperatures of 121 C at a pressure of 15 pounds for 20 minutes.

The downsides include that instruments that can not be submitted to high temperatures cannot be sterilized by autoclave; autoclave sterilization tends to rust carbon steel instruments and burs; and the instruments must be air-dried at the end of the cycle.

**Dry Heat Sterilization**

This method uses conventional dry heat ovens with a short cycle and high temperatures for items that cannot be exposed to moist heat, static air, or forced air. The high temperatures may damage heat-sensitive items; cycles are longer at lower temperatures, and ovens must be calibrated. Dry heat sterilization does not corrode instruments, and the effectiveness of sterilization can be verified. Industrial hot air ovens can sterilize more instruments at the same time.

**Unsaturated Chemical Vapor Pressure Sterilization**

This method uses an unsaturated chemical vapor system of alcohol and formaldehyde. The cycles are short, and the load comes out dry; the effectiveness of the sterilization can be verified, and corrosion-sensitive instruments do not rust.

The disadvantage of this method is that instruments must be completely dry beforehand, and heavy cloth wrappings of surgical instruments may not be penetrated.

**Ethylene Oxide Sterilization**

This method uses a fumigator. It works at low temperatures. The gas is penetrative and can be used for different equipment like handpieces. The efficacy of sterilization can be verified. It requires an aeration chamber and can be mutagenic and carcinogenic.