An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to patient care can help achieve the best possible outcomes. Cutaneous lesions and cysts are often found by a primary care provider or the emergency room provider on the initial presentation. The primary care provider or emergency department provider will often identify an epidermoid inclusion cyst or other cutaneous lesions. Given the provider's comfort level, they will then attempt to drain or remove the cutaneous lesion in the office. Often, this lesion turns out to be an epidermal inclusion cyst during the procedure, and there is not a complete excision of the cyst capsule. This incomplete removal can lead to complications such as infection, localized pain, and recurrence.

Additionally, the providers might order imaging of the lesion, such as an ultrasound, to further evaluate the lesion. If better communication can take place between healthcare providers, they could refer the patient to general surgery before any intervention. The surgeon may then offer definitive operative management and complete removal of the cyst capsule. Seeing a surgeon early in the care of a prospective epidermal cyst may also lead to a decrease in unnecessary imaging, which can also contribute to decreasing the overall cost of healthcare. Nurses should instruct patients about postoperative care and notify the surgeon if there are complications. This, in turn, provides the patient with a decreased chance of complications. From an overall healthcare system perspective, early referral and definitive treatment by a general surgeon for epidermoid inclusion cysts would lead to a single procedure for the patient, a higher level of patient satisfaction, decreased overall healthcare costs, and better patient outcomes.