**Indications for Submandibular Gland Excision**

The most common indication for submandibular gland excision is salivary calculus with secondary ductal obstruction and sialadenitis. In the setting of an isolated calculus within the submandibular duct, a transoral removal of the stone from the duct may be successful. However, most patients with salivary calculus disease have recurrent episodes of obstruction and sialadenitis, which are unlikely to resolve with non-invasive measures alone and may be cured by excision of the submandibular gland.

Another indication for submandibular gland excision is the presence of a benign neoplasm within the submandibular gland. Approximately 75 percent of submandibular gland tumors are benign (most commonly pleomorphic adenoma), and 25 percent are malignant (commonly mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, or adenocarcinoma).

Another indication for submandibular gland excision is refractory sialorrhea. When appropriate, this is generally performed bilaterally and may be completed in conjunction with ligation of the parotid ducts. However, sialorrhea may be treated with botulinum toxin injections which have been shown to be an effective and well-tolerated treatment.

**Pre-Operative Evaluation**

The workup for submandibular gland disease should start with a complete history and physical exam with attention to symptom onset and course, unilateral or bilateral symptoms, signs and symptoms of systemic autoimmune, inflammatory, or viral processes. A history of radiation or radioactive iodine treatment should also be obtained.  A complete head and neck exam with attention to the oral cavity with bimanual palpation of the floor of the mouth to assess for any palpable calculi, as well as a thorough neck exam to evaluate for any masses or lesions, should then be completed.  Facial nerve function and symmetry, with close attention to the corners of the mouth, should be assessed.

Imaging of the submandibular gland is indicated before surgical excision is indicated via either ultrasound or computed tomography of the neck to evaluate for a neoplastic process and identify the presence of calculi.