In general, most patients diagnosed with infantile acne have a moderate course at best requiring no treatment, resolving within 6 to 12 months of initial onset. However, some cases can be severe enough to warrant the initiation of medication. Due to a lack of high-quality clinical trials, especially from randomized controlled trials, there are no USFDA-approved medications for the treatment of acne vulgaris in patients under the age of nine.  As such, recommendations regarding therapeutic intervention for infantile acne derive from empiric observations of both adolescent and adult populations. Simply stated, the treatment of infantile acne is essentially the same therapeutic approach for acne vulgaris of any age.

For mild infantile acne, start with a topical agent such as a topical retinoid or benzoyl peroxide. They can be used as monotherapy or in combination. For mild inflammatory acne, the addition of a topical antibiotic (e.g., erythromycin or clindamycin) to the regimen above would be appropriate. Remember to avoid using a topical antibiotic as a monotherapy for acne of any age given the growing emergence of resistant bacterial strains of Propionibacterium acnes. In particular, simultaneous use of benzoyl peroxide, given its inherent nonspecific antimicrobial activity, has shown to be effective in preventing this trend.

For moderate to severe inflammatory lesions, especially with the presence of or growing concerns for scarring, the next option should be the administration of oral non-tetracycline antibiotics. First-line should be erythromycin. If the patient has documented colonization of a resistant strain of Propionibacterium acnes, then an acceptable alternative is sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim. Remember to avoid the systemic use of tetracycline-derived antibiotics in children less than 8 years of age given the risk of discoloration of the permanent dentition. Additional treatment options beyond the above also include intralesional triamcinolone (2.5 mg/mL) injections for isolated nodules and cysts. For cases of infantile acne that are particularly severe and considered intractable to all the above, judicious administration of oral isotretinoin is deemed reasonable to prevent further permanent physical and psychosocial sequelae. As with adolescent and adult patients, treatment with oral isotretinoin should include close monitoring, both clinically and with laboratory diagnostics. Both a fasting lipid profile and liver function test should be obtained at baseline and on a routine basis throughout its administration. It may also be prudent, depending on the original clinician’s level of expertise, to consult a dermatologist before initial administration.