Abnormalities in tear film biomarkers can reflect prolonged metabolic disarray or disease states both in ocular surface and systemic disease. However, dysregulation of tear components can also be observed following ocular surgery, infection, and the use of contact lenses. Abnormal concentrations of proteins and inflammatory mediators in the tear film have been observed in glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, meibomian gland disease, pterygium, keratoconus, autoimmune thyroid eye disease, diabetes, and even systemic cancer.

Studies have shown an increase in proinflammatory cytokines in dry eye syndrome, including IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha.

Studies have shown an increase in proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, TNF-α in tears of patients undergoing glaucoma treatment.

Tear film abnormalities are observed in ocular graft-versus-host disease following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, characterized by severe dry eye and ocular surface disease. The tear film in these patients and most patients with dry eyes show elevated levels of IL-2, IL-10, IL17α, INF-g, TNF-α, and IL-6.

Proinflammatory mediators are also increased in the tear film in corneal neovascularization (CNV). CNV is the formation of new vascular structures on the cornea and can cause corneal opacification and vision loss. In adults, studies have shown the tear film of individuals with CNV has higher levels of proangiogenic factors IL-6, IL-8, and VEGF compared to controls without CNV.

While only a few disease states and their associated tear film have been included here, other ocular surface and systemic diseases have been similarly characterized. Further characterization of the tear film in various diseases can identify disease-specific biomarkers to elucidate disease etiology, pathogenesis, and novel treatment targets.