The diagnosis and management of Addisonian crises require an interprofessional team because the disorder is difficult to diagnose, has non-specific clinical features, and is associated with nearly 100% mortality if treatment is delayed. Most patients present to the emergency department, and the triage nurse should be familiar with the signs and symptoms of this life-threatening disorder. Prompt admission and communication should be made to the emergency department physician. While the endocrine consult is made, laboratory workup and imaging tests should be ordered. At the same time, nurses should have two large-bore IVs with fluids running and have the patient hooked up to a monitor. The pharmacist should determine if the patient has been on prior corticosteroids.

The radiologist should be informed about an urgent CT scan to determine if there is an adrenal hemorrhage. However, good clinical acumen is needed before sending an unstable patient to an unmonitored radiology suite. If the patient is unstable, a mobile team should monitor the patient while being transported to the radiology department.

The endocrinologist, internist intensivist, infectious disease expert, and nephrologist should play an active role in the management. After the initial stabilization of the patient using the above measures, the underlying cause of the crisis should be identified and treated

Finally, the interprofessional team should urge the patient to wear an ID bracelet detailing the Addisonian crisis. [Level 5]