Historically, cobalt exposure occurred through using cobalt chloride (CoClto treat anemia) and from drinking beer in which cobalt sulfate had been added as a foam stabilizer. Current sources of cobalt exposure include chemistry sets, dyes, mining, and orthopedic implants. The most significant potential source of cobalt exposure is in the production of the hard metal tungsten carbide.

Several epidemics of "cobalt-induced goiter and cardiomyopathy" were identified between the 1950 and 1970s. The first identified cases of cardiomyopathy were in Nebraska in 1966, with 64 cases and 30 fatalities.

Researchers found that all cases were associated with beer with cobalt sulfate added as a foam stabilizer.

In the general population, the most common source of cobalt is likely to be in the form of nutritional supplements.

Tungsten carbide is created by sintering powdered cobalt and tungsten at high temperatures (1550 C) in the presence of hydrogen. Studies have shown that the concentration of cobalt and tungsten in the air inside factories can be ten times greater than when compared with atmospheric concentrations.

Other potential occupational exposures can occur in the maintenance of hard-metal blades

The actual incidence of HMD is not well defined. In one case series, 5 out of 320 patients presenting to an occupational respiratory clinic in over three years were diagnosed with HMD.

More recently, concern has been raised that competitive athletes may use cobalt salts for "blood doping" to increase athletic performance by promoting erythropoiesis. Though the potential adverse effects make it a less-than-ideal method of doping.