Spermatogenesis involves the following three complex integrated processes initiated at the onset of puberty:

**Meiosis**

Male fertility requires the formation of millions of gametes. Production of functional gametes or sex cells requires a single cell to undergo cell division to reduce the number of chromosomes by half. This process is known as meiosis. Meiosis occurs twice, thereby creating four daughter haploid cells, also known as spermatids. For every diploid spermatocyte, meiotic divisions produce four haploid spermatids.

Mitotic cell division: diploid spermatogenic stem cells differentiate into two sets of diploid primary spermatocytes, also known as tetraploid cells. The largest germ cells found in the germinal epithelium are the primary spermatocytes, containing the largest cell nuclei.

**Meiotic Cell Division I**

The division begins with the leptotene stage of prophase. The stage takes place in the germinal epithelium, more specifically, the basal compartment. Spermatocytes enter the ad luminal compartment after reaching the Sertoli cell barrier. Here, further prophase stages continue, and these include the zygotene, pachytene, and diplotene stages. These stages see DNA reduplication, chromosomes condensation, and homologous chromosomes pairing, as crossing over will occur. Each set of diploid primary spermatocytes differentiates into two haploid secondary spermatocytes, where the total number of chromosomes gets reduced to half.

**Meiotic Cell Division II**

Each haploid secondary spermatocyte differentiates into two haploid spermatids, therefore, resulting in four haploid cells. This process occurs quickly, and no DNA replication takes place.

**Spermiogenesis**

This process is the final phase of spermatogenesis. Spermatids mature and form spermatozoa, fully differentiated sperm cells. This stage ends when the mature cells leave the germinal epithelium. These free cells, at this point, are called spermatozoa. Spermatozoa have a unique shape, which is essential in their movement to the female gamete. The condensed nucleus and the presence of an acrosome needed to establish contact with the female gamete provide them with their unique shape. They exhibit extensive motility as they contain a connected flagellum. As they transform into mature sperm, spermatids undergo a wide array of morphological changes.

Extrinsic regulation of spermatogenesis requires stimuli from the hypothalamus and hypophysis. The hypophysis awaits a signal from the hypothalamus to begin the release of LH (luteinizing hormone). This signal is the pulsatile secretion of the hormone GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone). The release of LH stimulates the Leydig cells to produce testosterone. Testosterone has a significant effect on spermatogenesis as well as other functions throughout the body. Sertoli cells are stimulated by FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone), an important signal that allows for the maturation of germ cells. Sertoli cells secrete inhibin that is involved in the feedback mechanism.