Alzheimer's disease is characterized by an accumulation of abnormal neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.

Plaques are spherical microscopic lesions that have a core of extracellular amyloid beta-peptide surrounded by enlarged axonal endings. Beta-amyloid peptide is derived from a transmembrane protein known as an amyloid precursor protein (APP). The beta-amyloid peptide is cleaved from APP by the action of proteases named alpha, beta, and gamma-secretase. Usually, APP is cleaved by either alpha or beta-secretase and the tiny fragments formed by them are not toxic to neurons. However, sequential cleavage by beta and then gamma-secretase results in 42 amino acid peptides (beta-amyloid 42). Elevation in levels of beta-amyloid 42 leads to aggregation of amyloid that causes neuronal toxicity. Beta-amyloid 42 favors the formation of aggregated fibrillary amyloid protein over normal APP degradation. APP gene is located on chromosome 21, one of the regions linked to familial Alzheimer's disease. Amyloid deposition occurs around meningeal and cerebral vessels and gray matter in Alzheimer's disease. Gray matter deposits are multifocal and coalesce to form milliary structures called plaques. However, brain scans have noted amyloid plaques in some persons without dementia and then other persons had dementia but brain scans did not find any plaques.

Neurofibrillary tangles are fibrillary intracytoplasmic structures in neurons formed by a protein called tau. The primary function of the tau protein is to stabilize axonal microtubules. Microtubules run along neuronal axons and are essential for intracellular transport. Microtubule assembly is held together by tau protein. In Alzheimer's disease, due to aggregation of extracellular beta-amyloid, there is hyperphosphorylation of tau which then causes the formation of tau aggregates. Tau aggregates form twisted paired helical filaments known as neurofibrillary tangles. They occur first in the hippocampus and then may be seen throughout the cerebral cortex. Tau-aggregates are deposited within the neurons. There is a staging system developed by Braak and Braak based on the topographical staging of neurofibrillary tangles into 6 stages, and this Braak staging is an integral part of the National Institute on Aging and Reagan Institute neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. Tangles are more strongly correlated to Alzheimer's than the plaques are.

Another feature of Alzheimer's disease is granulovacuolar degeneration of hippocampal pyramidal cells by amyloid angiopathy. Some reports indicate that cognitive decline correlates more with a decrease in the density of presynaptic boutons from pyramidal neurons in laminae III and IV, rather than an increase in the number of plaques.

Neuronal loss in Nucleus Basalis of Myenert, leading to low Acetylcholine has also been noted.

Vascular contribution to the neurodegenerative process of Alzheimer's disease is not fully determined. The risk of dementia is increased fourfold with subcortical infarcts. The cerebrovascular disease also exaggerates the degree of dementia and its rate of progression.

**Genetic Basis of Alzheimer Disease**

Alzheimer's disease can be inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder with nearly complete penetrance. The autosomal dominant form of the disease is linked to mutations in 3 genes: AAP gene on chromosome 21, Presenilin1 (PSEN1) on chromosome 14, and Presenilin 2 (PSEN2) on chromosome 1. APP mutations may lead to increased generation and aggregation of beta-amyloid peptide. PSEN1 and PSEN2 mutations lead to aggregation of beta-amyloid by interfering with the processing of gamma-secretase. Mutations in these 3 genes account for about 5 % to 10 % of all the cases and about the majority of early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Apolipoprotein E is a regulator of lipid metabolism that has an affinity for beta-amyloid protein and is another genetic marker that increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease. Isoform e4 of APOE gene (located on chromosome 19) has been associated with more sporadic and familial forms of Alzheimer's disease that present after age 65. The presence of one APOEe4 allele does not always lead to Alzheimer's disease, but among persons carrying one APOE- e4 allele about 50% have Alzheimer's disease and those having two alleles, 90% develop Alzheimer disease. Each APOE e4 allele also lowers the age of disease onset. The presence of the APOE e4 allele is an important risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.

Variants in the gene for the sortilin receptor, SORT1, which is essential for transporting APP from cell surface to Golgi-endoplasmic reticulum complex, have been found in familial and sporadic forms of Alzheimer disease.