The forearm consists of two relatively parallel bones that connect two joints: elbow and wrist. Besides, the two bones themselves form joints that help in supination and pronation; therefore, forearm fractures are considered intra-articular fractures. Proper management of such fractures is necessary to restore forearm functions, including supination and pronation, elbow and wrist movements, and handgrip strength.

The forearm fractures are one of the common fractures seen in both children and adults. These fractures are relatively complex than other long bone fractures. The spectrum of such fractures includes isolated radius and ulna fractures, combined fractures, Galeazzi and Monteggia fractures.

Galeazzi fracture-dislocation was first described by Sir Astley Cooper in 1822 as distal third fracture of the radius with distal radioulnar joint dislocation. The incidence, mechanism, and management of Galeazzi fracture were extensively reported through case series by Riccardo Galeazzi. This fracture is considered highly unstable and comes under the category of fracture of necessity.

Monteggia fracture was first described by an Italian surgeon Giovanni Battista Monteggia in 1814 as a fracture of the shaft of the ulna and anterior dislocation of the radius. Initially, it was described as fracture of proximal third of ulna and anterior dislocation of radius. Later, Jose Luis Bado, an Orthopedic surgeon from Uruguay, introduced the concept of a Monteggia lesion and Monteggia equivalent injuries, which include a group of fractures that involve various levels of ulna and dislocation of the radial head.