The primary function of the female mammary gland is to produce and secrete milk for the nourishment of newborns. Additionally, an erogenous function exists for both the adult male and female mammary glands.

The mammary gland undergoes changes during both the menstrual cycle and pregnancy in preparation for lactation.

- Menstrual cycle

- Follicular phase: high estrogen levels stimulate ductal proliferation. The intralobular stroma remains dense, appearing more collagenous and less cellular. Additionally, this phase demonstrates an increase in Treg number.
- Mid-luteal phase: there is an increase in the size and height of epithelial cells. The high levels of progesterone trigger the formation of epithelial alveolar buds. Moreover, secretions start to accumulate in the ducts, forming lumina. The number of macrophages also increases when compared to the follicular phase. Mammary tactile sensitivity is at its maximum during this phase.
- Late-luteal phase: before the onset of menstruation, the glandular epithelium undergoes regression via apoptosis.

- Pregnancy – the observed changes are modulated by an increase in the lactogenic hormone complex (estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin). Other hormones, such as placental lactogen, are also involved.
- First trimester: the proliferation of MaSCs and progenitor cells leads to elongation and branching of ducts. The process of alveolar morphogenesis also begins. Each alveolus forms from a mesh-like bilayer of myoepithelial and epithelial cells, which encircles the alveolar lumen. Clinically, superficial veins dilate, and the areola darkens and grows.
- Second trimester: increases in prolactin levels stimulate epithelial differentiation at the alveolar lumen, forming lactocytes (secretory differentiation). Colostrum starts accumulating in the alveoli. The intralobular connective tissue becomes infiltrated by plasma cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils.
- Third trimester: this phase characteristically demonstrates the maturation of lactocytes, which start to accumulate fat globules within their cytoplasm.

After the placenta is delivered, progesterone levels decrease, lifting its inhibitory effect over prolactin. This allows for the initiation of copious milk secretion (secretory activation). The basement membrane that separates the mammary stroma from the epithelium becomes tight, with reduced permeability. This occurs in order to regulate the movement of milk components from the systemic circulation into the alveolar lumen. Oxytocin gets released in response to suckling, which then stimulates myoepithelial cell contraction in the alveoli and ducts, causing the ejection of milk.

The first secretion (3 to 5 days post-parturition) is known as colostrum, which is initially secreted during the twelfth to sixteenth week of pregnancy (a process known as lactogenesis I). This phase is followed by transitional milk for 2 to 3 weeks postpartum (lactogenesis II), after which milk is considered mature (lactogenesis III). Various mammary cell types are present in breastmilk, including human breastmilk stem cells, bipotent MaSCs, myoepithelial cells, and lactocytes.

After weaning, breastmilk starts accumulating in the ducts. The resulting breastmilk stasis initiates the process of mammary involution, although the involved mechanisms are not fully understood. The first phase of involution demonstrates the regression of epithelial and stromal tissues. An increase in hydrolytic enzymes clears the residual milk. This phase lasts up to two weeks and is reversible. The second phase is irreversible and is characterized by luminal cell loss and stromal remodeling. The apoptotic cells get shed into the alveolar lumen, where they are thought to be cleared by macrophages. However, murine studies suggest that a subpopulation of mammary epithelial cells may also phagocytize apoptotic epithelial cells, which brings the role of macrophages into question. After involution, the breast is similar but not identical to its pregestational state. Some epithelial cells escape the clearing process and remain as memory precursor cells that fuel mammary remodeling in subsequent pregnancies.

Following menopause, the ductal and glandular elements of the breast begin to involute. This process gets triggered by declining ovarian function and reduced levels of estrogen and progesterone. Eventually, the fat and stromal elements begin to regress as well, leading to breast shrinkage and loss of contour. Breast ptosis may develop as the suspensory ligaments of Cooper relax.