Spinal cord stimulation uses pulsed electrical energy near the spinal cord to manage pain.

**Nociceptive Fibers (peripheral pain receptors)**

-  Unmyelinated C fibers and lightly myelinated A-beta fibers (small nociceptive fibers, which conduct pain)

-  Myelinated A-beta fibers (large non-nociceptive fibers, which conduct touch, pressure, and vibration)

- Central pathways (relay neuronal signals to higher brain structures)

- The primary integrative site in the brain is the thalamus, but other structures also participate in response to pain. Once the brain receives the pain signals, several reactions are generated almost immediately to modify and respond to these signals. These reactions include, but are not limited to, somatic and autonomic reflexes, negative or positive feedback to increase or reduce the pain, endocrine and emotional responses, cortical awareness, or the pain, as well as the memory of the event.

- The gate control theory of pain, mentioned above, is directly associated with these pain systems. It establishes that C fibers, A-delta fibers (nociceptive), and A-beta fibers (non-nociceptive) can all carry information from the injury site to two different cell types in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, transmission cells, and inhibitory neurons. Both the nociceptive and non-nociceptive fibers can activate the transmission cells, opening the gate of signals sent to the brain. However, only the non-nociceptive fibers can activate the inhibitory cells, therefore closing the gate.

- Even though the gate control theory was the initial guiding mechanism of action, modern research has demonstrated that the underlying mechanisms are not clearly understood. There is evidence suggesting that dorsal column stimulation applies a different analgesia mechanism when utilized for neuropathic pain versus ischemic pain.