Colorectal cancer affects approximately 135,439 estimated new patients in the United States per year. Of these cases, 39,910 (30%) are due to rectal cancer per year. Determining mortality due to rectal cancer is difficult due to the large number of deaths from rectal cancer being misclassified as colon cancer. Among all cancer sites, colorectal cancers combined are the second leading cause of death in the United States, with an estimated 50,260 deaths per year.

Approximately 18% of rectal cancer is earlier onset (age <50 years) with more advanced stage and poorer prognosis. Interestingly, the over incidence rate for colorectal cancer has been declining 3% per year since 2004 except for screened young adults for whom it is increasing by 2% per year. The increase in incidence in young adults is driven by left-sided colon cancer and rectal cancer (3.9% per year).

Colorectal cancer incidence varies worldwide, with higher rates in developed countries than in developing countries. Low socioeconomic status has an increased risk of colorectal cancer; this association is strongest in the rectum and weakest in the right colon. It is believed this is due to poor-risk behavior and access to medical care. White American lifetime average incidence of CRC is 5%; incidence is higher in men than in women and African Americans than non-Hispanic whites. From 1975 to 2014, there has been a 51% decrease in the mortality of CRC in the United States, attributed to early detection and improvement of treatment modalities. National Cancer Institute estimates that 65% of all treated patients for CRC will be alive at 5-years.