# Continuing Education Activity

Elder abuse comes in many forms, including physical, psychological, and sexual abuse, as well as less obvious forms such as financial exploitation and neglect. Elder abuse is a common problem with complex social and medical considerations in which medical professionals are uniquely positioned to identify and intervene. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of elder abuse and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify risk factors for developing elder abuse.
- Summarize the psychosocial considerations for patients with elder abuse.
- Describe the common physical exam findings associated with elder abuse.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by elder abuse.

# Introduction

Elder abuse is a common problem with complex psychosocial and medical considerations. In general, elder abuse is considered a direct action, inaction, or negligence toward an older adult that harms them or places them at risk of harm either by a person in a position of presumed trust or by an outside individual targeting the victim based on age or disability.

Physical abuse of the elderly consists of intentional physical force to inflict pain, cause impairment, or injure the victim. Examples include hitting, restraining a person inappropriately, hair pulling, forcibly feeding a person, pinching, pushing, and any other mechanism intentionally used to cause physical harm.

Psychological or emotional abuse encompasses verbal threats of harm, harassment, intimidation, yelling, isolating someone, or treating an older person like a child. This abuse may lead to the elderly individual being depressed, anxious, withdrawing from social interactions, living under a constant state of fear, and may leave them feeling hopeless.

Sexual abuse of the elderly is considered a nonconsensual sexual act where the victim is either forced into the act against their will or are incapable of understanding or consenting to the sexual act.

Neglect is unique in that it may be intentional or unintentional.

Financial exploitation encompasses the withholding or misuse of the older adult’s resources, including money, property, and other assets to the detriment of the victim or benefit of the perpetrator. This form of abuse may include directly stealing assets, forging the victim’s signature on documents or checks, inappropriate changing of a will, overpaying for goods or services, use of the victim’s assets without their knowledge, or forcing them to make financial changes that are not in their best interest.

Elder abuse has devastating and costly effects on the victim and society as a whole, yet often goes unidentified or unreported.

# Etiology

Elder abuse is a complex phenomenon with many risk factors and societal factors to consider. These include victim and perpetrator characteristics, society’s perceptions, and environmental factors.

Victim characteristics strongly associated with elder abuse include increased reliance on a caregiver due to physical, emotional, psychological, or financial dependence.

Perpetrator characteristics associated with elder abuse include substance abuse, normalization of violence through previous life experiences, financial dependence on the victim, mental illness, personality disorders, and a history of a strained premorbid relationship with the older adult.

Societal and environmental factors include high crime rates, which may normalize violence, lack of community resources causing increased strain on caregivers and victims, and the belief that the elderly are unlikely to be victims of abuse.

# Epidemiology

Elder abuse is a widespread, global problem with an estimated prevalence of 5-10% in the general population of older adults in the U.S.

Other groups found to have disproportionately high levels of abuse include women, people older than 80, minority populations, residents of long-term care facilities, and people with multiple comorbidities. Due to limited and conflicting data, it is difficult to determine whether factors such as race, ethnicity, and gender are independent risk factors of abuse once corrected for confounding factors such as socioeconomic status and comorbidities.

Demographics do vary by abuse type, with women being victims of sexual abuse much more frequently than men.

# History and Physical

Appropriate patient history focusses on identifying risk factors for developing abuse as well as identifying patterns that may be concerning for active abuse. A single screening question like “do you feel safe at home” is much less likely to identify abuse than more extensive questioning or screening tools.

Red flags for possible abuse include unexplained or frequent injuries, delay of care following the onset of illness or injury, noncompliance with the medical regimen, and missing follow-up appointments. When an area of concern is identified, it is essential to ask focused questions based on the type of abuse suspected.

The caregiver should leave the room to obtain a history related to abuse.

In the case of an acute visit, it is critical to get a detailed history of the mechanism of injury or events leading up to their visit as the history requires a comparison to exam findings for congruency. Family members and caregivers should not be used as translators in cases when abuse is suspected.

When there is a concern regarding potential abuse, a comprehensive head-to-toe physical exam is necessary.

Exam findings concerning for physical abuse are patterned bruising, bite marks, bruising in different stages of healing, subconjunctival hemorrhages, intraoral injuries, and bruising in suspicious regions like the wrists, the ulnar aspect of the forearms, face, neck, ears, back, abdomen and other nonbony prominences.

Physical signs of neglect include patients who appear malnourished or dehydrated, are wearing dirty clothing, have long toenails or fingernails, and the presence of pressure ulcers.

# Evaluation

The evaluation should be directed by a detailed history and physical exam, focusing on the type of abuse suspected and injuries seen. It is essential to take into account the patient’s medical history, functional capacity, mechanism of injury, exam findings, laboratory findings, and imaging results to determine whether the injury is suspicious for abuse.

Unlike child abuse, there are limited data to identify specific radiologic patterns pathognomonic for elder abuse. Some radiologic findings suggested as potential signs of abuse include posterior rib fractures, fractures of varying chronicity, distal ulnar diaphysis fractures, skull fractures, subdural hematomas, small bowel hematomas, and high energy fractures in the setting of a low energy mechanism.

If imaging is obtained, it is important to communicate with the radiologist. Things that may be helpful for the radiologist include knowing the functional capacity of the patient, pertinent medical history, and the mechanism of injury to help them determine if the injury is consistent with the mechanism described.

Another aspect of the evaluation is determining the individual’s capacity to make their own decisions. If a person has the capacity to make their own decisions, even in the setting of abuse, they can remain in their abusive environment if desired.

Screening tools such as the Elder Abuse Suspicion Index or the Elder Abuse Vulnerability Index may also be useful. These tools help identify older adults currently being abused as well as those at risk of becoming abused, which can guide the utilization of education and resources.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment initially should focus on correcting the acute presenting problem or injury. However, it is crucial to address the social and psychological components of elder abuse as well. Social interventions may include coordinating home health services, meal delivery, transportation for appointments, helping set up insurance, or connecting the older adult with adult daycare or senior centers.

If the patient is in immediate danger, it is vital to protect the patient. This action could require the involvement of law enforcement or hospital security, social work, the hospital legal team, and possibly applying for emergency guardianship.

Most health care professionals qualify as mandatory reporters of suspected elder abuse, although specifics vary some by state. However, many cases of possible elder abuse go unreported. Some reasons for not reporting abuse include concern for the loss of physician control, loss of patient trust, unintended negative consequences, the subtlety of the findings, and retaliation of perpetrators against the victim.

# Differential Diagnosis

With the possibility of significant consequences associated with the diagnosis of elder abuse, it is important to consider alternative diagnoses. These would include anything that could cause the patient to exhibit behaviors indicative of abuse or that would make them more likely to develop concerning exam or imaging findings from a non-abusive etiology. For instance, a patient with malignancy, depression, metabolic disturbances, infection, endocrinologic disease, substance abuse, dementia, or dental issues may show signs of neglect such as dehydration or weight loss, be withdrawn, depressed, or anxious appearing.

# Prognosis

Elder abuse is important to identify and intervene promptly not only to alleviate the ongoing physical and psychosocial effects but to prevent the long-term effects. Elder abuse is associated with a significant increase in morbidity and mortality.

# Complications

Elder abuse has complications for the victims, caregivers, and society as a whole. For the victim, it has been shown to lead to physical and mental health problems, PTSD, poorly controlled chronic disease, high medical bills, decreased quality of life, breakdown of trust or quality of relationships, and even premature death.

Caregivers may suffer from the high burden of care, loss of productivity, loss of the ability to work, and financial strain as they are caring for the older adult.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

One challenging aspect of controlling elder abuse is that it is frequently unidentified and underreported. Campaigns to reduce elder abuse should focus on educating health care workers, caregivers, patients, and the community on the prevalence, risk factors, and signs of elder abuse as well as the resources available to help. Enhancement of community resources is also needed to better support victims and families.

Identifying and minimizing risk factors as well as providing support for families could help reduce the prevalence of abuse, and subsequently, reduce the burden on emergency medical services, hospitals, medical care costs, and need for placement in a long-term care facility.

Long-term care facilities can minimize the risk of abuse by avoiding understaffing, creating a calm environment, making staff feel appreciated, and by providing more education for staff on how to deal with difficult or aggressive residents.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although elder abuse is prevalent and has serious consequences, it is infrequently detected.

When any member suspects elder abuse of the care team, it must be acted on and reported to mobilize resources for the victim. This action is not only a moral obligation, but most states consider physicians, psychologists, law enforcement personnel, and nurses all mandatory reporters of suspected elder abuse.

There needs to be collaboration and clear communication between first responders, law enforcement, nurses, physicians, social work, case management, hospital administration, and the hospital legal team. Nurses also play a crucial role in identifying abuse as they are likely to spend the most time with the patient and family. Patients might confide in the nurse something they were unwilling to tell the doctor. The nurse might also take note of strained patient-caregiver interactions or additional exam findings while assisting with bathing, toileting, or doing procedures such as placing a urinary catheter.

Social workers and case management are integral parts of the team as well. They might identify non-medical risk factors for abuse not initially appreciated and can help organize resources and support for the patient and family.

A comprehensive, interprofessional approach is needed to effectively identify and navigate the medical, psychosocial, and societal complexities of elder abuse. By increasing awareness and working as an interdisciplinary team, we will hopefully begin to curve the prevalence of elder abuse and provide better care for older patients.