Amniocentesis is done as an outpatient procedure. After proper genetic counseling and informed written consent, a detailed ultrasound is performed to assess the gestational age, placental localization, gross congenital anomalies, maximum vertical pocket (MVP) of amniotic fluid, fetal position, fetal movements, fetal cardiac activity, and amniotic fluid volume. Skin is prepared with povidone-iodine, and sterile ultrasonography gel is applied. After confirming the prerequisites and once the preparation is complete, amniocentesis is performed using the aseptic technique. A 20- to 22-gauge spinal needle is used to enter the amniotic cavity under continuous ultrasound guidance. The entire procedure should be performed in real-time sonographic monitoring with continuous, direct visualization of the spinal needle. The needle is directed to the clear region in the deepest amniotic fluid pocket. Needle insertion in the upper third of the uterus is less painful.

The needle, in ideal conditions, is inserted perpendicular to the skin. The transducer is placed in a way that the ultrasound beam is directed at a 15 to 20-degree angle from the planned track of the needle. Figure 1 shows the ultrasound picture of the inserted needle during the amniocentesis procedure. It must be ensured that fetal parts, umbilical cord, or placenta are not present in the region of needle insertion. Transplacental puncture is usually not the preferred point of entry.

A firm entry into the amniotic cavity is recommended to prevent the tenting of the amniotic membrane.

Amniocentesis in twin pregnancies requires the determination of chorionicity and amnionicity. In dichorionic twins, there are two methods: single-needle technique and two-needle insertion technique. In the single needle technique, after collecting amniotic fluid from one sac, the syringe with the amniotic fluid of the first fetus is removed, and the needle pierces through the septum separating the two amniotic sacs to collect the amniotic fluid from the amniotic sac of the second fetus. This technique has a risk of contamination from the first sac. In the two-needle insertion technique, after collecting amniotic fluid from one sac, a small amount of blue-colored indigo carmine dye is injected into the sac of the first twin. Then the needle has pierced the skin and is placed into the sac of the second twin, and fluid is withdrawn. Repeat sampling of blue amniotic fluid allows the operator to know if the amniotic fluid of the first fetus is sampled twice.

The patient should be observed after amniocentesis for a short time. She should be instructed to report if there is any vaginal fluid leaking, vaginal bleeding, severe uterine pain, or fever. Routine activities can be resumed after the procedure, but the patient should avoid strenuous exercise.

Amniocentesis done without ultrasound guidance has 5 to 10 percent failure rates, where no amniotic fluid is aspirated.