The nasal turbinates are responsible for warming and humidifying air as it passes through the nasal cavity and into the nasopharynx on its way to the larynx, trachea, and lungs; their shape as curved shelves protruding from the lateral nasal walls provides them additional surface area with which to perform these functions. The turbinates, particularly the inferior turbinates, also regulate airflow to maintain appropriate levels of moisture within the nasal cavity by swelling and contracting, thereby obstructing or permitting air to pass. Beneath the pseudostratified columnar respiratory epithelium that covers the turbinates lies a layer of erectile tissue containing venous sinusoids that serve to regulate the volume of the turbinates based upon autonomic stimulation.

While all of the turbinates contain erectile tissue, it is the inferior turbinates, because of their size and location at the widest portion of the nasal cavity, that have the greatest impact on nasal airflow; the inferior turbinates, unlike the other turbinates, are not processes of the ethmoid bones but are separate structures that articulate with the ethmoid, maxillary, lacrimal, and palatine bones. The inferior meatus, which lies under the shelf of the inferior turbinate, contains the outflow tract of the nasolacrimal duct and Hasner's valve, or the plica lacrimalis, which is a mucosal fold that may prevent air from refluxing through the lacrimal system. The middle meatus contains the hiatus semilunaris, just inferior to the ethmoid bulla and posterior to the uncinate process of the ethmoid bone. Within the semilunar hiatus are the outflow tracts of the frontal sinus, the maxillary sinus, and the anterior ethmoid sinuses. The posterior ethmoid sinuses and the sphenoid sinus drain into the sphenoethmoidal recess within the superior meatus.

In addition to their respiratory functions, the inferior turbinates play a role in immune surveillance because they are the first intranasal structures to come into contact with outside air. The inferior turbinates determine the pathogenicity of inhaled particles and can trigger innate and adaptive immune reactions.