Except for the short head of the biceps femoris, the other posterior thigh muscles span the length of the femur and coss, both the hip and knee joints. Spanning from the posterior pelvis to the proximal tibia and fibula, the posterior thigh muscles provide motion to both the femoroacetabular joint (hip joint) and tibiofemoral joint (knee joint). The long head of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus originate from the ischial tuberosity of the pelvis extending distally on the posterior side of the femur, eventually crossing the knee — the biceps femoris crossing laterally while semimembranosus and semitendinosus cross medially.

The superior or proximal borders of the popliteal fossa, posterior to the knee, are created by the hamstring muscles descending and crossing the joint.

As a group of muscles, the hamstring muscles primarily work to extend the hip (movement of the femur directly posteriorly) and flex the knee (movement of the tibia and fibula directly posteriorly). These actions are significant components of the multi-joint movements of standing up from a seated position and normal gait. The ability to remain stable while standing is also largely attributed to the actions of the hamstring muscles, which allow the body to remain erect above the lower extremities by securely fixing the hip joint. The hamstrings additionally provide minor rotation pull on the lower extremity based on their lateral or medial insertion points distally (biceps femoris provides external rotation, semitendinosus/semimembranosus provides internal rotation).