**Classification**

The anatomical classification of uveitis is proposed by the Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group.

**Anatomical**

- **Anterior-**Involving the iris and ciliary body

- **Intermediate-**Involving vitreous and pars plana

- **Posterior-**Involving retina and choroid

- **Panuveitis-**Anterior, intermediate and posterior

**The Etiological Classification of Uveitis is Proposed by the International Uveitis Study Group (IUSG)**

- **Infectious**- Viral, bacterial, parasitic, Lyme disease, etc.

- **Non-infectious**- Idiopathic or associated with systemic diseases

- **Masquerade**-  Neoplastic and non-neoplastic

**SUN Working Group Proposed the Classification Based on the Timing of Inflammation**

- **Timing of onset**- Insidious or sudden

- **Duration of inflammation**- Limited (less than or equal to 3 months ) or persistent

**Clinical Activity**

- **Acute**- Insidious or sudden

- **Chronic**- Persistent with relapse within three months after stopping the treatment

- **Recurrent**- Repeated episodes with an in-between inactive period

- **Remission**- No active episode for three months or more

**Anterior Uveitis**

**Acute**

- Pain, redness, photophobia, tearing, and decreased vision with pain developing over a few hours or days except in trauma cases.

**Chronic**

- Blurred vision, mild redness, and little pain or photophobia except during an acute episode.

**Slit Lamp Evaluation in Uveitis Patients**

Circumciliary congestion or circumcorneal congestion (injection) gives the appearance of a purple hue due to involvement in conjunctival plexus and deeper vessels. It's a sign of AAU and may not be seen in CAU.

Pupillary miosis is due to iridoplegia and sphincter spasms, which lead to the formation of posterior synechiae.

Anterior chamber cells are estimated by SUN grading with the help of a 1x1 mm slit beam under adequate lighting and magnification. The cells and flare indicate inflammatory activity inside the anterior chamber. The cells and flare should be assessed before pupillary dilatation as dilatation invites pigment shedding into the aqueous. The cells can also be observed in the vitreous phase.

**SUN Grading of Cells in Anterior Chamber (1 mm x 1 mm Slit Beam)******

**S. No**

**Grade**

**Cells in the field**

1

0

< 1

2

0.5+

1-5

3

1+

6-15

4

2+

16-25

5

3+

26-50

6

4+

>50

An anterior chamber or aqueous flare is the turbid appearance of the aqueous in the anterior chamber due to the proteins secondary to the breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier. In children with JIA-associated CAU, flare is taken as the level of inflammatory activity more than cells and indicates complications in the long term. Flare is graded on a slit lamp by assessing the iris and lens details. Laser flare photometry is another modality for objective grading.

**SUN Classification of Flare in the Anterior Chamber**

**S. No**

**Grade**

**Description**

1

0

None

2

1+

Faint

3

2+

Moderate- Clear iris and lens details

4

3+

Marked- Hazy iris and lens details

5

4+

Intense- Plastic or fibrin aqueous

Hypopyon is the presence of whitish purulent exudative material in the anterior chamber. It is composed of inflammatory material, and form appears as a horizontal level that is gravity-dependent. It is common in HLA B27 associated uveitis. The hypopyon is immobile due to high fibrin content, making it difficult to absorb. Behcet's disease patients have a characteristically mobile hypopyon due to low fibrin content.

**Various Types of Hypopyon in Different Condition**

S. No

Hypopyon characteristic

Diagnosis/etiology

1

Sterile

Behcet's disease

2

Mobile

Bacterial keratitis

3

Fixed/ Immobile

Fungal keratitis

4

Central

Pneumococcal keratitis

5

Haemorrhagic

Pneumococcus, herpetic keratitis, trauma

6

Other causes

Endophthalmitis, ranibizumab, JIA, histiocytosis, Leukemia, laser iridotomy, lens-induced, HLA-B27 uveitis, leptospirosis, phacolysis

Keratic precipitates (KPs) are inflammatory cellular deposits at the back of the cornea (endothelium). The cellular aggregates include lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages. Epithelial cells and giant cells are also common in KPs. The KPs are seen inferior one-third of the cornea in a triangular pattern with the apex pointing upwards (Arlt's triangle). The KPs are distributed in Arlt's triangle due to aqueous convection currents and the effect of gravity. In contrast, they can be seen diffusely distributed in Fuch's heterochromic iridocyclitis (FHIC) and viral uveitis (stellate KPs). The morphological appearance of KPs indicates the type of uveitis, like small KPs in non-granulomatous (NG) uveitis and large in granulomatous uveitis. Large glistening greasy KPs are seen as granulomatous uveitis and are called mutton fat KPs. Once the acute episode resolves, KP usually disappears. Pigmented KPs can be observed (NG variety). The granulomatous KPs may also become pigmented and are classically described as the ground-glass appearance of KPs. Sometime before the appearance of KP's diffuse pigment deposition is seen at the back of the cornea called endothelial dusting.

**S. No**

**Characteristic**

**Type of KP**

**Fresh**

**Old**

1

Colour

White

Pigmented

2

Shape

Circular/ Round

Flat

3

Hydration

Fully hydrated

Dehydrated

4

Edges

Smooth

Crenated

The fibrinous membrane is a common entity in AAU and is seen in the anterior chamber.

Iris atrophy is another clinical sign of uveitic sequelae. Diffuse iris atrophy is observed in FHIC, and a patchy or sectoral pattern appears in herpetic uveitis. Sectoral iris atrophy can be seen more in herpes zoster uveitis, although both sectoral and diffuse patterns can be observed in both herpes simplex and zoster uveitis.

Iris nodules are observable in both NG and the granulomatous variety.

- **Koeppe's nodules**- These are present at the pupillary margin or the location of posterior synechiae. These are ectodermal nodules usually white and may be pigmented. They can be seen in granulomatous as well as non granulomatous uveitis.

- **Busacca's nodules -**These involve the iris stroma and are predominantly seen in granulomatous variety.

- **Roseolae**- These are yellow nodules are seen in Syphilis, resulting from dilatation of iris vessels.

- **Berlin nodules**- These are seen in angles in cases with sarcoidosis.

- **Iris pearls**- These are observed in lepromatous uveitis.

- **Russell bodies -**These, also called iris crystals, are seen in FHIC and rare cases of chronic uveitis. They are thought to result from immunoglobin deposits.

Posterior synechiae (PS) are another essential clinical finding in uveitic cases. They result from adhesion of the pupil margin to the anterior capsule secondary to uncontrolled inflammation. PS can be seen at the site of the Koeppe nodule. All cases should be instilled with a cycloplegic agent like atropine or homatropine to prevent PS formation.

**Types of Posterior Synechiae**

- **Segmental**- They are adhesions of the iris at some points over the lens

- **Annular (ring)**- They are 360-degree adhesion of the iris to the anterior lens capsule

- **Total**- These are plastered posterior surface of iris to the lens

- **Broad**- They are seen in tubercular uveitis

- **Filiform**-They are seen in non-tubercular uveitis

- **Seculusio pupillae**- When synechiae cover the 360-degree pupil and prevent migration of aqueous from posterior to the anterior chamber

- **Occlusio pupillae**- Formation of membrane over the lens surface

- **Festooned pupil**- When synechiae are localized, and on dilatation, the pupil takes an irregular shape

Heterochromic iris is the difference in the color of the iris between the two eyes. Heterochromia is seen in FHIC.

Neovascularization of the iris (rubeosis iris) can result from chronic inflammation. The vascularization seems to be less as compared to posterior segment pathologies. FHIC shows abnormal iris vessels but does not result in synechial angle closure. Iris's new vessels are also seen in posterior uveitis. Sometimes it becomes difficult to differentiate between new and normal iris vessels (pseudo-rubeosis of the iris). The differentiating point is new vessels show irregular branching in contrast to normal vessels, which are radial. Fluorescein angiography is used to assess the leakage from new vessels.

Fundus evaluation is mandatory in each case to rule out masquerades like malignant melanoma, retinal detachment, cystoid macular edema, and other posterior segment complications.

**Difference between Granulomatous and Non-Granulomatous Uveitis**

**S. No**

**Characteristic**

**Type of Uveitis**

**Granulomatous**

**Non-Granulomatous**

1.

Time of onset

Insidious

Acute

2

Pain severity

Mild

Marked

3

Photophobia

Mild

Marked

4

Congestion

Minimal

Marked

5

Keratic precipitates

Large- Mutton fat

Small

6

Anterior chamber flare

Mild

Marked

7

Iris nodules

Present

Absent

8

Posterior synechiae

Thick and broad

Thin and flat

9

Posterior segment

Patchy involvement

Diffuse involvement

**Difference between Acute and Chronic Uveitis**

**S. No**

**Characteristic**

**Type of Uveitis**

**Acute**

**Chronic**

1.

Time of onset

Sudden

Acute

2

Symptoms

Pain, redness, photophobia

Asymptomatic, reduced vision and floaters

3

Start date

Definite

Not definitive

4

Resolution

Self-resolving mostly

Long duration