There are four distinct stages of wound healing which are (1) hemostasis, (2) inflammatory phase, (3) proliferative ("rebuilding") phase, and (4) maturation phase. The wound closure or healing occurs through three different methods, as mentioned below. Regardless of the method used, the wound will heal by going through the above mentioned four phases.

Primary intention healing is when the wound edges are brought and kept together by sutures or staples. The healing occurs with wound epithelization and connective tissue deposition. This allows for lower infection rates. In the case of wound healing by secondary intention, the wounds heal by leaving them open and allowing for granulation tissue to form contraction of the wound edges and eventual epithelialization. Typically, this is seen with chronic wounds. These take longer to heal due to the volume of tissue needed to fill the defect. Healing by secondary intention puts the patient at risk for more infections as there is no epidermal barrier. The third one is healing by tertiary intention, also known as delayed primary closure, which involves delayed closure of a wound after a period of time, varying in different cases, for which the wound has been left open. These wounds are grossly contaminated but do not have significant tissue loss, and can potentially be closed after the wound is thoroughly explored, irrigated, debrided, and observed for 3 to 7 days before surgical closure or skin grafting.

In the process of wound healing, nutrition, lifestyle, medications, and infections all play a significant role. Active children and adults who exercise regularly tend to have better circulation and heal quicker due to better oxygenation and nourishment provided to the wound. Also, smoking limits the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and has been linked to forming clots, all of which can inhibit the wound healing process. Medications such as steroids, blood thinners, or antineoplastic agents tend to prolong healing as well.