An oral suspension of activated charcoal (AC) should merit consideration in poisonings when there is an indication for gastrointestinal decontamination of an ingested toxin, and the clinician can administer activated charcoal within 1 hour of ingestion. Careful consideration of the contraindications (see below) should occur before activated charcoal treatment.

Observational trial data in recent years suggests single-dose activated charcoal (SDAC) may be given and could significantly reduce drug absorption and bioavailability in the following circumstances:

- In anticipation of serious toxicity

- When the toxin ingestion occurs within 1 hour of administration, the decrease in absorption of the ingested toxin after 1-hour post-ingestion is unlikely to have clinical efficacy with the exceptions noted below.

- Activated charcoal administration may be beneficial if administered up to 4 hours after large ingestions, ingestions of delayed-release drugs, and ingesting substances with anticholinergic or opioid properties that decrease intestinal motility.

- In alert and cooperative patients

- When airway reflexes are intact, or there is airway protection by an endotracheal tube

- Ingestions of toxins without specific antidotes

- The ingested toxin is known to be adsorbed by charcoal (see below)

Multiple-dose activated charcoal (MDAC) is often a consideration in cases of life-threatening ingestions of carbamazepine, dapsone, phenobarbital, quinine, and theophylline.

Hatanaka K. et al. reported two cases of lamotrigine overdose. Multiple doses of activated charcoal were used for treatment. The investigators believe that the activated charcoal treatment shortened the elimination half-life of lamotrigine by decreasing enterohepatic recycling.

Störmann S. et al. reported on a suicidal patient who ingested a large dose of chloroquine and diazepam.

Maes K.et al. reported on a suicidal patient who ingested Digitalis purpurea (Foxglove) leaves. The patient initially received treatment with digitoxin-specific Fab fragments. Multi-dose activated charcoal was added to the treatment regimen to decrease absorption and enterohepatic recycling of the cardiac glycosides, e.g., digoxin from the Digitalis purpurea leaves in the patient’s GI tract.

Ajjampur K. and Subramaniam A. reported on a suicidal patient who consumed a toxic dose of caffeine. The patient received treatment with a beta-blocker and activated charcoal which saved the patient’s life.

An unlabeled use for activated charcoal is the treatment of inadvertent gluten ingestion by patients with celiac disease. However, there is a lack of clinical evidence to support this use.