Post-operative complications include cholangitis, anastomotic leak, intestinal obstruction, portal hypertension, and hepatopulmonary syndrome.

**Cholangitis**

The exact mechanism for the development of cholangitis is not known. However, the formation of a Roux-en-Y loop with the restoration of a bilio-intestinal flow results in colonization of the loop with bacteria and predisposes to ascending cholangitis. Cholangitis is reported in up to 50% of cases.

Surgeons have tried some surgical maneuvers in the past in an attempt to reduce the risk of cholangitis, but none of the maneuvers have proved useful. These include intussuscepted ileocecal conduit, anti-refluxing jejunal loop valve, use of an appendiceal conduit, stomas of the proximal limb of the Roux-en loop, and omental wrap to the porta hepatis.

Children with cholangitis present with fever, worsening of jaundice, and elevation of liver enzymes. Treatment should be prompt and aggressive with broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics with good coverage against gram-negative bacteria.

**Portal Hypertension**

Portal venous pressure is high in the majority of infants with biliary atresia due to liver fibrosis. As liver fibrosis is a time-dependent feature, it correlates with age at porto-enterostomy and bilirubin level.

**Variceal Bleeding**

Esophageal varices develop at an average of about 2 to 3 years after Kasai porto-enterostomy in 60% of the children and out of these about 30% will bleed. It is recommended that every child with biliary atresia undergo endoscopic surveillance. Those with an active bleed require sclerotherapy or banding

**Ascites**

Ascites can be caused by portal hypertension, hypoalbuminemia, and hyponatremia. Spironolactone therapy is usually advised.

**Intrahepatic Cysts**

Biliary cysts or “lakes” can develop within the livers of patients with biliary atresia and cause recurring attacks of cholangitis. Prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics is recommended. Cases that fail to respond require liver transplantation.

**Hepato-Pulmonary Syndrome**

This syndrome is characterized by cyanosis, dyspnea, hypoxia, and finger clubbing. The diffuse intrapulmonary shunting is thought to occur due to gut-derived vasoactive compounds that have bypassed the sinusoidal inactivation. Liver transplantation is usually required to reverse the process.

**Malignancy**

Rare cases of malignant changes have been reported in cirrhotic livers post-PE (hepatocellular carcinoma or cholangiocarcinoma).