Ampicillin/sulbactam is a widely prescribed antimicrobial by primary care providers, nurse practitioners, internists, surgeons, and other healthcare professionals. While the antimicrobial is effective, clinicians should not empirically prescribe for all infections as the resistance to this agent is increasing globally. Therefore, clinicians should initiate this medication only for precise indications and ensure the appropriate duration of drug use. Antimicrobial stewardship is a coordinated program that promotes the appropriate use of antimicrobials. Studies indicate that antimicrobial stewardship programs reduce antimicrobial resistance and decrease the spread of infections caused by multidrug-resistant organisms.

Pharmacists should verify dosing, look into the appropriateness of selecting ampicillin-sulbactam based on the infection type and available antibiogram data, and check for drug-drug interactions. In most cases, nurses administer this drug, monitor for adverse events, and assess therapeutic effectiveness, informing the clinician of their findings as treatment progresses. In the case of an overdose, emergency department physicians and nurses should rapidly stabilize the patient. Nephrology consultation is essential for extracorporeal removal in severe overdose. A psychiatrist consultation is necessary if the overdose is intentional. Infectious disease consultation is vital for superinfections. Gastroenterology consultation is crucial for colitis and toxic megacolon. A psychiatrist consultation is necessary if the overdose is intentional. Infectious disease consultation is vital for superinfections. A retrospective cohort study suggests that infectious disease consultation decreases one month and one-year all-cause mortality for multidrug-resistant organisms.

Multiple healthcare providers may be involved in caring for patients requiring ampicillin therapy, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, pharmacists, and nurses. In such a scenario, the entire team should work together in close collaboration to maximize efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions. Pharmacists will perform medication reconciliation, verify dosing, and offer patients counsel on their medication administration. Nurses will administer the drug in the hospital setting, watch for adverse events, counsel patients, and serve as liaisons between all interprofessional team members. Open communication lines between all team members are essential to the interprofessional model. In summary, an interprofessional team approach optimizes patient outcomes related to ampicillin/sulbactam therapy. [Level 5]