The most severe complication of PPS is respiratory failure from hypoventilation or airway obstruction, often as a result of deeper sedation than intended. Consequently, the pediatric airway's anatomic characteristics and any history of airway anomalies must be appreciated. Pediatric patients lack comorbidities complicating adult airways, and their variations are more predictable.

Many of the unique characteristics of the pediatric airway are most prominent in infancy. Anatomic considerations include a relatively larger head and occiput, large tongue and smaller mandible, and more cephalad larynx that appears more anterior than in adults. This more acute angle for visualization can be overcome by extending the neck (unless cervical spine injury is suspected) or placing a small roll under the shoulders to facilitate extension.

Young children also have floppy epiglottis that may obscure the laryngeal view, large adenoids and tonsils that may cause upper airway obstruction, and small cricoid cartilage, making open cricothyrotomy technically difficult.  Many skilled laryngoscopists use a straight laryngoscope to directly lift the floppier epiglottis out of view for better visualization.

Surgical cricothyrotomy is contraindicated in children <10 years old due to the small cricothyroid membrane, and needle cricothyrotomy is the invasive, subglottic airway of choice in this population.  Bag mask ventilation (BMV) is often necessary prior to intubation and alone may be sufficient to facilitate oxygenation in situations where rapid recovery is expected, such as deep sedation.  A tidal volume of 8 mL/kg is the goal in BMV, and providers should squeeze the bag only enough to cause chest rise to avoid barotrauma or gastric insufflation.