The diagnosis of LGV proctocolitis follows a stepwise approach. (Figure 1) Initial workup includes routine lab work, stool cultures to rule out more common infectious entities such as Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, Escherichia, Clostridium. Cross-sectional imaging and endoscopic evaluation with sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can help identify the extent of disease and any extraintestinal manifestations. An endoscopic biopsy can be utilized to rule out viral etiologies, malignancy, or underlying inflammatory conditions. As previously mentioned, endoscopic and histologic findings are often nonspecific and may mimic other disease processes.

When high clinical suspicion for LGV proctocolitis exists in a patient with known risk factors, attempts to isolate Chlamydia trachomatis should be performed. As Chlamydia trachomatis an intracellular organism, samples must contain cellular material, and routine bacterial smear and culture are insufficient to diagnose this organism.

Following confirmation of infection, the recommendation is the identification of the L1-3 serovars. LGV biovar-specific DNA NAATs can be performed using the initial anorectal swab sample by PCR-based assays.Chlamydia genus-specific serological assays such as complement fixation and L-type immunofluorescence are options, but these tests exhibit lower sensitivity and specificity. When serovar confirmation is unavailable, clinicians should consider initiating a 21-day course of antibiotic therapy in patients meeting one of the following criteria

- The presence of proctitis on initial colonoscopy

- More than ten white blood cells per high powered field on initial anorectal smear

- HIV positive

While these diagnostic strategies are important in symptomatic patients, they are also useful in screening asymptomatic, high-risk individuals who engage in receptive anal intercourse.