After the early discovery of high-risk cancer (>Gleason 7, T3a or higher, PSA=20 or higher, ISUP=4 or higher), the most effective, definitive therapy for localized prostatic malignancies is radical prostatectomy and/or definitive radiation therapy. Approximately 80% of patients are cancer-free for 7 years, but 27% to 53% will eventually develop a recurrence.

CT and MRI are generally poor in detecting small lymph node metastases as they rely primarily on anatomical findings and nodal size characteristics.

Therapeutic radioligands designed for prostate cancer are also part of managing metastatic disease.

Historically, radiotherapeutic isotopes have played a significant role in the palliative treatment of painful bone metastases. However, in recent years, therapeutic radioligands targeting prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), which is overexpressed on the cell surface membrane of most prostate cancers, have also been utilized successfully in several clinical trials.

PSMA is a transmembrane cell surface glycoprotein highly expressed in up to 95% of prostate cancer cells, including castrate-resistant, aggressive, metastatic disease.

The first available PSMA-based PET imaging radioligand was capromab pendetide radiolabeled with indium-111, known commercially as Prostascint which was FDA-approved in 1996. Although a breakthrough, it could only bind to intracellular PSMA and had poor tissue penetration. This meant it could only effectively image nonviable cells with membrane damage exposing their intracellular contents. Imaging was also degraded by high background activity. These factors significantly limited its clinical utility and gave PSMA an initial bad reputation for prostate cancer imaging.

This changed radically on December 1, 2020, when the FDA approved the first successful small-molecule PSMA-based radioligand that could highlight surface PSMA targets on living cancer cells. The development of small ligands which could reliably target active cell surface membrane PSMA sites has allowed widespread availability of prostate cancer radioligand-based imaging for staging and restaging, including castration-resistant tumors, even with very small tumor volumes and low PSA levels.

PSMA-binding radionuclides are now widely used and recommended for primary staging, restaging, and early cancer detection. Therapeutic radioligands can be used in selected high-risk and advanced cases.

Such tumors typically have a poor prognosis. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is overexpressed in many solid tumors, including prostate cancer. Preliminary investigational studies suggest it may become a useful alternative PET tracer in PSMA-negative prostate cancer patients for both diagnostic imaging and theranostic treatment.