An understanding of ON is incomplete without some basic knowledge of the anatomy of each of these nerves.

- GON: Arises from C2 dorsal ramus. It then passes medial to lower border of obliquus capitis inferior muscle and crosses the suboccipital triangle. It then runs rostral along the rectus capitis posterior major muscle; innervates and pierces the semispinalis capitis muscle; pierces tendon of the trapezius muscle; passes the superior nuchal line of the occipital bone; and courses toward the apex of the scalp in proximity to the occipital artery, possibly up to the coronal suture.

- LON: Arises from C2 ventral ramus; loops inferior to the spinal accessory nerve; ascends along the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle; pierces deep cervical fascia and runs across the posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid insertion and on into the superficial fascia of the scalp; split into three branches: the auricular, mastoid, and occipital.

- TON: Arises from the dorsal ramus of C3. This divides into lateral and medial branches; then, the medial branch gives rise to superficial and deep branches, the superficial branch being the TON, then curves around the dorsolateral surfaces of C2-C3 and travels along the semispinalis capitis muscle. It turns dorsally at the C2 spinous process, piercing semispinalis capitis, splenius capitis, and trapezius muscles and exits muscles and innervates small cutaneous area right below the nuchal line. Of importance, the TON sends many branches to the GON and LON, potentially making it difficult to separate symptoms due to the TON alone.

For the GON, multiple possible compression points exist that may result in neuralgia.