Hypotension and bradycardia are the primary features seen in calcium channel antagonist poisoning. These findings are due to peripheral vasodilatation and reduced cardiac contractility.

Hypotension may be profound and life-threatening; it results from peripheral vasodilation, bradycardia, and decreased ionotropy. Cardiac conduction may also suffer impairment with AV conduction abnormalities, complete heart block, and idioventricular rhythms.

Patients may present asymptomatic initially and progress rapidly to severe hypoperfusion and cardiovascular collapse. Symptoms may include lightheadedness, fatigue, change in mentation, syncope, coma, and sudden death. Non-cardiac symptoms may include nausea and vomiting, metabolic acidosis secondary to hypoperfusion, and hyperglycemia from the blockade of insulin release in the pancreas. The insulin blockade also impairs the uptake of glucose by myocardial cells, which further contributes to the reduction of cardiac contractility and worsens hypotension. Severe poisoning can lead to pulmonary edema, presumably as a result of precapillary vasodilation and increased transcapillary pressure.

Dihydropyridines in mild to moderate overdose may cause reflex tachycardia; however, in severe overdose, there may be a loss of receptor selectivity leading to bradycardia.

Many factors may affect the severity of overdose, including the calcium-channel antagonist dose, the formulation, ingestion with other cardioactive medications such as beta-blockers, the patient’s age, and comorbidities. These medications may also be life-threatening with as little as one tablet in small pediatric patients.

Hyperglycemia has been considered a prognostic indicator of the severity of calcium channel antagonist toxicity. Beta-islet cells in the pancreas depend on the influx of calcium through the L-type calcium channels to release insulin. In the case of calcium channel antagonist overdose, there is a reduction in the release of insulin and subsequent hyperglycemia.

As in any other overdose, it is crucial to maintain a patent airway. Obtain an electrocardiogram and place the patient on continuous monitoring, including pulse oximetry. Obtain a chest X-ray and basic labs (including acetaminophen and salicylate levels if warranted). Initiate gastrointestinal (GI) decontamination early, especially in the cases of large ingestions or those with sustained-release formulations in the appropriate settings (i.e., normal mental status, recent ingestion, among others.) Administer activated charcoal if the patient has presented early and is awake, alert, oriented, and protecting their airway. Whole bowel irrigation is an important option for those patients with massive overdoses or overdoses of sustained or extended-release formulations that do not already have an ileus.

In the case of hypotension, initial treatment with intravenous fluids requires caution in those who have congestive heart failure, pulmonary edema, or kidney disease. Intravenous calcium administration may reverse the decreased cardiac contractility. Calcium chloride 10% (10 ml for 0.1 to 0.2 ml/kg) or calcium gluconate 10% (20 to 30 ml 0.3 to 0.4 ml/kg) may be administered intravenously and may be repeated every 5 to 10 minutes. Caution must be used with calcium chloride as it may cause skin necrosis when given through a peripheral line. Atropine is a reasonable initial treatment option, but it typically does not reverse the effects of calcium channel antagonist poisoning. Give glucagon as a bolus of 5 to 10 mg intravenously with caution for nausea and vomiting, and patients may be pre-medicated with antiemetics to help avoid this. If the patient is refractory to these interventions, initiate vasopressor therapy using intravenous norepinephrine or push-dose phenylephrine while preparing hyperinsulinemia/euglycemia (HIE) therapy. HIE increases cardiac contractility by enhancing the transport of glucose into the myocardial cells, which corrects they hypo-insulinemia. Administer a bolus of insulin 1 unit/kg, followed by an infusion of 1 to 10 units/kg per hour. Monitor the patient’s glucose for hypoglycemia initially every 10 minutes and then every 30 to 60 minutes to maintain glucose between 100 to 200 mg/dL. Use a concomitant dextrose infusion to maintain these levels. If the initial glucose is less than 200 mg/dL, administer a bolus dose of glucose. Monitor glucose levels and potassium levels closely. Intravenous lipid emulsion therapy lacks clear evidence for efficacy but is a consideration if all else fails. Administer a bolus of intravenous lipid emulsion 20% 1.5 ml/kg, repeat if needed, and then start an infusion of 0.25 to 0.5 ml/kg per minute for an hour. Reports suggest that the use of methylene blue, especially in those with amlodipine overdose resulting in vasodilatory shock, may be effective. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are also an option in calcium channel antagonist therapy. They increase cardiac output by inhibiting the breakdown of cAMP.  Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has proven successful in cases refractory to all of the above interventions since it maintains perfusion to vital organs and continues hepatic metabolism.