The diagnosis and management of notalgia paresthetica are difficult and requires an interprofessional team that includes a neurologist, internist, dermatologist, primary care provider, pharmacist, and a pain management nurse. The diagnosis is not simple, and many other pain disorders have first to be ruled out. In many cases, consultation with other team members is required to make the correct diagnosis.

There are a wide variety of treatment options for notalgia paresthetica. Oral and topical medications, botulinum toxin A, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), and physical therapy have been used with varying levels of success. [Level 4] Before treatment, be sure to reassure the patient and explain that their condition is benign. Often, this provides enough relief, and patients with mild or intermittent pruritus may require no treatment. Pharmacists should review prescriptions, check for drug interactions, and educate patients about potential side effects. Dermatology nurses participate in patient education and arrange for follow up.

Like all other treatments for notalgia paresthetica, botulinum toxin A has varying reports of success. Early reports suggest botulinum toxin was a viable option with significant improvement in the patient's reported itch. Later studies attempted to replicate these findings, but little to no improvement was reported. (Level IV) Referral to a specialist for further workup should be reserved for patients with recalcitrant pruritus or those with related musculoskeletal or neurological symptoms in addition to notalgia paresthetica.