Currently, most cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever are diagnosed based on immunoglobulin M (IgM) and IgG serologic responses to R. rickettsiae, in conjunction with a high degree of clinical suspicion. It is crucial to consider repeat testing after the resolution of symptoms, as serologic tests may be negative if testing occurs early in the course of illness. A rise in Rocky Mountain spotted fever IgG in the weeks after symptoms when comparing acute and convalescent testing is suggestive of infection. While Rickettsia can be cultured in the microbiology laboratory, this approach is not often used for clinical diagnosis as the technique is difficult and requires a high level of biosafety containment due to the risk of exposure. Other diagnostic options include molecular tests, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), in some centers, and skin biopsy. Given its low sensitivity and specificity, the Weil-Felix agglutination assay is no longer the recommended test for diagnosing of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. In addition to suggestive or positive serologic tests, patients with rickettsial infections may also have thrombocytopenia, hyponatremia, and cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis. On a peripheral white blood cell count, it is important to note that this may be elevated, normal, or low and thus may not help to rule out Rickettsial infection. Given the possibility of negative serologic testing early in the illness and otherwise non-specific laboratory abnormalities, it is essential to have a high index of suspicion for Rocky Mountain spotted fever in patients with influenza-like symptoms in the warmer months if they reside in or have a history of travel to endemic areas.