**Laboratory Studies**

**CBC Count**

- CBC and platelet count will access the degree of cytopenia.

**Liver Function Enzyme Testing**

- Mild elevation of liver enzyme levels is common; the presence of jaundice or abnormal hepatocellular synthetic function merits further study.

**Coagulation**

- Regular monitoring should be performed.

**Enzyme Activity**

- Diagnosis is confirmed through measurement of glucocerebrosidase activity in peripheral blood leukocytes. Less than 15% of mean normal activity is diagnostic.

**Genotype Testing**

- Molecular diagnosis is often helpful in Ashkenazi patients, in whom 6 GBA1 mutations (c.84insG, L444P, N370S,  IVS2+1g>a, V394L, and R496H) account for most disease alleles.

- In some ethnicities, sequencing of the exons of GBA1 may be necessary in order to establish the genotype.

- Mutation analysis has limited predictive value with respect to Gaucher disease progression. Avoid relying on PCR-based tests for individual mutations because they do not reveal the presence of recombinant alleles associated with greater severity of the disease.

**Associated Marker Testing**

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme, total acid phosphatase, and ferritin levels are usually elevated. These levels may normalize with treatment.

- Monitoring chitotriosidase enzyme is useful except in the 10% of the population that has a deficiency in this protein.

- Monitoring glucosylsphingosine levels may be useful, as the level has been shown to correlate with response to therapy.

**Imaging**

- Ultrasonography - may reveal abdominal organomegaly.

- MRI - may be useful in revealing early skeletal involvement (avascular necrosis, spinal degradation, and degree of bone marrow infiltration.

- Radiography - may reveal skeletal manifestations and pulmonary involvement.

- Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry - may evaluate osteopenia and bone crises.

- Echocardiograms are helpful in evaluating the possibility of pulmonary hypertension.

- In neuronopathic Gaucher disease, monitoring of EEG, brainstem-evoked potential, swallowing studies, and neuro-ophthalmologic evaluation should be done at regular intervals.

**Bone Marrow Aspiration**

- In the past, the diagnosis was made by finding classic glycolipid-laden macrophages in bone marrow aspirate. Today, aspiration is not typically needed due to alternative less invasive tests.

- Bone marrow aspiration is not the initial diagnostic test because the blood enzyme test is more sensitive, specific, less invasive.

**Liver Biopsy**

- Liver biopsy may be performed to evaluate unexplained hepatomegaly. However, a biopsy is rarely needed because a specific diagnostic test is available.