There is evidence that small-fiber neuropathy (SFN) occurs early and with increased frequency in LADA when compared to T2DM, which is related to higher HbA1C and poor glycemic control. Patients with LADA have severe SFN more often than those with age and duration-matched T2DM patients. However, the affliction of large nerve fibers is not different from T2DM. It is recommended that during the evaluation of a patient with LADA, tests to detect SFN should be included. Small nerve fibers carry pain and temperature sensations, mediate sweating and regulate vascular tone, thereby controlling blood flow. Tests for SFN include cold sensation threshold (CST), warm sensation threshold (WST), intraepidermal nerve fiber density (IENFD), and corneal confocal microscopy. The sensitivity of nerve conduction studies (NCS) to diagnose SFN is low and not recommended.

There is a window of opportunity if detected early as the treatment of hyperglycemia may reverse SFN and decrease morbidity.

Long-term follow-up of patients with LADA reveals a lower risk in the first nine years but a higher risk in later years for microvascular complications when compared to T2DM even after adjustment for several factors.

patients with LADA have as much carotid artery atherosclerosis as T1DM and T2DM despite a better vascular risk profile.

Three studies, the Botnia study, the Freemantle diabetes study, and the HUNT study all concurred on the increased cardiovascular disease and mortality in LADA, similar to T2DM.

It is clear, therefore, that LADA is associated with both microvascular and macrovascular complications like T1DM and T2DM.

Bone resorption is reduced in LADA, but the mechanisms are different from those in T2DM.