Montelukast (empirical formula C35H35ClNNaO3S) is a highly selective leukotriene receptor antagonist that binds with high affinity to the cysteinyl leukotriene receptor for leukotrienes D4 and E4. These leukotrienes are excreted by various cells, such as mast cells, and are involved in the inflammatory process that may cause asthma and allergic rhinitis signs and symptoms. Leukotriene receptors are found in airway cells, such as macrophages and smooth muscle cells. When bound to leukotriene receptors, montelukast inhibits leukotriene physiologic effects (such as airway edema, smooth muscle contraction, and impairment of normal cellular activity) without exhibiting any agonist activity. In asthmatics, low doses of montelukast (5 mg) induce a significant inhibition of bronchoconstriction caused by leukotriene D4. Furthermore, in a crossover study, montelukast induced inhibition of both early and late phase bronchoconstriction caused by a challenge with antigen in 12 asthmatic patients. Although most international asthma guidelines advise that children ≤5 years with asthma be treated with daily low- moderate dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) as the preferred controller and montelukast as an alternative therapy.

In controlled studies, montelukast is reported to significantly reduce beta2-agonist use (p<0.001), asthma symptoms (p=0.001), blood eosinophils (p=0.009) and significantly increase morning peak expiratory flow (p=0.001). These parameters demonstrate that montelukast decreases airway eosinophilic inflammation and improves clinical symptoms. Its efficacy in the treatment of chronic asthma may be due, in part, to the effect on airway inflammation.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Absorption**:**Montelukast is quickly absorbed following oral administration. After the 10 mg film-coated tablet is administered to fasted adults, the mean peak montelukast plasma concentration (C max) is achieved in 3 to 4 hours (T max). The mean oral bioavailability is 64%. A standard meal does not influence the oral bioavailability and C max in the morning.

- Distribution**:**Montelukast is approximately 99% bound to plasma proteins.

- Metabolism**:**Montelukast is primarily metabolized by the liver. At clinically relevant concentrations, CYP2C8 appears to play a major role in the metabolism of montelukast.

- Elimination**:**Montelukast and metabolites are excreted almost singly via the bile.  The pharmacokinetics of montelukast is linear for doses up to 50 mg.