It is recommended that all people diagnosed with celiac disease follow a strict gluten-free diet. This adherence is best done under the supervision of specialists, including a dietician. In general, symptoms improve on the gluten-free diet within days to weeks. Unresponsive patients need further review of the diagnosis but also an assessment of compliance with the diet. Serology testing can assess compliance. Non-compliance can be unintentional in an individual who may be still ingesting gluten without realizing it.

Other tests include looking at the impact of malabsorption (due to celiac disease). The following can be monitored: full blood count, iron stores, folate, ferritin, levels of vitamin D and other fat-soluble vitamins, and bone mineral density.

Management of patients with positive serology but no abnormal findings on biopsy on duodenal biopsy is controversial. There are many situations when the diagnosis is not clear-cut. Some patients experience relevant symptoms in spite of no identified changes on small gut biopsy. There is also seronegative celiac disease. This term describes the reverse situation when in spite of typical symptoms there is no serological evidence of the disease, but there is significant villous atrophy of duodenal biopsy.

Currently, the only recommended treatment for celiac disease is the gluten-free diet. This makes a significant impact on the lives of people affected and can be challenging to maintain. There is continuous work on possible non-dietary therapies that enable people with celiac disease to tolerate gluten. One of the main focuses of the research in this area is immune modulators. Other approaches, like immunizations or ingesting substances that would change the toxicity of gluten are also being explored. However, none have reached the stage of being recommended or approved for such therapy.

Corticosteroids only benefit a small percentage of patients with celiac disease.