For patients in the early stages of the disease process, history is crucial for determining the underlying etiology since vital signs and physical exams may not reveal the diagnosis. Up to one-half of patients will have a history of embolic diseases such as deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), or a history of atrial fibrillation. They will also frequently have a preceding history of post-prandial pain, loss of appetite, nausea/vomiting, and unintentional weight loss.

Patients with bowel necrosis secondary to perforation and bacterial invasion will likely have a history of risk factors predisposing to perforation such as peptic ulcer disease, alcoholism, heavy NSAID use, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), or steroid use with acute onset of abdominal pain. Their exam will be concerning for evidence of an acute abdomen, fevers, nausea, and vomiting with progression to sepsis and septic shock without intervention.

Lastly, there are a variety of less common precipitators of bowel necrosis, though most of them cause either an acute or chronic low flow state. These patients typically have vascular risk factors such as diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, or smoking. They will present with acute on chronic pain, diffuse abdominal pain, and signs of sepsis or septic shock.

Description of the type and severity of abdominal pain depends on several factors including the cause of ischemia, affected vasculature, and comorbidities. Acute arterial obstruction of the superior mesenteric artery will present with severe, periumbilical pain with nausea and vomiting. Chronic mesenteric ischemia will present with progressively worsening post-prandial abdominal pain with appetite and weight loss. Venous thrombosis is subtle with waxing and waning non-specific pain. Lastly, nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia has a variable presentation and generally co-exists with other serious disease processes such as peripheral vascular disease (PVD), congestive heart failure (CHF), or dialysis-dependent renal failure.

On physical exam, patients will appear in distress and diaphoretic. Their abdominal exam can vary from severe pain out of proportion to physical exam findings to an acute rigid abdomen with peritonitis.