Assessment and stabilization of the burn patient's airway, breathing, and circulation according to ATLS guidelines should be the first step to treating any burn patient, as they are first and foremost considered trauma patients. Appropriate supportive care including resuscitation with crystalloids, blood products, and possibly endotracheal intubation. After initial stabilization, appropriate assessment for transfer to an accredited burn center must be considered. Indications for transfer include TBSA of partial-thickness or deeper burns of 10% or greater, burns involving the face, hands/feet, genitalia/perineum, or major joints, chemical or electrical burns, large burns with concomitant trauma, inhalation injury, large burns in patients with special social or rehabilitation needs or significant medical problems that affect mortality, and if the evaluating hospital is without qualified personnel/equipment to care for pediatric burns.

Initial TBSA calculation will guide the need for resuscitation and resuscitation fluid rates.  Burn resuscitation may be the most important and also one of the most controversial elements of burn care, with many differing opinions among experts. The 2012 American Burn Association Consensus acknowledges 20% TBSA as criteria for requiring formal resuscitation but also recognizes that pediatric burns may need different criteria, and many institutions have individualized guidelines for this patient population. They also acknowledge that there is insufficient evidence that more expensive colloid resuscitation is advantageous than crystalloid resuscitation. The most popular burn resuscitation formulas are the Parkland formula (4-times %TBSA x weight in kg) and the newer Modified Brooke formula (2-times %TBSA x weight in kg). They both calculate a number with units in milliliters. The first half of this calculated volume is divided evenly over the first 8 hours and the second half is divided evenly over the second 16 hours. Both original formulas advocated the use of colloid but more recently lactated ringers have been the resuscitation fluid of choice. After initial resuscitation rates are calculated, both formulas also advocate titration of rates to markers of physiologic response such as urine output of 0.5-1cc/kg/hr, and one should be aware that over-resuscitation can be as detrimental as under-resuscitation.

There is significant variation in burn wound care regimens, but all follow several basic principles. Adequate wound care serves to prevent infection, allows for slow mechanical removal of devitalized tissue, helps prevent fluid loss, and is cost-effective. Common classic topical antibacterial regimens from least to most tissue penetrance include silver nitrate, silver sulfadiazine, and mafenide acetate. The most commonly used is silver sulfadiazine as it has a good penetrance, good antibiotic spectrum against gram positives and negatives, and is less painful than mafenide acetate. Silver nitrate, with activity against Staph species and Pseudomonas, is generally used for superficial burns in patients with Sulfa allergies. Mafenide acetate, which is highly effective against gram negatives and has deep tissue penetrance, is generally reserved for very deep, heavily contaminated wounds, those with eschar, and auricular burns due to its superior cartilage penetration.

For deep partial or full thickness burns, surgical excision of damaged tissue and split-thickness skin grafting for wound closure are indicated. While it is possible for a deep partial or full-thickness burn to heal without surgery, these wounds generally take 3 weeks or longer to heal. This prolonged wound healing process predisposes the patient to wound infection, hypertrophic scarring, and the formation of scar contractures. With excision and grafting by ten days following the burn injury, a patient can heal the wound within 7 to 10 days postoperatively and decrease the risk of infection or scar significantly. For larger % TBSA burns, early removal of the burn injury, and closure of the wounds with a skin graft or skin substitute allow for a significant decrease in systemic inflammation and assist in temperature regulation and fluid management. Of note, deeper wounds may require surgical excision and placement of a dermal substitute before a skin grafting procedure.