Nitrofurantoin is an antibiotic medication that is used for the treatment of uncomplicated lower urinary tract infections. It is effective against most gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. The FDA approved nitrofurantoin in 1953 to treat lower urinary tract infections. Nitrofurantoin is a synthetic antimicrobial created from furan and an added nitro group and a side change containing hydantoin.

Nitrofurantoin’s primary use has remained in treating and prophylaxis of urinary tract infections. Nitrofurantoin is advantageous as it concentrates in the lower urinary tract while maintaining a low serum concentration and does not significantly affect bowel flora. The predominant cause of urinary tract infections is periurethral colonization of bacteria from a fecal reservoir, which then ascends the urinary tract. Researchers think that nitrofurantoin’s continued effectiveness and minimal resistance patterns are partly attributable to its minimal effect on bowel flora. Nitrofurantoin is effective against many gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Nitrofurantoin is bactericidal against most common urinary tract pathogens, including Escherichia coli, Enterococci, Klebsiella, Staphylococcus saprophyticus, and Enterobacter. Its spectrum of susceptibility also includes Shigella, Salmonella, Citrobacter, Neisseria, Bacteroides, group B streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, and Staphylococcus epidermidis. Studies have shown the effectiveness of nitrofurantoin does not differ between ESBL-producing E. coli and Non-ESBL-producing E. coli strains.

Resistance to nitrofurantoin remains relatively rare despite several decades of widespread use. Numerous studies demonstrated that nitrofurantoin is an effective prophylactic agent in long-term prophylaxis and compares well to other antibiotics. A population-based survey of in vitro antimicrobial resistance of urinary E. coli isolates among United States outpatients showed a resistance rate of 1.6%.