Mechanical ventilation techniques and parameters for prehospital care should be disease-specific and similar to the in-hospital standard of care.

**Basic Variables of Mechanical Breath**

Before discussing the mechanics of the ventilator, it is important to understand the basic variables that determine the generation of a mechanical breath.

- Tidal Volume: The volume of air delivered with each breath, measured in ml.

- Respiratory Rate**:**the number of breaths delivered per minute

- Minute Ventilation: The volume of air exchanged over one minute, determined by the tidal volume multiplied by the respiratory rate, expressed in liters per minute (L/Min).

- Peak Airway Pressure: The maximum pressure exerted on the airways during inspiration, measured in cm H2O.

- Flow Rate: The rate of inspiratory flow required to overcome the resistance of the circuit to deliver the inspiratory breath, measured in liters per minute (L/Min).

- I: E Ratio: The ratio of inspiratory time compared to expiratory time.

- Fraction of Inspired Oxygen (FiO2): The percentage of oxygen in the inspired air.

- Positive End Expiratory Pressure (PEEP): The airway pressure applied at the end of exhalation, measured in cm H2O.

**Modes of Ventilation**

Mechanical ventilators have several modes of ventilation that deliver breaths based on three preset factors: trigger, target, and termination.

- Trigger: How the breath is initiated, which could be ventilator-initiated based on a preset time or rate, or patient-initiated based on negative pressure generated by the patient

- Target: A preset inspiratory flow rate or pressure limit that the ventilator targets to generate the breath.

- Termination: The endpoint of the inspiratory breath, which could be a preset duration of inspiration, volume target, or rate of inspiratory flow.

**Types of Breaths**

Three different types of breaths delivered during mechanical ventilation vary based on the trigger of the breath and how the work is performed.

- Mandatory: Mandatory breaths are triggered by the ventilator, and the ventilator does all the work of inspiration.

- Assisted: The patient triggers assisted breaths, but the ventilator does the work of inspiration.

- Spontaneous: The patient triggers spontaneous breaths and does all the work of inspiration.

**Categories of Mechanical Ventilation**

Two broad categories of mechanical ventilation are determined by the breath strategy or the target and termination of the inspiration.

- Volume Control (Volume Limited): Volume-limited breaths target a preset flow rate, and inspiration is terminated when a preset volume is achieved. Airway pressures are determined by the intrinsic resistance of the circuit and airways and lung compliance.

- Pressure Control (Pressure Limited): Pressure-limited breaths target a preset inspiratory pressure, and inspiration is terminated when a set inspiratory time is achieved. Tidal volume and, ultimately, minute ventilation are variable and dependent on lung compliance and airway resistance.

**Ventilator Mode**

Each ventilator mode will vary based on the trigger, the breath strategy, and the types of breaths delivered.

- Controlled Mechanical Ventilation (CMV): All breaths are mandatory and triggered by the ventilator based on the preset respiratory rate, with the target and termination depending on volume or pressure-limited strategy. There are no assisted or spontaneous breaths.

- Assist/Control Ventilation (AC): Mandatory breaths are triggered by the ventilator at a preset minimum respiratory rate; however, this mode allows for patient-triggered assisted breaths as well. The target and termination are determined by volume or pressure-limited breath strategy. There are no spontaneous breaths.

- Pressure Regulated Volume Control (PRVC): A similar mode to assist/control; however, the ventilator will adjust the inspiratory flow rate to regulate the amount of pressure delivered to the airways.

- Intermittent Mechanical Ventilation (IMV): Mandatory breaths are triggered by the ventilator at a preset rate. However, this mode allows for patient-triggered breaths, which can be either spontaneous or assisted, depending on the settings. The ventilator can be set to provide a level of pressure support to spontaneous breaths to reduce the work of breathing, or breaths can be fully spontaneous. The target and termination of mandatory breaths vary depending on the breath strategy.

- Pressure Support (PS): Breaths are fully patient-triggered, and the ventilator delivers a set driving pressure which each breath. Inspiration is determined by the cessation of inspiratory force generated by the patient. Tidal volume varies depending on compliance and resistance.

- Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP): There is no ventilator cycling. The ventilator provides a fixed amount of airway pressure, and breaths are entirely spontaneous.