There are 2 techniques used for the insertion of a DLT:

- Blind insertion

- Fiberoptic guided placement

For blind insertion of a DLT, first, perform a direct laryngoscopy and visualize the vocal cords. Visualization of the vocal cords is important as these tubes are large and placement more challenging than placing an SLT. Once the vocal cords are visualized, gently advance the DLT with the tip of the bronchial concave curve facing anteriorly through the vocal cords until the bronchial cuff passes through the cords. The tube is then turned 90 degrees to the left when using a left-sided DLT, and to the right when using a right-sided DLT, and advanced until it meets resistance. Once the DLT is well positioned, inflate the tracheal cuff and ensure ventilation of both lungs by both inspection and auscultation. Verify correct placement by checking ventilation through the bronchial lumen. First, inflate the bronchial cuff 1ml at a time until leak stops. Clamp off gas flow through the tracheal lumen at the Y connector and open the tracheal sealing cap to air. Check whether you can isolate the other lung through the tracheal lumen, by clamping off the gas flow through the bronchial lumen.

The DLT can also be positioned using fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Using a fiberoptic bronchoscope through the bronchial lumen and guiding the DLT over fiber-optic scope increases the accuracy of placement.

Once inserted, the DLT is connected to the ventilator circuit via the DLT connector, and the detection of ETCO2 confirms placement in the trachea after both cuffs are inflated to seal leaks. No more than 3 mL of air should be required to create a seal in the bronchial cuff. Cuff pressures should be measured to prevent airway injury. Confirmation of correct positioning of the DLT can be done by auscultation or with fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Auscultation and bilateral chest wall movement is first confirmed. On clamping the endobronchial lumen limb connector, breath sounds should be absent from the corresponding side of the lung if the endobronchial lumen is in the correct bronchus. On clamping the endotracheal limb connector and ventilating through the endobronchial lumen, breath sounds should be absent from the opposite side of the chest.

Once the DLT is in place, confirm correct placement by inserting the fiberoptic scope through the tracheal lumen to verify that the bronchial lumen is in the correct main-stem bronchus and there is no bronchial cuff herniation.

Though the tracheal lumen confirm that:

- The endobronchial portion is in the correct main bronchus. Left-sided DLT should be in the left main bronchus, and right-sided DLT should be in the right main bronchus.

- The bronchial rings should be anterior with the longitudinal fibers posterior to help with side identification.

- The bronchial cuff should be just visible without cuff herniation over the carina when inflated.

- The right upper lobe (RUL) bronchus should be identifiable via the right main bronchus with 3 lobar branches (apical, anterior and posterior).

Next, the fiberoptic bronchoscope is advanced through the endobronchial lumen.

- For a left-sided DLT, identify the origins of the left upper and lower bronchi (confirm that the tip of the endobronchial orifice is not occluding the left upper or lower bronchi).

- For a right-sided DLT, identify good alignment between the opening slot of the endobronchial lumen relative to the takeoff of the right upper lobe bronchus (to allow ventilation of the right upper lobe bronchus).

- Identify the bronchus intermedius and the right lower lobe bronchus distally.

Fiberoptic bronchoscopy is the gold standard for confirmation of correct placement of a DLT. Auscultation alone is unreliable as an indicator of proper DLT placement.

Troubleshooting techniques for DLT insertion include:

- Using a bronchoscope to cannulate the bronchus and railroading the tube over the scope. Always place the scope in the bronchial (longer) lumen.

- A stylet should be used when placing a DLT.

- Always check placement when changes to the patient's position have been made, or changes have been made between normal ventilation and isolated lung ventilation.

- To assist in cannulating the bronchus, rotate tube toward bronchus that is to be cannulated, turn the patient's head to the opposite side and gently slide the tube down until resistance is felt.

To initiate one-lung ventilation, the bronchial cuff is inflated, the lung to be isolated is clamped off at the corresponding connector, the connector is then opened to the atmosphere to allow lung collapse. Lung collapse is most rapid if initiated at end expiration.

Intraoperatively the bronchial cuff should be kept deflated (unless needed to avoid the spread of blood or infection) and should be inflated only during the time of lung isolation to minimize bronchial mucosal injury.