The clinical manifestations of emphysema are the consequences of damage to airways distal to terminal bronchiole, which include respiratory bronchiole, alveolar sacs, alveolar ducts, and alveoli, collectively known as the acinus. There is abnormal permanent dilatation of the airspaces and destruction of their walls due to the action of the proteinases. This results in a decrease in the alveolar and capillary surface area, which decreases the gas exchange. The part of the acinus affected determines the subtype.

It can be subdivided pathologically into the following:

- Centrilobular (proximal acinar) is the most common type and is commonly associated with smoking. It can also be seen in coal workers' pneumoconiosis.

- Panacinar is most commonly seen with alpha one antitrypsin deficiency.

- Paraseptal (distal acinar) may occur alone or in association with the above two. When it occurs alone, the usual association is a spontaneous pneumothorax in a young adult.

After long-term exposure to noxious smoke, inflammatory cells such as macrophages, neutrophils, and T lymphocytes are recruited, which play an important role in the development of emphysema. First, macrophages are activated, which release neutrophil chemotactic factors like leukotriene B4 and interleukin-8. Once the neutrophils are recruited, these, along with macrophages, release multiple proteinases and lead to mucus hypersecretion.

Elastin is an important component of the extracellular matrix that is required to maintain the integrity of the lung parenchyma and small airways. Elastase/anti-elastase imbalance increases the susceptibility to lung destruction leading to airspace enlargement. Cathepsins and neutrophil-derived proteases (i.e., elastase and proteinase) act against elastin and destroy the connective tissue of the parenchyma of the lung. Cytotoxic T cells release TNF-a and perforins, which destroy the epithelial cells of the alveolar wall.

Cigarette smoking not only causes mucus hypersecretion and release of neutrophilic proteolytic enzymes, but it also inhibits anti-proteolytic enzymes and alveolar macrophages. Genetic polymorphisms have a role in inadequate antiprotease production in smokers. All of these contribute to the development of emphysema.

Lung parenchyma produces alpha one antitrypsin (AAT), which inhibits trypsinize and neutrophil elastase in the lung. AAT deficiency can lead to panacinar emphysema.