The testimony of the expert witness is often a crucial component of a medical malpractice case.  Therefore, the testimony must be objective, accurate, reliable, and an appropriate analysis of the medical record as it relates to the standard of care. One of the most significant concerns among the legal community regarding expert witnesses is that not all experts provide testimony that is ethical and supported by scientific or medical evidence.

There are some examples of inappropriate testimony provided by expert witnesses and the effect of that testimony on the outcome of the case. As a result of these types of cases, when determining whether the testimony of the expert should be admissible in court, judges should consider the following: (1) whether the expert’s opinion has been peer-reviewed, (2) whether the expert can and has been tested, (3) the known or potential error rate of the theory; and (4) the general acceptance of the theory in the relevant scientific community.

The court determines the admissibility of expert medical testimony. Daubert is still frequently cited by trial courts when ruling on a motion to preclude expert testimony.Physicians may be asked to testify about patients whom they have not taken a medical history nor examined personally. Nevertheless, they are expected to make estimates about causation, risk of injury, or surmise future injuries. They may even need to assess the medical records of a deceased litigant.

To ensure the highest quality and appropriate expert witness testimony, some professional medical societies have published recommendations or guidelines for expert witnesses in these specific medical specialties.

Examples of expert witness guidelines are provided below.