Conservative treatment is preferred for asymptomatic fistulae, especially when not associated with nasolacrimal duct obstruction.

Regarding invasive treatments, the literature reports techniques such as nasolacrimal duct probing, cautery ablation of the external ostium, and surgical excision of the fistula with or without intervening dacryocystorhinostomy. However, there are some controversies concerning the efficacy of dacryocystorhinostomy. Nowadays, the use of cautery has become more cautious and less popular due to its unsatisfactory success rate and tendency to relapse. Moreover, before making the excision of the fistula, it is important to assess the patency of the proper lacrimal system to avoid the risk of postprocedural epiphora and dacryocystitis.

Probing the nasolacrimal duct is recommended when there is a concomitant obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct. Procedures such as simple probing and cauterization may be highly risky, especially if the fistula takes origin from the common lacrimal canaliculus, with the persistence of epiphora of variable degree owing to the damage to underlying lacrimal ducts.

Concerning fistulectomy, this procedure can be performed in association or not with dacryocystorhinostomy. When the fistulous tract is excised externally, it is considered a closed fistula excision, whereas, in association with dacryocystorhinostomy, it is regarded as an open excision.

Dacryocystorhinostomy was initially described based on an external approach. The advantage of this technique is that it allows the complete excision of the fistulous tract and optimal visualization of the internal ostium. Moreover, any nasolacrimal duct obstructions can be managed by bypassing the duct. Several studies have recommended external dacryocystorhinostomy, fistula excision, and canalicular intubation to manage symptomatic fistulae.

A modification to external dacryocystorhinostomy, less invasive, is the endoscopic technique, in which there is the creation of a bone window on the medial wall of the lacrimal socket marsupialization of the lacrimal sac in the middle meatus. This technique improves the visualization of the internal ostium, more radical removal of the fistulous tract, and avoids the creation of an unaesthetic scar on the medial canthal region.