Many etiologies can lead to a stroke. One of the most common causes is plaque formation secondary to low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) buildup within the arteries. The most common risk factors include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and smoking. Thrombi can also develop at the bifurcation sites of the internal carotid, middle cerebral arteries, and basilar arteries. Emboli that cause strokes are thrombi formed at a distant site and then lodged in an artery of the brain. Embolic strokes are commonly caused by emboli that originate from the heart, especially in patients with preexisting heart arrhythmias (atrial fibrillation), valvular disease, structural defects (atrial and ventricular septal defects), and rheumatic fever. Emboli usually lodge in areas of preexisting stenosis.

Strokes that occur in small vessels are most commonly caused by chronic, uncontrolled hypertension and arteriosclerosis. These strokes occur in the basal ganglia, internal capsule, thalamus, and pons. Uncontrolled hypertension in these areas can also lead to small hemorrhages.

About 20% of all strokes are classified as hemorrhagic, with the most common etiology being uncontrolled hypertension. Other causes of hemorrhagic strokes include cerebral amyloid angiopathy, a disease in which amyloid plaques deposit in small and medium vessels, which causes vessels to become rigid and more vulnerable to tears. Deposition can occur anywhere, but they occur most commonly on the surfaces of the frontal and parietal lobes. The structural integrity of vessels is another critical consideration in hemorrhagic stroke. Aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, cavernous malformations, capillary telangiectasias, venous angiomas, and vasculitis have all been identified as common causes of hemorrhagic strokes.