The diagnosis of SLE can be challenging, and no single clinical feature or lab abnormality can confirm SLE diagnosis. Instead, SLE is diagnosed based on the constellation of signs, symptoms, and appropriate laboratory workup. Imaging and histopathology may play a crucial role as well.

Several autoantibodies have been described in SLE, with varying sensitivity and specificity. While some autoantibodies may be associated with a certain clinical subset of SLE, others may serve as a marker of disease activity.

Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are the hallmark of the disease and shall be the initial test performed. Immunofluorescence assay is considered the gold standard test for ANA. Although other detection methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and multiplex assays are widely available, they lack sensitivity. A positive ANA is seen in more than 97% of cases of SLE. However, it can also be seen in several other disorders and a significant proportion of the healthy population, and have a specificity of only 20%. Hence, a positive ANA does not confirm SLE diagnosis, but a negative ANA makes it significantly less likely. ANA negative SLE has been rarely described, although it is primarily due to methodical error. Those cases have either a positive ANA on immunofluorescence or a positive Anti-Ro (SSA) antibody.

Several patterns of ANAs have been reported, including speckled, homogenous, centromere, cytoplasmic, nucleolar, and dense fine speckled patterns. With the availability of more specific ANAs targeting specific antigens, the staining patterns of ANAs are not considered significant enough by themselves. ANAs with a dense, fine speckled pattern (anti-DFS70) are considered least pathological, and patients with ANAs with this pattern rarely develop systemic autoimmune diseases. The speckled pattern is seen when ANAs are directed against the antigens such as SSA, SSB, Smith, ribonucleoprotein. The homogenous pattern is associated with ANAs targeted at histones, chromatin, and dsDNA, while the centromere pattern is associated with Anti-centromere antibodies seen in limited systemic sclerosis.

Besides SLE, ANAs can be seen in several other conditions, as noted above. More than 20% of the healthy normal population, especially females or relatives of patients with autoimmune diseases, can have a positive ANA, although titers more than 1:320 are uncommon. Other rheumatological disorders associated with a positive ANA include drug-induced lupus, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis/dermatomyositis, mixed connective tissue disease, Sjogren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, Raynaud's disease, cutaneous lupus, and fibromyalgia. Several other autoimmune disorders are associated with a positive ANA, including autoimmune hepatitis, multiple sclerosis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Several infections and malignancies have also been associated with a positive ANA.

A positive ANA shall be followed by testing for more specific autoantibodies to detect the antigen responsible for the positive ANA. It must be noted that frequently, a positive ANA will not be associated with any of the known more specific autoantibodies. There are several possible targets for ANAs, with any peptide synthesized inside the cell's nucleus serving as a potential antigen. However, only a few have been identified as having clinical relevance so far. A positive ANA with negative testing for more specific autoantibody testing is less likely to be associated with systemic autoimmune disease.

Antibodies to deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) can be primarily divided into two groups: those reactive with denatured, single-stranded (ss)DNA and those identifying native, double-stranded (ds)DNA. Notably, anti-ssDNA antibodies are considered non-specific and may be seen either as a laboratory error or in the healthy population. Anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA) antibodies have more than 95% specificity for SLE but are found in only about 60% to 70% of SLE patients. Thus a negative anti dsDNA does not rule out the diagnosis of SLE. The Farr radioimmunoassay test is considered the gold standard for detecting anti-dsDNA antibodies, although it is not frequently used. ELISA tests are available, but they have a high risk of giving a false positive test. The immunofluorescence test by using the Crithidia luciliae method can confirm the presence of anti-Ds-DNA antibodies. Anti-dsDNA antibodies can also be seen in drug-induced lupus, primarily secondary to anti-TNF agents and interferon-alpha. Rarely low titers of anti-dsDNA antibodies have been reported in rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren syndrome. In SLE, anti-dsDNA antibodies can correlate with disease activity and the development of lupus nephritis. However, this may not always be true as some patients have elevated anti-dsDNA antibodies in the setting of minimally active or inactive lupus.

Anti-Ro (SSA) and anti-La (SSB) antibodies target ribonucleoprotein particles. Anti-Ro and Anti-La antibodies are seen in up to 90% of cases of Sjogren syndrome but can be seen in SLE as well (anti-Ro in up to 50% and anti-La in up to 20% of the cases). In SLE, they may be associated with secondary Sjogren syndrome and keratoconjunctivitis sicca, subacute cutaneous lupus, photosensitivity, congenital heart block, and neonatal lupus.

Anti-Smith antibodies are seen in less than 30% of SLE patients but have 99% specificity for SLE. They are observed more in African-American patients with SLE. Anti-Smith antibodies in SLE are usually always associated with Anti-U1-RNP antibodies, which are present in up to 30% of SLE patients. Anti-U1-RNP antibodies can also be seen in mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), although in MCTD, a disorder that is closely related to SLE. Anti-ribosomal-P antibodies are very specific for SLE, although their prevalence in SLE is less than 5%, and they may correlate with neuropsychiatric manifestations of SLE. Anti-histone antibodies are not specific for drug-induced lupus and can be seen in 50% to 70% of cases of SLE. Anti-centromere and anti-topoisomerase-I (SCL70) antibodies are seen in systemic sclerosis and rarely in SLE (less than 5%). Anti-histidyl-tRNA-synthetase antibodies are seen in myositis. Patients with SLE may also have antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulants, anti-cardiolipin, and anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I antibodies) and are associated with more thrombotic events and adverse pregnancy-related outcomes.

Complements C3 and C4 shall be checked in patients with SLE or suspicion of SLE, and low complement levels indicate complement consumption and may correlate with disease activity. Markers of inflammation such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein may be elevated. Complete blood counts, liver function tests, and renal function tests, including serum creatinine, urinalysis, and urine protein quantification (24-hour urine protein, or spot urine protein/creatinine ratio), shall be checked to assess organ involvement. Synovial fluid aspiration reveals an inflammatory fluid. Joint radiographs may demonstrate peri-articular osteopenia, deformities, or subluxation but rarely show erosions. Chest imaging with computed tomography (CT) scan, cardiac workup including echocardiography (trans-esophageal when suspecting Libman-Sacks endocarditis), CNS work up with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and/or lumbar puncture shall be pursued if specific organ involvement is suspected. Renal biopsy shall always be performed if suspicion of lupus nephritis. Skin biopsies can be considered, especially if atypical presentation.