As previously mentioned, seborrheic keratoses are a nearly ubiquitous, benign skin lesion in patients greater than 40 years of age. The typical morphology of these lesions tends to vary extensively amongst patients and may present as a macule, papules, and plaques. They are well-circumscribed pigmented lesions with the color ranging from skin tone to tan or brown, and some lesions may appear black. The texture is typically described as waxy or velvety, and they may have a "stuck on" appearance. The presence of horn cysts on the surface of the lesions is also classic. Although these lesions are typically rather easy to distinguish from other melanocytic neoplasms, the histopathological examination may be required for lesions lacking typical exam findings.

Physical examination will typically reveal numerous seborrheic keratoses usually in a symmetric pattern on the back that may resemble a "Christmas tree," "splash," or "raindrop" pattern. Although the back is the most common location, additional sites may include the extremities, face, neck, and abdomen. Patients will often complain of pruritus associated with these lesions. Interestingly, many patients truly displaying the sign of Leser-Trelat will concurrently experience another paraneoplastic disease process so a careful examination and history cannot be overemphasized. Malignant acanthosis nigricans, characterized by velvety, symmetrical hyperpigmentation often in intertriginous sites (but may occur in any location on the body) occurs simultaneously in about 20% of cases displaying the sign of Leser-Trelat. The generalized presence pruritus and/or acanthosis nigricans should heighten the physician's suspicion for underlying malignancy.