It is essential to appropriately manage the sympathetic nervous system symptoms of patients suffering from pheochromocytoma with first-line medication, phenoxybenzamine, an alpha-adrenergic blocker. Beta-adrenergic blockers are to be avoided before using alpha-adrenergic blockers due to possible profound unopposed alpha-mediated vasoconstriction that may lead to pulmonary edema and hypertensive crisis. Concurrent administration with compounds that stimulate both alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors may result in extreme hypotensive response and tachycardia. Cardiovascular monitoring of blood pressure readings should be taken at least twice daily in both seated and standing positions.

Proper management of a drug overdose with phenoxybenzamine requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists. Morbidity and mortality of phenoxybenzamine overdose may be high if not properly managed. Once a patient with phenoxybenzamine overdose is under the care of an interprofessional team, the following should take place for the best patient outcome:

- Order blood and urine levels/toxicology

- Patient monitoring for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression and cardiovascular collapse with treatment initiation

- Consult toxicology, nephrology, cardiology, psychiatry, and other healthcare professionals, if necessary

The clinicians will initiate therapy and chart the overall course of treatment, while nursing can answer patient questions and provide counsel on what to expect as well as potential adverse effects of the medication. These points can be reinforced by the pharmacists, who will also examine the patient's record for drug interactions, and appropriate dosing and answer medication-related questions. This approach will yield optimal therapeutic results with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]

As mentioned previously, phenoxybenzamine is not recommended for long-term use due to case reports showing the development of carcinoma.