The most useful method of making a diagnosis of MVP is by echocardiogram. M-Mode echocardiography is not used to diagnose MVP. This is because the normal movement of the base of the heart can mimic or mask MVP.  The two- or three-dimensional echocardiogram allows the measurement of leaflet thickness and displacement relative to the annulus.

Mitral Valve Prolapse is defined as mitral valve displacement more than 2 mm above the mitral annulus in a long-axis view (parasternal or apical three chambers).  MVP is further subdivided into non-classic and classic based on the thickness of the mitral valve leaflets.

In non-classic MVP, mitral valve leaflet thickness is 0 mm to 5 mm. In classic MVP, mitral valve leaflet thickness is more than 5 mm.

Classic MVP is further subdivided into symmetric and asymmetric based on the point at which leaflets tips join the mitral annulus. In symmetric form, leaflet tips meet at a common point on the annulus. In asymmetric form, one leaflet is displaced toward the atrium with respect to the other.

Classic asymmetric MVP is further subdivided into flail and non-flail subtypes. In the flail subtype, prolapse occurs when a leaflet tip turns outward, becoming concave toward the left atrium causing mitral valve deterioration. The flail leaflet varies from tip eversion to chordal rupture. Dissociation of leaflet and chordae tendineae results in unrestricted motion of the leaflet, giving the name "flail leaflet."  The flail leaflet has a higher prevalence of mitral regurgitation than the non-flail form.

Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) clinical modality has not been evaluated in MVP. CMR enables the quantification of mitral regurgitation prior to mitral valve surgery.

Sometimes, MVP is discovered incidentally on left ventriculography during cardiac catheterization. This is characterized by the displacement of mitral valve leaflets into the left atrium with late systolic mitral valve regurgitation. In such individuals, MVP should be evaluated by echocardiography. If there is discordant between clinical and echocardiographic findings on the severity of mitral valve regurgitation, then cardiac catheterization and left ventriculography would be useful.