Pierre Robin sequence (previously named Pierre Robin syndrome) is now correctly named a sequence because one initial malformation leads to a sequential chain of events causing the other anomalies. A syndrome, in contrast, is a set of anomalies that arise separately due to one underlying pathogenesis. In PRS, micrognathia is the first abnormality that leads to glossoptosis and, ultimately, airway obstruction and/or a cleft palate. The following are common theories behind the hypoplastic mandibular growth.

**Mechanical Theory**

In the early first trimester, around the 7th week of gestation, the mandible typically grows ventrally and inferiorly. If mandibular growth is abnormal, the tongue is not able to follow the normal trajectory of growth and blocks the closure of the palatal cleft in the 11th week of gestation. The glossoptosis, due to abnormal mandibular growth, ultimately leads to upper airway obstruction.

**Neurological Maturation Theory**

This theory proposes a delay in the neuromuscular development of the tongue, which in turn does not stimulate the mandible to grow appropriately or palatal shelves to fuse.

**Mandible Compression Theory**

This theory proposes that external forces cause the fetal head to become flexed, compressing the mandible against the chest, rendering it unable to grow appropriately. This may be caused by multifetal gestation, uterine anomalies, or oligohydramnios. The tongue continues to grow normally and is ultimately displaced backward, causing potential obstruction of the upper airway. The tip of the tongue may also impede the fusion of the palatal shelves, leading to cleft palate.