**Lab Investigations**

**Muscle Enzymes**

Initial testing in suspected cases of dermatomyositis should include muscle enzymes, such as creatine kinase (CK), aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Testing for muscle enzymes helps to guide further diagnostic studies and to assess response to therapy. In some cases, the elevation of muscle enzymes occurs prior to the appearance of muscle weakness.

**Autoantibodies**

Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are present in a majority of patients with dermatomyositis but do not help to make a diagnosis. Instead, testing should focus on detecting myositis specific autoantibodies (MSA), which are present in approximately 30% of dermatomyositis and polymyositis patients. Testing for myositis-specific antibodies offers valuable information for determining the prognosis and can help to predict the pattern of organ involvement. Aminoacyl-transfer (t) ribonucleic acid synthetase (also known as antisynthetase antibody) is the most common myositis specific autoantibody associated with dermatomyositis. Anti-Jo is the most common antisynthetase antibody found in dermatomyositis. The following autoantibodies are associated with specific complications and findings:

- Anti-Jo: antisynthetase syndrome consisting of interstitial lung disease, mechanic's hands, Raynaud phenomenon, sclerodactyly, and arthritis.

- Anti-Mi2 (directed against-helicase): Acute onset disease, V-neck sign, and shawl rash

- Anti- SRP (directed against signal recognition particle): severe myositis, resistant to treatment

- Anti- MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5): severe cutaneous involvement, amyopathic dermatomyositis, and rapidly progressive ILD

- Anti- TIF-1 gamma (transcription intermediary factor) /Anti-p155/140: malignancy

- Anti-SAE (ubiquitin-like modifier activating enzyme): dysphagia, skin disease preceding myositis

- Anti-NXP2 (nuclear matrix protein 2): calcinosis cutis

**Electromyography (EMG)**

Electromyography helps to identify which groups of muscles are most affected and provides guidance about which muscles to biopsy. It also helps to distinguish dermatomyositis from neuropathic conditions. However, the electromyographic findings are not specific and may be absent in 11% of patients.

- Increased insertional activity

- Spontaneous fibrillations

- Positive sharp waves

- Complex repetitive discharges

- Early recruitment

- Low-amplitude, short polyphasic motor unit potentials

**Radiology**

Chest radiography: Every patient with dermatomyositis should undergo chest radiography to screen for interstitial lung disease. If the patient has respiratory symptoms or abnormal chest X-ray findings, further testing with high-resolution computer tomography (HRCT) of the chest. In addition, pulmonary function tests should be performed. Findings on HRCT suggestive of interstitial lung disease include nodules, fibrosis, linear opacities, honey-combing, or consolidation.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): Magnetic resonance imaging of skeletal muscles is a non-invasive and sensitive test to evaluate myositis. Typical findings include muscle edema, areas of inflammation; that appear hyperintense on T2-weighted images; and fat suppression.

Barium swallow: may be done if esophageal dysfunction is present.

**Histopathology**

Muscle biopsy is the most accurate test to confirm the diagnosis of dermatomyositis and to exclude other causes of muscle weakness or skin rash. However, choosing the right muscle for a biopsy is crucial to prevent a missing diagnosis. Muscle biopsy should be obtained on weak muscles as identified by physical exam or contralateral to the abnormal muscles, as identified by electromyography. A muscle biopsy should be obtained from patients with suspected dermatomyositis but who lack the characteristic skin findings. Similarly, patients who have the characteristic skin manifestations of dermatomyositis but lack muscle weakness should undergo a skin biopsy procedure.

**Other Investigations**

Other baseline lab investigations include a complete blood count with differential, creatinine, liver function tests, and inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP). ESR in dermatomyositis is usually normal, or may only be mildly elevated. Serum Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) may be ordered to exclude hypothyroidism. Electrocardiography (ECG) may be ordered to look for conduction abnormalities that might be subclinical. Pulmonary function tests may be conducted to assess the severity of pulmonary involvement. Patients with interstitial lung disease show a restrictive defect on pulmonary function tests with reduced forced vital capacity (FVC), reduced total lung capacity (TLC), and diminished diffusing capacity. Patients with respiratory muscle weakness will also show a restrictive pattern, but they may have normal diffusing capacity.

**Investigations for Malignancy**

Patients with dermatomyositis are at the highest risk of having an underlying malignancy during the first five years of diagnosis. Therefore, all patients should undergo age and sex appropriate cancer screening at diagnosis regardless of whether or not, and they have specific symptoms. Initial testing for malignancy may include colonoscopy (or fecal occult blood test), urine analysis, mammography, and pap smears. Women at high risk of ovarian cancer should be screened, with serial measurements of CA-125 and transvaginal ultrasound. There is no consensus on the frequency and how extensively patients with dermatomyositis should undergo cancer screening. Earlier studies recommend against extensive evaluation for malignancy apart from history, physical exam, and basic lab tests.

**Classification Criteria**

Historically, several classification criteria have been used to identify idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, including dermatomyositis. These classifications systems include the Bohan and Peter classification (1975), Targoff criteria (1997), and the Dalakas and Hohlfeld's criteria (2003). However, most of these classification systems suffer from limitations ranging from a vague description of skin findings, unclear exclusion criteria, failure to incorporate the presence of autoantibodies as a criterion, and failure to include all subgroups of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies.

In 2017, the European League Against Rheumatism and the American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR)  released a set of criteria to help identify idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and its major subgroups. This new classification system overcomes many of the limitations of the previous classification systems. The EULAR/ACR criteria for idiopathic inflammatory myopathies have been found to have a sensitivity of 87% (93% with muscle biopsy) and specificity of 82% (88% with muscle biopsy). According to this classification, a combination of clinical, lab, and muscle biopsy criteria are used to calculate the probability of having idiopathic inflammatory myopathies.

Clinical criteria include the age at onset of symptoms, the pattern of muscle weakness (proximal, progressive, symmetric muscle weakness involving upper limbs/lower limbs, selective involvement of neck flexors), presence of skin manifestations (heliotrope rash, Gottron papules, Gottron sign) and other findings (esophageal dysmotility, dysphagia). Lab criteria include the presence of anti–Jo-1 (anti–histidyl–transfer RNA synthetase) and elevation of muscle enzymes (creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, aspartate transaminase, alanine aminotransferase).

A probability of 55% or more is considered the threshold for the diagnosis of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy. Patients are further classified as having "**possible"** "**probable**" or "**definite**" idiopathic inflammatory myopathy if the probabilities are 50% to less than 55%, 55% to 75% (including muscle biopsy findings), and greater than 90%, respectively. Once the minimum criteria for the diagnosis of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy are met, subtypes such as dermatomyositis can be identified using a sub-classification tree.