Patients with congenital iris ectropion may present in infancy, childhood, or adolescence. Usually, there is no genetic predisposition. It is typically unilateral.

Slit-lamp biomicroscopy shows unilateral (rarely bilateral) pigmentation on the anterior iris surface. The extent of pigmentation varies. In CEU, the pigmentation nearly terminates with a scalloped border and does not reach the angle. The rest of the iris has a glassy and cryptless appearance without radial folds and concentric furrows. A variable degree of hypoplasia of the iris stroma is usually noted. The ectropion uveae may involve all around the pupil or maybe sectoral. Distortion of the round shape of the pupil may be noted in sectoral involvement with iris ectropion. The pupil may be round or oval. The pupil may not be in the center of the iris (corectopia). The size of the pupil may be normal or more significant than the fellow eye.

The pupil may be normally reactive to light or, in some cases, less reactive to light. The cornea is nearly always transparent. Mild ipsilateral ptosis, mild proptosis, and prominent corneal nerves may be noted. The ptosis is usually related to dysfunction of the Müller's muscle which originates from the neural crest cells.

Systemic associations include neurofibromatosis type 1 and Prader Willi syndrome.

Gonioscopy shows anterior iris insertion, prominent iris processes, prominent Schwalbe line, pigmentation at the angle, and poorly developed trabecular meshwork. Fundus evaluation may show normal optic discs or varying stages of optic nerve damage due to glaucoma.

Fine iris new vessels, angle neovascularization, and raised intraocular pressure due to neovascular glaucoma may be seen in acquired ectropion. Gonioscopy may show new vessels in the angle of the anterior chamber. In early cases, a magnified examination of the pupillary border is necessary to identify fine tufts of new vessels which usually respond to therapy. The cornea may be clear or show epithelial edema due to raised intraocular pressure. The slit-lamp examination also reveals the cause of ectropion uveae, including inflammation. Fundus evaluation will show the pathology that led to the formation of new vessels, including venous occlusions, proliferative diabetic retinopathy, long-standing retinal detachment, and arterial occlusions. Severe ocular inflammation can also cause NVI.