History includes determining any precipitating factors that may lead to inflammation or edema of the mucosal surfaces, leading to reduced patency of the Eustachian tube, including gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, rhinosinusitis, Samter’s triad, allergies, and recent upper respiratory tract infections. A history of adenoidectomy is a risk factor, and it is important to establish a family history of Eustachian tube dysfunction or diseases of reduced mucociliary clearance, e.g., Kartagener syndrome and cystic fibrosis. Down syndrome and cleft palate disorders have an association with ETD.

Irritants that lead to inflammation include exposure to cigarette smoking and environmental allergens. Has the patient participated in activities such as diving or hiking at high altitudes? Ensure that the use of intranasal medication, including oxymetazoline and corticosteroids, is explored.

The examination involves a head and neck examination, with otoscopy required to visualize for tympanic membrane retractions and evidence of negative middle ear pressures. Occasionally, hemotympanum is present in baro-challenge-induced ETD.

Visualize the oropharynx and perform anterior rhinoscopy. Flexible nasoendoscopy (FNE) should be included to directly examine the nasal mucosa for signs of inflammation or edema and the larynx for evidence of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. FNE provides access to the postnasal space, including a view of the contralateral nasopharyngeal orifice of the Eustachian tube. The valve mucosa is S-shaped when closed at resting state and becomes rounded when dilated. Dilation should occur with swallowing.