The disease of human trafficking may find its etiology in a multitude of contributing factors that make a person susceptible to a trafficking situation.

**Adverse Childhood Experiences**

Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACES) can increase the likelihood of risk-taking behavior that could predispose a person to a trafficking situation. A better understanding of how a high ACE score can potentiate a trafficker's hold on a victim is best explored through research. The CDC-Kaiser Permanente Adverse Childhood Experiences study was a massive study, which began in 1995 and concluded in 1997, that investigated the ramifications of child abuse and neglect on health and well-being later in life.

According to the ACE Pyramid, neurodevelopment is disrupted or stunted following an adverse childhood experience. Social, emotional, and cognitive impairments can result in high-risk behaviors that negatively impact overall health. Disease, disability, and social problems ensue, cascading to an early death. Therefore, a correlation exists between a higher ACE score and an increased risk of poor physical and mental health due to poor choices, risky behaviors, and social issues.

An ACE questionnaire asks difficult, emotion-provoking questions about growing up during the first 18 years of life. Questions are related to physical, emotional, and sexual abuse and the frequency of such insults. The suicide of a family member, drug addiction, and mental health issues play roles in score calculation. ACE scores range from zero to 10, with zero representing no exposure.

According to a Florida study conducted between 2009 and 2015, trafficking abuse reports were highest among children with an ACE score of six or higher. Children with a sexual abuse history in connection with a higher ACE score had an increased chance of exploitation by traffickers. According to a 2017 study, sexual abuse was the most reliable predictor of a person's exploitation by traffickers.

**Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Questioning (LGBTQ) Population**

A critical distinction among the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ) population was revealed by the 2012 North Carolina, 2011 Washington, and 2011 and 2012 Wisconsin Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) surveys. Lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) individuals had higher ACE scores than their heterosexual counterparts. In this 2016 study, Austin, Herrick, and Proescholdbell concluded that the higher prevalence of ACES among LGB individuals might account for some of the increased risks for poor adult health outcomes, poor choices, and heightened risk of being trafficked.

The transgender community may seek expensive hormone therapy and resort to "survival sex." This vulnerable position of needing money to buy hormone therapy from black-market suppliers at inflated prices with exorbitant interest rates can increase the chances of being lured into trafficking. Transgender youths may have additional vulnerabilities that heighten their risk of being trafficked, such as homelessness, addiction, depression, lack of financial or emotional support from family, being victims of intimate partner violence, and a history of sexual abuse as a child. Transgender individuals with HIV are also vulnerable to being trafficked if they struggle to meet their basic needs of food and shelter.

The National Center for Transgender Equality (NCTE) conducted a 2015 US Transgender Survey and found that 5% of all participants had engaged in sex work for income in the past year. Fifty-five percent of those who had resorted to survival sex in the past year were transgender women. Approximately 19% had participated in "survival sex" for money, food, sleeping quarters, or other goods or services. According to one study, those who had engaged in sex for money were more likely to have experienced some form of intimate partner violence or sexual assault. Debt bondage places an invisible chain that binds a victim to a "Romeo" or "guerilla" pimp. The invisible chain tightens with unmet quotas and may become a physical one.

Further resources provided by the Polaris Project address the risks of being trafficked within the LGBTQ community and are available on their website.

**Trafficking Risk Factors and Vulnerability**

Sexual abuse puts an individual at risk for substance abuse, mental health issues, and a lack of social norms, belonging, or a sense of family. Vulnerability and feelings of distrust towards authority figures take the place of security. Often those who are supposed to protect an individual are the initial perpetrators of the insult or crime. "Forgotten," "invisible," "different," "broken," and "discarded" are all words used to describe the feelings of victims of human trafficking. Traffickers prey upon this vulnerability, use it to their advantage, and strategically place themselves nearby. Often seen as a rescuer who offers a chance at a better life, security, or a remote possibility that better days are ahead, a trafficker is a profiler, trolling for victims to turn a profit.

Traffickers do not discriminate based on gender, race, social demographic, immigration status, or economic status. No exact mold fits a victim. Anyone is at risk, but specific populations have a higher vulnerability risk. The US Department of Health Office on Trafficking in Persons provided a fact sheet in 2017 to further highlight at-risk groups, such as survivors of child abuse, sexual abuse, assault, interpersonal or intimate partner violence, gang violence, or community-violence exposure.

The SOAR Campaign further delineates at-risk, vulnerable individuals as those lacking a stable support structure or home life, such as a runaway, a foster child, a child in the juvenile justice system, a homeless youth, an unaccompanied minor, a person displaced due to a natural disaster, or an individual with a language or cultural barrier. Increased risk also involves those with substance abuse problems, undocumented or migrant workers, and the LGBTQ population. Minorities, those with disabilities, and those on Native American reservations can be at a higher risk of being trafficked.

The US Department of Education published a fact sheet for schools entitled "Human Trafficking of Children in the United States" that discussed the vulnerability of school-age children and human trafficking incidence. In identified child-trafficking cases, children commonly were involved in stripping acts, pornography, forced begging, commercial sex, and drug sales. Children at most significant risk were identified as working in restaurants, in hair and nail salons, as nannies or au pairs, or in agricultural settings. Signs of child trafficking include unexplained absences, poor attendance, runaway behavior, boasting about frequent travel to other cities, inappropriate dress for the current weather, being sleep-deprived or malnourished, or impairment due to drugs or alcohol.

Lack of a stable support structure and social media accessibility may put a child at risk of being targeted for sexual exploitation. Social media websites, classified advertisement sites, chat rooms, and after-school programs are potential venues for youth exploitation. School hallways pose a risk, as a trafficker may be another student. A trafficker may promise a "happening" party or a good time to entrap an unsuspecting, troubled, or bored youth.

Educational campaigns, such as the Blue Campaign created by the US Department of Homeland Security, offer much-needed insight into the identification and treatment of victims of human trafficking. The Blue Campaign by the Department of Homeland Security offers sex trafficking awareness videos to educate youth on the risks of being trafficked in familiar places such as schools, coffee shops, malls, sporting venues, and other hangouts.