Initial treatment is usually conservative, non-operative medical management. Management in the acute setting includes fluid resuscitation, electrolyte correction, total parenteral nutrition and nasogastric tube insertion for gastric decompression. The patient is encouraged to eat small meals and engage in posture therapy which involves patients lying in the left lateral decubitus position, rather than recombinant, to improve symptoms. Nutritional support through hyperalimentation is of great importance with conservative therapy in an attempt to increase the mesenteric fat pad, thus increasing the AO angle and improving symptoms. Many patients will fail conservative therapy and ultimately require surgical intervention.  Various surgical procedures have been considered for surgical management including gastrojejunostomy, Strong procedure (a division of the ligament of Treitz), transabdominal duodenojejunostomy and laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy. Traditional open bypass surgery was the standard of care until 1998 when the first successful laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy was performed**.**This technique has since surpassed open bypass as the most common surgical treatment. Laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy has recently replaced open bypass at the standard operative treatment. A study involving laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy as a treatment for failed conservative management was done on 12 patients. This retrospective study revealed improved or eliminated symptoms in 11 of the 12 patients without any postoperative bowel obstruction, wound infection, anastomotic complications or deaths. Most surgeons prefer duodenojejunostomy due to reported success rates of 80% to 100% with reduced postoperative pain shortened hospital stay and reduced risk of incisional herniation.