Classic symptoms of asthma include cough, wheezing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath. Symptoms are often episodic and can become triggered by numerous factors, including upper respiratory tract infections, exercise, exposure to allergens, and airway irritants such as tobacco smoke. They may also be worse at night.

As previously discussed, there exists a classic triad of asthma, eczema, and allergies, and it is worthwhile to elicit a personal or family history of these components as young children may not have a formal diagnosis. In children, the diagnosis of RAD (reactive airway disease) or recurrent WARIs (wheezing associated respiratory infections) often precede a formal diagnosis of asthma.

During acute exacerbations, children may also have significantly increased work of breathing or audible wheezing, which may be appreciated by caregivers and prompt presentation for further evaluation. Information to ascertain during these acute visits include:

- What interventions have taken place before arrival, e.g., nebulizer treatments or rescue inhaler use

- If the child has been taking other asthma medications as prescribed,

- If the child has ever been hospitalized for asthma

- If critical care admission was required
- If the child has ever needed intubation

- If the child has taken oral steroids for asthma exacerbations and if so, when

**Physical Examination**

The physical examination should focus on three main areas, which will help to develop your differential diagnosis and identify co-morbid conditions.  These are general appearance, including state of nutrition and body habitus, signs of allergic disease, and signs of respiratory dysfunction.

The physical examination may be completely normal, especially in a child with well-controlled asthma who does not have an acute exacerbation. Children may have increased nasal secretion, mucosal swelling, or nasal polyps, consistent with allergic rhinitis. The skin exam may reveal atopic dermatitis.

Cough, prolonged expiratory phase, and wheezing, which may be expiratory or inspiratory, are common respiratory exam findings in asthmatic children with acute exacerbation. Children may experience varying degrees of tachypnea and dyspnea. There may also be signs of increased work of breathing (“belly breathing,” use of accessory muscles, including subcostal, intercostal, or supraclavicular retractions, nasal flaring), tripod positioning, inability to speak in full sentences, or grunting. Of note, a child who was previously noted to have significantly increased work of breathing by caregivers, but who has now “tired out,” appears to be breathing at a normal rate, or who becomes lethargic, may have impending respiratory failure.

In a child with significant airway obstruction, there may come a point at which wheezing may no longer be present. This absence of wheezing indicates that the child is moving a minimal volume of air. A child who develops altered mental status, appears truly lethargic, becomes unresponsive, is cyanotic, or has a “silent chest” has signs of impending respiratory failure and may rapidly decompensate to respiratory arrest.

Features such as digital clubbing, barrel chest, localized wheezing, urticarial rash, or stridor may suggest other diagnoses or comorbid conditions.