The main categories of diseases that must be considered in the differential diagnosis of A-T are as follows:

**Recessive Forms of Ataxia**

These disorders usually present at an early age, and no other family members are affected. Autosomal recessive disorders are more common in cases of consanguinity in the family. The list of autosomal recessive ataxia is very long, and the incidence of these disorders can vary in different populations. Among autosomal recessive ataxia, Friedreich’s ataxia can be easily misdiagnosed as A-T since both can present with early-onset cerebellar ataxia, polyneuropathy, and systemic involvement. The other autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias can be grouped into metabolic disorders (such as abetalipoproteinemia, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, Refsum disease), congenital ataxias like Joubert syndrome, degenerative disease such as Charlevoix-Saguenay spastic ataxia, mitochondrial disorders like myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF), NARP syndrome (neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa), sensory ataxic neuropathy with dysarthria and ophthalmoplegia (SANDO), infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA), and Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome.

**Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia**

Oculomotor apraxia is a distinctive sign of A-T. However, there are other disorders where this can be found. Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia types 1 and 2 (AOA1 and AOA2) are autosomal recessive ataxias characterized by an early age of onset. The systemic symptoms which are commonly found in patients with A-T are not characteristically seen in these other forms.

**Ataxia-Telangiectasia-Like Disorders (ATLD)**

The disorders due to the mutations of the MRE11 gene and the NBS1 genes, associated with the ATDL1 and the Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), should always be considered when assessing the diagnosis of an early onset progressive ataxia and/or the concomitant presence of immunological deficit, tumorigenesis and growth failure. However, both of these disorders lack the typical telangiectasias.