**Light Microscopy**

Transport of the portion of the biopsy bound for light microscopy can be in standard buffered formalin solution at room temperature. The tissue should be wrapped in lens paper to prevent loss during processing. Using net bags or sponges introduces artifacts that will interfere with interpretation and should be avoided if possible. After fixation, the tissue will be embedded in paraffin. Sectioning should be done with 2 to 4 micrometers serial sections with multiple sections per slide. Each institution tends to have its standardized practice for how many slides are initially created and which stains are initially performed. Standard stains include hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), periodic acid-Schiff, a silver stain, and trichrome stains.

**Immunofluorescent Microscopy**

Immunofluorescent protocols generally call for tissue to be frozen rather than fixed. Fixation of tissue does not completely eliminate the possibility of performing immunofluorescence; however, it is not as ideal. Cross-linking fixatives, such as formalin and glutaraldehyde, are excellent at preserving morphologic integrity but may cross-link target antigens and introduce too much background autofluorescence. If the biopsy is being performed near the lab doing the procedure, then the tissue can be transported in regular saline. If the sample needs to travel further, then a medium such as Michel medium is preferred.  Sectioning can occur on a cryostat with 2 to 4 μM sections. Again, the standard workup is institution-dependent; however, routine examination typically includes IgG, IgM, IgA, complement proteins (C3, C1q, C4), fibrin, and kappa/gamma light chains along with appropriate controls.