The management of HELLP syndrome, a disorder of pregnancy, requires input from multiple specialties in addition to an obstetrician. Acute complications and supportive management, including blood pressure control, management of pulmonary edema, and monitoring volume status, can be managed by a hospitalist. Acute respiratory failure needing ventilator support and shock needing pressors may be comanaged by a hospitalist and an Intensivist. If the patient needs a large volume of blood products, it would be in the patient's best interest to have hematology involved in the care. A nephrologist may be involved if the patient develops acute kidney injury. Hepatology and surgical team involvement is needed if the patient develops complications like liver hematoma or rupture. Ophthalmologist input may be necessary if the patient develops any vision changes. A neonatologist may be involved early to avoid any neonatal complications.

Managing HELLP syndrome also requires interprofessional team management. In addition to the clinicians above (which includes physicians as well as mid-level practitioners, i.e., NPs, and PAs), nursing staff and pharmacists can make significant contributions to patient care. Nursing will provide support for evaluation and surgical interventions, and the pharmacist a perform medication reconciliation for medications needed as part of treatment or post-surgically. All interprofessional team members must alter the rest of the team if there are any changes in clinical status and document their findings in the patient's health record. This interprofessional team approach will help drive positive patient outcomes in managing HELLP syndrome. [Level 5]