The workup is usually to differentiate acute tubular necrosis from prerenal AKI and other causes of AKI. Major tests that help to differentiate include urinalysis (UA), response to fluid repletion, urinary sodium concentration, fractional excretion of sodium (FENa), and fractional excretion of urea in patients who get diuretics and novel biomarkers.

**Urinalysis (UA)**

In prerenal disease, the UA microscopy is normal or may contain hyaline casts. On the other hand, the UA of acute tubular necrosis shows muddy brown casts or renal tubular epithelial cells secondary to the sloughing of tubular cells into the lumen due to ischemia or toxic injury.

**Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa)**

This is a good test to differentiate between acute tubular necrosis and prerenal disease, with a value less than 1% favoring prerenal disease and more than 2% acute tubular necrosis. However, these values are not always accurate as in chronic prerenal states such as congestive heart failure and cirrhosis in which there is an overlap between both (ATN and prerenal AKI) having a value of less than 1%.

**Urine sodium concentration**

This test determines that the kidney is sodium avid in hypovolemic states (prerenal) where kidneys try to conserve sodium or lose sodium due to tubular injury with values more than 40 to 50 mEq/L indicating acute tubular necrosis and less than 20 mEq/L suggestive of prerenal disease.

**Novel Biomarkers**

Numerous biomarkers have evolved to detect AKI/acute tubular necrosis early as compared to serum creatinine. These biomarkers include serum cystatin C to be an early and reliable marker of renal injury as compared to serum creatinine which is often witnessed 48 to 72 hours after the initial insult. Other markers include urinary alpha one microglobulin, beta-2 microglobulin, urinary liver-type fatty acid-binding protein (L-FABP), and kidney injury molecule 1 (KIM-1) for the detection of proximal tubular damage, urinary interleukin-18 (IL-18) is known to differentiate ATN from CKD, urinary tract infection (UTI), and prerenal azotemia. Urinary biomarker neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is upregulated in renal ischemia after distal tubular injury.