Type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease are some of the leading causes of mortality in the United States and globally. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is impaired insulin secretion, leading to increased blood glucose

One of the most influential studies completed regarding type 2 diabetes prevention with the prevention strategy of weight loss was the United States Diabetes Prevention Study (DPS), which randomly assigned over 3,000 overweight adults with impaired glucose tolerance to groups to either receive placebo, metformin or join the lifestyle interventional group.

It was found that with a lifestyle intervention of a low-calorie and low-fat diet and moderate-intensity exercise for 150 minutes each week, patients in the lifestyle intervention group demonstrated a 67% reduction in the risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. This study showed that patients could participate in prevention methods, significantly reducing their risk.

Clinicians are responsible for informing their patients about their risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus as well as prevention methods and how these methods would impact their long-term health. Other health professionals, especially nurses, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants, are responsible for sharing this information and working with patients on these lifestyle changes.

Coronary artery disease is a co-morbid condition that poses life-threatening consequences of disease sequelae, and like type 2 diabetes mellitus, It is a condition that can be managed with prevention methods. Specifically, the Lyon Diet Heart Study demonstrated that patients who have experienced a myocardial infarction in the past had a 70% reduction in risk after starting the Mediterranean diet.

Thus prevention strategies involving diet changes should be communicated to patients at higher risk of developing this co-morbidity. Physicians should be educated in the physiology behind preventative methods to recommend the best patient strategies. Other health professionals should also be aware of these so they can educate and provide the best care for patients.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease are associated with some of the highest mortalities. However, preventative strategies have been extensively studied and have demonstrated significant risk reductions in these conditions. Health professionals should be well informed regarding the benefits of these prevention methods to improve patient outcomes.