Patients with suspected non-IPF should undergo laboratory and radiographic testing. In some cases, it may be necessary to perform a biopsy. Testing is tailored to the patient’s history and physical findings.

Initial laboratory testing should include a complete blood count with differential, electrolytes, serum urea, creatinine, and liver function tests. If the history and exam raise suspicion for an autoimmune process (e.g., arthritis, fever, fatigue, weight loss), serological testing may be indicated. Serologic testing often includes rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), and extractable nuclear antigens (ENA). Further testing for anticardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant may be done if the ANA is elevated.

Other laboratory tests may include creatine kinase, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, c-reactive protein, tuberculin testing, and calcium levels. In patients with sarcoidosis, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme may be elevated. However, the test has low sensitivity and poor specificity and is not routinely used in the diagnostic workup. IgE levels and an antibody panel specific to a variety of known antigens may be measured when suspecting hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Imaging studies are key in evaluating and diagnosing non-IPF. It may be normal in the earlier stages of the disease. Abnormal findings may include low lung volumes, reticular and nodular opacities, and hilar lymph node prominence. The findings and patterns of distribution seen on chest x-ray may help narrow the etiology of non-IPF (e.g., mediastinal or hilar lymphadenopathy in sarcoidosis).

High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) has an important role in confirming ILD. The specificity of HRCT is dependent on the etiology of the disease. Patterns on HRCT, along with the clinical history, can often make the diagnosis and assist in staging. Common findings may include reticular opacities, centrilobular or perilymphatic nodules, ground-glass appearance, consolidation, and honeycombing. Honeycombing is a nonspecific late finding and appears as small cystic airspaces within areas of fibrosis. It develops over months to years and is associated with advanced disease.

In cases where the diagnosis remains unclear, further testing may include bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB), and surgical lung biopsy. BAL may be useful if there is suspicion of malignancy or infection. Cell patterns on BAL samples may also help identify the etiology of non-IPF and exclude other causes. TBLB may be diagnostic in certain conditions as sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, malignancy, infections, alveolar proteinosis, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Surgical lung biopsies can be done via video-assisted thoracoscopy or as an open biopsy. Surgical biopsies provide a larger specimen without artifacts compared to TBLB. TBLB and surgical lung biopsies are often not required and are used to increase diagnostic confidence in cases where additional information will influence management.

Pulmonary function testing (PFT) should be obtained in all patients. PFTs are essential in the evaluation and diagnosis of non-IPF and are often used to assess disease severity and monitor disease progression. A complete PFT should include spirometry, body plethysmography, DLCO along with resting and ambulatory pulse oximetry. Patients with non-IPF typically have a restrictive pattern and a decrease in DLCO. The frequency of testing varies; however, it’s most often completed annually.