**Testing for Retinal Aniseikonia**

- Amsler Grid. This test helps to detect barrel and pincushion distortion and evidence of dragging or other types of distortion of the macula. This test measures distortion in the central 20 degrees of the macula. There are several types of Amsler grid tests. The most common consists of a square grid of black lines on a white background with a black dot in the center. Variations on this grid are white lines on a black background, 1 degree versus 1/2 a degree per square in the grid, and the presence of diagonal lines from the corner of the grid toward the center. Some grids only have horizontal lines or just dots.

- Other testing methods for metamorphopsia include an experimental 3D digital device, the M-chart (Inami Co., Tokyo, Japan), which allows quantification of the amount of metamorphopsia, and the Preferential Hyperacuity Perimeter that tests the central 14 degrees of the macula.

- Direct assessment of the retina through a dilated fundus exam is often supplemented with ancillary tests such as optical coherence tomography of the macula. It is central to the diagnosis and correct treatment of underlying retinal pathology.

**Testing for Optical Aniseikonia**

- In practice, the most common method to estimate aniseikonia is by calculating the difference in spectacle magnification between the two eyes. The formula for spectacle magnification (SM) for a thin lens is SM = 1/(1-dFsp). d is the distance in meters from the spectacle lens to the entrance pupil.

- The distance from the spectacle lens to the apex of the cornea (called vertex distance) can be measured with a distometer. This distance is generally close to 12 mm (0.012 m).

- The distance from the apex of the cornea to the entrance pupil is assumed to be an additional 3 mm (0.003 m). Therefore, d is usually close to 15 mm (0.015 m).

- Fsp is the power of the lens in diopters.

- If we apply this formula for a plus 1 diopter lens positioned at a vertex distance of 12 mm, the formula allows us to calculate a 1.5% magnification. In contrast, a minus 1 diopter lens positioned at the same distance will create 1.5% minification.

- Clinicians often employ a rule of thumb that 1 diopter of anisometropia generates about a 1 to 2% difference in image size.

- Online calculators are available to clinicians to make these calculations quickly and easily.

- Corneal topography or, when unavailable, manual keratometry can be used to test for corneal steepening or flattening as the cause of anisometropia.

**Optical and Retinal Aniseikonia Tests**

- A relatively simple test compares the size of diplopic images. In this test, the patient is made to see double with a horizontal or vertical dissociating prism. The width or height of the image can then be compared. Different size lenses are then held in front of one of the eyes until the perceived size of the two images is equal. A size lens creates a certain percent magnification. Size lenses are not commercially available but can be manufactured. Different percentages of magnification of size lenses are achieved by creating a lens that acts as a small afocal telescope. The telescope will magnify in one orientation and minify when it is flipped over.

- Size comparison of images observed by each eye can also be made during the alternating cover test. Instead of creating diplopia with a prism, the perceived size is compared during the alternating cover test. Size-lenses are then used to magnify the smaller appearing image to be equal in size to the image that initially appeared larger.

- The Turville test evaluates aniseikonia in the vertical meridian. Using a device developed by Morgan, in which the two eyes are dissociated, each eye sees two horizontal lines separated by a vertical line. An unequal distance between the horizontal lines on each side indicates aniseikonia. Size-lenses can, again, be used to make the lines an equal distance apart in each eye.

- Testing for aniseikonia can be done with a Maddox rod and two light sources. This test also called the Brecher test, employs a Maddox rod placed over one eye to dissociate the two eyes. Dissociation can be done with a Maddox rod placed over each eye as well. This is called the Miles test. The two lights are separated horizontally or vertically to measure horizontal or vertical aniseikonia, respectively. Size lenses can then be used to eliminate a difference in the separation of the lights.

- The Robertson Technique employs a Maddox rod placed over one eye and a light source that is moved away so that the observer's visual axis does not pass through the optical center of the spectacle lenses. When anisometropia causes optical aniseikonia, Prentice's rule predicts a larger displacement of the image falling through the higher plus lens. This displacement can then be neutralized with a prism. The amount of prism required to neutralize the image displacement is then converted to an aniseikonia percentage. Since the observed image is moved away from the optical center, this test evaluates dynamic aniseikonia and not static aniseikonia, as is the case when a non-moving image is evaluated by the observer.

- The (Awaya) New Aniseikonia Test (Good-Lite Company, Tokyo, Japan) uses red-green glasses to dissociate the two eyes and a booklet with red and green half-circles of different relative sizes. The observer finds the image where the half circles appear to be the same size. If, in reality, the half-circles are a different size, a diagnosis of aniseikonia is made. The amount of aniseikonia can be determined from this test as well.

- An auto-stereoscopic smartphone was programmed to display half moon images similar to those in the New Aniseikonia Test. The auto-stereoscopic effect allows dissociation of the two eyes. In the test, the size of the two half-moon images is compared until they are deemed equal in size. The percentage of the actual size difference between the two half-moon images is the amount of aniseikonia present.

- The Aniseikonia Inspector version 3 (Optical Diagnostics, Culemborg, The Netherlands) employs red-green glasses to dissociate the eyes and displays a red and green line on a computer screen. The lines can be oriented vertically, horizontally, and diagonally and the program allows the observer to match the apparent length of the two lines. The adjustment of the lines is done twice, with at the start of the test, one line displayed as 25% smaller and the second time as 25% larger. The average result of the two tests is used to determine the level of aniseikonia. One advantage of this test is the large range of aniseikonia it allows to be tested.

- The space eikonometer is a very accurate test and is considered the gold standard for measuring aniseikonia. It requires single binocular vision with visual acuity of 20/60 or better and the ability to perform a relatively complex task of aligning four images of lines to be at an equal distance around a central target. The device was developed and sold by American Optical in 1951 and is no longer in production. This device can measure up to 5% of aniseikonia. It was developed by Adelbert Ames in the 1940s and, for this reason, is also called the Ames eikonometer.

- The Contrast-balanced Aniseikonia Test is useful for patients with anisometropic aniseikonia that have suppression and amblyopia as well. The intensity or brightness of the image presented to the amblyopic or suppressed eye can be increased to allow for a better comparison of the perceived size of the two images.