WHO projects the global prevalence of COPD to be about 250 million, with about 3 million deaths each year. Unfortunately, this figure is expected to rise in the coming years, equating to a substantial socio-economic impact. Therefore, while research for the definitive treatment of COPD continues, it is imperative to divert attention to therapies that could improve the lifestyle and reduce acute exacerbations, hospital stay, and mortality in such patients. This area is where mucolytics show immense potential.

A well-coordinated interprofessional team of pulmonologists, physiotherapists, family clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nurses, and pharmacists is required to work together to manage a case of COPD. First of all, the patient must be counseled regarding the importance of lifestyle modifications. The physician must instruct the patient thoroughly regarding the benefit of the prescribed drugs, the correct dose, the expected adverse reactions, and teaching them the proper procedure for using a nebulizer. This approach will help maximize patient compliance. Patients must also receive education about the importance of regular follow-up visits. A crucial role is also played by clinical psychologists, support groups, and de-addiction centers, as this will help delay the disease progression in patients who smoke. This interprofessional approach to care with mucolytics in patients where appropriate can drive improved outcomes with fewer adverse events. [Level 5]

In the last 30 years, great strides have occurred in the management of cystic fibrosis. Today, the median survival age of a patient is almost 40 years. This can, in part, be credited to the advancement in therapies like mucolytics. This effort can be furthered by utilizing a well-organized interprofessional team in its management. Although mucolytics prescribed by a physician are an important part of this, the role of nurses, chest physiotherapists, dieticians, and child psychiatrists is also important.

Although the effectiveness of mucolytics has been challenged in recent times, the evidence presented by large-scale studies conducted for N-acetylcysteine [Level 2], dornase alfa [Level 1], carbocisteine [Level 1], and erdosteine [Level 2] cannot be ignored.