Injuries to the penis from zipper entrapment are actually the most common cause of penile trauma in adults, with roughly 2,000 reported cases yearly. When they occur, the individual often presents to the emergency department with the prepuce caught in the zipper after unsuccessfully trying home management. It will often present with swelling, pain, bruising, and edema related to the injury. Adult patients are often extremely reluctant to come to the hospital for this type of problem due to extreme embarrassment, which can cause delays in presentation and treatment. The majority of affected patients are children.

Zippers were first patented about 100 years ago by Gideon Sundback, a Swedish-American engineer, as an improved clasp locker. At the time of its development, Sundback reportedly had some reservations about "possible genital mishaps." In 1923, B. F. Goodrich was the first company to use the new fastener commercially on their rubber galoshes. It was originally called a "separable fastener" but was soon given the catchy name of "zipper."

Penile rings are intended to improve and maintain erections and are typically used for erotic or auto-erotic purposes. Various types of constricting bands and the injuries they can produce have been reported, but Gauthier described the first case of penile strangulation from such a ring in 1755. It can become quite serious when a ring becomes trapped either at the base of the penis or behind the penoscrotal junction. Such events, called penile ring entrapments, are quite rare. When distal venous engorgement and edema prevent their removal, the penis can progressively become quite swollen, ischemic, and painful. Left untreated, this can progress to ischemia, infarction, necrosis, and even gangrene. For these reasons, penile ring entrapments are considered urological emergencies and must be dealt with promptly.