Celecoxib is a medication taken orally and comes in 50, 100, 200, and 400 mg doses. In rare cases, celecoxib can also be added to customized compounds for topical administration with or without the use of iontophoresis or other topical delivery mechanisms. It is not available via any other route of administration.

Dosing for approved indications is as follows:

**Osteoarthritis:**200 mg orally daily, or alternatively, 100 mg twice daily.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis:**100 to 200 mg by mouth twice daily, using the lowest effective dose.

**Ankylosing Spondylitis:**200 mg by mouth daily. Dosing can increase to 400 mg. Always use the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible treatment duration. Prescribers should consider discontinuing the drug if there is no response at the highest dose after six weeks.

**Dysmenorrhea:**200 mg by mouth twice daily. Dosing can increase to 400 mg. Always use the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible treatment duration. Prescribers should consider discontinuing the drug if there is no response at the highest dose after six weeks.

**Acute Pain:**200 mg orally twice daily; patients can start with 400 mg for a single dose on day one of therapy, with an additional 200 mg on the first day if necessary.

All doses should be given with food if GI upset occurs. In patients who are poor CYP2C9 metabolizers, consider starting at 50% of the lowest dose. Avoid use in renal impairment of creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/s. Also, avoid use in hepatic insufficiency if the patient isChild-Pugh Class C.