Patient optimization and preparation for hepatobiliary scintigraphy depends on the specific clinical question asked. For example, the preparation for the evaluation of cholecystitis is different than preparation for a biliary leak, which is different from the preparation for assessment of biliary atresia.

**Acute Cholecystitis:**

Patients must be fasting for at least 4 to 6 hours before radiotracer injection. Fat in food stimulates the secretion of endogenous cholecystokinin (CCK) by the duodenum, which causes gallbladder contraction and artificially absent filling of the gallbladder on the scan. Fasting for 4 to 6 hours generally allows for the complete passage of ingested contents, cessation of duodenal CCK secretion, and relaxation of the gallbladder.

On the other hand, fasting for more than 24 hours allows gallbladder time to resorb water from bile (a normal physiological process) which thickens the bile and often prevents radiotracer entry. This extended fast may lead to a false positive study (non-visualization of the gallbladder). In the fasting population, a cholecystokinin analog, sincalide, should be given prior to the study to contract and empty the bile content from the gallbladder. To accomplish this, intravenous sincalide is 0.02 micrograms/kilogram is administered over one hour. Tc-99m Mebrofenin should be injected at least 30 minutes after sincalide administration to allow adequate gallbladder relaxation.

As noted in the section on contraindications, opiates should be withheld for at least 6 hours if there is a concurrent concern for biliary obstruction.

**Chronic Biliary Disease:**

As with acute cholecystitis, patients must be fasting for at least 4 to 6 hours prior to radiotracer injection, but no greater than 24 hours (though not typically a concern in the non-acute setting).

As noted in the section on contraindications, opiates should be withheld for at least 6 hours since they may falsely depress the measured gallbladder ejection fraction. Other medications may also interfere with the gallbladder contraction, though are generally less of a concern.

**Biliary Leak:**

No special patient preparation is required to include no need to be fasting, avoid opiates or pretreat with CCK.

**Biliary Obstruction:**

As with cholecystitis, patients must be fasting for at least 4 to 6 hours prior to radiotracer injection, but no greater than 24 hours.

As noted in the section on contraindications, opiates should be withheld for at least 6 hours since they increase the tone at the ampulla of Vater and therefore delay the flow of radiolabeled bile from the CBD into the duodenum. This pseudoobstruction may mimic a true mechanical obstruction, resulting in a false-positive result.

**Biliary Atresia:**

Phenobarbital-enhanced cholescintigraphy is used to differentiate neonatal jaundice and biliary atresia. Phenobarbital is a medication which induces hepatic enzymatic activity, bilirubin conjugation, and excretion. Given that the HBS radiotracers follow the same pathway as bilirubin, this preparation step helps reduce the risk of a false-positive result related to hepatic immaturity. The recommended dosing regimen is 5 mg/kg/day given for five days prior to the scan.