For those patients that survive the initial dissection, the prognosis is usually good. Approximately 10% of patients die initially.

The goal of management is to prevent stroke, which is the complication of vertebral artery dissection. Management is done with anticoagulation, typically heparin. If there are no contraindications, then thrombolytic therapy can be started as long as the time is within 4.5 hours from the onset of symptoms.

In one clinical follow-up study, 80% achieved a full recovery. Death is typically secondary to extensive intracranial dissection, brainstem infarction, or subarachnoid hemorrhage. Most dissections will resolve over time with no neurological deficits. Be advised however that when the dissection is intracranial or extends intracranially, the risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage increases significantly and anticoagulation is contraindicated.

Admission is required for all patients with vertebral artery dissection. Close monitoring of neurological deficits is vital.

Today technological advances have permitted the use of endovascular therapies to manage vertebral artery dissection. However, the role of this therapy does remain controversial as most patients can be managed with anticoagulation therapy. In addition, most dissections do a repair on their own. Thus, endovascular therapy is best reserved for patients who are not candidates for thrombolytics and/or have a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Surgery in the form of bypass graft is rarely done and not always successful.

Secondary prevention strategies include reducing risk by targeting and modifying vascular risk factors. Aspirin is used as preventative therapy is aspirin for most etiologies. For atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation is recommended. Most stroke patients, including young adults, should be treated with statin therapy.