The close differentials that mimic meibomian gland disease include diseases that cause eyelid inflammation, conjunctival congestion, or dry eyes.

- **Staphylococcal anterior blepharitis**– This condition is characterized by hard deposits in the eyelashes, loss of eyelashes, and distorted lashes or trichiasis. There is often associated ulceration or notching of the lid margin. Other associated signs include dry eyes, punctate erosions, vascularisation, and infiltrates in the cornea. This is commonly associated with atopic dermatitis.

- **Seborrheic anterior blepharitis**– This is a condition characterized by soft deposits, with or without loss or distorted eyelashes. Other signs include dry eyes, punctate erosions, vascularisation, and infiltrates in the cornea. This is associated with seborrheic dermatitis.

- **Demodex blepharitis**– characterized by cylindrical dandruff-like scaling (collarettes) around the base of eyelashes.

- **Evaporative dry eyes**- present with irritation, burning or stinging sensation, fatigue, blurred vision, intolerance to bright light, and contact lenses. On examination, Schirmer's and TBUT scores are decreased along with decreased tear film height. Ocular study reveals corneal punctate epithelial erosions, positive conjunctival and corneal staining. Severe dry eyes can be associated with autoimmune diseases like Sjogren's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, or diabetes.

- **Conjunctivitis**– presents with redness, watering, lid edema, intolerance to light. Signs include diffuse congestion, follicles, papillae, matted eyelashes with or without corneal punctate epithelial erosions.

- **Cicatricial conjunctivitis**– Stevens-Johnson syndrome, mucous membrane pemphigoid.

- 
**Contact lens-related keratoconjunctivitis**

- **Keratitis**– neurotrophic, filamentary, interstitial, contact lens-related