The treatment of Amatoxin mushroom toxicity is predominately supportive care. There is no specific antidote. The patient must have two large bore IVs and fluid loss, electrolyte deficiency, and glucose should be normalized. If the patient presents early (within two to four hours,) decontamination with oral activated charcoal may be performed. Once the stomach is empty, nausea should be treated if needed.

Several agents have been used and have anecdotal support in the literature:

- **N-acetyl-cysteine:**Used intravenously (IV) as per acetaminophen poisoning to treat potential liver injury, and provide glutathione.

- **Penicillin:**High dose IV  (four million units every four hours) is thought to compete with the liver uptake of the amatoxin.

- **Silymarin:**Both the pharmaceutical form available in Europe as an intravenous formulation and the over the counter raw milk thistle extract used in North America have been used in a majority of cases in the literature. Its mechanism of action is felt to be an OAT-P transporter inhibitor that slows the entry of amatoxin into the liver. Doses are 1 gm orally four times daily, or its purified alkaloid silibinin intravenously  5 mg/kg IV over one hour, followed by 20 mg/kg/day as a constant infusion.

- **Activated charcoal:**May reduce absorption of amatoxins if given early after ingestion and may also prevent toxin readsorption hours later as amatoxins undergo enterohepatic recirculation. A dose of 1 g/kg may be given every 2 to 4 hours.

- **Cyclosporine:**Inhibitor of OAT-P transporter inin vitro studies

- A variety of other therapies, such as intravenous cimetidine or thioctic acid, have been tried but have only animal model support.

In selected cases, once a severe liver injury occurs, despite aggressive fluid resuscitation and supportive care, a liver transplant may be the only life-saving option. Rapid progression to hepatic encephalopathy, hepatorenal syndrome, or coagulopathy are indications for liver transplantation. Consideration to transfer to a liver transplant setting and intensive care unit care should be done early in the course of mushroom ingestions.

When renal failure occurs, dialysis should be used, but its use even early after an ingestion does not remove Amatoxin from the blood.