The visceral pleura receives its blood supply from bronchial circulation, while the parietal pleura receives its supplies from the intercostal arteries, making the 2 layers 2 distinct anatomic structures. The visceral part of the pleura does not have any sensory nerves; on the contrary,  the parietal part of the pleura has a rich network of sensory nerves making it very sensitive to painful stimuli. The pleural cavity aids in the mechanics of inspiration and expiration during breathing. Kampmeier's foci are a collection of lymphoreticular and mesothelial cells that acts as a “guard” by preventing the entry of undesirable substances from the pleural cavity into the media in the chest wall and mediastinum.

The pleural cavity also contains cells, some macrophages, red blood cells, and lymphocytes. The number of fluids and cells in the pleural space can change considerably in pathologic conditions.

Malignant pleural effusion occurs due to disrupted homeostatic forces that control the flow and fluid in and out of the pleural cavity. The pressure in the pleural cavity is determined by the opposing forces of the elastic recoil of the lung and the pressure from the chest wall. The pleural fluid is not in a state of hydrostatic equilibrium. This is because the vertical gradient of the pleural fluid pressure is not equal to the hydrostatic pressure. This helps to create a movement of fluids in the pleural cavity. Pulmonary and cardiac mechanics also controls the net movement of fluid in the pleural cavity. The fluid in the pleural cavity is ultrafiltrate from parietal pleura capillaries. The amount of fluid in the pleural cavity is regulated by a filtration rate that is matched by fluid outflow via the lymphatic stomata.

For the development of pleural effusion in malignancy, there must be:

- An increase in the production of pleural fluid secondary to increased hydrostatic pressure

- Decreased oncotic pressure or pleural pressure

- Increased the permeability of the microvasculature

The increased pleural fluid production must be such that the lymphatic clearance is impeded by decreased hydrostatic pressure or blockage of lymphatic drainage.

The major contributing factors in the malignant pleural effusion formation are angiogenesis and vascular remodeling.

Several in vivo studies report a potential association between the infiltration of macrophages and MPE development.

Accordingly, the IL-10, released upon phagocytosis of the apoptotic cell, is considered a valid diagnostic marker for MPE.

PEs osmolality depends on the underlying pathology and is affected by the PE pH and glucose. Hypo-osmotic PEs results in decreased pleural permeability.