Fluvastatin is available in 20 mg and 40 mg immediate-release capsules and 80 mg extended-release tablets. Fluvastatin's ability to block cholesterol synthesis in the liver is significant because circulating cholesterol is primarily derived from internal production rather than from diet. The fluvastatin capsule is a low-intensity statin because it lowers LDL cholesterol by less than 30%.

For adults with hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia, the starting dose of fluvastatin immediate-release capsules is 20 mg in the evening if the LDL cholesterol-lowering goal is less than 25%. The starting dose is 40 mg in the evening or twice a day if the LDL cholesterol-lowering goal is more than 25%. The maintenance dose is 20 to 80 mg per day. Of note, patients should not take two 40 mg immediate-release capsules at one time. The fluvastatin 80 mg extended-release tablets are taken once a day, at any time of the day. Some specialists consider prescribing fluvastatin to patients intolerant to other statins as it is associated with the lowest rate of muscular toxicity among individual statins.

For children and adolescents with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia between 10 and 16 years of age, the starting dose of fluvastatin immediate-release capsules is 20 mg orally once a day. The maintenance dose is 20 to 80 mg per day. The maximum dose is 40 mg twice a day (immediate-release) and 80 mg once a day (extended-release).

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

- **Hepatic Impairment:**The use of fluvastatin is contraindicated in persistent unexplained elevations in serum transaminases or active liver disease.

- **Renal Impairment:**Dose adjustment for mild to moderate renal impairment is not required. However, fluvastatin has not been studied at doses greater than 40 mg in patients with severe renal impairment; therefore, caution is advised when treating such patients at higher doses.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**According to****the****manufacturer's labeling and FDA revised labeling in 2021 fluvastatin sodium is contraindicated in pregnancy. If pregnancy is detected on fluvastatin therapy, fluvastatin should be discontinued, and clinicians must counsel the patient regarding the potential hazards to the fetus. However, in 2021, the FDA revised statins' labeling to remove the contraindication for use during pregnancy. Health care providers should discontinue statin therapy in most pregnant patients. Additionally, health care providers should evaluate the ongoing therapeutic needs of the individual patient, particularly for patients at very high risk of cardiovascular events during pregnancy, such as patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia or after acute coronary syndrome.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**Preclinical studies indicate that fluvastatin is present in breast milk in a 2:1 ratio (milk: plasma). Additionally, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors can cause serious adverse reactions in nursing infants, and women who require treatment with fluvastatin should be advised not to breastfeed their infants. The consensus is that fluvastatin should not be used during breastfeeding. An alternate drug may be preferred until additional data becomes available, especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.