The first step in the treatment of conversion disorder involves an effective presentation of the diagnosis to the patient. General recommendations are that the clinician does not reveal the diagnosis during the first encounter. Instead, it is essential to build a strong therapeutic alliance with the patient. The clinician should ask the patient what they feel is wrong with them and encourage discussion of their feelings regarding their symptoms. During subsequent encounters, several important points merit focus:

- Focus on the fact that the patient’s symptoms are real and that you understand the effects of these symptoms on the patient.

- Do not tell the patient that there is nothing wrong with them or that this is “just” a psychologically-based illness.

- Give the patient examples of organic diseases that can be induced or worsened by stress, such as irritable bowel syndrome or peptic ulcer disease. Also, provide examples of other common physical manifestations of underlying stress/psychological illness, such as sweating, shaking, or palpitations during an episode of acute anxiety.

- Explain how the diagnosis was made, and point out the differences in physical exam and history that helped you differentiate between organic/neurologic disease and conversion disorder.

- Explain that their symptoms are potentially reversible because although they are not functioning properly, there is no underlying structural damage.

- Emphasize the fact that understanding and accepting the diagnosis of conversion disorder is essential for proper treatment, as it allows the patient to fully engage in treatment instead of focusing on figuring out what is wrong.

- Reach out to any other provider that the patient has to ensure that there is a cohesive approach in the presentation and treatment of the disorder.

Psychotherapy is the first-line treatment in most cases of conversion disorder. Different types of therapy can be useful, but the most effective throughout literature seems to be cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT).

Another first-line treatment that clinicians should offer in conjunction with CBT is physical therapy. This approach is more useful for functional motor symptoms and helps patients feel as though their clinical team takes their symptoms seriously. The therapist can usually decrease functional motor symptoms by encouraging normal movements and slowly working on more complex tasks at each session. Physical therapy can also prevent secondary weakness or true deficit caused by the patient’s functional motor symptoms. Hypnosis is a second-line treatment that may be helpful for patients with speech symptoms or sensory loss.

Pharmacotherapy is most effective when there is a comorbid mental illness, such as anxiety or depression. Medications such as antidepressants, anxiolytics, or mood stabilizers would be chosen based on the underlying illness. Some studies have suggested that antidepressants, specifically those that target pain (such as serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors), may be helpful for certain symptoms of conversion disorder, even if underlying mental illness is not clear. Among the pharmacological approaches, several investigations have taken place to evaluate the effects of antipsychotics. Recent studies suggest that quetiapine and haloperidol have a comparable effect in relieving the patients from conversion disorder symptoms; however, the occurrence of extrapyramidal symptoms seems to be significantly lower with the atypical antipsychotic quetiapine.

Transmagnetic stimulation (TMS) may be beneficial for patients with conversion disorder, though no published control studies have been published. There are hypotheses that TMS may have neuromodulating effects that can change beliefs or expectations about symptoms. There have been mixed reviews on paradoxical intention treatment, which involves asking patients to intentionally engage in unwanted behavior, which elicits conversion disorder symptoms. Some critics feel that this is harmful to the patient-clinician relationship, and others believe that it may help the patient realize that specific thoughts or situations trigger their symptoms. One of the most critical aspects of treatment in conversion disorder is frequent follow-up appointments with all involved clinicians. Frequent follow-up prevents the patient from visiting other facilities such as urgent care or the emergency room.