**Hypersensitivity:**Hypersensitivity to ramipril, other ACE-i, or any component of the formulation is a major contraindication.

**Angioedema:**(hereditary or idiopathic) or previous history of angioedema after treatment with an ACE inhibitor.

**Hyperkalemia**: Aldosterone is responsible for the excretion of potassium from the kidney. Therefore low levels of aldosterone can result in hyperkalemia. Due to its effects on aldosterone production, ramipril should be withheld or stopped in the patients who develop hyperkalemia (potassium levels greater than 5 mEq/L)

**Hyponatremia**: Angiotensin II results in increased release of aldosterone from the adrenal glands. In the absence of angiotensin II, there is low production of aldosterone. Aldosterone is responsible for reabsorbing sodium and water from the kidneys. Therefore if a patient is already hyponatremic, the use of ramipril and other ACE-i can worsen their hyponatremia.

**Pregnancy:**Ramipril is absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy. Oligohydramnios and skull defects have been reported with concurrent use of ACE-i in pregnant ladies. [British National Formulary]

Concomitant use with aliskiren or a neprilysin inhibitor (sacubitril) is contraindicated.

The HOPE (Heart Outcome Prevention Study) study conducted in 2008 demonstrated that after administering ramipril 10mg for 12 weeks, clinically, there is no significant change in renal function of patients who had renal artery stenosis. Therefore according to the HOPE study, ramipril can be safely used in patients with renal artery stenosis.