**Assessing Airway Risk:**

Several parameters need to be evaluated before the start of the procedure. Multiple mnemonics exist to help a clinician determine if an airway will be difficult, including L.E.M.O.N.

L: Look Externally (facial trauma, beard, loose teeth, dentures, large incisors)

These factors can be an indication of a difficult airway.

E: Evaluate the 3-3-2 rule

- Can 3 fingers fit between the incisors?

- Can 3 fingers fit between the tip of the chin and the hyoid bone?

- Can 2 fingers fit from the top of the thyroid notch to the hyoid bone?

A decrease in these distances can be an indication of a difficult airway.

M: Mallampati score

Assess how much of the posterior pharynx and uvula can be seen.

- Mallampati 1 score indicates that the entirety of the uvula can be visualized.

- Mallampati 2 score indicates that half of the uvula can be visualized.

- Mallampati 3 score indicates that only the base of the uvula can be visualized.

- Mallampati 4 score indicates that the uvula cannot be visualized.

A higher Mallampati score is an indication of a more difficult airway.

O: Obstruction or Obesity

Obesity (body mass index > 30) can be a predictor of a difficult airway.

Obstruction of the airway, including head and neck cancer, epiglottitis, can indicate a difficult airway.

N: Neck Mobility

Assess the mobility of the neck.

A neck that cannot be maneuvered into an ideal position due to trauma, c-collar, or rigidity can lead to a more difficult airway.

**Positioning and Anatomy:**

Proper positioning of the patient is vital to the success of the procedure. Ideally, the neck should be flexed at the lower cervical spine (C6-C7) and extended at the upper cervical spine (C1-C2).  This position is called the "sniffing position."  This allows for the best visualization of the anatomy, including the epiglottis and vocal cords.

SEE MEDIA ITEM 4

The epiglottis serves as the primary landmark that will direct successful endotracheal intubation. The origin of the epiglottis can be found at the base of the tongue. The valley between the tongue and the epiglottis is called the vallecula. When intubating with a Macintosh blade (discussed later), the tip of the blade should ideally be placed at the base of the tongue in the vallecula, and a ventral and inferior movement of the blade reveals the vocal cords.

SEE MEDIA ITEM 3

The Cormack and Lehane Grading system allow the provider to evaluate their view of the vocal cord and estimates the chance of successful intubation. A Grade 1 view of the cords using this system indicates a high likelihood of successful intubation. In this grade, the provider can see nearly the entirety of the vocal cord anatomy. Successive grades reveal less of the cords and have a decreased rate of successful intubation.

SEE MEDIA ITEM 2