Cefotaxime is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is FDA-approved and indicated to treat gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic organisms of susceptible strains causing pneumonia, urinary tract infections, cervicitis, endometritis, urethritis, and sepsis. The care for patients suffering from infectious diseases prompts critical care from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, as preventable contagious disorders can lead to medication resistance, complications, and mortality. These healthcare professionals include a primary care physician, an internist, an infectious disease specialist, critical care, a gynecologist, a nurse, and a pharmacist.

Primary care clinicians, internists, and specialists should educate the patients about the consequences of non-compliance with therapy for the full duration and how resistance to treatment can further cause complications and result in mortality. The primary care physician should routinely monitor renal function, liver enzymes, and CBC as cefotaxime is metabolized and cleared in the liver and kidneys, respectively, and has also been shown to cause hematologic adverse effects. Cefotaxime should be renally dosed in patients with compromised renal function, such as CKD or ESRD, and patients receiving hemodialysis.

Patients developing diarrhea while receiving treatment with antibiotics should be assessed for Clostridium difficile infection. Colonic flora is changed when receiving treatment with antibiotics, making it susceptible to Clostridium difficile infection resulting in mild to severe forms of diarrhea. Diagnostics and treatment focused on Clostridium difficile, electrolyte, and volume depletion should be initiated, and discontinuing management with cefotaxime should be considered.

Counseling and careful monitoring are necessary during pregnancy, as clinical studies during its use in pregnancy are limited, and cefotaxime FDA pregnancy category B. Cefotaxime is reported to also be present in breastmilk in low amounts, and infants should be monitored accordingly.

During the treatment of gonorrhea causing urethritis or cervicitis, treatment for chlamydia should be added as cefotaxime does not have coverage for this organism. An interprofessional healthcare team approach to antimicrobial care with cefotaxime involving collaborative interventions and communication is key to building patient rapport and developing a therapeutic alliance so the patients comply with therapy adequately to eradicate the bacteria and prevent further spread. Continued communication and teamwork between healthcare professionals will improve antimicrobial stewardship, improve patient outcomes, limit microbial resistance, and lower the incidence of multidrug-resistant organisms.