Protein C and S deficiencies can be secondary to inherited gene mutations or due to acquired causes.

**Protein C Deficiency**

In the healthy general population, the incidence of asymptomatic protein C deficiency is 1 in 200 to 500 individuals, while clinically significant venous thromboembolism is estimated to occur in 1 in 20,000 individuals.

Protein C deficiency may be inherited or acquired.

The inherited form of protein C deficiency is typically an autosomal recessive disorder; however, de novo mutations have been reported. Approximately 160 mutations in the protein C gene (PROC) located on chromosome 2q14.3 have been described in the literature.

Protein C deficiency may also be acquired by one of several mechanisms. Newborns may have physiologically low levels of protein C at birth; levels have been reported to be as low as 35% in otherwise healthy full-term infants. This is an age-related acquired form of protein C deficiency; protein C levels increase to the lower level of the adult reference range by 6 to 12 months of age.

**Protein S Deficiency**

The exact prevalence of protein S deficiency in the general population is unknown. However, some studies have estimated a prevalence of 0.03% to 0.13% in healthy individuals.

Protein S deficiency may also be inherited or acquired.

The inherited form of protein S deficiency is typically an autosomal dominant disorder. The PROS1 gene is located on chromosome 3q11.1, and approximately 200 mutations in this gene have been described in the literature.

Type I protein S deficiency is the most common type and is characterized by a low total protein S level, low free protein S level, and low protein S activity. Type II deficiency is characterized by a normal free and total protein S level but low protein S activity levels. Type II deficiency is a rare form of the disease. Type III protein S deficiency is characterized by normal total protein S levels but low free protein S levels and low protein S activity.

Protein S deficiency may also be acquired by one of several mechanisms. Newborns may have low levels of protein S at birth; levels increase to the adult reference range by 6 to 10 months of age, typically sooner than protein C levels.