The proper development of the eye involves a complex interaction of a myriad of genes and molecular signals. During this process, it is important to understand that genetic mutations and inaccurate molecular products carry links to eye malformations. The full complexity of eye development is too broad for the scope of this article, and the mechanism is discussed further later in this article. Nevertheless, the most important of the genes involved include PAX6, PAX2, sonic hedgehog (SHH), BMP4, and Rx.

PAX6 is coined as the primary control gene and indicates the eye field with its expression at the anterior neural plate. However, the eye field at this time is yet to undergo division for the creation of the globes. The belief is that SHH is responsible for the division of the eye field into two via suppression of PAX6.SHH leads to cyclopia, a single eye. On the other hand, increased expression of SHH can lead to an absence of ocular structures. In the optic vesicles, there are two antagonistic molecular signals: SHH ventrally and BMP4 dorsally. These two signals coordinate together, mutually inhibiting each other, to create the normal pattern of the eye on its dorsal-ventral axis.SHH promotes PAX2 expression, which is an optic stalk marker.PAX2 complements the retina marker PAX6, creating a distinct boundary between the optic stalk and the retina. Another gene expressed in the anterior neural plate, Rx, is crucial for the evagination of the optic vesicle and Pax6 expression.Rx may play an essential role in the differentiation of the retina.

In addition to paired box gene 2 or PAX2, there are other transcription factors, such as ventral anterior homeobox 1 and 2 (VAX1 and 2); these affect the invagination of the choroid fissure. Other genes are called for an appropriate path: bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7), fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), transforming growth factor beta2 (TGF-beta2), transcription factor AP-2 alpha (TFAP2A).