An interprofessional approach to care is essential in the management of patients with craniosynostosis, especially those with syndromic craniosynostosis. The team should include pediatrics, neurosurgery, plastic surgery, maxillofacial surgery, ophthalmology, genetics, nurses, respiratory sleep physician, orthopedics, and later on, a developmental specialist.

Referral to a nurse specializing in developmental pediatric care for early intervention and developmental monitoring is important in the implementation of a special plan of education to improve the patient's possible weaknesses since they are at risk of developmental delay. Early identification and referral for prompt management are key in giving these patients their best chance.

They will also require physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy as well as possible hearing or vision aid, and placement in an appropriate school setting.

Each of these disciplines must engage the other members of the interprofessional healthcare team. They must communicate their findings and ensure that other clinicians are aware of changes or therapy results that have ramifications across interprofessional lines. Only then can outcomes be optimally directed. [Level 5]

The follow up is for a prolonged period because as the infant grows, physical and mental deficits may come to light. With early identification of developmental gap and placement in support programs, a negative academic and cognitive outcome for these children is minimized, if not prevented

The outcomes for most children are guarded and depend on the type of genetic syndrome acquired. But with adequate nursing care, the lives of some children can be improved.