Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis is characterized by progressive cognitive decline. Symptoms typically present about 8 to 11 years of post-measles infection. Initially, personality or behavior changes are present, in addition to poor school performance and intellectual deterioration. There is a steady decline in motor function with myoclonus in most cases, autonomic dysfunction, and focal paralysis. Some patients have seizures, either focal or generalized, and about one-third of patients with SSPE develop epilepsy. Patients eventually fall into a vegetative state or akinetic mutism, which is shortly followed by death.

The course of SSPE has been divided into stages, each of which describes a certain phase of the disease. Stage I includes many personality or behavioral changes, such as irritability, dementia, lethargy, social withdrawal, or speech regression. Stage II is made up of the progressive decline in motor function, including myoclonus, dyskinesia, and dystonia. Stage III consists of patients who have progressed to extrapyramidal symptoms, posturing, and spasticity. Lastly, stage IV occurs when patients develop akinetic mutism, autonomic failure, or enter a vegetative state.

Visual symptoms sometimes precede disease onset by about 2 years, with the most classic lesion being focal necrotizing macular retinitis. Ocular symptoms can range from retinal hemorrhages to papilledema to complete vision loss. Most structures of the eye can be affected, but there is never vitreal inflammation.

Atypical presentations of SSPE can include psychiatric symptoms, seizure disorders poorly controlled with medication or solely extrapyramidal symptoms. When atypical symptoms are present, SSPE tends to have a fulminant course with neurological deficits occurring in the first 3 months or death within 6 months in about two-thirds of cases. Having the measles virus before the age of 2, increased viral virulence and coinfection with other viruses are risk factors for a more fulminant, atypical course.

SSPE tends to vary in presentation, making it very difficult to diagnose. It is important to have SSPE in a differential in many circumstances. SSPE has been diagnosed in elderly patients with predominantly psychiatric features that become progressive dementia.