The treatment of proteinuria is mainly focused on treating the specific underlying cause. In addition, most treatment modalities focus on reducing the degree of proteinuria, particularly albuminuria. These include drugs acting on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. The 2013 Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guideline strongly recommends using ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists (ARB) in adults with more than 300 mg/24 hours of persistent proteinuria. The Chronic Kidney Disease Management publication by Kidney Health Australia in 2015 set the treatment target as a 50% reduction in albuminuria.

Data obtained from multiple efficacy trials have shown the effectiveness of ACE inhibitors in reducing proteinuria in diabetic and nondiabetic patients. In addition to their effect on proteinuria, they have effectively reduced the risks of renal disease progression and hence, the requirement for renal replacement therapy.

A study has shown that the efficacy of ACE inhibitors in halting the progression of proteinuria is more significant in patients with higher quantities of proteinuria than those with lower amounts of protein in the urine.

Combination therapies of ACE inhibitors with ARBs and direct renin inhibitors have been trialed in multiple studies showing an increased risk of adverse effects, including hyperkalemia, hypotension, renal impairment, and syncope.

**Diuretics**

Patients with moderate to severe proteinuria have fluid overload and require diuretic therapy and dietary salt restriction. Aldosterone antagonists have also shown an advantage in their efficacy for proteinuria.

**Calcium Channel Blockers**

Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (NDCCBs), diltiazem, and verapamil decrease proteinuria greater than dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (DCCBs). The newer NDCCBs, such as efonidipine and benedipine, used in combination with ARBs, have reduced proteinuria.