The bacterium meningococcus, recently called Neisseria meningitides, is an exclusively human-encapsulated Gram-negative diplococcus. It colonizes the human nasopharynx (termed nasopharyngeal carriage) and mostly affects children and young people with high mortalities. Rarely, invasive strains of N. meningitides may invade across the mucosal surface, entering the bloodstream and invading the blood-brain barrier, causing septicemia and meningitis, also called invasive meningococcal disease (IMD).

Issue of concern: In addition to meningitis and septicemia (meningococcemia), IMD is responsible for a spectrum of infections such as pneumonia, and more rarely, septic arthritis and pericarditis. It also may be associated with long-term sequelae and lifelong morbidity, including limb loss, neurologic impairment, allergic complications, hearing loss, and even death.

The onset of the disease is typically rapid and fulminant, as it may develop in 1 to 14 days after acquisition. The characteristic symptoms, however, manifest relatively late, making the infection tricky to diagnose on time. So the celerity of the disease and difficulty distinguishing it from other febrile infections can lead to the death of a previously healthy individual within hours. The disease mostly affects infants aged less than one year, but the incidence is likewise high in adolescents, so this age group mainly has the highest fatality rates. Even when given antibiotics, mortality due to IMD  reaches 10 to 20%, being highest in older adults, especially when accompanied by septicemia.

Transmission of the meningococcus occurs through droplets transmitted via close contact with a carrier of N. meningitides or an infected one. Studies calculate roughly that carriage crests in early-to-late adolescence, depending on the region, showing that persons of these ages are likely essential vectors of the disease. Meningococcal disease has an association with exposure to active or passive smoking, travelers to endemic regions (e.g., the meningitis belt in Africa, Hajj pilgrims), settings of increased exposure and close contact with a person carrying the organism such as crowding in military barracks and student residences, in addition to antecedent respiratory infections (e.g., Mycoplasma, influenza and other viruses), and finally dry or windy air conditions which are associated with a heightened risk for invasive disease due to mucosal damage and irritation.

Usually, the humoral response is adequate to stop the spreading of the micro-organism and avert IMD; but, when the antibody response is not enough, bacteremia occurs, causing endothelial damage, increasing vascular permeability, and inducing a prothrombotic state. That is why the real meningococcal disease is a very unusual complication of bacterial colonization in healthy individuals.

-  Extremes of age (<6 months and greater than or equal to 65 years), as well as some specific host genetic polymorphisms usually associated with invasive diseases.

- A defective complement system, be it early (including C3, properdin, or factor H and D) or late complement system (C5-C9). The late complement system plays the main role in the host defense against invasive bacterial meningitis, mainly meningococcus, which causes up to 85% of identified invasive bacterial infections in those patients. Attacks are usually observed in those with terminal complement deficiency as they are associated with a 1400- to a 10000-fold increase in meningococcal disease risk and propensity for recurrent infections (in up to 50% of patients) with a recurrence rate of 100-150 times higher than that in the general population.

- In some cases, the defect in immunity and complement system is not congenital but acquired. A multitude of causes, including inadequate production of complement components secondary to liver dysfunction, increased consumption of complement by an autoimmune disease such as lupus, increased excretion by protein-losing diseases. It can also occur secondary to drugs like eculizumab, which inhibit complement protein C5 leading to terminal complement cascade, or by receiving some medications like eculizumab (therapy for atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome), which is a monoclonal antibody that binds e inhibition.

- Children with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), partial T-cell defects (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia), and those with anatomic and functional asplenia (that are associated with impaired antibody production). Studies have shown those with low CD4 counts or AIDS or are at higher risk than the general population. Additionally, reports exist of outbreaks among HIV-infected people or men who have sex with men (MSM).

- Conditions associated with poor antibody responses (e.g., congenital or acquired antibody deficiencies such as those seen in hypogammaglobulinemia and glomerulonephritis) also pose a risk for invasive disease. These conditions can cause atypical presentations of invasive disease. Hence providers need a high degree of suspicion for this disease when dealing with these underlying conditions. Invasive meningococcal disease represents a serious but potentially preventable healthcare problem in both developed and developing countries; that makes it a formidable public health concern due to its rapid clinical onset, a predilection for causing high rates of permanent disability or death, and the inability to accurately forecast when an epidemic or sporadic case might occur.