The management of obesity requires an interprofessional team of providers, including an internist, primary care provider, nurse practitioner, dietitian, bariatric surgeon, sociologist, physical therapist, and an endocrinologist. The key to the prevention of obesity is patient education about changes in lifestyle and diet. Surgery is usually the last alternative, and while it does work, it is also expensive and associated with serious complications. Interprofessional care coordination includes working as a team during the preparation and performance of the procedure and also involves patient education and monitoring/follow-up. The interprofessional team approach will result in improved and more lasting patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is a commonly performed operation today in the United States. It has many advantages over other weight-loss surgeries but can present with early and late complications. Chronic complications include but are not limited to strictures, internal hernias, gastro-gastric fistulae, gallstones, marginal ulcers, dumping syndrome, and the nutritional deficiencies that accompany altering the GI tract. As increasingly more patients will have had this surgery, a healthcare practitioner must be aware of these sequelae and their management. Patients need to be made aware that surgery does not cure obesity- it is just a temporary method of inducing weight loss, and if the patient does not partake in exercise or a change in diet, the weight will soon be regained.