Cystitis is a commonly encountered disorder by primary care clinicians. The diagnosis and management are relatively straightforward in most patients. However, there are other patients with structural abnormalities, diabetes, and patients with spinal cord problems who are more difficult to manage due to the risk of recurrent cystitis. Hence, an interprofessional team approach is necessary to improve outcomes.

An interprofessional healthcare team approach is essential in managing cystitis. Patient education is the key, and all clinicians who manage patients with cystitis should encourage an increase in fluid intake. Several studies show that increased fluid intake reduces the risk of recurrent infections. The pharmacist should educate the patient on medication compliance, verify all drugs are appropriately dosed and perform medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions. The nurse should educate sexually active women to void after sexual intercourse as this has been shown to lessen the risk of a bacterial infection. Patients with recurrent infections should be referred to a urologist for a more extensive workup. Only with open communication between members of the interprofessional team can the morbidity of cystitis be lowered; therefore, it is incumbent on any team member who notices an issue or a change in the patient's status to document their findings and reach out to the appropriate team members for corrective action. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

Patients with uncomplicated cystitis typically have an improvement in symptoms within three days after initiation of antibiotic therapy. However, recurrent cystitis occurs in 25% of women within six months after the first UTI, and the rate increases in women with more than one prior UTI. Complications are rare, especially in patients who are appropriately treated. When males present with a first-time episode, a referral to a urologist should be made to ensure no structural or functional abnormality. Immunosuppressed individuals or those with diabetes who require chronic catheterization or take steroids regularly have a greater potential to develop sepsis. They should be closely monitored and managed by an infectious disease specialist.