Innominate artery injuries can present either by penetrating or blunt force. A provider must make a quick decision on treatment to avoid the feared morbidity and mortality associated with this injury. This activity reviews the associated mechanisms of injury and the various ways to approach (open vs. endovascular) and repair (primary vs. stent-graft) innominate artery injuries. This activity also reviews the evaluation and management of innominate artery injury and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for such patients.

**Objectives:**
- Innominate artery injuries may occur as a consequence of blunt or penetrating trauma to the chest, such as high-speed motor vehicle collisions, shootings, and stabbings, or by iatrogenic injury such as central line placement.
- The most common imaging findings of innominate artery injury include a widened mediastinum greater than 8 cm or a tracheal shift to the right on a chest x-ray but can also present with an intimal flap, thrombus, dissection or active arterial extravasation on a chest CT.
- Management of innominate artery injury in unstable patients is a primary open repair. In contrast, treatment for stable patients is endovascular repair with a completion angiogram to examine for any further extravasation or filling defects at the injured segment.
- Innominate artery injury management requires excellent interprofessional teamwork between the EMS, ER, and OR staff as well as rapid recognition and diagnosis for the appropriate treatment of the injury to avoid morbidity and mortality of the patient.