A history of food intake can help with the diagnosis of foodborne illness, and timing of illness onset after food intake may aid in determining food sources of greatest concern for contamination. Travel history can impact the consideration of additional pathogens and potentially broaden the differential diagnostic considerations.Clostridiodes difficile associated diarrhea.

The number, consistency, volume, and other characteristics of the stool should be determined. The diagnostician should seek associated symptoms. Small intestinal diarrhea is usually voluminous, watery, and comes with abdominal discomfort, bloating, and pain. Large intestinal diarrhea is less voluminous and comes with painful bowel movements and minimal abdominal discomfort. E.coli (toxicogenic - STEC), Salmonella spp., Vibrio cholerae, Clostridium perfringens affect the small bowel, whereas Campylobacter, Shigella, Yersinia, E. coli (enteroinvasive) primarily involve the colon.

Fever, blood, and mucus in the stool are usually concerning symptoms and are a sign of enteroinvasive disease in the colon. When there is clear red blood in the stool, chances of presence of STEC will increase. STEC starts with watery diarrhea that will turn bloody in 1 to 5 days. Severe cramping is usually present, and diarrhea is more than five times a day. STEC is the most common reason for renal failure and hemolytic uremic syndrome in children.

General medical history is essential. Underlying immunosuppressed or compromised states (cancer, transplant, HIV,etc.) can increase the risk of specific pathogens or increase the severity of illness. Certain medical conditions are associated with certain organisms (i.e., cirrhosis with Vibrio, hemochromatosis with Yersinia, pregnancy with Listeria).

Reheated fried rice is associated with Bacillus cereus infection, raw beef like a hamburger is associated with STEC, raw milk can harbor Salmonella, and Campylobacter, seafood such as shellfish can have contamination with Vibrio cholerae or V. parahemolyticus, undercooked pork is associated with diarrhea from Yersinia spp.

Persons with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have an increased risk of diarrhea caused by Cryptosporidium, Microspora, Isospora, or Cytomegalovirus. Listeriosis is associated with immune suppression as well as with pregnancy.

Certain medications can cause diarrhea: antibiotics, laxatives, antiacids, colchicine, and chemotherapy regimen have all been implicated. Microscopic colitis or radiation colitis can also be a problem.

General physical examination with a focus on vital signs and signs of hypovolemia is of importance. The abdominal exam should evaluate for distension, tenderness, presence of normal bowel sounds or ileus, and clinical evidence of peritonitis.

Clostridiodes difficile infection usually presents with watery diarrhea, nausea, fever, anorexia in the setting of recent antibiotic use. Antibiotic use can be up to 10 weeks before the symptom onset. Although any antibiotic can cause this, the most frequently associated are fluoroquinolones, penicillins, and clindamycin. Very low potassium levels can also present in this entity.

Salmonella infection is usually associated with poultry, eggs, and milk. The enteric fever version results from S. typhi and S. paratyphi. It presents as a febrile illness with abdominal pain, fever, bradycardia, pulse-temperature disassociation, rose spots, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, and leukopenia. Diarrheal illness is usually from non-typhoidal types, which are commonly isolated from the diarrheal stool. They are typically self-limited courses of diarrhea, fever, cramps, and nausea. No antibiotics are recommended ordinarily for non-typhoidal unless the host is immunocompromised.

Shigellosis presents with abdominal cramps, high fever, bloody mucosal diarrhea, tenesmus, leukemoid reaction, and lasts for up to seven days. It is usually self-limited, but complications can be reactive arthritis, seizure, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, rectal prolapse, toxic megacolon, obstruction, and perforation.

Yersiniosis presents with abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, leukocytosis, and can be easily mistaken for appendicitis. "Epidemic appendicitis" describes the sudden appearance of many cases of appendicitis-like patients that is secondary to a yersinia epidemic.