Prehospital treatment for hypoglycemia depends upon the level of training for the provider.  2018 National EMS Scope of Practice Model for EMS delineates the ability of emergency medical technician level and above to perform blood glucose monitoring. In the United States of America, prehospital providers have to obtain a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) waiver to perform blood glucose testing.

A review of the literature in prehospital treatment and release of hypoglycemic patients appears to be safe with the caveat that the patient did not have a severe hypoglycemic episode.

The National Association of State EMS Officers (NASEMSO) National Model EMS Clinical Guidelines updated on January 5, 2019, has specific treatment disposition parameters for prehospital providers on the release without transport of the hypoglycemic patient requiring dextrose or glucagon administration.  Obtained from https://nasemso.org/wp-content/uploads/National-Model-EMS-Clinical-Guidelines-2017-PDF-Version-2.2.pdf to include specifically:

- Disposition

- If hypoglycemia with continued symptoms, transport to the closest appropriate receiving facility.
- Hypoglycemic patients who have experienced a seizure should be transported to the hospital irrespective of their mental status and therapeutic response.
- If symptoms of hypoglycemia resolve following treatment, release without transport should only be a consideration if all of the following are true:

- Repeat glucose measurement is greater than 80 mg/dL.
- The patient takes insulin or metformin to control diabetes.
- The patient returns to normal mental status, with no focal neurologic signs/symptoms after receiving glucose/dextrose.
- The patient can promptly obtain and will eat a carbohydrate meal.
- The patient or legal guardian refuses transport, and EMS providers agree transport not indicated.
- A reliable adult will be staying with the patient.
- No significant co-morbid symptoms exist, like chest pain, shortness of breath, seizures, intoxication.
- A clear cause of hypoglycemia is identifiable (e.g., missed meal).