The ultimate aim of an evaluation is to make an accurate diagnosis of the nature of bladder dysfunction and identify the underlying cause as well as any associated complications. The general approach to the diagnosis begins with a basic investigation of lower urinary tract symptoms to rule out common causes. Urine culture and sensitivity should be done if there is a suspicion of UTI. Besides serum electrolytes, urea & creatinine should also be measured. A 24-hour urine voiding diary will help characterize the voiding dysfunction. Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) scan imaging can be helpful for the assessment of hydronephrosis, reflux, urinary calculi, and post-void residual urine volumes, although they will not specifically help diagnose DSD.

The diagnosis of DSD is made through a urodynamic study with or without fluoroscopy via electromyography (EMG), voiding cystourethrogram, video urodynamics, or urethral pressure profile measurements. Cystoscopy is often recommended to rule out any urethral strictures which might affect these studies.

DSD may be suggested by the finding of a plateau level of voiding detrusor pressure, but this is not diagnostic by itself without confirmation.

Urethral pressures are used as an adjunctive tool for diagnosing DSD. A 7 French urodynamic catheter, with independent bladder and urethral pressure sensors, is placed with the urethral sensors at the point of maximal sphincter pressure in the proximal urethra. DSD is then defined as an acute urethral pressure rise >20 cm of water during or immediately prior to a voluntary or involuntary detrusor contraction.