There are many different types of aphasia syndromes with signs and symptoms that may overlap with each other. A clinician with the insight to differentiate and recognize the differences in each type of aphasia can carefully formulate an individualized treatment plan.

**Wernicke Aphasia (Receptive)**

- The lesion is located in the Wernicke area (Brodmann area 22), which is the center for comprehension and planning of words.
- Example:

- Examiner: Hi, how are you doing today?
- Patient: I’m happy, are you pretty.
- Examiner: What are you doing today?
- Patient: We stayed with the water today.

**Broca Aphasia (Expressive)**

- The lesion is located in the Broca area, which is the center for the motor part of speech and sentence formation.
- Example:

- Examiner: Hi, Mr. Smith, when did you graduate college?
- Patient: I was umm… 7 years… ago
- Examiner: What did you use to do?
- Patient: well… work… um… work… on desk… uh… marketing… very good…

**Conduction Aphasia**

- The lesion is located at the arcuate fasciculus, which is the neural pathway connecting the Wernicke area to the Broca area.
- Example:

- Examiner: Please repeat after me; boy.
- Patient: Boy.
- Examiner: Seventy-nine.
- Patient: Ninety-seven…no… seventy sine… seventy-nice

**Transcortical Sensory Aphasia**

- The lesion is located around Wernicke area, however, sparing Wernicke area and isolating it. Patients have an inability to comprehend but can repeat with fluent speech. At the same time, patients display the presence of semantic paraphasia.

**Transcortical Motor Aphasia**

- The lesion is located around Broca area, however, sparing Broca area and isolating it. Patients have a non-fluent speech but are able to repeat long, complex phrases. Patients tend to remain silent but may speak with 1 to 2 words.

**Mixed Transcortical Aphasia**

- The lesion is located around Wernicke area, Broca area, and arcuate fasciculus, but these areas are spared and are isolated. Patients would have severe speaking and comprehension impairment; however, they can repeat long, complex sentences.

**Global Aphasia**

- Lesions vary in size and location but tend to follow the left middle cerebral artery distribution. This is the most severe form of aphasia. Patients can only produce a few recognizable words and have little to no understanding of written or spoken language. Patients are unable to read or write.

**Anomia**

- The lesion is at the angular gyrus and is the mildest form of aphasia. Patients have difficulties with word finding.

**Related Behaviors**

- Self-repairs are disruptions in fluent speech resulting from mis-attempts to repair erred production of speech.

- Speech disfluencies include repetitions and prolongations at the phonemic, syllable, and word level with pathological frequency.

- Preserved and automatic language are when some language or language sequences that were utilized frequently prior to onset are still produced with more ease.

- Struggle in non-fluent aphasias is a severe limitation in the number of words expressed