**Anterior Superior Iliac Spine (ASIS) Avulsion**

Young athletes are susceptible to ASIS avulsion injuries through the physis. These injuries typically occur secondary to indirect trauma via a sudden, forceful contraction of the sartorius, along with the tensor fascia lata. The ossification of the apophysis usually does not occur until age 21 to 25. Before this ossification occurs, there is a weak point at the muscle-tendon-bone interface, which is susceptible to an avulsion. This commonly occurs while the hip is in an extended position, like sprinting or swinging a bat.

Avulsions of the ASIS are most often treated conservatively. This involves rest, stretching, protected weight-bearing with the aid of crutches, and early commencing of range of motion exercises. There are indications, however, for operative treatment of this injury. If there is a displacement of the fragment, there is a risk of irritation, loss of strength, as well as healing of the fragment in a displaced position if the injury is treated by conservative means.

Open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) is indicated when the avulsion of the ASIS displaces by a distance of more than 2 or 3 centimeters. Painful non-unions are also an indication for surgical fixation. There are several different options, including lag screw and tension band fixation.

**Chronic Overuse Injuries**

Much like other overuse injuries like tennis elbow, chronic overuse of the sartorius, along with the gracilis and semitendinosus, can create inflammation at the insertion point of the conjoined tendon of these three muscles. This inflammation can irritate the local tissue surrounding the tendon, including the bursa, a condition known as pes anserine bursitis. This is most commonly seen in male athletes in their fourth decade. These patients are often involved in endurance sporting activities like cycling or running and complain of pain in the posteromedial aspect of the knee, directly at the pes anserine insertion. There are reports of underlying osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis as causes of chronic bursitis.

Like avulsions of the anterior superior iliac spine, the vast majority of these injuries improve with conservative treatment. First-line treatment involves physical therapy, including stretching and strengthening. In cases with no apparent improvement with physical therapy alone, steroid injections can be helpful as adjunctive therapy.