Bare-metal Stent: Circumstances in which bare-metal stent (BMS) may be reasonable have considerably decreased since the advent of drug-eluting stents.

- Patients who require noncardiac surgery within 4 to 6 weeks of PCI.

- Patients with active bleeding at the time of PCI or those who are at a very high risk of bleeding while taking Dual antiplatelet therapy.

- If a patient is unlikely to comply with antiplatelet therapy for more than 1 month.

Drug-eluting Stent: First-generation drug-eluting stents (DES) are no longer used in the USA, Europe, and Canada since advancements in stent platforms and polymer biocompatibility found in newer DES listed above. For most patients undergoing coronary artery intervention with stent placement, current-generation DES are used.

Primary percutaneous coronary intervention with drug-eluting stent implantation is indicated to patients with acute MI according to the recent clinical guidelines. Evidence showed improved outcomes with new-generation DES as compared to early-generation DES and bare-metal stents.

There are several advancements in drug-eluting stents. Vessel size among patients with acute MI is either underestimated or overestimated due to vessel wall correction or pressure of thrombus between the vessel wall and stent platform. To negate this issue, self-expanding stents that adapt to the size of the artery were developed. The role of fully biodegradable stents is under extensive study. Further studies are indicated to improve clinical outcomes in diabetic patients with a diffuse disease requiring DES either introducing novel DES with higher restenotic activity or fully bioresorbable scaffolds. For coronary bifurcation disease, these are several techniques, but in 2019 meta-analysis showed DK crush technique to reduce stent-related events compared to others.

Revascularization with percutaneous coronary intervention as opposed to coronary artery bypass graft surgery:

- Single-vessel disease

- Two-vessel disease involving the right coronary artery and circumflex coronary artery

There are several other determining factors that are taken into account to determine percutaneous coronary intervention as opposed to coronary artery bypass graft (CABG).