The management of dental caries should be aimed at 1) detecting initial lesions, 2) determining caries activity, 3) performing a caries risk assessment, 4) preventing new carious lesions, 5) preserving dental tissue, and 6) maintaining teeth for as long as possible.

Existing caries should be initially managed by non-invasive procedures (e.g., remineralization, biofilm removal, sealing) instead of removing dental tissue. Cavitated lesions should be arrested or controlled following a minimally invasive approach, e.g., repairing a defective restoration instead of replacing it.

**Non-invasive Procedures**

We do not need to place a filling in a lesion that can be accessed by easy cleaning measures that will disturb the biofilm, such as fluoride-containing toothpaste.

The following lesions can be managed conservatively without the need of a filling:

- White spot lesions, including initial occlusal lesions.

- When on a bitewing x-ray, approximal lesions are limited to the enamel or are just into dentin. (It is improbable that these lesions are cavitated in modern populations).

- Cavitated and non-cavitated root surface lesions that can be reached by cleaning implements.

- If a recurrent lesion adjacent to a restoration is cleansable, it does not require restoration.

**When do we restore?**

In 2016 The International Caries Consensus Collaboration

The resulting consensus was as follows:

- 
“Noncleansable cavitated dentine caries cannot be managed by biofilm removal, remineralization, or sealing alone. However, in the primary dentition, these lesions might be transformable into cleansable lesions and managed via nonrestorative cavity control.”

- 
“Certain occlusal lesions might appear clinically non-cavitated but radiographically extend significantly into dentine. If such lesions cannot be arrested through biofilm control alone, fissure sealing can be carried out; however, the integrity of the sealant needs to be monitored, and there is a possibility, until more evidence has emerged, that a “trampoline” effect may lead to failure of the sealant and a restoration will be required.”

Furthermore, Kidd et al.