The underlying pathogenetic mechanism common to all of these different varieties of glomerulonephritis (GN) is immune-mediated, in which both humoral as well as cell-mediated pathways are active. The consequent inflammatory response, in many cases, paves the way for fibrotic events that follow.

The targets of immune-mediated damage vary according to the type of GN. For instance, glomerulonephritis associated with staphylococcus shows IgA and C3 complement deposits.

One of the targets is the glomerular basement membrane itself or some antigen trapped within it, as in post-streptococcal disease.

These initiating events activate common inflammatory pathways, i.e., the complement system and coagulation cascade. The generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and complement products, in turn, results in the proliferation of glomerular cells. Cytokines such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) are also released, ultimately causing glomerulosclerosis. This event is seen in those situations where the antigen is present for longer periods, for example, in hepatitis C viral infection. When the antigen is rapidly cleared, as in post-streptococcal GN, the resolution of inflammation is more likely.

**Structural Changes**

Structurally, cellular proliferation causes an increase in the cellularity of the glomerular tuft due to the excess of endothelial, mesangial, and epithelial cells.

- Endocapillary - within the glomerular capillary tufts

- Extracapillary - in the Bowman space, including the epithelial cells

In extra-capillary proliferation, parietal epithelial cells proliferate to cause the formation of crescents, characteristic of some forms of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.

Thickening of glomerular basement membrane appears as thickened capillary walls on light microscopy. However, on electron microscopy, this may look like a consequence of the thickening of the basement membrane proper, for instance, diabetes or electron-dense deposits either on the epithelial or endothelial side of the basement membrane. There can be various types of electron-dense deposits corresponding to an area of immune complex deposition, such as subendothelial, subepithelial, intramembranous, and mesangial. (See the images below)

Features of irreversible injury include hyalinization or sclerosis that can be focal, diffuse, segmental, or global.

**Functional Changes**

Functional changes include the following:

- Proteinuria

- Hematuria

- Reduction in creatinine clearance, oliguria, or anuria

- Active urine sediments, such as RBCs and RBC casts

This leads to intravascular volume expansion, edema, and systemic hypertension.