Trauma-informed care is central to the treatment of human trafficking victims.

**Management of human trafficking in Texas**is centered on the prevention, recognition, and reporting of human trafficking.

- The 24-hour hotline to report suspicious activity is 1-888-3737-888 or text the words "help" or "info" to 233733.

- Call law enforcement through the non-emergency number and request to speak with someone who works with cases of human trafficking.

- Call the Texas Department of Public Safety to request a victim advocate.

- If a minor is involved, call child protective services at 1-800-252-5400.

- The Human Trafficking and Transnational/Organized Crime Section can be contacted at 512-463-1646 or by email at humantrafficking@oag.texas.gov.

**Mandatory reporting in Texas**

In Texas, reporting suspected abuse or neglect cases for children, the elderly, and adults with disabilities is mandatory. While this is not specific to human trafficking, mandatory reporting could be necessary for many victims of human trafficking. For many adults who have been trafficked, reporting is not mandatory. In these cases, motivational interviewing can be used to assess readiness to exit trafficking and gain consent for reporting. This is similar to mandatory reporting laws in other states. Other mandatory reporting laws in Texas include threats of violence and gunshot wounds.

**Trafficking Health Implications**

Labor and sex trafficking carry inherent health risks that need exploration. Research studies in South Africa and West Bengal, India determined that women and girls who experienced forced sexual encounters through being trafficked were 50% more likely to acquire HIV. In younger patients, immature cervical epitheliums or cervical ectopy might lead to breaks in the vaginal mucosal and subsequent inflammation, which increases the chance for HIV to spread during repeated sexual assaults. Vulnerability and inexperience may lead to HIV and other sexually transmitted infections due to inadequate condom use and exposure to many people throughout the trafficking lifespan.

**Sex Trafficking Health Implications**

All patients who may have been trafficked should be screened for injury and sexually transmitted infections (STI). If a recent forced sexual encounter has occurred, emergency contraception and STI prophylaxis should be provided. The patient can also be offered birth control treatment. Concealable birth control such as intrauterine and implantable devices are particularly appealing in this situation. These are highly effective, long-term solutions that can be hidden from the trafficker.

When a recent sexual assault has occurred, follow sexual assault collection of evidence protocols in your local area and per institutional policy. Project Help, Rape Crisis, and women's shelters may be a resource. Psychological pain from daily forced sexual encounters and trauma may need psychological resources. Specific to sexual trafficking, complications of forced tampon use may be seen. Packing of the vagina by traffickers to facilitate sexual encounters (unnoticeable to customers) while victims are menstruating may be of concern. Foreign objects may be present in the vagina on pelvic examination. The patient with a lost tampon may be a victim of trafficking.

**Labor Trafficking Health Implications**

Labor trafficking victims may experience dehydration or malnutrition due to being forced to work long hours in construction, on farms, at factories, or in "sweatshops." In addition, heat exhaustion or hypothermia may present in these trafficking victims.

According to the 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, Southeast Asia is emerging as a destination for short, medium, and long-distance trafficking. Increasing in frequency, these individuals are made to endure long ocean voyages as they are smuggled into the United States and other countries on cargo ships. These overcrowded, unsanitary conditions may cause a variety of infectious diseases.

Communicable or infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, HIV, and typhoid may occur. Scabies, lice, and bacterial and fungal skin infections may be a concern. Malaria, Chagas disease, cysticercosis, toxoplasmosis, toxocariasis, and trichomoniasis also may be risks. Asbestos concerns exist for miners who are victims of labor trafficking.

Migrant workers who are being trafficked in the fishing and seafood industry may suffer from exposure to Vibrio vulnificus and subsequent necrotizing fasciitis with septicemia if left untreated. Vibrio vulnificus, found in warm climates with shallow, coastal waters, can infect a person through lacerations or breaks in their skin.

Labor trafficking victims may suffer from injuries related to poor ergonomics, such as back and neck injuries, vision problems, carpal tunnel syndrome, and headaches."

**Referral Considerations**

Long-term psychological impacts necessitate referrals for treatment of psychological trauma.

According to the findings of a study of male and female survivors of trafficking in England conducted between 2013 to 2014, healthcare, including physical, mental, and sexual healthcare, must be a fundamental component of post-trafficking care. Follow-up care coordinated with multiple disciplines is essential. Basic needs of clothing, food, safe shelter, and transportation must be discussed. Ensure language barriers are addressed and provide resources on free classes to learn the local language. Discuss medical issues and refer to appropriate subspecialists.

**Transitioning from Victim to Survivor - Potential Referrals**

- Dietician consults in cases of severe malnutrition.

- Infectious disease consults for communicable diseases and sexually transmitted infections.

- Referral to obstetrics/gynecology for infertility concerns related to forced abortions, repeated trauma, or frequent miscarriages or medical problems such as prenatal concerns, addiction issues, torch infections originating from lack of preventative care, or poor access to care may need investigation. In addition, hormone replacement therapy concerns must be met for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ) victims.

- Surgical or dermatology referrals for removal of unwanted tattoos or brands or to treat burns and other injuries.

- Consultations with gastroenterologists for stress-related issues.

- Children often suffer developmental delays and need assistance with transitioning into a healthy life.

- Social stigma implications of forced homosexuality can play a role in future psychological care. Crisis intervention teams and case managers will have a role in successful integration practices.

- Perpetrators often use substance abuse to control victims, or victims use it as a form of escape from the abusive environment. As a result, addiction and sobriety treatment may be needed. Community-based organizations, support groups, and faith-based programs may ease this transition period and lessen the impact of psychological stressors.

- Legal services referrals are made for child custody issues, immigration assistance, protective/restraining orders, assistance with any offenses, and the successful prosecution of the trafficking entity.

**Survivor's Role**

Cultural impacts and language barriers play a role in the recovery period and successful transition into society as a survivor and not a victim. Survivors of human trafficking can offer much-needed insight into the thoughts, feelings, and interactions with members of the healthcare team and guide care and training programs for this vulnerable patient population.

In 2015, a study conducted in New York City’s Rikers Island jail suggested that survivor-based input was essential in addressing healthcare concerns and improving care in this patient dynamic. Issues identified in this study include victims feeling intimidated, judged, and stereotyped. The study suggested that providers and front-line personnel pay attention to these patients' body language and nonverbal cues. The initial interaction, if negative, can prevent a victim from feeling safe enough to disclose their abuse. The victims in this study emphasized an approach that was not an interrogation but straightforward, direct questions asked in a compassionate, nonjudgmental way that reinforced a feeling of safety and confidentiality.

Further research is needed in the use of trafficking survivors to aid current victims, but survivors can assist in the education of healthcare providers."