GABA is of great clinical significance. Medications that act on the GABA receptor are commonly used as therapeutic medications and substances of abuse, and it is unlikely that any physician, regardless of specialty, will not encounter clinical situations that involve GABA.

There are numerous uses for drugs that modulate GABA signaling. Benzodiazepines are a drug class that exerts its effects by binding to the GABA-A receptor, resulting in increased chloride ion permeability by changing the frequency with which the chloride channels open. They are used in surgical anesthesia, the treatment of epilepsy, REM-sleep disorders, alcohol withdrawal, essential tremor, and muscle spasticity. They are also common drugs of abuse. Ethanol, one of the oldest and most widely-used psychoactive substances, also exerts effects on the GABA-A receptor. Alcohol withdrawal is treated with GABA modulating drugs, such as benzodiazepines. Furthermore, ethanol and benzodiazepines exhibit cross-tolerance with one another due to their similar mechanism of action. Overdosing or taking multiple GABA modulating drugs can result in respiratory depression due to increased GABA signaling in the medulla of the brain stem.

Many other drugs modulate GABA signaling, including the following:

- Barbiturates, sedative drugs which increase the duration at which the chloride channel is open when GABA binds the GABA-A receptor

- Vigabatrin, an antiepileptic inhibitor of GABA transaminase

- Propofol, a sedative commonly used in general anesthesia and allosteric modulator and agonist of the GABA-A receptor

- Flumazenil, a benzodiazepine antagonist which binds to the GABA-A receptor and can reverse benzodiazepine intoxication and improve mental status in hepatic encephalopathy

- Baclofen, a muscle relaxant and GABA-B agonist

- Valproic acid, a mood stabilizer and anti-epileptic that is hypothesized to have an inhibitory effect on GABA uptake

- Zolpidem, a sedative-hypnotic, exerts its effects on the GABA-A receptor

- Gabapentin, commonly prescribed to treat neuropathic pain, partially exerts its effects by increasing GABA synthesis via modulation of glutamate dehydrogenase