Nocturia has multiple potential causes.  The initial evaluation should start with a good history and physical examination, including such things as drinking habits, caffeine and alcohol intake as well as sleeping habits.  A high sodium intake, hypertension, use of diuretics, and diabetes will all influence nocturia. The presence of any peripheral or dependent edema should be noted.

The cornerstone of nocturia diagnosis and treatment is the 24-hour voiding diary.  It is critical to correctly identify polyuria and bladder overactivity as well as track progress after treatment.  All patients with nocturia who desire treatment should be asked to do a 24-hour voiding diary which will be described in more detail later.

The typical question to identify possible nocturia might be, "on average, how many times do you wake up at night to void?" If a positive response is received, the next question would be how much sleep disruption this causes and if it bothers the patient very much. Further questioning would include fluid intake, types of liquids ingested, medications such as diuretics, sleep disturbances, comorbid medical disorders, and the presence of any other urinary tract symptoms.

**Fluid Intake**

The type and amount of fluid intake are important in the evaluation of nocturia. Larger fluid intake alone (greater than 40 mL/kg per day) may be responsible for the patient's nocturia without other identifiable causes. This may be voluntary, psychogenic, or a sign of possible diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus. Caffeine and alcohol intake should be reduced in the late afternoon and evening. Caffeine usage alone can result in bladder overactivity and polyuria. Ingestion of large amounts of fluids just before bedtime should be discouraged as well as general fluids between dinner and bedtime. Be aware that some elderly patients may already be somewhat dehydrated and might require extra fluid intake earlier in the day before they can safely do any evening fluid restriction before bedtime. Fluid restriction before bed may not cure nocturia, but it will not make it worse and may help a little.

**Medications**

Various medications, foods, and supplements can affect bladder storage and diuresis. Loop diuretics should be moved to the early afternoon, so their diuretic effect ends just before bedtime. If prescribed twice a day, the evening dose should optimally be taken 6 to 8 hours before bedtime (in the mid-afternoon) to minimize its effect on nocturia. Beta-blockers, caffeine, alcohol, anticholinergics, cholinesterase inhibitors, diuretics, and medications with diuretic effects, lithium, for example, may all affect the patient's nocturia.

**Contributing Co-morbid Medical Conditions**

Over 50% of patients with nocturia of at least 2 times per night report at least 3 contributing comorbid conditions. The most commonly reported include diabetes, use of diuretics, hypertension, and obstructive sleep apnea. Other medical facts to consider include other sleep disorders, vision, and ambulatory issues that might predispose to falls while going to the bathroom at night, prior history of falls, dizziness, and dementia. Obesity doubles or triples the incidence of nocturia in both genders.

**Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS)**

The presence of lower urinary tract symptoms (hesitancy, straining, incomplete emptying, weak stream, frequency, urgency, intermittent stream, incontinence) may suggest the need for further urological evaluation. Irritative bladder symptoms, especially urgency, without high post-void residual volumes (less than 200 mL) or other evidence of obstruction would suggest an overactive bladder and/or neurogenic, which can usually be treated medically. The use of overactive bladder medications to treat nocturia in patients who do not have symptoms of urgency is not likely to be successful. The presence of daytime irritative symptoms like urgency would tend to suggest a potential role for overactive bladder medications in reducing that particular patient's nocturnal voids, although overall such drugs tend to be overutilized in treating nocturia. Obstructive symptoms in men would suggest benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). These impressions can be investigated more completely with a voiding diary and a post-void residual determination.

Further evaluation, including flowmetry, urodynamics, and cystoscopy, can be helpful in selected cases. If confirmed, treatment of BPH with alpha-blockers (or other prostatic obstruction modalities) and the use of various bladder relaxing therapies for overactive bladder can be very helpful in alleviating the symptoms and bother of nocturia. However, care needs to be taken in those individuals who are likely to encounter side effects from these therapies, such as elderly patients prone to dizziness being treated with alpha-blockers.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

Serum glucose and/or A1C, renal function, urinary osmolality, and serum electrolytes should be checked. A urinalysis should also be done. Patients with poorly controlled diabetes, renal disease, or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus often report nocturia.

**Physical Examination**

The following aspects of the physical examination are particularly relevant in the evaluation of a patient with nocturia. They are directed toward diagnosing contributing factors and comorbid health issues that may cause or exacerbate nocturia.

- Check for orthostasis and dizziness. They may signal orthostatic hypotension, which is an issue in prescribing alpha-blockers if the patient has BPH.

- Heart and lung examinations to focus on possible evidence of fluid overload or congestive heart failure.

- Abdominal examination for suprapubic distension or tenderness, even though such examinations are not very reliable indicators of bladder over-distension or high post-void residual volumes.

- A formal post-void residual volume with a straight catheterization or bladder scan should be performed. A post-void residual greater than 200 mL is considered pathological and may require further evaluation. Patients with urinary retention and overflow can present with frequency and nocturia.

- A digital rectal examination should be done, especially in men. Rectal muscle tone, rectal masses, and fecal impactions may all contribute to nocturia. Estimating prostatic size in men by digital rectal examinations is useful if imprecise.

- A neurological evaluation should include checking sacral plexus nerve health (S2 to S4). This is easily tested by looking for an anal wink (quick contraction of the anus, which can be visualized after lightly scratching the skin just lateral to the rectum) and by checking perineal sensation.

- Evaluate the lower extremities for evidence of edema, which might suggest fluid overload or congestive heart failure.