If acute cholecystitis is suspected and there is a negative gallbladder ultrasound, then a hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid or HIDA scan is indicated. This is done by injecting technetium Tc 99m intravenously. It is taken up by the liver and excreted into the biliary system. If there is no filling of the gallbladder, then this would indicate complete mechanical or functional blockage of the cystic duct. This finding is close to 100% accurate for diagnosing acute cholecystitis. If a patient has characteristic symptoms of nonacute cholecystitis or biliary cholic and the gallbladder ultrasound is negative, they could have chronic acalculous cholecystitis. This is a functional problem caused by the hypokinetic emptying of the gallbladder. The best diagnostic test for this condition is a HIDA scan with KINAVAC (cholecystokinin-CCK). Tc 99m is administered as with a routine HIDA scan. Once the gallbladder is visualized, then the KINAVAC is administered intravenously. This simulates eating and causes the gallbladder to contract and empty. The percent that the gallbladder empties, called ejection fraction (EF), is measured digitally. An ejection fraction of below 30-35% is considered abnormal and possibly indicative of acalculous cholecystitis. Documented reproduction of symptoms with administration of the KINAVAC may also be indicative of gallbladder disease. Some studies have shown a 95% accuracy rate in detecting acalculous cholecystitis with a low EF in a HIDA scan. Other studies found that the accuracy of a HIDA scan may be altered in the presence of other ailments, especially other gastrointestinal (GI) conditions.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28861635