Most cases of hamartoma are asymptomatic and found incidentally. Other patients are treated conservatively with supportive management, such as analgesics used for the pain. If the patient is unresponsive, further investigations are required. Surgical treatment is a consideration in unresponsive patients and is the treatment modality of choice for hamartomas. Surgery is also indicated for diagnostic confirmation, mass symptoms, and cosmetic reasons.

- **Lung:**A pulmonary****nodule is generally an incidental finding. Subsequent management depends on specific features and the probability of malignancy. The nodule is usually a small, well-defined lesion less than 30mm. Lesions larger than 30mm are associated with increased chances of malignancy. Non-surgical techniques such as bronchoscopic-guided transbronchial biopsy (TBB) can be performed for lesions with an intermediate risk of malignancy or in patients who are not surgical candidates. The gold standard for diagnosing a pulmonary nodule is a surgical excisional biopsy, which is curative for some malignancies.Imaging(CT/PET Scans) can be used to identify the best location for biopsy or staging.

- **GIT:**Hamartomatous polyps are primarily****asymptomatic and do not require any specific treatment, but the polyps may grow progressively and becomes symptomatic or even undergo a malignant transformation in patients of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. These polyps should undergo surgical resection. In some complicated cases, nutritional support, steroids, immunosuppressants, acid suppression, and antibiotics are used in the treatment.

- **Breast:**Breast hamartomas are usually asymptomatic and found incidentally on screening mammography or may present as painless encapsulated masses. These lesions are usually benign, and only observation is required as management. Symptomatic or suspicious hamartomas should be surgically excised.

- **Cowden Syndrome:**As it involves various organs and complications, a multi-disciplinary approach is required. Benign and asymptomatic lesions are treated conservatively, while the symptomatic and suspicious lesions are surgically resected. In addition, cancer surveillance and genetic testing are also required in these patients.