Broadly, the conditions associated with choroidal folds are:

- Idiopathic- Previously, it was thought to comprise most of the cases of choroidal folds. However, with recent investigations, it is noted that a cause can be found in up to 85% of cases with a thorough work-up.

- Reduced intraocular pressure (hypotony): This occurs due to volume loss as a result of loss of lens, aqueous or vitreous humor, which is combined with an opening in the globe. The common causes are:

- 
              
- After ocular surgery (including cataract or glaucoma surgery)
              
              
- Cyclodialysis
              
              
- Trauma

- Compression/distortion of the globe/choroid/ocular coats: In these cases, choroidal folds occur due to mechanical displacement of surrounding choroid in cases of choroidal tumors or increased pressure on the globe with traction on the optic nerve due to an orbital mass.

- 
              
- Increased orbital tissue/orbitopathy- Edema and congestion within the orbit, combined with the enlargement of extra-ocular muscles leads to choroidal folds, especially in Graves’ ophthalmopathy.
              
              
- Orbital inflammation- idiopathic orbital inflammatory disease
              
              
- Orbital infection due to chronic sinusitis and orbital cellulitis.
              
              
- Scleral buckling procedure- Encircling element reduces the circumference of the globe under the buckle but also stretches sclera and choroid in a direction perpendicular to it, thus leading to choroidal folds perpendicular to the plane of the buckle.
              
              
- Orbital mass including cavernous hemangioma, optic nerve meningioma, hemangiopericytoma, lymphoproliferative lesion, dermoid, mucocele, and metastatic neoplasms lead to increased pressure on the globe with traction on the optic nerve which perpetuates choroidal folds.
              
              
- Retrobulbar injection/anesthesia
              
              
- Choroidal tumors such as melanoma, nevus, and metastasis produce choroidal folds due to the mechanical displacement of the surrounding choroid.
              
              
- Choroidal detachment- compressive forces at the edge of choroidal detachment push the choroidal tissue aside, leading to the formation of choroidal folds locally.

- Increased choroidal thickness/thickness of ocular coats in eyes that might have a short axial length: Choroidal folds develop in these conditions due to an increase in either choroidal volume due to congestion or thickness which throws it into folds.

- 
              
- Uveal effusion syndrome
              
              
- Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR)
              
              
- Nanophthalmos 
              
              
- Choroidal effusion
              
              
- Hypermetropia

- Optic nerve disorders: swelling of the optic nerve head compresses the peripapillary choroid throwing it into folds.

- 
              
- Papilloedema
              
              
- Pseudopapilledema
              
              
- Increased intracranial tension: may cause choroidal folds even though clinically papilledema may not be evident

- Ocular inflammation

- 
              
- Posterior scleritis
              
              
- Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease
              
              
- Sympathetic ophthalmia

- Other causes

- 
              
- Choroidal neovascularization and scar-due to contraction of sub-retinal pigment epithelium neovascular complex in cases of neovascularization.
              
              
- After spontaneous resolution of a dural cavernous sinus fistula
              
              
- Space flight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS): Cephalad fluid shift causes venous congestion in the head and neck that leads to increased vortex venous pressure, which in turn causes blood stagnation in the choroid causing its expansion and choroidal fold formation. Also, globe flattening and disc edema occur due to raised intracranial tension being transmitted through the optic nerve to the optic disc.
              
              
- Acquired hyperopia with choroidal folds
              
              
- Diode endolaser photocoagulation of the retina

The suggested etiologies depend on associated conditions and are as follows:

- Thickening of choroid by congestion in the choriocapillaris in cases of hypotony or choroidal tumors

- Deformation of the sclera due to optic nerve traction as in cases of orbital masses, and hypotony

- Thickening or shrinkage of sclera due to chronic traction or chronic inflammation

- Decreased scleral rigidity, especially in young myopes because of the elongated eyeball and thin sclera

- Contraction of the sub-retinal pigment epithelium choroidal neovascular complex in cases of neovascularization

The characteristic striations seen in the case of choroidal folds are thought to be due to choriocapillaris congestion along with its attachment to overlying Bruch’s membrane.