The etiology of gallbladder disease is associated with a poorly functioning gallbladder and superconcentrated bile. Normally, the gallbladder empties its contents in response to physiologic changes associated with digestion (cholecystokinin, vagal input from antral distension, migrating myoelectric complex). High concentrations of cholesterol within the gallbladder is a known cause for precipitation of cholesterol gallstones. Pigmented stones precipitate typically from hemolytic diseases (black stones) or from infection (brown stones) where bacterial enzymes break down bilirubin into an insoluble content. Stasis within the gallbladder or bile ducts increases the likelihood of stone formation. Gallbladder disease is exemplified by obstruction of the cystic duct. Patients may experience acute obstruction of the cystic duct by stones, or occasionally, in most critically ill patients, there is acute acalculous cholecystitis, where there is no mechanical obstruction but a functional obstruction. This obstruction, mechanical or not, in conjunction with attempted bile excretion for digestion will cause acute inflammation of the gallbladder.

A classic finding for gallbladder disease is right upper quadrant or epigastric abdominal pain. The pain typically has an onset 30 minutes to two hours after consumption of fatty foods. The pain can last from one to two hours, up to more than 24 hours. Pain lasting more than 24 hours is associated with a secondary infection known as acute cholecystitis. Pain radiates from the right upper quadrant to the right flank, and occasionally to the right shoulder due to sympathetic innervation. Associated symptoms include but are not limited to nausea, vomit (bilious), fever, chills, and diarrhea. Less specific symptoms may be experienced like indigestion, GERD-like symptoms, PUD symptoms, and dyspepsia. Earlier in the disease process pain will be intermittent and associated with oral intake of fatty foods. As the process progresses, pain may become more frequent and occur regardless of oral intake.

Complete a thorough history and physical examination, including abdominal examination, and specifically check for a “Murphy’s Sign.”

- Murphy’s sign: deep palpation in the right upper quadrant while the patient inspires deeply. A positive test is when the patient abruptly stops their inspiration secondary to pain

- Labs: Complete Blood Count (CBC) with differential (leukocytosis), Liver function panel (Elevated total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and possible transaminitis), Amylase/Lipase (Elevation can indicate gallstone pancreatitis).

- Imaging:

- Abdominal ultrasound of the right upper quadrant will identify the presence of gallstones/sludge/polyps/masses, thickness of the gallbladder wall (normal limits less than 3 mm), width of common bile duct (normal limits less than 6 mm, however, 1 mm may be added per decade of life after 50 years of age or in pregnant women), and the presence/absence of pericholecystic fluid

- Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP): MRI imaging study for noninvasive visualization of biliary and pancreatic ducts

- Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP): an invasive endoscopic procedure is utilizing x-rays and dye to visualize biliary and pancreatic ducts. The advantage of ERCP is that it is both diagnostic and therapeutic. However, this is an invasive procedure and comes with procedural risks

- Hepatobiliary Iminodiacetic Acid (HIDA) Scan: imaging study to visualize liver, gallbladder, and bile ducts. A radioactive tracer is injected into the vein, attaches with bile substrates, and is processed by the liver. A nuclear scanner then tracks the flow of the tracer through the liver, into the bile ducts, gallbladder, and into the duodenum. The addition of cholecystokinin, CCK, in the absence of gallstones is useful to diagnose acalculous cholecystitis. A measured ejection fraction of less than 35% is usually indicative of a poorly functioning gallbladder. Reproduction of symptoms with administration of cholecystokinin also has been shown to predict the resolution of symptoms after cholecystectomy. Cholecystokinin should not be administered in the presence of gallstones as this may provoke passage of the stones into the common bile duct.