The primary care physician, pediatricians, and health care workers should be educated and made well aware of the signs and symptoms of ophthalmia neonatorum and primary HSV blepharoconjunctivitis. Prompt referral pathways to primary care physicians or an ophthalmologist should be established to treat HSV ophthalmia neonatorum without delay. Primary care physicians should be trained to stain the corneas with the fluorescein and examine under cobalt blue light for a possible dendrite. Every physician and healthcare worker should be trained to assess corneal sensations. A proper detailed history of previous episodes of HSV keratitis should be elicited before starting the patients on topical steroids or before corneal surgical procedures. As of now, there isn’t a successful vaccine to prevent herpes simplex ophthalmicus. The treatment guidelines are provided by the Herpetic eye disease study (HEDS).

Herpetic eye disease study (HEDS) consists of five randomized double-masked placebo-controlled multicentre trials designed to evaluate oral acyclovir (400 mg twice daily) for herpetic stromal keratitis.

- Oral acyclovir has no significant benefit in HSV stromal keratitis already on topical antiviral and steroid medications.

- Topical steroids are beneficial than placebo in herpetic stromal keratitis.

- A possible benefit of oral acyclovir in herpetic iridocyclitis.

- No added benefit of oral acyclovir to topical trifluridine in the prevention of anterior uveitis or stromal disease in patients with HSV epithelial keratitis.

- Long-term oral acyclovir prevents recurrences in patients with a history of HSV stromal keratitis.