When determining the appropriate flap to use for the closure of a defect, surgeons often think through a construct known as the "reconstructive ladder," which serves to enumerate the options from least invasive to most complex. The reconstructive ladder also includes options not strictly classified as flaps, but that are nevertheless important techniques commonly employed for tissue reconstruction.

**The Reconstructive Ladder**(the simplest options begin at the bottom, and the list progresses in complexity towards the top):

- Composite tissue allograft (transplant)

- Free flap transfer

- Regional flap transfer

- Local flap transfer (may include tissue expansion)

- Skin and composite graft transfer (full thickness or split thickness)

- Delayed primary closure

- Primary closure

- Healing by secondary intention

**Free Flap Technique**

Free tissue transfer techniques vary considerably depending upon both the type of flap and surgeon preferences. Primary considerations include ensuring the flap contains the correct tissue types in appropriate amounts and that the vascular pedicle is long enough to reach the recipient vessels that will perfuse the flap. Because only a single angiosome is usually harvested as a free flap, it is important to ensure that the entirety of the harvested tissue will be perfused adequately by the vessel harvested in continuity with the flap.

Some flap harvest techniques involve identifying and dissecting the vascular pedicle before elevating the flap itself, for example, the gracilis flap, and others, such as the radial forearm flap, begin with the elevation of the flap, and vascular dissection occurs afterward.

Once the flap is harvested, a clock to keep track of ischemia time is usually started so that the surgeons know how long the tissue has been deprived of blood flow; every attempt to minimize ischemia time should be made. The flap is then usually inset either partly or completely prior to the microsurgical anastomosis of the blood vessels to ensure the geometry of the vascular pedicle is correct, and it will not be stretched or twisted during the closure of the defect. Microsurgical anastomosis requires an operating microscope and microsurgical instruments, as well as 8-0 to 10-0 suture, and frequently venous couplers as well. In cases of buried flaps, a monitor paddle may be brought to the skin to facilitate postoperative monitoring, or an implantable Doppler probe may be used for real-time evaluation of blood flow.

Correct pedicle geometry is critical for maintaining flap perfusion, particularly the prevention of venous outflow obstruction. The first three postoperative days are when the freshly sewn vessels are most likely to fail and result in flap death because it takes approximately 72 hours for the vessel endothelia to heal over the sutures. During this time, frequent "flap checks" are often required so that if a vascular insult does occur, the patient may be returned to the operating room for prompt wound exploration and flap revision, if necessary. After that, the risk of flap failure steadily decreases until neovascularization has taken place and rendered the original vascular pedicle less critical for flap survival, roughly two to three weeks postoperatively.

**Regional Flap Technique**

Regional tissue transfer may be performed similarly to free tissue transfer; indeed, several flaps may be transferred as either regional or free flaps (radial forearm, gracilis, trapezius, latissimus dorsi, temporoparietal fascia, strap muscle, etc.). The same considerations of tissue type and volume apply to regional flaps that apply to free flaps, and the techniques are just as variable. The primary difference between regional and free flaps is that regional flaps maintain a consistent blood supply throughout the operation and are never completely separated from the body; they are generally considered interpolated flaps. Regional flap vascular pedicles are therefore vulnerable to stretching and twisting, although they are not nearly as tenuous as free flaps during the first 72 postoperative hours. Regional flaps tend to require significant twisting of their vascular pedicles by virtue of the donor locations relative to the most common recipient sites; classic examples include the paramedian forehead flap and the pectoralis myocutaneous flap, and the supraclavicular artery island flap.

Advantages of regional flaps over free flaps are reliability, lack of requirement for microsurgical equipment, decreased time requirement in the operating room (and therefore increased safety in patients with multiple comorbidities), and the ability to elevate and delay the flap for approximately two weeks preoperatively to improve survival rates.

**Local Flap Technique**

Local flaps, by definition, consist of tissue that lies adjacent to the defect; to reach their destinations, they may be advanced, rotated, transposed, interpolated, or any combination thereof.

Likewise, because these flaps are perfused solely by microvasculature, the tissue should be handled very carefully, elevation should be performed meticulously and in the correct plane, and the use of electrocautery should be minimized. The correct plane of elevation will depend on the area of the body, but it is typically subdermal. In the scalp, a subgaleal plane is often preferred; however, and on the nose, a supraperichondrial plane is frequently used. In general, local flaps should be designed such that the length does not exceed three times the width of the base; otherwise, the distal tip of the flap is likely to suffer vascular insufficiency, particularly if the base needs to twist for flap inset.

To close both the primary tissue defect and the secondary defect (where the flap was harvested), wide undermining for up to 2 to 4 cm should be performed, taking care to avoid disrupting sensitive structures in the area (eyelids, nostrils, etc.).

Relaxed skin tension lines and aesthetic subunit boundaries are critical considerations for local flap design; while the defect size and location are not usually planned, it is critical to laying out the flap in such a way that transfer does not cause distortion of any nearby structures (lips, ears, hairline, etc.) and that its scars will fall as closely as possible into aesthetic subunit boundaries and relaxed skin tension lines.