Both SPECT and PET scanners collect three-dimensional data by detecting photons released by various radiopharmaceuticals. SPECT radiopharmaceuticals directly emit photons which are detected by SPECT cameras. In the case of PET, radiotracers emit positrons which, upon annihilation with adjacent electrons, subsequently release two photons in opposite directions. The PET scanner then detects the presence of both photons simultaneously to differentiate a "true" radiotracer signal from scatter radiation. Because PET uses this process of "coincidence detection," a physical collimator to block scatter radiation is not needed, unlike in SPECT.

This is one of the reasons why PET images tend to have higher resolution when compared to SPECT images, as they tend to have inherently less noise from scatter radiation. In addition, the number of counts acquired while scanning is generally higher in PET when compared to SPECT, giving greater image resolution.

One of the advantages of SPECT scanners is their ability to detect multiple different radiotracers at once based on the differing energies of their photons. This isn't possible in PET because all positrons emit photons with the same energy of approximately 0.511 MeV.

In comparison, because SPECT radiotracers tend to have photons with a lesser MeV when compared to PET radiotracers, they tend to produce a weaker signal, resulting in an image with inherently less resolution.

PET and SPECT cameras coupled with CT or MRI scanners can provide greater anatomic detail. Most PET scanners in use today are hybrid PET/CT scanners, while hybrid SPECT/CT scanners are less common. SPECT scanners dedicated to cerebral imaging are commercially available, but more basic SPECT scanners, which can be used to image any organ system, are much more common.

In addition to giving greater anatomic detail, PET/CT and SPECT/CT scanners benefit from being able to standardize measurements of radiotracer activity based on the density of the surrounding tissue in a process called CT attenuation correction. This process can also be done using a prior CT, although the results are not as accurate due to inherent differences in patient positioning.