Treating menopausal symptoms can often be challenging, as the symptoms tend to vary on an individual basis. Many women experience only local or systemic symptoms, while some experience a combination of both. The cause of menopause is typically the same for many women, regardless of whether the symptoms are local or systemic. Women, specifically those experiencing signs of urogenital atrophy, also tend to feel embarrassed to report these symptoms or think that the local or topical therapy will carry the same risk as does the systemic treatment of menopausal symptoms, known as menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). Around 50% of women will experience symptoms of urogenital atrophy, which include vaginal dryness, itching, infections of the urinary tract, urinary incontinence, and dyspareunia. Unfortunately, only 25% of them will seek options for treatment and avoid treatment altogether.

Urogenital atrophy, using treatment with topical forms of estrogen, and systemic menopausal symptoms, treated with estrogen therapy taking orally, have vastly different risks and benefits. MHT, which includes estrogen and progesterone, used to manage the systemic vasomotor symptoms of menopause, correlates with an elevated risk of breast cancer after 3 to 5 years of continuous use. Local estrogen creams, as opposed to systemic MHT, promotes vaginal maturation and thickening.

Estrogen therapy requires the efforts of an interprofessional team that includes physicians, pharmacists, and specialty-trained nurses to optimize patient treatment and outcomes. [Level 5]