Once inside the enterocyte, iron can be stored as ferritin or transported through the basolateral membrane and into circulation bound to ferroportin. (Ferritin that is not bound to iron is called apoferritin, which has an intrinsic catalytic activity that oxidizes ferrous iron into ferric iron to be bound and stored as ferritin.)

Ferritin is a hollow, spherical protein consisting of 24 subunits that potentiate the storage and regulation of iron levels within the body. Iron is stored in the Fe3+ state on the inside of the ferritin sphere through incorporation into a solid crystalline mineral called ferrihydrite [FeO(OH)]8[FeO(H2PO4)].

Monomers of the ferritin molecule have ferroxidase activity (Fe3+ ↔ Fe2+), allowing the mobilization of Fe2+ ions out of the ferrihydrite mineral lattice structure enabling its subsequent efflux out of the enterocyte via ferroportin and into circulation across the basolateral membrane of the enterocyte. The transmembrane protein ferroportin is the only efflux route of cellular iron and is regulated almost exclusively by hepcidin levels. High levels of iron, inflammatory cytokines, and oxygen lead to increased levels of the peptide hormone hepcidin.  Hepcidin binds ferroportin, resulting in its internalization and degradation and effectively shunting cellular iron into ferritin stores and preventing its absorption into the blood. Thereby, hepcidin also potentiates the excretion of iron through the sloughing of enterocytes (and their ferritin stores) into the feces and out of the body.

If hepcidin levels are low and ferroportin is not downregulated, ferrous iron (Fe2+) can be released from the enterocyte, where it is oxidized once again into ferric iron (Fe3+) for binding to transferrin, which is its carrier protein present in the plasma. Two copper-containing enzymes, ceruloplasmin in the plasma and hephaestin on the basolateral membrane of the enterocyte, catalyze the oxidation of and subsequent binding of ferrous iron to transferrin in the plasma. The principal role of transferrin is to chelate iron to be rendered soluble, prevent the formation of reactive oxygen species, and facilitate its transport into cells.