As with other types of seizures, diagnosis of focal impaired awareness seizure is based on clinical history. Epilepsy is a clinical diagnosis. As with any other seizure, it is most important to make sure that the episode is truly a seizure. Obtaining a detailed history from the patient and family members is important. A detailed description of the spell, for example, the sequence of events, nature of onset, loss of consciousness, any motor or convulsive activity, bilateral involvement, tongue bite, incontinence, stare, automatisms, eye movements, postictal confusion, recovery, and duration of events are very important to elicit. It is important to elicit a detailed medical history to identify possible risk factors.

The clinical semiology depends on the location of the seizure focus. A detailed neurological examination is important. Even subtle findings on the neurological exam can support the diagnosis of seizures. Also, certain lateralizing abnormalities on the neurological exam can help predict the epileptic focus.

Some specific features associated with focal seizures can help in lateralizing the seizure origin to one hemisphere. These features provide a good clue for lateralization but can be falsely lateralizing.

- Dystonic limb posturing: Unilateral dystonic posturing is the most reliable lateralizing sign in the temporal lobe automotor seizures. Unilateral hand/arm dystonic posturing in conjunction with automatisms of the opposite limb and head-turning is highly suggestive of temporal lobe onset contralateral to the dystonic upper extremity.

- Head version: Classical head version (defined as a tonic, unnatural, forced lateral gyratory head movement) is highly suggestive of seizure onset to the contralateral side. It can occur in both temporal and extratemporal seizures. Seizures spread to the premotor areas may be the cause.

- Automatisms: Oroalimentary automatisms like lip-smacking, chewing, or swallowing may occur without loss of consciousness at seizure onset in temporal lobe seizures with seizures confined to the amygdala and anterior hippocampus. Most automatisms are usually accompanied by impaired consciousness and have no lateralizing value, but preserved responsiveness during automatisms lateralize to the non-dominant hemisphere. Eye blinking or fluttering at seizure onset may indicate occipital lobe onset. Aversion of the eyes to the opposite side suggests seizures arising from the occipital region. Focal seizures with impaired consciousness arising from mesial frontal and orbitofrontal regions can cause bicycling or pedaling movements of the leg. Mimetic automatisms and crying have been reported in focal seizures with impaired consciousness arising from the non-dominant temporal lobe. Vomiting during seizure lateralizes to the non-dominant hemisphere. Sexual or genital automatisms (like pelvic thrusting, masturbation) can occur in focal seizures with the impaired consciousness of frontal lobe origin and temporal lobe origin.

- Postictal nose-wiping: Postictal nose-wiping that occurs within 60 seconds of the seizure occurs in about 50% to 85% of temporal lobe epilepsy patients and is performed with the ipsilateral hand in a majority of the cases.