**Connective System Organization Gives the Shape of the Muscles**

The fascial structure largely gives its ability to transmit the produced force. The latter not only functions as a transporter of the produced mechanical tension but stores mechanical energy to save myoelectric energy. The connective tissue that determines the various muscular layers derives in great proportion from the fibroblast.

Muscles play a valuable role in managing the mechanical tension produced and felt by rapidly changing the morphology of their cytoskeleton; this mechanism is facilitated by the intervention of fibroblasts. If the mechanical stimulation felt by the myofascial system (connective and contractile tissue) is present for a short period, the morphological change will be transient. If the mechanical forces persist in reshaping the myofascial system, there will be a chronic change in form and function.

Every fibroblast, potentially, is aware of the functional state of the one close to it as well as those distant from it, ensuring the fascial and mechanical continuity. In the connective tissue, there are other types of cells not yet wholly studied and cataloged.

In the superficial and deep fascial tissue that covers and divides the muscle, cells like fibroblasts are called fasciacytes. These cells specialize in the production of hyaluronic acid (high molecular weight glycosaminoglycan polymer of ECM); the latter allows dampening of the tensions, fills the cell spaces, and allows sliding of the different tissue layers. They most likely will reside in the areas with the greatest presence of innervation (nerve endings, Pacini, and Ruffini corpuscles).

Another type of cell found in the connective tissue is the telocyte. There are few studies on such cells in the fascial field, particularly for the latae fascia, thoracolumbar, crural, and plantar. They are found in many tissues of the human body and are involved in many biological processes. Telocytes form a network in the fascial network. They can form homocellular junctions (including telocytes) and heterocellular (telocytes and fibroblasts, endothelial cells, stem cells, adipocytes, etc.). Through these contacts, they can influence the metabolic environment and play a role in repair and remodeling. Probably, the telocytes can influence the production of hyaluronic acid. The exact role of these cells in the fascia is still unknown.