The basic structure of the IgG molecule is made up of polypeptide chains and consists of two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains forming a Y-shaped structure. The protease papain can digest the immunoglobulin into two Fab fragments and one Fc fragment. IgG-Fab is the antigen-binding fragment and mediates highly specific interactions with the antigenic epitope. IgG-Fc is the crystallizable region, which mediates the binding to Fc-gamma-receptors (FcgRs) on immune cells and/or complement proteins.

Major functions of the Fab portion of IgG are neutralization of infective pathogens (by interfering with pathogen attachment to host cell receptor or by targeting various steps in their lifecycle) and non-specific opsonization by binding to the surface of microorganisms leading to phagocytosis.

IgG-Fc binds to various FcgRs, which are expressed on almost all the immune cell types and can be either activatory or inhibitory in function. IgG-FcgR interaction results in pleiotropic functional consequences, including the activation or inhibition of effector immune response, expansion of regulatory T cell population (inhibits overt immune response), modulation of FcgR expression on B cells and immune cells, phagocytosis, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), immune cell differentiation and maturation, apoptosis regulation, expression of proinflammatory mediators, modulation of the antigen-presenting cell and dendritic cell functions.

In humoral immunodeficiencies, IVIG primarily acts by substituting for the lack of IgG and confers passive immunity by neutralizing bacterial toxins and viruses through the Fab portion. They also help activate the complement cascade at low doses by specific interaction with pathogens, a function that reverses in high doses to complement inactivation by non-specific interactions.

Autoimmunity is essentially an overt immune response against the body’s own tissues, and IgG autoantibodies are considered the main players in most conditions. Self-antigen is recognized by Fab fragment of IgG autoantibody, and Fc fragment relays this signal to Fc-gamma-receptors (FcgRs) on various immune cells.

The immunomodulatory actions of high-dose IVIG in autoimmune and inflammatory conditions are highly complex and differ in different diseases. In general, high-dose IVIG paradoxically leads to a reversal of their effects, as opposed to their actions at replacement doses, resulting in a more immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory phenotype.

- Anti-idiotypic antibodies in IVIG, for instance, binds and neutralizes circulating autoantibodies to factor VIII.

- F(ab’) neutralizes C3a and C5a anaphylatoxins that mediate inflammation in autoimmune rheumatic conditions; IVIG binds to complement proteins and sequesters them away from auto-antibodies, which helps prevent the formation of membrane attack complex in dermatomyositis.

- Fc mediated effects 
- Monomeric IgG in high dose IVIG causes blockade of activating FcgRs by saturating them on immune cells attenuating immune complex-mediated inflammation and autoimmunity.
- Neonatal FcRs (FcRn) on endothelial cells bind to auto-IgG and prolong its half-life by preventing its catabolism. IVIG can saturate FcRn, thereby promoting the rapid elimination of the pathogenic endogenous IgGs.
- Fc-gamma-RIIb is an inhibitory IgG receptor on innate immune cells, and IVIG causes upregulation of these receptors leading to an increase of the activation threshold by immune complexes, thus suppressing inflammation.

- IVIG modulation of cellular immunity:

- Inhibits activation of monocytes and macrophages.
- Induction of anti-inflammatory cytokines from innate cells and leads to decreased macrophage responsiveness to interferon.
- Inhibition of DC maturation and differentiation.
- IVIG is cytotoxic to neutrophils and eosinophils, leading to a switch from a pro- to an anti-inflammatory environment.
- IVIG can induce apoptosis by inducing the Fas apoptotic pathway in DCs and effector Th1 and Th17 cells.
- Enhances immunosuppressive effects through the expansion of the regulatory T cell population.
- Exerts immunosuppressive action by suppressing the proliferation of B-lymphocytes and, thus, modulation of antibody production.

- IVIG also modulates the activity of endothelial cell proliferation and expression of adhesion molecules in the vascular lumen leading to an anti-inflammatory action in vasculitic disorders.

- Inhibition of Fas-ligand mediated apoptosis by Fas antibodies present in IVIG halts the progression of disease in toxic epidermal necrolysis.

In addition to the above mechanisms, natural autoantibodies present in the IVIG also suppress some autoimmune pathophysiological mechanisms. Sialylated IgG antibodies present in IVIG preparations are shown to have an anti-inflammatory property, although this claim is controversial.

Hyperimmune IgG also provides passive immunity to an infectious agent, but they are active against only one specific pathogen, unlike replacement therapy. High-dose IVIG therapy, in contrast, exerts its action through its non-specific interactions with various immune molecules and cells, as seen above. Hyperimmune IgG action is instant and leads to efficient clearance of specific pathogenic microorganisms or toxins mediating the disease.

Different IVIG preparations are used at different doses in diverse diseases in a variety of patients with dissimilar immune statuses, and although research so far has shed some light on the various mechanisms of actions, it is very hard to generalize the actions, which must be considered separately for each disease in question.