Avoidance of the offending substance is the cornerstone of management. Patients should be educated on cross-reactive proteins and advised avoidance if they develop symptoms on exposure.

Protective gear like gloves, skin conditioning creams or emollients, and cotton liners are necessary when the exposure at work is unavoidable.

For patients with allergy to NRL, alternatives such as nitrile, neoprene, and polyvinyl chloride gloves are recommended. Some of the healthcare institutions around the world have banned powdered NRL gloves at work resulting in the decline of incidence of CU.

Second-generation H1-receptor blockers (Ex. diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, loratadine, desloratadine) are the first-line treatment in ICU. Leukotriene inhibitors like montelukast, zafirlukast, and zileuton inhibit the inflammatory component.

Aspirin and NSAIDs are the first-line treatment options for the management of NICU.

Self-administered subcutaneous epinephrine pens should be available at all times to the patient.

Steroids are second-line treatment options and help to prevent the delayed phase of an anaphylactic reaction.

Immunosuppressive drugs like cyclosporine and methotrexate are options in severe cases.

Ultraviolet A and B light inhibit NICU reaction, and the effect can last for up to 2 weeks after treatment. It has the advantage of inhibiting skin sites that are not directly irradiated.

Subcutaneous immunotherapy in the management of CU is an object of research. A study on 41 bakers sensitized to wheat protein who received subcutaneous immunotherapy, has shown promise as an intervention in the management of CU.

A rush (2 or 4-day) sublingual desensitization to NRL has shown significant improvement in symptom scores.