Nondepolarizing drugs like rocuronium are quaternary ammonium compounds, which are intermediately acting, highly ionized drugs administered intravenously under controlled conditions by anesthesiologists and other critical care providers after ensuring that the patient is under the effects of anesthesia. The dose of administration can be decided based on the clinical indication versus patient characteristics. Rocuronium does not undergo metabolism into active metabolites and has very limited lipid solubility. Therefore these drugs do not pass the blood-brain barrier, placental barrier, and other lipid membrane barriers. Thus, rocuronium has no effects on the central nervous system, impact on the fetus, minimal renal reabsorption, and ineffective absorption if given orally. Rocuronium is largely excreted unchanged in bile and has around 30 % renal excretion. Factors like hypothermia, hypovolemia, concomitant volatile agents, and renal and hepatic diseases prolong the effects of rocuronium.

Rocuronium is an intermediate-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocker with ED95 of 0.3 mg/kg. At a dosing range of 0.6 to 1.2 mg/kg, intubating conditions can be reached in 1 to 2 minutes, with effects lasting until 20 to 35 minutes. Higher doses, like 1.0 to 1.2 mg/kg, can be used to provide intubating conditions similar to succinylcholine with a short onset time of approximately 1 minute. However, that comes with a duration of action similar to longer-acting nondepolarizing drugs like pancuronium.