The microscopic structure of the urinary bladder wall organizes into the following layers from the inside out.

- Lining epithelium

- Lamina propria

- Muscularis propria

- Serosa/Adventitia

**Lining epithelium:**The urinary bladder lining is a specialized stratified epithelium, the urothelium. The urothelium is exclusively in urinary structures such as the ureter, urinary bladder, and proximal urethra.

- Apical layer - The innermost layer is a barrier between the bladder lumen and the underlying tissue. It is a single layer of umbrella-shaped cells (i.e., umbrella cells) that are frequently binucleated. These apical umbrella cells of the urothelium form an impermeable barrier. Tight junctions between the cells decrease paracellular flux, while a glycoprotein layer of uroplakin on the surface of umbrella cells forms a superficial plaque that covers the superficial area.

- Intermediate layer - The middle layer is formed from two to three layers of polygonal cells.

- Basal layer - The basal layer is formed from two to three layers of small cuboidal cells.

The urothelium is thick with five to seven structural layers when the urinary bladder is relaxed. However, the bladder wall stretches to accommodate the increased volume when the urinary bladder fills with urine. The urothelium reorganizes into two or three layers in the distended bladder without structural damage. Due to this transitional ability of the urothelium, it is also known as the transitional epithelium.

**Lamina Propria**is the suburothelial layer separating the urothelium and underlying muscularis propria (detrusor muscle). A layer of basement membrane separates the overlying urothelium from the lamina propria. This layer is a heterogenous network of structural proteins and cells, composed of an extracellular matrix with elastic fibers, capillaries, lymphatics, immune cells, afferent and efferent nerve endings, fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, adipocytes, interstitial cells of Cajal or telocytes, an indistinct smooth muscle cells, and the muscularis mucosae.

The interstitial cells of Cajal are within the lamina propria; they form a syncytium with smooth muscle cells and nerve endings. The interstitial cells of Cajal are multifunctional in different tissues. They are known to function as pacemaker cells in the gut, urethra, and prostate. However, in the bladder, they appear to act as nerve signal transducers to the bladder's smooth muscle cells.

**Muscularis****propria,**also known as the detrusor muscle, consists of three sublayers: inner longitudinal, middle circular, and outer longitudinal. These sublayers are well-defined around the neck of the urinary bladder but are randomly aligned with the rest of the bladder wall. The bladder's body has a higher smooth muscle content than the trigone, reflecting a well-developed network of myofibroblasts of lamina propria and muscularis mucosae in the body.

**Serosa**is a thin connective tissue layer that covers the bladder dome and is continuous with the peritoneal layer of the abdominal wall. It also contains blood vessels of various sizes.

**Adventitia**is a loose connective tissue layer that serves as the bladder's outer layer in areas of the bladder where there is no serosa.