General anesthesia or deep sedation is usually employed for the procedure with on-site surgical support.

Angiograms are typically performed in the main pulmonary artery and RV in two projections, although in patients with severe pulmonary regurgitation, a single PA angiogram may be sufficient. Very often, the AP projection is optimized with cranial angulation (20 to 30 degrees) to best profile the RVOT/conduit to most accurately determine the conduit’s length, diameter, and morphology. Typically a straight lateral projection with the lateral camera nicely defines the conduit and the proximity to the sternum, which may help predict how and where the conduit will dilate during balloon testing. Aortic root injection, and often selective coronary angiography, is also performed to assess the proximity of the coronary arteries to the conduit, as will be addressed below. It is helpful when performing the angiograms to leave a catheter and/or wire out the RVOT to identify the exact location of the conduit to the coronaries.

After determining whether reasonable clinical and/or hemodynamic criteria are present for intervention, it is important to consider how to best prepare the conduit for valve placement. For patients with significant conduit stenosis, this will almost certainly require dilation of the conduit and potentially “pre-stenting” of the conduit. The most common contemporary practice is to fully dilate the RVOT conduit as much as possible prior to placing a valve to reduce the risk of the stent and/or valve fracture, particularly in patients with severe stenosis and/or calcification. In patients without significant stenosis, or in patients with a rigid bioprosthetic valve that are unlikely to dilate, this may not be necessary. Nonetheless, the presence of a bare-metal stent may provide a nice and easily identifiable landing zone for subsequent valve placement and should always be considered.

Before proceeding with stent implantation for pre-stenting, there are several very important steps that are necessary to reduce the likelihood of significant complications. Firstly, in patients were severe stenosis and/or severe calcification, it is important to perform serial dilations of the conduit with multiple balloons rather than immediate and rapid restoration of the conduit to its original diameter. This is typically done in 2 mm increments up to the original diameter, and in some cases, just slightly larger than the original conduit diameter. This is felt to reduce the risk of conduit rupture and will allow for assessment of and intervention on any conduit tears that may result. As is certainly important during valve implantation, balloon dilation requires a secure and stable wire position as distal as possible to allow for the most stable balloon position. Given the more posterior orientation of the left pulmonary artery (LPA) as compared to the right, the LPA often provides a smooth wire course. However, many anatomic variations can exist in patients post repair, and the RPA can be considered if this orients the wire and/or balloon more ideally. The use of “super-stiff” wires is extremely helpful and should be available for this part of the procedure, with the tip placed as far distally in the branch PAs as possible.

Secondly, it is important to assess the coronary artery anatomy once the conduit is dilated to its intended maximal diameter. The incidence of coronary artery compression with conduit dilation has been shown to be about 5% of patients with complex CHD.

Despite these technical concerns, the procedure has been performed successfully in greater than 96% of patients with RVOT dysfunction.

Following conduit preparation with pre-stenting, if necessary, it is important to select the type and size of the pulmonary valve for implantation. As described above, the first-generation transcatheter valve system allows for the placement of valves 16 mm to 22 mm in diameter with a valve and delivery system designed for the pulmonary position. The associated delivery system for this valve allows for the preparation of the valve onto an appropriate BIB balloon, which is then housed by an integrated sheath that eliminates the need for additional sheathing or manipulation. The tapered nature of the sheath with a long tapered dilator at the tip allows for relatively easy delivery of the entire delivery system over the wire into the RVOT that protects the valve within the sheath. The second-generation valve is an alternative that allows for larger diameter valves (up to 29 mm) and thus may be ideal for larger conduits and/or outflow tracts. The delivery system is unique in that it allows for valve alignment onto the balloon within the IVC and thus allows for a smaller access sheath. The valve itself is therefore not covered by the sheath, and this may create some challenges in passing this delivery system through the RVOT with the potential for the valve/balloon apparatus to the course along RV trabeculations and/or conduit calcifications or irregularities. More recently, the use of larger introducer sheaths into the MPA has helped alleviate this problem. The second-generation valve is loaded onto a single large diameter balloon, and thus slow, controlled inflation to the intended balloon volume allows for accurate valve positioning.

Following valve placement, right heart hemodynamics are reassessed, as is a pulmonary artery angiogram to evaluate the valve position, valve competence and to assess branch PA flow. Occasionally, post-implantation dilation to further expand the valve or eliminate any residual gradient or perivalvular leak is indicated. Hemostasis can be achieved with several maneuvers (i.e., the figure of eight suture, closure device, or manual pressure), and post-procedure bleeding from the venous access site is rarely problematic, despite the large sheaths. Patients are observed in CCU or telemetry wards overnight, and a 24 hr course intravenous antibiotics is standard. ECG, posteroanterior (PA)/lateral X-ray chest, and transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) should be performed the following day, with most patients suitable for discharge in 24 hrs. The patient should be discharged home on daily aspirin, and this should be continued indefinitely while the valve remains in place.