Epoetin alfa is recombinant human erythropoietin, which is nearly identical to the endogenous hormone erythropoietin (EPO). Erythropoietin occurs in the peritubular cells of the kidney. Anemia and hypoxia are sensed by these cells and lead to the rapid secretion of EPO, which acts on erythroid marrow. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1) is a (HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta) transcription factor that boosts the expression of erythropoietin in the setting of hypoxia. During the state of hypoxia, the prolyl hydroxylase is inactive, allowing the accumulation of HIF-1 alpha and activating erythropoietin expression, which stimulates erythroid progenitors.

Erythropoietin binds to specific receptors (JAK-STAT-binding receptor) on the surface of its target cells. It subsequently alters the phosphorylation of intracellular proteins and activates transcription factors to regulate gene expression. The magnitude of increase in red blood cell concentration after administration of epoetin alfa is primarily dependant on the length of time this medication is maintained, not by its concentration level.

It induces erythropoiesis in a dose-dependent manner but does not affect the RBC lifespan, which results in:

- Stimulates the proliferation of colony-forming cells of the erythroid series

- Induces hemoglobin formation and erythroblast maturation

- Releases reticulocytes in circulation, followed by a rise in hematocrit and hemoglobin levels.

A clinically significant increase in hemoglobin is usually not observed in less than two weeks because of the length required for the erythropoiesis process. The erythroid progenitors take several days to mature and undergo release into circulation.****