Modern-day phacoemulsification has revolutionized cataract surgical outcomes. With the advent of innovative and premium intraocular lenses, cataract surgery has become the most commonly performed refractive surgery worldwide. The patient expectations and surgeon expertise and skill have also increased. Every eye deserves the best, and it is the duty of all cataract surgeons to perform the surgery ethically and give a perfect visual outcome. The patient should be educated about the risk and benefits of cataract surgery. The patient should be educated regarding the benefits of modern-day phacoemulsification.

The clinician should help the patient fully understand the phacoemulsification technique, the types of foldable and premium intraocular lenses available, and which lens will benefit the patient most. In addition, in case of risk factors like Fuch's dystrophy, compromised endothelium, or small pupil cases, the patient should receive counsel regarding the need for additional instruments and devices like iris hooks and viscoelastic devices. In case of any intraoperative complication, the patient should be described in detail the intraocular mishap and what best can be done intraoperative or postoperatively to achieve a perfect visual outcome.

Any patient requiring cataract surgery must be examined in detail by an ophthalmologist. Patients with high-risk factors for cataract surgery like pseudoexfoliation, limited pupillary dilatation, zonulopathy, history of uveitis, narrow-angle and shallow anterior chamber, subluxated cataractous lens, corneal opacity, secondary glaucoma, retinitis pigmentosa, etc. can be referred to a cataract and IOL surgeon with the skilled expertise to manage such cases. A vitreoretinal surgeon should evaluate patients landing with intraoperative complications like zonular dialysis, posterior capsular tear, and vitreous prolapse postoperatively to rule out nucleus or cortex drop in the vitreous cavity other dreaded complications like retinal and choroidal detachment.