The most common complaints of patients with keratitis include redness, pain, and irritation in the eye. The patients may also present with photophobia, visual decline, or cosmetic blemish.

**Bacterial Keratitis**

Keratitis by gram-positive organisms: Staphylococcal keratitis can be either because of direct invasion of the organism or because of staphylococcal antigen. Staphylococcal antigen-induced keratitis is usually affecting the peripheral cornea and hence the name 'marginal keratitis.' Marginal keratitis is invariably associated with staphylococcal blepharitis. The corneal lesions usually start at 10, 2, 4, and 8' o'clock positions, where the lid margin is in contact with the limbus. There is always a clear area between the limbus and the ulcerative lesion, unlike HSV marginal keratitis.

The most common cause of Streptococcal keratitis is a blocked nasolacrimal duct. So, lacrimal duct patency or regurgitation on pressure over the lacrimal sac (ROPLAS) should be evaluated in corneal ulcer cases.

In early-stages of Gram-positive infection, the cuff of cellular infiltration is noted around the corneal focus of infection and is not diffuse, unlike Pseudomonal keratitis.

Pseudomonas keratitis: In early-stage, diffuse and dense corneal cellularity is noted much beyond the focus of infection. Pseudomonas is a gram-negative bacteria with predominantly greenish-yellow corneal infiltrate and extensive collagenolysis.****The symptoms are more acute and rapidly progressive. Corneal melt might progress to corneal perforation or endophthalmitis if not taken care of in the early stages.

Nocardia keratitis: Nocardia is a weakly acid-fast bacteria (Modified Kinyoun stain).

Atypical mycobacteria: The Atypical mycobacteria are acid-fast bacilli causing keratitis with a protracted course. There may be a history of trauma with corneal foreign bodies or a history of corneal surgery (LASIK).

**Viral Keratitis**

Adenoviral keratitis: Adenoviral keratitis often has associated conjunctivitis, so the exact terminology would be Epidemic adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis (Human adenovirus types 8,19,37 and 54). Presentation is usually unilateral to start with; however, it becomes bilateral later. A predominantly follicular reaction is noted.****The patients at this stage often complain of photophobia, glare, and haloes.

Herpes simplex keratitis: HSV keratitis can present as epithelial disease, stromal keratitis, and endotheliitis.

HSV necrotizing stromal keratitis is a variant where both the viral load and the inflammatory component play roles simultaneously.

Herpes zoster keratitis: The diagnosis of Herpes zoster ophthalmicus (HZO) is very obvious. Associated unilateral rashes over the forehead and eyelids with rashes reaching the tip of the nose (Hutchinson's sign) suggest likely involvement of the corresponding eye also.

Thus, the absent terminal bulbs and poor fluorescein uptake by the ulcer base differentiate HZO keratitis from HSV keratitis.

**Protozoal Keratitis**

Acanthamoeba keratitis: History of exposure to soil or contaminated water is very often seen in Acanthamoeba keratitis in the developing world. However, in developed countries, contact lens wear has been found to have a strong association with Acanthamoeba keratitis. The spectrum of clinical features can vary from superficial punctate keratitis, pseudo-dendrites to peri-neuritis in the early stages.

**Keratitis by Oomycetes**

Pythium keratitis: This keratitis is caused by an oomycete, a distinct phylogenetically related lineage of fungus-like eukaryotic micro-organism. Pythium insidiosum species causes disease in human. The corneal lesions often mimic fungal infiltrate, and careful examination reveals dry-looking corneal infiltrates denser in the periphery of the whole infiltration with hyphate edges. Pin-head like lesions and tentacular extensions of the main lesion is very characteristic for Pythium keratitis.

**Fungal Keratitis**

Microsporidial keratitis: Previously, microsporidia was considered to be a primitive protozoan.

Filamentous fungal keratitis: History of trauma with vegetative matter is very often noted. Corneal infiltrates in fungal keratitis is usually dry-looking and having feathery edges with the presence of multiple satellite lesions. Plaque-like (with or without pigmentation) or fungal ball-like surface lesions can also be very commonly seen. At times, retained corneal vegetative foreign body lies in close association with the infiltrate. Endothelial plaque or exudates in the absence of anterior stromal infiltrate can also be seen. In such a scenario, careful examination often reveals a track from the anterior corneal surface to endothelium. This track is usually the path of entry for fungal infection and usually follows penetrating trauma. The hypopyon is usually thick and does not shift with a change in head position. The course of the disease is usually longer. Compared to bacterial keratitis, the outcomes of fungal keratitis is poor.

Alternaria sp., Bipolaris sp., Curvularia sp. are the pigmented fungal species causing infections in humans. The infiltrate may have pigmentation (brown) in dematiaceous fungal keratitis.

Candida keratitis: Clinical features are indistinguishable from fungal keratitis.

Onchocerca volvulus keratitis: This results in sclerosing keratitis. Corneal opacity starts from the periphery, and the visual axis gets affected at last. Deep vascularization is noted 360 degrees.

**Non-infectious Keratitis**

**Local Causes**

Trichiatic eyelashes, giant papillae, or any foreign body lodged in sulcus subtarsalis can result in persistent epithelial denudation mechanically and subsequent stromal ulceration. To start with, these corneal epithelial defects are usually sterile; however, they can get secondarily infected. Ulcers due to trichiatic lashes are very often seen as sequelae of cicatrizing conjunctivitis. The corneal ulcers in trichiatic lashes of the lower lid are usually present in, the lower half of the cornea.

Patients with severe allergic conjunctivitis often develop giant papillae and can result in the formation of an ulcer on superior half of cornea called "Shield ulcer." Patients will give a history of previous allergic eye disease.

In both****the above-mentioned cases, the onset of ulcer development will be gradual.

Patients with a foreign body in sulcus subtarsalis often come with a short history and acute onset of symptoms. Patients usually give a history of the fall of the foreign body in the eye. On careful examination, multiple linear abrasions in superior cornea may also be very obvious.

**Systemic Causes**

Various systemic causes can result in alteration of the local ocular surface milieu and subsequent development of severe dry eye and keratitis.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA): RA is known to cause the spectrum of ocular abnormalities. Severe dry eye, scleritis, sclerokeratitis, and peripheral ulcerative keratitis are various manifestations of the disease.

Wegner granulomatosis (WG)/granulomatosis with polyangiitis: WG is a connective tissue disorder (necrotizing vasculitis) that is known to cause keratitis, episcleritis, and scleritis.

Other systemic conditions resulting in keratitis are also known, like systemic lupus erythematosus, relapsing polychondritis, and polyarteritis nodosa. Careful history taking helps to reach the diagnosis.

Xerophthalmia: The keratolysis in xerophthalmia results in a punched out corneal ulcer and have a high propensity to perforate, if left untreated.