**Actinic Keratosis (AK)**

AK, or solar keratosis, typically arises from prolonged exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Other variables also influence their development, including male gender, older age, baldness, and history of melanoma or squamous cell carcinoma.

Typically, lesions arise on the sun-exposed regions of the body—that is, the dorsum of the hands, shoulders, and face. They can occur alone or as multiple lesions and tend to have overlying yellow/brown scales. Adjacent skin may show signs of sun damage in the form of telangiectasias and yellow discoloration. Occasionally, heavily pigmented AKs may resemble lentigo maligna.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC)**

Basal cell carcinoma is the most common skin malignancy in the world, with approximately 80% of lesions occurring in the head/neck region with 20% on the eyelids.

For a more in-depth discussion on cutaneous BCC, the authors refer you to the StatPearls article dedicated to this; we will primarily focus on aspects specific to eyelid BCC.

Systemic conditions that may predispose a patient to BCC include:

- Sturge Weber/Port-wine stain

- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome

- Gorlin-Goltz syndrome

- Rombo syndrome

- Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome

- Xeroderma pigmentosum

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) and Keratoacanthoma (KA)**

Eyelid SCC is characterized by abnormal proliferation of cutaneous squamous cells. SCC typically arises from prolonged exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation and aging. Other causes include arsenic exposure, HPV infection, and HIV infection. Keratoacanthomas can be considered a well-differentiated variant of SCC, while actinic keratoses are defined as precancerous squamous lesions. As mentioned previously, one study showed that two-thirds of SCCs and one-third of BCCs arose from prior clinically diagnosed AKs in a high-risk population.

Systemic conditions that may predispose a patient to KA/SCC include:

- Oculocutaneous albinism

- Epidermolysis bullosa

- Fanconi anemia

- Ferguson-Smith

- Muir-Torre syndrome

- Mibelli-type porokeratosis

- Rothmund-Thomson syndrome

- Keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness syndrome

- Bloom syndrome

- Epidermodysplasia verruciformis

- Xeroderma pigmentosum

**Sebaceous Carcinoma (SC)**

Sebaceous carcinoma (SC) of the eyelid typically presents as a yellow painless mass along the eyelid margin originating from sebaceous glands such as meibomian glands or glands of Zeis.

**Melanoma**

Eyelid melanoma can be thought of similarly to cutaneous melanoma. Excessive sun exposure, presence of dysplastic nevi, a personal history of melanoma, older age, and Fitzpatrick skin types I-II are all risk factors.

Systemic conditions that may predispose a patient to this include

- Familial atypical multiple mole melanoma syndrome

- Familial melanoma

- Xeroderma pigmentosum

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC)**

Merkel cells are mechanoreceptors and were historically thought to be the source of Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC). However, MCC is now known to have both an epithelial and neuroendocrine origin; for this reason, epidermal stem cells, dermal stem cells, and B-cells have also been suggested as alternative cells of origin.