Many patients with RCVS have a full recovery without residual symptoms, given that reversibility of vasoconstriction is needed for the diagnosis. Clinical and angiographic features may not always resolve together; one may persist without the other and vice versa.

Overall, the majority of patients had no evidence of disability, with less than 30% of patients having minor disabilities. In terms of cognitive function, 92% of patients reported no evidence of cognitive impairment or only minor problems. In one study, out of 214 patients reviewed who had RCVS, only one patient had relapsed.

Despite the reversible nature of the disease and overall favorable long-term prognosis, patients can develop severe vasoconstriction leading to ischemic stroke and sometimes rare death. The mechanism of hemorrhage continues to be unclear, as well as the incidence of stroke in patients with RCVS. In previous studies, the reported prevalence of stroke was between 7% and 50%.

Patients who present with thunderclap headache can have a recurrence. The average period of recurrence of thunderclap headache is approximately one week; however, it has occurred as late as 26 days after the initial presentation. A portion of patients also reports mild persistent headache. If patients develop intracranial or subarachnoid hemorrhage, it usually presents as an early complication within the first three days and ten days, respectively, after headache onset. The diagnosis of ischemic stroke was made approximately two weeks after headache onset in patients who developed this complication.