**Prevention Strategies**

Screening and monitoring strategies to prevent stillbirth are controversial. It is appropriate to monitor patients with conditions that increase their risk of stillbirth with some form of antenatal testing during antepartum care. However, providers should be aware that false-positive rates are high for most tests. Intrapartum global use of cardiotocography and the ability to perform cesarean section for nonreassuring fetal heart tones has led to a decrease in stillbirth rates in developed countries. This resource must be made available in low and middle-income countries where the majority of stillbirths are occurring.

Risk scoring systems have good sensitivity but a poor predictive value when it comes to predicting negative birth outcomes.

There is no evidence that fetal kick count monitoring is useful in all pregnancies or helps prevent stillbirths.

Although a pregnancy ultrasound has several benefits, the routine use of ultrasound in pregnancy has not demonstrated benefit in reducing stillbirth.

Uterine artery Doppler has been shown to identify fetuses with intrauterine growth restriction at risk for stillbirth, but this identification requires timely and appropriate measures to prevent stillbirth, which requires ongoing research.

Stillbirth incidence is not affected by the use of pelvimetry, but the cesarean section rate increases.

Diabetes in pregnancy warrants screening and treatment aimed at maintaining glucose control to reduce stillbirths, especially in populations where the prevalence of diabetes is high. Pregestational control of diabetes has the most benefit in reducing the risk of stillbirth. Stillbirth risk is not increased in women with good diabetic control and no evidence of diabetic vasculopathy.

In the USA, a reduction in the stillbirth rate was noted when the cardiotocography/nonstress test (NST) was introduced for the management of high-risk pregnancies.

Although vibroacoustic stimulation may help to reduce the testing time for cardiotocography and the incidence of nonreactive tests, it has not been shown to reduce stillbirth rates.

Although polyhydramnios is associated with an increased risk for stillbirth, the benefit of diagnosing polyhydramnios to reduce the stillbirth rate is uncertain and warrants further study.

Home-based care for pregnancies complicated by non-proteinuric hypertensive disease of pregnancy and multiple gestations does not appear to be inferior to hospital-based care.

Compared to no or intermittent auscultation in low-risk women, admission cardiotocography was associated with higher caesarean rates and fewer neonatal seizures but no improvement in stillbirth rates.

A fetal electrocardiogram or pulse oximetry, in addition to cardiotocography, has not been shown to prevent stillbirth.