**Special Populations**

**Pregnant travelers**should generally be counseled to avoid travel to malaria-endemic areas until after delivery as malaria increases the risk for prematurity, spontaneous abortion, and stillbirth. Malaria may also be more severe in pregnant patients.  In situations where deferring travel is not possible, mefloquine, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine are safe for pregnancy when accounting for the usual contraindications and resistance patterns. Doxycycline is contraindicated in pregnant women due to concerns for fetal dental discoloration and bone growth inhibition. Atovaquone-proguanil has not been well-studied in pregnant women and is generally not prescribed in this population.  Primaquine should also not be used in pregnant travelers due to concerns about fetal G6PD deficiency.

**Breastfeeding:**There is not enough antimalarial drug excreted in breastmilk to provide chemoprophylaxis to infants. As mefloquine, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine are safe for infants; they are also reasonable during breastfeeding. Little data exists for doxycycline, but it is generally not recommended for use in the breastfeeding mother. Atovaquone-proguanil also has little safety data and is not recommended for prophylaxis in those breastfeeding infants under 5 kg. Primaquine also has no available data; however, both the mother and the infant require G6PD deficiency testing before prophylaxis with primaquine. Tafenoquine is also not recommended due to a lack of data.

**Children**Atovaquone-proguanil is an option for children over 5 kg.  Mefloquine, chloroquine, and primaquine can be prescribed to children, taking into account the usual contraindications and resistance patterns. Children under the age of 8 should not receive doxycycline due to concerns of dental discoloration. Pediatric weight-based doses should not exceed adult doses and may be tolerated best when mixed with something sweet to overcome the bitter taste. The medication should also be taken on a full stomach to reduce the risk of vomiting or other GI upset. Overdose of antimalarials, especially chloroquine, can be fatal to children - childproof bottles and regular safety measures are essential.

**Malaria prevention in older travelers:**Elderly travelers are more likely to suffer morbidity and mortality related to malaria than their younger counterparts. In a systematic review, travelers over 60 years old were less likely to adhere to mosquito avoidance measures, though chemoprophylaxis adherence appeared better in older patients. Prescribers should consider any creatinine clearance inhibition when choosing chemoprophylaxis regimens.