Galantamine is taken by oral route only. It is readily available over the counter on the web market as a supplement in 4 mg tablet and 8 mg capsule dosage forms for boosting memory and inducing lucid dreams.

Galantamine is widely available in pharmacies with clinicians' prescriptions. There are two different types of dosage forms currently available in the market, immediate and extended-release.

As a capsule, the extended-release dosage form is available in different strengths of 8 mg, 16 mg, and 24 mg. The ER capsule has the advantage of a convenient dosing schedule and is taken once every morning. This leads to improved patient compliance with the treatment regimen.

For extended-release capsules, the dosage range that has shown efficacy in a controlled clinical trial for dementia of Alzheimer disease is 16 to 24 mg/day. For dementia therapy, 8 mg a day is the recommended starting dosage and is taken once every morning with a meal for a minimum of 4 weeks. Then, the dosage can be titrated up to the initial maintenance dosage, which is 16 mg per day. After a minimum of 4 weeks at 16 mg/day dosage, further escalation in the dosage can be considered to maintain the patient at 24 mg daily. An increase in all the dosages depends on the assessment of the patient for clinical benefits and degree of tolerance to the previous dosage.

The two forms, tablets, and solutions are the immediate types of drug-delivering systems. The solution form contains 4 mg of galantamine per ml, and the tablet form is supplied in various strengths of 4 mg, 8 mg, and 12 mg. For immediate-release tablets, the dosage range of 16 to 32 mg per day has shown effectiveness in a controlled clinical trial for dementia of Alzheimer disease. However, studies show that the 32 mg daily dosage is less tolerable than other lower dosages, and therefore, the recommended dosage range is 16 to 24 mg/day, taken in two divided dosages with food to decrease or completely avoid gastrointestinal adverse events such as nausea and vomiting.

The recommendation is to initiate the treatment at the lowest dosage and titrate up slowly after carefully assessing the patient for clinical benefits and tolerability of the previous dosage. Treatment begins with a 4 mg twice a day dosage and should be taken in the morning and evening with food. After a minimum of 4 weeks, the dosage can be increased to 16 mg/day, which is an initial maintenance dosage. A further escalation to 24 mg daily dosage can be attempted after a minimum of 4 weeks at 16mg daily dosage. If possible, maintain the patient on a 16 mg/day dosage as 24 mg/day dosage has not shown statistically significant higher efficacy in a clinical trial. However, 24 mg/day dosage may offer greater clinical benefits in some patients.

If a single dose is missed, it can be taken as soon as the patient remembers. However, if it is close to the time for the next dosage, the missed dose is skipped to continue following the regular dosing schedule. The dose cannot be doubled to catch up. If the dosage gets interrupted for more than 72 hours, then the treatment will restart at the lowest dosage and be titrated gradually to the current dosage level. As galantamine has the potential to cause dehydration, the patient and caregiver should be educated to ensure adequate fluid intake.

In patients with renal impairment and creatinine clearance of 9 to 59 ml/min, galantamine dosage should usually not exceed 16 mg/day. Therapy with galantamine, immediate or delayed-release, is not recommended if creatinine clearance is less than 9ml/min.

For patients suffering from moderately severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 7 to 9), caution needs to be exercised during dose titration, and the maximum dosage should usually not exceed 16mg/day. Severe liver impairment (Child-Pugh score 10 to 15) is a contraindication for treatment with galantamine, immediate or extended-release.

A patient currently on therapy with the immediate-release tablet and at a steady-state (receiving stable doses) can be converted to extended-release capsule treatment. Switching from galantamine IR to galantamine ER does not require the following dosage escalation schema and should occur at the same daily dosage.

The abrupt withdrawal of the galantamine, immediate or delayed-release, in patients who have been taking dosages within the effective range is not associated with higher incidences of adverse events when compared with the group of patients who continue to receive the same dosages of galantamine. However, the beneficial effects of the galantamine are lost when the medicine is discontinued.

If donepezil, another acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, is ineffective or poorly tolerated by the patient, a switch to galantamine may be beneficial.

**Pharmacogenetics**

APOE and CYPs are the most relevant genes that influence the efficacy and safety of galantamine. Carriers of the APOE-4 gene are the worst responders to galantamine.

**Pharmacodynamics/Kinetics**

Galantamine demonstrates a dose-linear pharmacokinetic profile over a dose range of 8 to 32mg/day. The absolute oral bioavailability of galantamine is approximately 90%. Following oral administration, the time to peak concentration (Tmax) is about one hour. Food does not affect the AUC of galantamine, but Cmax is reduced by 25%, and Tmax is delayed by 1.5 hours when galantamine is administered with food. The mean volume of galantamine distribution is 175 L. At therapeutic concentration, plasma protein binding of galantamine is 18%. In whole blood, 52.7% of galantamine is distributed to red blood cells. The blood concentration of galantamine is 1.2 times higher than that of the plasma. Furthermore, galantamine crosses the blood-brain barrier.

Galantamine metabolism involves the multiple metabolic pathways hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes, glucuronidases, and urinary excretion in unchanged form. In vitro studies indicate that inhibition of two major hepatic cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, increases oral bioavailability modestly. There are extensive and poor metabolizers of CYP2D6, and CYP2D6 mediated O-demethylation predominates in extensive metabolizers. In vitro studies in poor and extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6, unchanged galantamine and its glucuronide accounted for the most plasma radioactivity. The CYP3A4-mediated pathway forms galantamine-N-oxide. N-demethylation, epimerization, and sulfate conjugation are other important metabolic pathways. Other metabolites include or galantamine, O-desmethyl-or galantamine, O-desmethyl-galantamine, galantamine, and epigalantamine, which do not even retain clinically significant pharmacology activities.

Galantamine ER 24 mg capsules administered once a day, and under fasting conditions are bioequivalent to galantamine IR tablets 12 mg twice a day with respect to AUC24h and Cmin. However, compared with the galantamine IR tablets, the Cmax and Tmax of the galantamine ER capsules are lower and occur later, respectively, with Cmax about 25% lower, and median Tmax occurs about 4.5 to 5.0 hours after dosing. In addition, dose-proportionality is observed for galantamine ER capsules over the dose range of 8 to 24 mg per day, and steady-state is achieved within one week. Age does not affect the pharmacokinetics of galantamine ER capsules. CYP2D6 poor metabolizers have approximately 50% higher drug exposures than extensive metabolizers. There are no appreciable changes in pharmacokinetic parameters, whether galantamine ER capsules are given with food or in the fasting state.

In healthy individuals, renal clearance accounts for approximately 20 to 25% of the total plasma clearance of the drug. The elimination of galantamine has been shown to reduce in subjects with impaired kidney function. Following oral or intravenous administration, about 20% of the dose excretes unchanged in the urine within 24 hours, representing about 65 ml/min of renal clearance and approximately 20 to 25% of total plasma clearance; 300 ml/min. The terminal half-life of galantamine is about 7 hours. In a radiolabeled drug (3H-galantamine) study, approximately 95% and 5% of the total radioactivity was detected in the urine and feces, respectively. Of the total dose excreted in the urine, 32%, a significant portion was the unchanged parent compound, and 12% was the metabolic product in the form of glucuronide.

**Specific Populations**

Elderly: According to the data from clinical trials in patients with Alzheimer disease, the galantamine concentrations are 30-40% higher in geriatric patients than in healthy young subjects.

Gender and Race: Analysis of population pharmacokinetic on both the genders, males and females, reveals that clearance of galantamine is about 20% higher in men than in women (which is explained by higher body weight in men) and that race did not have any effect on the clearance of galantamine.

Hepatic Impairment: Following ingestion of a single 4 mg dosage of galantamine IR tablets in patients with mild hepatic dysfunction (Child-Pugh score of 5 to 6) and healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of galantamine has no appreciable differences. In subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 7 to 9), a 25% reduction in galantamine's metabolic clearance compared to clearance in normal volunteers was observed. Galantamine exposure would be expected to increase further along with increasing severity of hepatic impairment.

Galantamine clearance was decreased by 60% in patients suffering from moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Pugh score 7 or higher). Various simulations were performed to evaluate the impact of hepatic dysfunction on the peak plasma concentration of galantamine. These simulations confirmed the need for a slower rate of dose escalation in patients with impaired liver function: 4 mg per day during the first week followed by 4 mg, 8 mg, and 12 mg twice a day dosage as compared to the standard titration scheme of 4 mg-8 mg-12 mg-16 mg twice daily dosage.

CYP2D6 Poor Metabolizers: CYP 450 2D6 genotype also influences the galantamine metabolism and clearance. About 7% of the general population has a genetic variation that causes a decrease in the activity level of the CYP2D6 isozyme. These kinds of individuals have been identified as poor metabolizers. After oral administration of a single dosage of 4 mg or 8 mg galantamine, compared to CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers, CYP2D6 poor metabolizers exhibited a similar Cmax and an increase in AUC∞ of unchanged galantamine.

In two Phase 3 studies for Alzheimer disease, randomized patients in a blinded treatment were genotyped with respect to the CYP2D6 isoenzyme. Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed a 25% reduction in median clearance of galantamine in poor metabolizers versus extensive metabolizers. Despite this, an adjustment in galantamine dosage is not required in patients identified as poor metabolizers because the medication dosage is individually titrated to tolerability.

Pregnancy: Research data from animal studies have shown teratogenic effects in fetuses.

Lactation: The data is not available on the secretion of galantamine in human milk, the effects on breastfed infants, or the effects of galantamine ER or galantamine IR on milk production. The physician and patient have to weigh the benefits versus the side effects in prescribing it.

Pediatrics: Clinical trials are not conducted in the pediatric population to establish safety and efficacy.