**Absolute Contraindications**

- Hemodynamic instability with poor end-organ perfusion. Enteral feeding in patients with bowel ischemia or necrosis can make a bad situation worse

- Active GI bleeding

- Small or large bowel obstruction

- Paralytic ileus secondary to electrolyte abnormalities, peritonitis

**Relative Contraindications**

- Moderate to severe malabsorption

- Diverticular disease

- Fistula in the small bowel

- Short bowel disease in the early stages.

**Special Cases**

**Acute Kidney Injury**

In acute kidney injury (AKI), nutritional support is geared toward conserving lean body mass and energy reserve and preventing malnutrition.

Patients with AKI and renal failure might be in a non-hypercatabolic or hypercatabolic state with excessive sodium, potassium, and phosphate load. In a non-hypercatabolic state, high-energy enteral nutrition with normal protein content and low sodium, potassium, and phosphate load are recommended.

**Acute Liver Failure and Liver Transplantation**

Liver failure is associated with the loss of the synthetic function of the liver. Liver failure patients also have an impaired ability to synthesize clotting factors. Enteral feeding should be cautiously approached in patients with liver failure because of the inherent risk of gastrointestinal bleeding from varices and coagulopathy. In acute liver failure, parenteral nutrition might be better if the gut is not viable or if the risk of hepatic encephalopathy is high. If enteral feeding is used, a balanced mixture of energy supply from carbohydrates and protein is recommended. Caloric intake should be around 25 kcal/kg per day. Enteral feeds should contain an adequate quantity of potassium, magnesium, and zinc. In liver transplant patients, early enteral feeding via a transpyloric approach is recommended.

**Acute Lung Injury (ALI), Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)**

This is one of the most common reasons for admission into the intensive care unit (ICU). Daily protein intake should be around 1 to 1.8 g/kg daily. Use of high fat, low carbohydrate is not indicated. ALI and ARDS require an enteral diet rich in omega-3 fatty acids and antioxidants.

**Multiple Trauma**

A patient who sustained multiple trauma should be started early enteral feeding. We recommend that trauma patients be started on a total caloric intake of about 25 to 30 kcal/kg per day. We also recommend arginine and omega in patients with multiple trauma.

**Abdominal Surgery**

The nutritional needs of patients with abdominal surgery are similar to those of other critically ill patients. Surgery causes both inflammatory and metabolic changes in the body. A post-surgical patient with malnutrition might have delayed wound healing and dehiscence and decreased immunological functions placing the patient at risk for infectious and cardiopulmonary complications. This can prolong hospital stays and cause a higher rate of mortality.

**Acute Pancreatitis**

Inflammation of the pancreas can provoke a systemic inflammatory response syndrome. This causes a hypermetabolic, hyperdynamic, and catabolic state. Classically acute pancreatitis is treated with bowel rest and parenteral nutrition. It has been shown that this approach is associated with high morbidity and mortality. In acute pancreatitis, there is intestinal barrier dysfunction which is associated with multiple organ failure, pancreatic necrosis, and mortality. Based on these facts, the current recommendation is to start early enteral feeding via the jejunum within 48 hours of hospitalization.