Levetiracetam is available in oral and intravenous (IV) formulations. The total daily dosage of IV levetiracetam is equivalent to oral. It is administered as a 15-minute infusion. There is no evidence to use a loading dose. In addition, oral forms are available in immediate-release and extended-release forms. The bioavailability and metabolism of the extended-release form are similar to the immediate-release formulation. However, the time to reach peak plasma concentration is 3 hours higher with the extended-release formulation.

**Adult Dosing**

The minimum recommended dose is 500 mg twice daily. Some older adults may respond to doses as low as 500 mg daily. It should be started at a low dose and titrated for clinical response. Increase the dose to 250 or 500 mg at 1 to 2-week intervals until the clinical response is achieved. The maximum recommended dose is 3000 mg per day. Rapid dose escalation can lead to adverse effects. An immediate-release form is dosed twice daily, and extended-release forms once daily. A therapeutic serum concentration is not established for levetiracetam, and dosage is guided by clinical response.

Efficacy of more than 3000 mg/day dose is not fully established. Some suggest that the dose can be increased up to 4000 mg /day in patients who have shown clear response but have occasional breakthrough seizures. However, some reports of seizure exacerbation with higher doses, and the physician should keep that in mind while using higher doses.

It is also used off-label sometimes for status epilepticus. The dose commonly used is 1000 to 3000 mg IV infusion at a rate of 2 mg/kg per minute or a single dose of 60 mg/kg. Levetiracetam is conventionally given as an intermittent infusion to mitigate potential adverse drug reactions due to its acidic formulation. However, the time lag in the preparation of diluted levetiracetam can delay the treatment of status epilepticus; hence, a recent study examined the administration of undiluted doses. Results demonstrated that rapid and undiluted intravenous levetiracetam is safe and effective.

**Pediatric Considerations**

Levetiracetam may be used safely (with caution) in children older than five years. The recommended starting dose is 20 mg/kg per day in 2 divided doses. It can be titrated up to 20 mg/kg every two weeks up to a maximum dose of 60 mg/kg daily.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Dosage adjustment is generally not needed for hepatic impairment. However, there are reports that total body clearance of levetiracetam is reduced by half in severe liver disease(Child-Pugh C). Therefore, half of the recommended dose should be initiated in patients with severe liver cirrhosis.

**Renal Impairment**

Levetiracetam is excreted through the kidneys, so renal impairment decreases the elimination rate, necessitating dose reduction. Therefore, according to the manufacturer's labeling following dosage adjustment is required.

- For creatinine clearance 30-50 (mL/min/1.73m^2) - 250 to 750 mg every 12 hours is recommended.

- For creatinine clearance< 30 (mL/min/1.73m^2) - 250 to 500 mg every 12 hours is recommended.

- ESRD patients on dialysis 500 to 1,000 mg every 24 hours. After dialysis, a 250 to 500 mg additional dose is recommended.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

According to manufacturer labeling, marked pharmacokinetic changes during pregnancy are particularly observed during the third trimester. Current studies cannot definitively establish the absence of risk, and the literature review has not demonstrated an association between levetiracetam use during pregnancy and major congenital disabilities or miscarriage. However, significant differences in pharmacokinetics during pregnancy have been observed for levetiracetam. Average peak clearance increased by approximately two-fold for levetiracetam from a nonpregnant baseline.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Manufacturer labeling indicates that The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be evaluated, along with the mother's clinical requirement for levetiracetam and adverse drug reactions in the breastfed infant. Levetiracetam is excreted in breast milk, but infant serum drug levels are low. However, the levetiracetam concentration in milk can be high in some women and sometimes cause sedation in breastfed infants. If the mother requires levetiracetam, it is not necessarily a reason to stop breastfeeding. However, clinicians should monitor exclusively breastfed infants for developmental milestones, drowsiness, and weight gain. Evidence indicates that levetiracetam might decrease the maternal breastmilk output in some women. Therefore, maternal serum level monitoring and dosage adjustment are recommended in the early postpartum period if the mother was administered levetiracetam throughout pregnancy and breastfeeding.