# Learning Outcome

- Describe the items that are often swallowed by children

- Recall the presentation of foreign body ingestion

- Summarize the management of a patient with foreign body ingestion

- List the nurse care plans for a child with foreign body ingestion

# Introduction

Children commonly swallow foreign bodies. Coins are the most commonly swallowed foreign body that comes to medical attention in the U.S.; in other countries, those related to food, such as fish bones, are most common.  Preschoolers of both sexes, adolescent boys, and children with mental health issues are at the highest risk. Even infants may swallow foreign bodies that are given to them, perhaps by older siblings. Most swallowed foreign bodies will harmlessly pass through the GI tract, but some will lead to health problems if they become lodged (e.g., too large to pass or small objects like a pill that may adhere to a moist surface); traumatize the mucosa (e.g., sharp or pointed object, like a razor blade or pin), or cause caustic burn injury (e.g., biologically active substances, such as a button battery or a medication patch).

# Nursing Diagnosis

- Anxiety

- Cough

- Drooling

- Chest discomfort

- Dyspnea

- Respiratory distress

- Diaphoretic

- Gagging

- Emesis

- Stridor

- Altered mental status

# Causes

Typically, pediatric foreign body ingestion is accidental, although deliberate ingestion can also occur.

# Risk Factors

The vast majority of ingestions occur in the six months to three year age range.

# Assessment

In cases of suspected foreign body ingestion, the airway (including the oropharynx) and breathing should be evaluated promptly.  A foreign body that has become obstructed within or injured the esophagus may cause chest pain or a foreign body sensation. Symptoms may be more notable when swallowing. Younger children may drool, gag, vomit, or refuse food. Hematemesis and cough may be present.  A foreign body lodged in the stomach or intestines may cause abdominal pain, vomiting, or bloody stools.  If present for a prolonged period, fever or weight loss may develop. A foreign body that has completely obstructed the esophagus will cause more dramatic symptoms.

Importantly, however, there may be no signs or symptoms (or they may be subtle and hard to recognize) in pediatric ingestions. Since many foreign body ingestions by children are unwitnessed, the possibility of non-specific symptoms being caused by foreign body ingestion should always be considered.  In one series, for example, only half of the patients had any symptoms whatsoever despite witnessed ingestion of a foreign body.

Swallowed foreign bodies that contain nickel may cause systemic signs and symptoms, such as rash or pruritus, in patients with nickel sensitivity.

# Evaluation

If a complete history and physical examination (including examination of the pharynx) suggest possible foreign body ingestion, the provider must decide whether imaging is indicated.  If so, usually plain radiographs suffice initially. Healthy children with recent, low-risk ingestions may be simply observed.  Metallic swallowed foreign bodies, such as coins and batteries, will show up readily on a plain radiograph. Metal detectors are occasionally used, especially in the setting of known coin ingestion.

Button/disc batteries may cause serious injury if lodged in the esophagus, nose, ear, or other orifice for even a brief period.  The highest risk is associated with larger lithium-based batteries, but all models carry some risk. Children with suspected button/disc battery ingestion should be managed urgently; a battery lodged in the esophagus should be removed without delay. Treatment algorithms for button/disc battery ingestions are widely available.

Small, powerful magnets, such as those found in some toys and games, may cause serious injury to the intestines, as the strong attraction between two or more magnets may cause them to erode through intervening tissues.

Preexisting GI tract abnormalities, such as previous surgery, strictures, fistulas, diverticula, or functional abnormalities, increases the risk of a swallowed foreign body becoming lodged at the site of the abnormality.

Unusual or recurrent foreign body ingestion should prompt consideration of psychosocial concerns. Foreign body ingestion may be risk-taking or attention-seeking behavior. Abuse or neglect may be present. Mental illness may lead some children to swallow foreign bodies. This may be inadvertent, such as the patient with bulimia who loses grip on a toothbrush used to induce vomiting and swallows it.  Packets of drugs may be swallowed to avoid detection by police.

Prevention of foreign body ingestion in children is a high priority. Caregivers should be educated about preventing small children from contact with small objects that may be harmful if swallowed, especially button/disc batteries, small magnets, and other high-risk objects. This includes items placed into a trash container that may be accessible to children.

# Medical Management

Most children who have swallowed a foreign body do not require invasive treatment. Asymptomatic, previously healthy children who have swallowed low-risk foreign bodies typically will do well. Patients/caregivers should be instructed on the signs and symptoms of subsequent potential complications.

Foreign bodies that are lodged in the esophagus are most commonly removed endoscopically.

Medical management of foreign body ingestion is not recommended. Emetics, muscle relaxants, and meat tenderizers are typically ineffective, and are potentially dangerous, in the treatment of children with esophageal foreign bodies.

# Nursing Management

- Assess vital signs

- Get a history from the parents

- Assess for respiratory distress

- Listen to the chest for wheezing

- Provide oxygen if saturations are low

- Start two large-bore IVs

- Keep patient NPO in case endoscopy is required

- Provide comfort care

- Suction to ease drooling

- Check x-ray report for the location of the foreign body

- Educate caregiver on safe storage of toys and keeping small objects away from the child

- Assess the mental status of the child to ensure that it was not the cause of the foreign body ingestion

# When To Seek Help

- Respiratory distress

- Chocking

- Low oxygen saturation

- Cyanotic

- No air entry in the lungs

- Unstable vital signs

# Outcome Identification

The majority of ingested foreign bodies pass through the gastrointestinal tract without any complications. In rare cases, the retained foreign body may cause ulceration, perforation, bleeding, or localized stricture formation. The most dangerous foreign bodies are button batteries which can rapidly cause mucosal injury. Magnets are also known to cause mucosal injury in the small bowel leading to perforation. In rare cases, complications are also known to occur during removal of the foreign body- usually from the anesthesia.

# Coordination of Care

Management of children who have swallowed foreign bodies requires an interprofessional approach. Physicians, nurses, poison control specialists, radiology technologists, child life specialists, ambulance personnel, and others must work together to provide continuous, child-friendly care, both acutely and in follow-up. [Levels 3, 4, and 5] The nurse should educate the parent and caregiver about the dangers of leaving small items around children. In addition, parents should be told never to keep button batteries around children as they are known to cause rapid damage to the GI tract.

# Health Teaching and Health Promotion

Prevention of foreign body ingestion in children is a high priority. Caregivers should be educated about preventing small children from contact with small objects that may be harmful if swallowed, especially button/disc batteries, small magnets, and other high-risk objects. This includes items placed into a trash container that may be accessible to children.

# Risk Management

Management of children who have swallowed foreign bodies requires an interprofessional approach. Physicians, nurses, poison control specialists, radiology technologists, child life specialists, ambulance personnel, and others must work together to provide continuous, child-friendly care, both acutely and in follow-up. [Levels 3, 4, and 5] The nurse should educate the parent and caregiver about the dangers of leaving small items around children. In addition, parents should be told never to keep button batteries around children as they are known to cause rapid damage to the GI tract.

Unusual or recurrent foreign body ingestion should prompt consideration of psychosocial concerns and an evaluation by a mental health nurse. Foreign body ingestion may be risk-taking or attention-seeking behavior. Abuse or neglect may be present. Mental illness may lead some children to swallow foreign bodies. This may be inadvertent, such as the patient with bulimia who loses grip on a toothbrush used to induce vomiting and swallows it. Packets of drugs may be swallowed to avoid detection by police.