The preparation consists of the following steps:

- Insert the cannula.

- Connect to the circuit (removal of all air from the circuit).

- Check for gases.

- Make sure that there are no air bubbles in the circuit, membrane, or connections.

- Connect sweep gas flow to the oxygenator and start at 3-4 L/min (titrate to CO2 on ABG)

- Increase rotations per minute (RPM) to generate adequate positive pressure in the return limb of the circuit.

- Clamps on the circuit are removed and ensure the antegrade blood flow of ECMO.

- Increase RPM to achieve 3 to 4 L/min ECMO blood flow.

- Mechanical chest compressions are discontinued if in cardiac arrest.

Following a cannulation placement position is confirmed by fluoroscopy or echocardiography in VA ECMO. Vasopressors should be titrated to maintain mean arterial pressure > 60 mmHg for proper organ perfusion and <80 mmHg to prevent the development of LV distention. Endotracheal tube placement, central venous access, sedation, analgesia, bedside ultrasound to identify possible complications like pneumothorax, thoracic or abdominal bleeding, targeted temperature control, 12 lead EKG, chest x-ray, end-tidal CO2, laboratory blood test including crossmatch is encouraged as part of ECPR management.

No definite timing before the initiation of ECPR has been defined. Initiation of cannulation is recommended to start in 10-20 minutes after the failed resuscitation efforts as too late initiation can increase the risk of hypoxic brain injury or other organs. Recommended goal to establish ECMO flow is within one hour of cardiac arrest.

If the patient is not at a facility where ECMO is performed, the patient should be transported to the nearest center as early as possible. Emergency medicine service should continue high-quality CPR without interruptions. Automated cardiac massage device is proven to be equally effective as human chest compressions.

The cannulation phase starts with preparing femoral areas with an antiseptic solution. External cardiac massage should be continued with an automated mechanical compression device during the cannulation phase. Cannulation should be performed with a team of surgeons, intensivists, cardiologists, or emergency physicians. The cannulation sequence is mentioned below.