The length of the styloid process is not consistent across all individuals, with studies reporting average lengths anywhere from 1.52 cm to 8 cm.

The ossification and fusion of the styloid process also show variance. As mentioned previously, the stylohyal part might unite with the tympanohyal after puberty. If the stylohyal part successfully fuses with the tympanohyal part and the stylohyal aspect ossifies, it results in a long styloid process. However, if the stylohyal part fails to ossify, it results in a short styloid process.

Multiple theories have been proposed as the etiology responsible for the variance in ossification and elongation of the styloid process. The first theory is the "theory of reactive hyperplasia," which proposes that the styloid process reacts and proliferates after pharyngeal trauma, causing elongation. The second theory is the "theory of reactive metaplasia," which is similar to the first theory in trauma being the triggering factor. However, the second theory suggests that the stylohyoid ligament is the structure responsible for the abnormal ossification as it undergoes metaplasia and partial ossification. The third theory is the "theory of anatomic variance," which suggests that the ossification of the styloid process and the stylohyoid ligament is a normal process representing an anatomical variation resulting in the elongation of the styloid process. An additional and fourth theory that the elongated styloid process is due to retained embryologic tissue from Reichert's cartilage.