**Acute Management**

Due to the high mortality rate and extreme acuity of the condition, VF patients warrant immediate attention. Healthcare professionals should immediately initiate guideline-directed management as per Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) protocol. There is a lower likelihood of survival if the healthcare professional deviates from the ACLS guidelines.

**Preventative Management**

Primary prevention has been a significant factor in reducing VF-related SCDs. Most VF transition from VT and other VA and hence identifying such arrhythmias at an early stage can help prevent VF. In patients with symptoms suspected to be related to VA, detection using ambulatory electrocardiography and implanted cardiac monitors is recommended.

**Medication Therapy
**

Amiodarone is the most commonly studied antiarrhythmic for prevention of SCD. The overall effect of amiodarone on survival is controversial. Most studies have failed to show any added benefit when compared to placebo or ICD.

**Defibrillators
**

Randomized control trials such as MADIT-I (Multicenter Automated Defibrillator Implantation Trial), MADIT-II, SCD-HeFT (Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Trial) have clearly demonstrated mortality benefits with ICD when compared to standard medical therapy. Trials comparing ICD with antiarrhythmic therapy such as AVID (Antiarrhythmic Versus Implantable Defibrillator) have shown similar results.

ICD placement is recommended for primary prevention of SCD in patients at increased risk of life-threatening VF/VT. ICD placement is also indicated for secondary prevention of SCD in patients with prior episodes of VF and sustained VT.