The treatment of cardiac amyloidosis aims to treat the underlying cause and the symptoms of heart failure.

- Treatment of heart failure: For AL amyloidosis, diuretics are the cornerstone of therapy. Most patients do not tolerate renin-angiotensin-aldosterone inhibitors (RAAS-I), with hypotension being precipitated even with low doses. However, RAAS-I is better tolerated in ATTR amyloidosis. Orthostatic hypotension is commonly encountered due to autonomic dysfunction. Peripheral vasoconstrictors such as midodrine can be used to maintain blood pressure while allowing diuresis to relieve congestion. Likewise, beta-blockers are poorly tolerated. Profound hypotension on initiation of low doses of beta-blockers should raise suspicion for the possibility of underlying cardiac amyloidosis. Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists and loop diuretics, hence, remain the vital therapy options for heart failure management in cardiac amyloidosis.

- Treatment of AL amyloidosis is based on standard treatment for multiple myeloma. It requires coordinated teamwork of hematologists and cardiologists. The aim is to remove paraproteins from blood and urine and stabilize bone marrow. The most used chemotherapy agents include melphalan (an alkylating agent) and bortezomib (proteasome inhibitor). Bortezomib can be used along with dexamethasone and cyclophosphamide. A positive cardiac response is defined as a 30% reduction in B-natriuretic peptides over six months.

- Orthotropic heart transplant in AL amyloidosis is associated with a high risk of disease recurrence in the transplanted heart. However, in carefully selected patients (particularly those with clinically isolated heart involvement), a heart transplant can be considered if the patient agrees to undergo intensive chemotherapy for plasma cells after the heart transplant. This is because the amyloid heart cannot tolerate aggressive chemotherapy because of depressed myocardial function. Hence, a heart transplant followed by aggressive chemotherapy can be attempted with an expected 5-year survival of 60%.

- Patients with wild-ATTR amyloidosis usually have isolated heart involvement, making them suitable candidates for heart transplants. However, because of the greater age of diagnosis (7 decades or later), most patients are excluded owing to their age.

- Transthyretin is mainly produced in the liver. In mutant ATTR, liver transplantation is necessary to remove the source of amyloid proteins. Orthotropic liver transplant carries a 5-year survival of 75% (mainly for Val30Met mutation). Patients with mutant-ATTR are younger than wild-ATTR patients. These patients are suitable for a heart transplant in isolated heart involvement. However, if there is autonomic neuropathy, most patients would require combined liver and heart transplants to prevent the recurrence of amyloid disease in the transplanted heart.

- However, in wild ATTR, there is no role in liver transplantation. Instead, some agents (under investigation) can be used to stabilize TTR, such as tafamidis.

- Rhythm and rate control for atrial arrhythmias is challenging in amyloidosis as beta-blockers are poorly tolerated. Amiodarone remains a reasonable option and is well tolerated. Digoxin tends to bind to amyloid fibrils and increases the risk of digoxin toxicity. However, digoxin can be used for rate control in patients with cardiac amyloidosis and atrial fibrillation if carefully titrated. Calcium channel blockers have not been proven to be of benefit in amyloid diastolic dysfunction as with other diastolic dysfunctions such as hypertensive heart disease and may precipitate hypotension. For atrial flutter, catheter ablation can be attempted. Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in the setting of amyloidosis carries a high recurrence rate.  Patients may irrespectively require anticoagulation because of the increased risk of thrombosis and thromboembolism.

- In the case of atrioventricular block, one should aim for biventricular pacing as the pacing of the right ventricle alone in the setting of stiff myocardium would be disadvantageous. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for primary prevention provides no clear benefit and is not indicated. It is reserved for secondary prevention, as otherwise generally indicated.

- Treatment of secondary amyloidosis requires treatment of the underlying inflammatory conditions.

- Isolated atrial amyloidosis generally requires no treatment.