The pituitary gland has a dual origin. The oral ectoderm gives origin to the adenohypophysis, and the neural ectoderm gives origin to the neurohypophysis. The posterior lobe is smaller and derives from the outpouching of the third ventricle neural primordia. Thus it is an extension of the central nervous system. The organogenesis begins around the 4th week of the intrauterine development of the fetus. A hypophyseal placode forms at the oral ectoderm and gives origin to the Rathke's pouch; this develops as an upward evagination of the oral ectoderm towards the neural ectoderm to form the anterior lobe. The ventral diencephalon extends downward to form the posterior lobe. Around 6 to 8 weeks, a constriction forms at the base of the Rathke's pouch and closes completely, thus separating it from the oral epithelium. The hypothalamus communicates with the adenohypophysis through a vascular link called the hypothalamohypophyseal portal system. Meticulous coordination between the regulatory transcription factor signals is a requirement for proper pituitary gland development. There are several transcription factors such as the bone morphogenic protein four and fibroblast growth factor 8 that are necessary for the development. The notch signaling pathway has a vital role in cell lineage commitment with epigenetic regulation. SOX2 and SOC3 are involved in pituitary morphogenesis. Mutation of transcription factors such as Rpx, Prop-1, and Pit-1 can lead to a range of pituitary disorders as they are early factors that aid in organogenesis.