For MEBT to occur, there must be a history of exposure to a change in ambient pressure or trauma. Initially, the negative pressure gradient across the TM causes a sensation of fullness or dullness, which progresses to discomfort. This will advance to severe pain if the ambient pressure increase does not cease, or the pressure in the middle ear space is not equalized. Patients may report varying degrees of hearing loss secondary to serous or serosanguinous effusion within the middle ear space, or due to hemotympanum.  In the event of TM rupture, patients will often report a history of increasing pain with an abrupt improvement, associated with varying degrees of hearing loss. A patient who develops IEBT or a PLF may also report hearing loss, tinnitus, hyperacusis, vertigo, nausea, and vomiting.

It is important to note that some patients may suffer ETD and MEBT without experiencing symptoms. Jansen et al.

Otoscopy directly and easily visualizes the EAC and TM, however, visualization of the TM may be obstructed due to impacted cerumen or exostoses. Cerumen should be disimpacted to facilitate visualization of the TM (and to facilitate middle ear equalization). A significant consideration is that all EACs are not anatomically identical and elicit slight variations. This is true when observing the appearance of superficial landmarks, including differences in skin color, vascular formations, vascular prominence, and different cartilaginous and bony configurations and shapes. Some patients may exhibit superficial changes related to prior trauma of the EAC and TM. The physiological and anatomical changes due to MEBT are readily and easily visualized via direct otoscopic examination. Physical examination may demonstrate varying degrees of erythema or bleeding into the tissues, middle ear space effusions, or TM perforation. In the event of IEBT, gait instability, nystagmus, and audiometric hearing loss may be revealed. For further information, please read below in the evaluation section.