Patients can have variable presentations depending on the area of involvement of the disease.

- **Nasal symptoms:**This subset involves symptoms ranging from nasal obstruction, blood-tinged nasal discharge, and post-nasal drip to denasalization of voice and cacosmia. Symptomatology is proportionate to the size of growth and the extent of local involvement. Around 80% of the individuals suffering from the disease present with nasal symptoms

- **Otological symptoms:**Patients present with symptoms secondary to Eustachian tube blockage, i.e., conductive hearing loss, effusions and fullness, and tinnitus. Half of the patients with NPC have some form of otological complaint during the disease caused because of the growing mass obstructing the outflow of the Eustachian tube.

- **Neurological symptoms:**Intracranial extension is prevalent among 8% to 12% of the demographic — various forms of cranial nerve involvement present with the associated symptom. The most commonly involved nerve is the abducens nerve.

- **Nodal involvement:**One of the most common presenting features would be an enlarged neck node. Lymph nodes of the apex of the posterior triangle and the upper jugular are most commonly involved initially. Supraclavicular nodes are the last to be involved and are a sign of advanced disease.

**Distant metastasis and Paraneoplastic Syndrome**

Symptoms associated with distant spread are rarely presented to the primary care provider. The most significant spread includes the liver and lungs. It is sometimes difficult to assess the primary site of malignancy when metastatic pulmonary lesions are observed. PET scan aids in the differentiation of the two. Secondly, a handful of cases present with symptoms of dermatomyositis. A 10-year retrospective review has shown an association of NPC in patients with dermatomyositis.