During the first three weeks of fetal development, implantation of the blastocyst occurs. This occurs around the same time as secretion of hCG, which is the hormone detected for pregnancy tests. During the second week, the bilaminar disc forms, which includes the epiblast and hypoblast. During the third week of development, gastrulation occurs; the epiblast cells invaginate, replace the hypoblast, and proliferate into the middle layer, while the primitive streak forms the ectoderm. This process of gastrulation leads to the development of the three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, endoderm. These layers form different parts of each system, as discussed above.

During week four, the heart begins to beat and can be detected by ultrasound by week six. Also during week four, limb buds begin to form. By week eight fetal movements begin and by week ten, the genitalia forms.

The changes that occur during embryology take place simultaneously. Organogenesis (development of the organs) occurs from weeks three to eight. Avoiding teratogens especially during these weeks is crucial. The following are the embryological changes that occur specifically with the gastrointestinal tract.

- Week 3: the digestive tube starts differentiating. Gastrulation occurs. Initially, the prime gut tube forms as a hollow cylinder of endodermal cells surrounded by mesoderm. The endoderm sheet elongates and folds ventrally at the anterior and posterior ends, meeting near the yolk sac to form a closed tube.[1]

- Week 4: resorption of the buccopharyngeal membrane occurs, which closes the cranial end of the digestive tube.

- Week 6-10: midgut herniates throughout the umbilical ring, where it develops almost entirely outside the peritoneal cavity, then rotates back around in week ten.

- Week 7: obliteration of the omphalomesenteric duct (vitelline duct), which connects the midgut lumen to the yolk sac

- Week 9: Opening of the distal cloacal membrane.

- Week 11: distinctive longitudinal and circular muscle layers are present through the intestines

- Week 12: crypt development begins.

- Week 14: muscularis mucosae develops

- Week 24: fetal intestinal absorption function develops

- Week 32: fetal intestinal absorption reaches adult level.

Gastrointestinal development also includes the development of the enteric nervous system. The enteric nervous system (ENS) includes two ganglion neuron networks: the location of the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus is between the inner circular and the outer longitudinal muscle layers, the submucosal (Meissner) plexus is situated adjacent to the mucosal layer. These cells derive from the neural crest cells. The enteric nervous system is developed through many complex mechanisms, such as axon guidance and synaptogenesis, leading to the proliferation, migration, and differentiation of ENS precursors. These plexuses work with smooth muscle cells and mucosal villi to control the absorption and secretion of the GI system. The smooth muscle cells are derived from mesoderm and differentiate in a rostral to caudal wave.