The enlargement of the thyroid gland may be due to a chronic low-grade intermittent stimulus or stimuli, which can be physiologic, pathologic, or a combination of the two. The chronic stimuli lead to diffuse hyperplasia of the gland and can form a nodule or multiple nodules followed by the autonomous activity of the nodules or part of the thyroid gland, independent of pituitary TSH feedback. These processes, in turn, lead to a toxic multinodular goiter. The hypothesis is that toxic multinodular goiter is developed from diffuse goiter, as seen in studies done by Taylor, in which the thyroid glands removed at surgery had initial diffuse lesions that, with time, developed into discrete nodules.

Primary factors consist of functional heterogeneity of normal follicular cells, most probably due to genetic factors and the acquisition of new inheritable qualities by replicating thyroid cells. The incidence of Plummer disease increases when there is a family history of the disease. Multiple gene base substitution mutations occur on exon 10 of chromosome 14q31, leading to Plummer disease. Gender is an important factor, with females being at a higher risk.

Secondary factors include elevated TSH, smoking, stress, certain drugs, other thyroid-stimulating factors (IGF-1 and others), and endogenous factors (gender).

Iodine studies support the hypothesis of iodine deficiency, as described by David Marine, but it is considered circumstantial. The low levels of iodine cause hyperplasia of the thyroid gland due to the increased TSH levels, but when the iodine levels become normal, or there is a decreased demand of the gland for iodine, it goes into a resting phase. The alternation between these two phases leads to the development of diffuse hyperplasia, with the possible development of either one nodule or multiple nodules in the form of nontoxic multinodular goiter or even toxic multinodular goiter. Hence this disease is mostly seen later in life. The sequence of events from thyroid nodule to toxic MNG is not always uniform.