Traditionally MRI is an adjunct or complementary imaging exam following initial evaluation with more accessible and cost-effective modalities, like radiographs, ultrasound, or computed tomography (CT). The goal is to characterize a finding using the specific magnetic properties of the tissues and less commonly to guide biopsy.

**Neurological**: MRI is broadly useful to image the central nervous system. It serves as a beautiful addition to non-contrast CT to evaluate for acute and subacute infarcts, headache and seizure evaluation, as well as following a neoplastic process.

Considering the time-sensitive nature of stroke evaluation, a non-contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain is indicated for patients following a non-contrast CT of the head/brain to evaluate for ischemic stroke. Image sequences based on the diffusion coefficient of water in the brain parenchyma can demonstrate areas of hyperacute ischemia.

The gold standard of craniocervical vascular imaging to rule out obstruction, high-grade stenosis, or dissection is CT angiography. MR angiography could be considered in patients with diminished renal function. Time of flight (TOF) MR angiography is a multidimensional (2-D or 3-D) technique mapping the imaged vessels while subtracting the bony structures and brain parenchyma. TOF does not require contrast and instead uses flow-related enhancement properties during image acquisition.

When considering MRI to evaluate patients for headaches, seizures, demyelinating disease, and suspected mass, it is generally acceptable to request the use of an intravenous contrast agent. For example, post-contrast-enhancing lesions indicate active disease in a patient undergoing imaging evaluation for multiple sclerosis.

**Breast**: Breast MR is indicated in very select scenarios due to the use of a specialized breast coil, large field of view, and standardized sequences. It is important to inform the patient that the exam is performed in the prone position with the arms extended overhead. Dynamic contrast-enhanced breast MRI is an important tool to evaluate the extent of breast disease, therapy response, and surveillance of residual or recurrent disease.

**Chest/Cardiac**: MRI with IV contrast agents and customized fields of view are appropriate to evaluate chest wall abnormalities not definitively diagnosable with other modalities. MRI technologists are educated to mark the area of concern with an MRI visible Vitamin E capsule. While contrast-enhanced MR can define the extent of mediastinal soft tissue involvement, a review of the literature shows that the more costly MR was only superior to CT for preoperative planning of posterior mediastinal masses.

Cardiac MRI provides both structural and functional information. It requires the patient to tolerate upwards of 45 minutes of imaging and comply with breath-holding instructions. Non-contrast techniques are emerging, but current cardiac MR protocols typically include intravenous contrast agents; patterns of late gadolinium enhancement are critical to identifying scarred tissue.

**Abdomen/Pelvis**: Multiphase, post-contrast sequences are helpful to characterize abdominopelvic lesions and masses and follow responses to therapy. MR usually follows the more cost-effective and widely available initial imaging like ultrasound or CT, for example:

- Radiologists can confidently characterize a benign versus malignant liver lesion by MR enhancement patterns with liver and biliary specific contrast agents. Studies show that MRI with contrast is superior to ultrasound in diagnosing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in high-risk populations defined as higher rates of detection and decreased false positives.

- A small study of 81 female patients with sonographically indeterminate pelvic masses showed that even limited sequence MR could define uterine vs. extra-uterine origins of a mass, determining and guiding clinical management.

- MRI plays a critical role in diagnosing, staging, treatment, surgical planning, and surveillance of rectal cancer.

- The radiologist may make recommendations for follow up MRI in the appropriate clinical settings. A detailed history is critical when ordering these exams to ensure the acquisition of appropriate sequences. Of note, some institutions have established abdominal MR protocols to evaluate the appendix in pregnant women and small children if ultrasound is not diagnostic.

**Musculoskeletal**: Magnetic resonance imaging is useful to diagnose internal derangements of the support structures of the joints, occult fractures, bone marrow edema, infiltrative processes of the marrow space, and soft-tissue masses. Radiographs are first-line imaging of the musculoskeletal structures and are an important contribution to MRI interpretation. To highlight this point, consider that independent of radiographic findings, an MRI of the hip changed clinical management in as little as 7% of patients in a retrospective study performed at a single institution.

The aging population of the United States correlates with the increasing popularity and frequency of joint arthroplasties. The 2017 American Joint Replacement Registry reported more than 1 million total joint replacements annually, and that number is predicted to quadruple by 2030.

Traditionally gadolinium-based contrast is administered when evaluating for masses or bone lesions. The clinical benefits of MRI outweigh the cost when characterizing bone lesions or masses, supporting the role imaging plays in diagnosing neoplasms.