Measurement of the complement system proteins in serum or plasma can divide into four main categories: (a) analysis of complement function or activity; (b) complement factors, individual antigen quantitation; (c) detection of autoantibodies against complement factors; and (d) quantitation of activation fragments, also called split products.

**Functional screening tests**

Laboratory testing for complement components includes tests for functional activity of the CP (CH50 and its equivalents), the AP (AH50 or APH50), and the MBL pathway. The CH50 has its basis on a hemolytic assay in which an immune complex is formed by adding antibodies that react with a surface antigen on sheep red blood cells. When the antigen-fixed antibodies activate complement on the cell surface, the cell lyses and hemoglobin gets released. Since the formation of the MAC on the cell requires the sequential action of all nine components of the classical (C1, C4, and C2) and terminal (C3, C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9) pathways, titrating the complement source (serum in most cases) so that only a portion of the cells present undergo lysis, the amount of active complement can be calculated, and the results get expressed as the reciprocal of the serum dilution that caused lysis of 50% of the cells in the assay. Two variations of the CH50 are currently in use in clinical laboratories: an assay based on the lysis of liposomes that releases an enzyme that can be read on an analyzer of the sort used for other clinical laboratory tests and solid-phase assays (ELISAs) that detect the final C9 neoantigen that forms when the complete pathway becomes activated. The CH50 is the single best screen for complement abnormalities in that absence or decrease of activity in the CH50 implies that at least one of the necessary components is missing or low. The analogous assay for AP activity, the AH50, is not as widely available as the CH50, but it is useful as a screen for complement deficiency, especially when used in conjunction with the CH50. The AH50 depends on the unique properties of erythrocytes from certain species to provide a surface that promotes activation of the AP, with sequential activation of factors D, B, P, C3, C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9. Properdin is necessary for the stabilization of the C3 convertase (C3bBb), and inefficient activation of the AH50 occurs if P is low or absent. The most common variation of the AH50 uses rabbit red cells in combination with a buffer that blocks the activation of the CP or LP. Like the CH50, the AH50 is a measure of the percentage of rabbit erythrocytes lysed by diluted serum and is expressed in units that represent the dilution that lyses 50% of the cells used in the assay. If both CH50 and AH50 are used to screen for complement deficiency, it minimizes the number of additional tests required to pinpoint the defect. Because both assays include the same 6 terminal components (C3, C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9), the results will be low or absent for both tests if one or more of these components is missing. If a CP component is missing, the CH50 will be low or absent, but the AH50 is normal, whereas if an AP component is low or missing, the reverse will be true. Table II provides a generalized guide to choosing tests for differentiating between acquired and inherited complement deficiencies. Several assays for the C1-Inh function have undergone development. One in common used is an ELISA that measures complexes formed between biotinylated C1s and C1-Inh that get captured on an avidin-coated plate (Quidel). A drawback of this particular assay is that the rare patient might have normal function in the assay but a mutation of the C1-Inh that allows binding of C1s but not of 1 or more of the other enzymes with which the inhibitor reacts. Another test for C1-Inh function relies on the observation that binding of the inhibitor to C1r masks the site on C1r that is recognized by some polyclonal antibodies. After activation of the test serum with aggregated immunoglobulins, the amount of C1r detectable by radial immunodiffusion decreases in proportion to the amount of active C1-Inh present. Functional tests are possible for each of the individual components by using variations on the CH50 or  AH50 assays in which an excess of all components except the one under evaluation gets added to the appropriate cells, and the patient’s serum provides the only source of the component in question.

Alternatively, purified components can be added to the patient’s serum to determine which one(s) restores activity. The determination of the function of the MBL pathway is through using an ELISA in which the patient’s serum gets placed into wells coated with mannan. After MBL binds to the mannan-coated surface, the MASP enzymes cleave C4, and the resulting C4b and C4d that get deposited on the plate are measurable by using enzyme-conjugated mAbs.

**Quantitative tests for component concentrations**

Like most other circulating proteins, the complement components are measurable by standard immunochemical methods available in most laboratories. These include immunoprecipitation assays, including nephelometry, radial immunodiffusion, RIA, and ELISA techniques. The critical points are the specificity of the antibodies used and the reliability of the standard and controls. There are, as yet, very few complement assays that have been standardized and validated for Food and Drug Administration approval. Most laboratories must rely on in-house methods and proven research technology to perform diagnostic procedures for complement analysis. The most definitive method for the evaluation of complement activation is in quantitation of the fragments formed during the enzymatic cleavage steps. Because many of the complement components are acute phase reactants, decreases due to activation might be masked by increases in the synthesis rates during an inflammatory episode. The split products can be used to determine whether activation has occurred because their increase occurs only when the complement enzymes are formed and active. A bonus is that the pathway of activation can be established; C4a and C4d are markers for CP or LP activation, Bb is a marker for AP activation, and C3a, iC3b, C5a, and soluble C5b-9 can be used to determine terminal pathway activation.

**Complement autoantibody tests**

Testing can determine C1q and C1-Inh autoantibodies by using ELISA methods. The antibodies to C1-Inh bind to the inhibitor molecule and prevent it from attaching to the enzyme, but they don't restrict the enzyme from cleaving the inhibitor. The resulting lower molecular weight inhibitor fragment is detectable by PAGE. There are several assays available for C3v nephritic factors that rely on its function and either measure lysis due to the generation of C3b on a red cell surface or look directly at the amount of C3 that is cleaved when the patient’s serum mixes with normal serum.