Intercostal nerve blocks without US guidance are performed following the next steps:

- The patient can be situated in the sitting, lateral, or prone position prior to performing the block. The sitting one should lean to some degree forward with a pillow between their arms to retract the scapulae, and some support is needed.

- After cleaning the skin with an antiseptic solution, it is important to identify the block sites (like the inferior borders of the targeted ribs) at around 6 to 8 cm from the midline, and they should be marked over the skin.

- Infiltration of the needle sites with the preferred local anesthetic.

- Introduction of the needle in the sagittal plane and advance it approaching the inferior edge of the correspondent rib ending in the subcostal groove.

- A little dose of local anesthetic should be injected to desensitize the periosteum.

- The needle is advanced at this point forward only 2 to 3 mm, and the clinician should feel a “pop” of the fascia close to the internal intercostal muscle, with or without the existence of paresthesia. What is anesthetized is usually helpful to ensure the correct position of the needle.

- The injection of 3 ml to 5 ml of local anesthetic is recommended, making sure their aspiration for blood is negative.

- The clinician should repeat the previous steps as needed to achieve the desired level of anesthesia.

**ULTRASOUND TECHNIQUE**

- Place the high-frequency linear transducer in a transverse orientation in order to identify the external, internal, and innermost intercostal muscle layers between ribs (image 1).

- Power Doppler or B-mode is normally used to localize the blood vessels, keeping in mind that caudal to the arteries lie the intercostal nerve.

- After localizing the angle of the rib with a long-axis view, the clinician now should insert the needle in-plane aimed centrally and administer the local anesthetic 2 cm medial to that situation under the costal groove, always controlling needle tip as it is advanced. The local anesthetic should be deposited between the innermost intercostal muscle and internal intercostal muscle layers (image 1).

- It is crucial to aspirate for blood to ensure the needle is not intravascular.

- An indentation in the pleura is often shown in the sonogram after the intercostal block is performed.

- A single injection can spread centrally the drug of choice to anesthetize different intercostal spaces.

- Multiple levels should be often required to provide a better quality of analgesia.

- Detailed calculation of the doses of local anesthetic is necessary because the peak plasma levels after this block are pretty high and occur quickly.

**DOSING**

It is considered that a dose of the local anesthetic agent of 0.1 to 0.15 ml/kg per intercostal space (maximum dose 2 to 3 ml per space) can be administered after making sure that the tip of the needle is in the proper tissue plane. Common medications used for this blockade are ropivacaine 0.2%, levobupivacaine 0.25%, or bupivacaine 0.25%.

The fairly new liposomal bupivacaine is a safe option for the management of severe pain in patients undergoing a thoracotomy or mastectomy as well.