The Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) guidelines address preparation for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy and other aspects of patient care in PLLB.

Whereas some lesions are so apical that they do not move with respiration or are so large that they are nearly impossible to miss despite respiratory excursion, many lesions in the 1 to 2 cm range near the diaphragm may take more than 20 minutes of frustrating effort and multiple chest wall punctures attempting to align the biopsy needle with the target lesion before entering the lung.

CT images for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy are usually only available as axial slices, and the CT machine often only images a 1 cm or so thick slab of tissue. A lesion near the diaphragm may easily move craniocaudal 4 to 5 cm throughout a standard breath. Just asking the patient to "hold your breath" may not succeed. Even after pinpointing the small lesion within the slab of tissue and then inserting the needle at that level, the patient would need the opportunity to regain his breath to hold it again at the time of the needle thrust into the lung. Then the next time the patient holds his breath, he may have moved his torso or diaphragm differently enough that the lesion is no longer visible or that it is visible but a rib, fissure, or diaphragm is now in the line of the site, precluding safe entry. If a new skin entry site is then selected to account for the change, then the patient, not knowing what to do to aid the radiologist, may revert to the first breath hold position on the subsequent breath.

This process is made all the more complicated if the patient is sedated. The success or failure of the procedure may devolve into more a matter of chance than of logic or planning while striving for the moment when the needle is properly aligned to have a high probability of striking the lesion on the first thrust. Lesions with a higher technical challenge can be addressed in the following ways:

- Training the patient to breathe in a controlled fashion

- Positioning the patient to reduce the likelihood of motion and post-procedure air leak

- Choosing a target with the most desirable features

**The Patient is a Partner in Promoting a Successful Biopsy**

More so than for other types of image-guided biopsies (in which there is neither a biopsy target that moves faster than the imaging machine nor a moderate risk of short-term hospitalization), it may be important before the day of the procedure to spend time explaining the usual biopsy experience to the patient and even simulating the experience.

Each patient is slightly different in their ability to follow instructions and hold a given position. Patients sent for lung biopsies are often debilitated, dyspneic, arthritic, hard of hearing, and sleep-deprived. Holding the same amount of air in the lungs on command is a feat that usually takes practice, even for healthy, highly intelligent persons. There are no known clinical trials that demonstrate that one technique to facilitate consistent breath holds is superior.

Nevertheless, emphasizing to the patient their role in contributing to a successful procedure and having the patient practice breath-holding and prolonged lying in the planned biopsy position theoretically will improve the chance of a successful outcome.

Patients dependent on 100% oxygen infusion, tracheostomies, phobias (such as lying partially prone), or additional factors that would otherwise prevent successful percutaneous lung lesion biopsy can be trained to turn the moving target into a stationary target. Different methods work better for different patients, and a detailed discussion of these methods is beyond the scope of this article.

**Patient Position Effects**

Some recommend placing the patient in a lateral decubitus position to reduce the risk of iatrogenic pneumothorax. Another position that can be used as an alternative is supine or prone positioning.

Patients are more comfortable with their arms at their sides. All positions should seek to eliminate cervical or other joint strain, pressure on "pressure points," and dyspnea, as these are problems that will result in patient motion increasing procedure duration and risks.

**Choice of Target Lesion****(in the setting of more than one potential target)**

Size is often not the most important factor in selecting a target. A 1 cm pleura-based lesion may be safely directly accessed in the upper lung in a cooperative patient because the upper lung moves little with respiration. However, even a 1 cm lesion would be an undesirable target for a direct puncture in the lower lung because of the high likelihood of respiratory misregistration either at the moment of initial pleural puncture or at some point during obtaining subsequent samples.

A large (in the craniocaudal dimension) lesion that either abuts the pleura or is visually distinct from but has adjacent airspace opacification extending to the pleura, demonstrated on prior PET-CT to be hypermetabolic is the ideal lesion for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy. The size improves the chance of striking the target. The craniocaudal lesion size is more important than other lesion dimensions (especially if the procedure is performed using a machine that does not have real-time CT fluoroscopy), as that is the dimension that will determine how likely it will be to keep the lesion in the field of view on the imaging monitor during the procedure. A peripheral location in the thorax reduces the chance of striking larger vessels and the chance for needle drift/inadvertent redirection during insertion. The ability to avoid aerated lung on entry diminishes the odds of pneumothorax. A higher metabolic activity increases the chance that viable abnormal tissue will be obtained.

When a lesion large in the craniocaudal dimension is not available as a target, the next most ideal location is one that neither abuts the pleura nor is central (allowing room for needle redirection after a possible inadvertent initial pleural puncture without withdrawing the needle through the pleura but avoiding proximity to larger central vessels).

The most mobile part of the lung is peridiaphragmatic. The part of the lung most challenging to expand after a pneumothorax is the lung apex. A lesion in the upper region of the lower lobe is preferable to peridiaphragmatic and apical lesions because this part of the lung moves little with respiration and because the lower lobe can undergo compression with gravity in the supine position after the procedure to prevent or reduce a pleural air leak.

In a patient with multiple lesions and prior invasive thoracic procedure, the side on which prior surgery was performed should be selected for biopsy. Pleural adherence can increase due to scarring and reduce the chance of a pneumothorax. Puncturing via the thoracotomy scar itself should be avoided, however, because the hard tissue can interfere with needle manipulation.

It cannot be stressed enough that the morphology of the area of concern is a key feature when contemplating lung biopsy. Benign round atelectasis or even "standard non-round atelectasis" can fit all of the criteria of the optimal "lesion" described above, including being very hypermetabolic on PET, as could a region of parenchymal fibrosis. However, biopsying such abnormalities, with or without an associated mass, rarely yields clinical benefit. Only true nodules/masses will likely yield any useful material on pathology review.

Some scenarios have a probability of failing (with or without the need for emergent surgery) that is more probable than not (i.e., risks outweigh likely benefits).

- Small, immediately subpleural lesions make it difficult to time needle entry to pierce these lesions on the first attempt and keep the introducer needle in the lesion throughout obtaining multiple samples (increasing risk for pneumothorax).

- Small lesions touching the heart are usually unsuitable for biopsy. Cardiac motion on the lesion increases the risk of missing the lesion while placing the patient at high risk for pericardial/myocardial puncture followed by tamponade and death.

- Nodules along fissures (particularly in the superior portion of the right middle lobe just under the minor dome-shaped fissure) can be difficult to target without puncturing a second lobe (thereby making two additional pleural punctures inadvertently) even with the benefit of an angled CT gantry.

- Small lesions deep in the costophrenic sulci move a great deal. An inadvertent puncture of the diaphragm (which can be very painful even if there is no associated puncture of an immediately underlying structure such as the liver or spleen) is a likely sequela.

- Ground glass or largely necrotic lesions where the viable cellular yield is likely to be too low from needle sampling to enable a diagnosis. The smaller the lesion, the more unlikely it is to yield diagnostic material. Nodules as small as 4 mm have yielded enough tissue for a pathologist to feel confident in diagnosing nonsmall cell lung cancer, but size in and of itself is not a reliable indicator of success.

In these situations, either planning to offer thoracoscopic biopsy post-percutaneous lung lesion biopsy the same day or next day service or proceeding straight to thoracoscopic sampling with all its inherent risks is the proper route.

Before the procedure is started, the following steps should be taken:

- Review of patient allergies, medications, sedation plan, and laboratory tests (such as platelet count and coagulation profile).

- Review the patient's imaging and confirm the size and site of the guided sampling intended for the diagnosis.

- A preprocedural time-out is obtained, including confirmation of the lesion's location.