L. monocytogenes is a foodborne illness that has the propensity to cause meningitis or fetal demise in unborn infants, and as such, requires management by an interprofessional healthcare team. Primary care clinics and emergency departments are the first line of defense in diagnosing patients with meningitis and initiating appropriate therapy. Intake nurses and triage staff have an important role in recognizing unstable vital signs that might trigger systemic inflammatory response (SIRS) criteria and should alert the physician of these findings. Having a high suspicion for meningitis, performing diagnostic testing, and starting with broad-spectrum antibiotics in the emergency department to cover the most likely organisms based on patient risk factors. Early detection and diagnosis of meningitis are critical for good outcomes. If the patient is diagnosed with meningitis, this will require admission to the hospitalist team with a consultation with an infectious disease physician to help narrow the spectrum of antibiotic coverage by analyzing cerebrospinal fluid and blood cultures. Infectious disease physicians and hospitalists should work closely with pharmacists to choose the correct antibiotics for the patient, based on the most up-to-date antibiogram data. After recovery and discharge, the patient should establish care or follow-up with their primary care physician. Nursing staff need to be fully apprised of the condition, and monitor on all follow-up visits to ensure that there is no regression in the patient's condition, and will report any concerns to the treating physician promptly. Finally, there should be hospital committees in place as well as protocols for the treatment of L. monocytogenes associated infections.

**Outcomes**

Currently, available data shows that the overall mortality of L. monocytogenes, when it progresses to meningitis or sepsis, is relatively high compared to other food-borne illnesses. The mortality percentage increases in patients that have more comorbidities.