The recognition and management of urogenital complications are essential as failure to do so leads to significant morbidity and potential mortality. Complications can be divided into early and late complications. Early complications include bleeding, infection, and sepsis, or evidence of missed injury, such as azotemia, peritonitis, urinary ascites, or ileus. Functional abnormalities generally constitute delayed complications and include urinary retention or incontinence, urethral strictures, sexual dysfunction, and reproductive dysfunction.

Urethral strictures are reported in up to 69% of complete urethral transections.

Urinary incontinence and retention are also treated conservatively initially. Pelvic floor strengthening exercises and biofeedback can be very effective. Duloxetine can be used in combination with physiotherapy and has been successful in multiple patients.

Sexual and reproductive dysfunction is possible with genital trauma. Microvascular repair of the penis’s neurovascular bundle results in regaining of penile sensation in over 80% of cases. The native penile skin can become necrotic, even after microvascular repair. This is because superficial structures supply the skin. If this occurs, split-thickness skin grafts can be applied after several weeks of serial debridements. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy can also be used to promote healing.

Vaginal injuries that extend to the rectum can cause fecal incontinence. Similarly, fecal incontinence starts with nonoperative management. Dietary changes and fiber supplements can optimize stool consistency and limit urgency. Medications can be used to slow the bowels. Examples include the antidiarrheals loperamide and atropine/diphenoxylate, the bile acid binder cholestyramine, and medications the reduce the reflexive relaxation of the sphincter, such as amitriptyline. Physical therapy and biofeedback have been used successfully to strengthen the pelvic floor. If conservative treatments fail, a sphincteroplasty can be performed. Other options include implanting artificial anal sphincters or magnetic anal sphincters. Sacral nerve stimulators can also be successful.

Rectovaginal fistulas are another potential complication. They have high morbidity, as they negatively affect the social and sexual quality of life. Multiple surgical options exist for rectovaginal fistulas. Endorectal advancement flaps are typically used for low rectovaginal fistulas and have a success rate of up to 71%. Other options include ligation of intersphincteric fistula tract (LIFT) procedure, interposition flaps, mesh repair, or the use of fibrin glue.

Psychologic complications are an important consideration. They can stem from the residual scars, the embarrassment of sexual dysfunction, or from sexual abuse that resulted in the genital trauma. Psychologists should be employed early in the care of these patients.