**Cervical Lordosis**

- normal 20-40°

**Thoracic Kyphosis**

- Normal 20-50°.

- This is predominantly impacted by lumbar and pelvic anatomy.  Thoracic kyphosis can generally range 30 degrees more than lumbar lordosis

**Thoracolumbar Junction**

- Normally a transition from thoracic kyphosis to lumbar lordosis, the T12/L1 junction should be neutral, with less than 10 degrees or regional kyphosis.

**Lumbar Lordosis**

- Average 60°

- A wide range of acceptable values depending upon the pelvic anatomy

- As much as 75% of lumbar lordosis occurs between L4 and S1 with 40-50% occurring at L5/S1

**Pelvic Tilt**

- Normal <20 degrees

**Pelvic Incidence**

- Normal 55 +/- 10 degrees

**Pelvic Incidence/Lumbar Lordosis Mismatch**

- Normal <10 degrees

**Sagittal Vertical Axis**

- Normal <5mm

**C7 Plumb Line and Sagittal Vertical Axis (SVA)**

The C7 plumb line is a radiographic reference to determine the sagittal vertical axis, the most traditional measurement of sagittal balance of the spine.  A vertical line is drawn from the center of the C7 vertebral body in a caudal direction. The line should connect with, or be within 5mm of, the superior-posterior endplate of S1.  This is considered within the tolerable range for health-related quality of life outcomes. However, as patients age, they lean forward and tolerate slightly more positive sagittal alignment.   Any surgical intervention must consider patient selection.

It remains vitally important to release the harmonious anatomy of sagittal plane consideration.  The cervical spine can compensate with a hyperlordotic presentation to maintain a more neutral posture. The patient can further compensate with increased pelvic tilt and knee flexion.  However, this is a physically taxing and non-anatomically normal, fatiguing position.

**Pelvic Incidence**

Pelvic incidence is a radiographic measurement comparing the biomechanic relationship between the lumbar spine and the pelvis in patients with differing pelvic anatomy. The pelvic incidence and lumbar lordosis may vary amongst different individuals, but their relationship is maintained to create sagittal balance in the lumbopelvic junction and maintain SVA in the global spine. Fixed sagittal deformities in the lumbar spine are often compensated by changes in pelvic and hip positioning, maintaining SVA.

PI is defined as the angle between a line drawn perpendicularly to the surface of the superior endplate of the sacrum and a line connecting the midpoint of the superior endplate of the sacrum to the center of the femoral head. The normal value for this measurement should be 55 +/- 10 degrees.

**Pelvic Tilt**

The angle between two of the following radiographic lines

- A line from the center of the S1 endplate to the center of the femoral head

- A vertical line is drawn intersecting the center of the femoral head

The normal value should be less than 20 degrees, can vary with patient positioning and contractures.