Though many AIAN communities have flourished, the legacy of colonialism and ongoing inequities continue to impact some AIANs' health negatively. There is a complex interplay of factors contributing to this. A history of genocidal policies, forced assimilation, broken treaties, systemic racism, and other forms of discrimination have led to disparities in social determinants of health.

To address the barriers to adequate health care access that have led to the disproportionate burden of illness amongst AIAN people and lower life expectancy rates, it is important to review the structures from which these health disparities have emerged.

**Structural Competency**

Research indicates social inequalities lead to poor health outcomes in marginalized communities.

Using a framework of structural competency enables healthcare providers to recognize the historical and contemporary drivers of upstream factors, such as social, political, and economic structures, that impact patients’ health and wellbeing. Similarly, structural violence helps underscore how upstream structural inequalities lead to emotional and physical suffering. Seeing social determinants of health within a broader context provides opportunities for intervention at the individual, community, and structural levels to promote health. It is crucial to employ interventions at all three levels to successfully achieve health equity.

**Historical & Sociopolitical Context**

Understanding the historical events that influence AIAN communities is necessary for evaluating and treating AIAN patients. Knowing the history of genocidal practices, forced relocation, and forced assimilation experienced by AIAN communities helps contextualize the health disparities faced by some today.

Many AIAN individuals have familial histories of forced relocation and restriction to reservations. A few examples of these include the Navajo Long Walk of 1864, which forced 8,000 Navajos to a military concentration camp, the Cherokee “Trail of Tears in 1838, which forced the Cherokee out of their homelands; and the General Allotment Act of 1887 (continued through the 1960s) which led to the termination of more than 100 Indian Nations and widespread land seizure.

The forced relocation to reservations and seizure of land and natural resources restricted access to traditional food sources through hunting, gathering, fishing, and farming. This resulted in AIAN communities becoming increasingly reliant on the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations. This program, which the U.S. Department of Agriculture developed, provides canned and packed food that is high in sugar and fat content.

Forced assimilation practices were prevalent throughout history as well. In 1883 the “Code of Indian Offences” was established to outlaw many traditional AIAN practices, and these policies remained in effect until 1934. During this time, AIAN people who continued to practice their traditions risked being incarcerated.

Forced assimilation attempted to eradicate AIAN traditions and culture and led to the loss of language, culture, land, resources, community, and loved ones. Research indicates the experience of these historical losses is associated with some physical and mental health conditions.

In general, it is well established that trauma experienced by one generation impacts the developmental experience of future generations and is therefore associated with adverse health outcomes in future generations.

**Environmental Risk Factors**

Upstream sociopolitical factors have also led to environmental injustice and contribute to health disparities today. An example that highlights this is the impact of abandoned uranium mines on the health of AIANs living near them.

Treaties between AIAN Nations and the U.S. government designated certain regions as Tribal “Reservations” and gave tribes sovereign status to self-govern. However, as mineral resources were identified on tribal land, laws like the General Mining Law of 1872 gave the U.S. government power to acquire the land and allow mining companies to extract minerals from them. The disregard for the legal and ethical obligations set forth by treaties led to extensive mining of various metals, including uranium, on AIAN land.

From 1944 to 1986, mining companies extracted 10 million tons of uranium from Navajo land, allowing the U.S. Energy Department to stockpile this heavy metal during the Cold War.

One study suggests the disproportionate rate of health conditions among Navajo people may be due to increased serum inflammatory protentional induced by exposure to abandoned uranium mines. Specifically, in this study, they found a significant association between closer residential proximity to uranium waste sites and increased levels of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, intracellular adhesion molecule-1, and chemokine ligand 2 among Navajo people.

Unfortunately, uranium is only one out of many environmental pollutants leading to health disparities in AIAN populations. Native Nations have also been mined for gold, silver, lead, copper, vanadium, arsenic, manganese, iron, nickel, and more.

Structural-level interventions require policy changes addressing unethical practices permitted via laws like the General Mining Law of 1872 and holding mining companies responsible for the clean-up cost of waste sites. On a community level, it is important to partner with AIAN communities and work together to better understand the health impacts caused by toxin exposure and find appropriate solutions to address the adverse effects. On an individual level, providers must be sure to ask about exposure to these metals when working with AIAN populations and identifying individuals at risk of developing an illness due to the exposure.

**Economic Structures: Lack of Funding & Shortage of Medical Personal**

AIAN populations are, by law, born with a right to health care. Treaties made between the United States and AIAN Nations promised services, including health care services, in exchange for tribal land and natural resources.

Ultimately, the lack of funding has resulted in under-sourced clinics, a lack of infrastructure development in clinics serving AIAN patients, and insufficiently competitive wages for those working at these clinics. These factors influence the high turnover rate for health professionals at these facilities and have led to an overall shortage of medical personal in AIAN communities. To fill in the gaps, IHS and tribal health care facilities contract temporary providers who have limited knowledge of the AIAN population (particularly the local population they serve) and are often not interested in staying long-term. This leads to chronic understaffing, poor continuity of care, and decreased access to care.

**Medical Marginalization & Mistrust**

An important factor contributing to health disparities in AIAN communities is the mistrust of Western medicine and research generated by historical and contemporary instances of unethical practices. For example, from 1973-1976, involuntary sterilizations were performed on 3406 AI women aged 15 to 44 years. Even more recently, in 2003, members of the Havasupai Tribe discovered the DNA samples they had donated for a genetic research study on type II diabetes mellitus was used for other studies without their consent.

Additionally, experiences of discrimination or unfair treatment in health care settings have left some AIAN patients feeling uncomfortable and unwelcomed in clinics. Many AIANs report feeling stereotyped, ignored, or disrespected by non-AIAN providers, and they are more likely than any other racial/ ethnic minority group in the U.S. to report discrimination as a barrier to health care.

The implications of unethical medical and research practices and experiences of discrimination in health care settings should be considered when providers are evaluating and treating AIAN populations. To overcome the mistrust cultivated, providers must learn about and respect the history and culture that are specific to the local AIAN population they work with. They should acknowledge the practices that may have led to mistrust and work to foster trusting relationships through dialogue and cultural humility. A significant effort must be made to address institutional racism and individual provider bias that contributes to discriminatory behavior towards AIAN patients.

Health professionals also need more education pertaining to AIAN cultures, especially the culture of the AIAN communities local to them and the social determinants of health impacting these communities. Through more education and the practice of cultural humility, they can work to better understand the personal and cultural health beliefs of their patients and provide culturally sensitive care that holds real value. Providers should ensure they use a strength-based instead of a deficit-based approach to care when treating patients. This means focusing on what a patient has that could improve health outcomes, such as strong social, spiritual, or family ties, rather than focusing on something a patient does not have access to.

**Lack of Diversity & Training Gaps in Academic Health Centers**

AIANs are underrepresented among health professionals, particularly among physicians.

Educational partnerships among AHCs, IHS, and tribal health care facilities can provide trainees supervised hands-on experience in caring for AIAN communities. Experiential learning through direct exposure can help increase awareness of health disparities and encourage more trainees to work towards addressing the health inequities experienced by AIAN populations. Additionally, consistent, positive interactions between health professional trainees and AIAN community members can foster better relationships, address the history of mistrust caused by structural violence, and help address provider bias. These educational opportunities also allow students to learn about AIAN culture, Indigenous healing, traditional medical practices, and tribal health interventions from AIAN individuals directly. This is beneficial and will allow trainees to be more culturally sensitive when evaluating and treating AIAN patients. Importantly, working with and learning from AIAN community members directly exposes trainees to community-driven solutions for improving health care and helps them recognize the particular community’s self-identified strengths.