The medulla has always been considered challenging to surgically treat, due to its essential cardiac, respiratory, and autonomic functions. Medulloblastoma, glioma, ependymoma, and hemangioblastoma are common intracranial germ cell tumors that originate from extragonadal seminal cells and usually are located in midline structures but rarely in the medulla and the fourth ventricle. Symptoms typically include cranial nerve palsies such as dysphagia, disturbance of breathing, cerebellar function, motor, sensory disturbances, and hiccups. From 1991 to 2013, there were only 17 cases of pure primary medulla oblongata germinoma. Using a CT and MRI, clinicians diagnosed the medullary mass. Patients received tumor debulking as their initial management. After the initial surgery, patients had the option to be treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, which both led to a good prognosis.

Cavernous malformations have been found to develop in the brainstem, and rare cases can affect the medulla. Cavernous malformations involving the medulla oblongata have been reported to be more harmful if bleeding occurs due to the major functions located in the medulla. Small changes or injury to the medulla can lead to paraplegia, cardiovascular and respiratory dysfunction, or vagus nerve injury. There is still a debate in the community on which patients will benefit from surgical treatment. Out of 69 case reports of cavernous malformation located in the medulla, three distinct microsurgical approaches applied to the resection involved the medulla oblongata. The far lateral craniotomy technique was used for lesions in the lateral or anterolateral portion, while the rectosigmoid craniotomy was the option chosen for lesions involving the pontomedullary. Lesions in the posterior medulla or the fourth ventricle had a suboccipital craniotomy performed. Postoperatively, patients require observation for at least 48 hours after surgery because of the high risk of respiratory dysfunction. About 30% of the patients had immediate post-operative dysphagia or coughing. Ming-Guo Xie et al. in 2018 found a favorable functional long-term outcome with younger patients, who have experienced fewer hemorrhages, and perilesional edema. They believed perilesional edema findings around the cavernous malformation on the MRI should be considered a protective factor because edema around the malformation can signal a more favorable prognosis in response to surgical intervention. These patients would benefit more from surgical resection when compared to patients without perilesional edema because the resection could relieve the pressure and improve the blood supply to the brainstem for a functionally improved long term outcome.