Normally, patellar hyaline cartilage has a bluish-white, smooth, glistening, and resilient appearance. The pathology of chondromalacia patellae starts with softening, swelling, and edema of the articular cartilage, giving it a dull or even slightly yellowish-white appearance.

**Pathological Process in Chondromalacia Patellae**

Hyaline cartilage is composed of chondrocytes that are dispersed throughout an extracellular matrix. This matrix consists of type 2 collagen, proteoglycans, and water. The chondrocytes produce proteoglycans, which are then secreted into the extracellular matrix. Hyaline cartilage is avascular. Its nutrients diffuse into the matrix from synovial fluid. It does not repair well because of the lack of blood supply. Hyaline cartilage is also devoid of lymphatic and neural tissue.

The cartilage reacts to both the environment and physical loads. Destruction of hyaline cartilage can occur in response to chondrotoxic substances injected into a joint. It can also occur through exposure to cytokinins and proteolytic enzymes produced in response to intra-articular bacterial infections.

Hyaline cartilage degeneration also occurs in response to microtrauma wear and tear. Repeated activities that create compressive stress on the patella-femoral joint or increased loads applied to the joint can lead to chondromalacia.

Aging also affects hyaline cartilage. The number of chondrocytes in the cartilage decreases, which correlates with a reduction in the number of proteoglycans produced. This reduction leads to a decrease in the water content of the cartilage. Loss of the cartilage's elastic properties develops because of the cross-linking of collagen fibrils that also occurs with aging. The superficial zone of hyaline cartilage is the first zone to degenerate in the aging process.

The anterior fat pad and the joint capsule are most commonly involved in generating pain signals, while the subchondral bone is less likely to cause pain signals.

Pathology of chondromalacia patellae starts with softening, swelling, and edema of the articular cartilage.