Laboratory evaluation is required to make the diagnosis of sitosterolemia. Clinical suspicion of a cholesterol disorder often prompts a standard lipid panel to be ordered. Depending on the institution, this will usually include a total cholesterol level, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and triglyceride level. Patients with sitosterolemia may have elevated total cholesterol, but otherwise, the standard lipid panel does not provide specific diagnostic information. In contrast to familial hypercholesterolemia, there is a significant lowering of serum cholesterol levels once plant sterols are minimized in the diet. As well, sitosterolemia patients often have a poor clinical response to statins.

A serum plant sterol level is the standard method of diagnosing sitosterolemia.

There are additional laboratory and diagnostic test abnormalities that are commonly noted. This includes hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. A complete blood count (CBC) and hemolysis diagnostic evaluation are generally sufficient to diagnose this. Patients may also have liver disease with an unknown etiology which may present as transaminitis with a negative comprehensive diagnostic workup.  As a result of uncontrolled disease, premature atherosclerosis may also be discovered. Given the major association of sitosterolemia with premature atherosclerosis and cardiac valvular disease, it is generally reasonable to pursue diagnostic evaluation in the form of coronary imaging with computed tomography (CT), calcium scoring, and echocardiography.