Toxicities are the exaggerated symptoms of known pharmacologic effects and adverse drug reactions. The most prominent toxicities of haloperidol are 1) severe extrapyramidal symptoms, hypotension, and sedation. The patient may appear comatose with severe respiratory depression or shock from hypotension. The extrapyramidal symptoms include akathisia, rigidity, bradykinesia, tremor, and acute dystonia. Haloperidol overdose is also associated with ECG changes known as torsade de pointes, which may cause arrhythmia or cardiac arrest.

Since there is no specific antidote, supportive treatment is the mainstay of haloperidol toxicity. If a patient develops signs and symptoms of toxicities, the clinician should consider gastric lavage or induction of emesis as soon as possible, followed by the administration of activated charcoal. Maintenance of Airway, Breathing, and circulation are critical factors for survival. A patent airway is ensured by using an oropharyngeal airway or endotracheal tube. Comatose patients with a difficult airway or upper airway obstruction require a tracheostomy. Supplemental oxygen is administered via nasal prongs or facemask. Patients with refractory hypoxia often require intubation and mechanical ventilation. Hypotension and circulatory collapse need aggressive treatment with intravenous fluids, concentrated albumin, and vasopressor agents such as norepinephrine or phenylephrine. Epinephrine should not be used as it can decrease blood pressure.

Extrapyramidal reactions such as acute dystonia are treated with benztropine. ECG and vital signs require regular monitoring, especially for signs of torsades de Pointes or QT prolongation, or dysrhythmias. Cardiac monitoring should be in place until the ECG becomes normal. If the patient develops arrhythmias, which could be life-threatening, prompt management should commence with appropriate anti-arrhythmic measures.