Initial history and physical assessment in both the prehospital and hospital settings must address life threats to the patient while minimizing the risk of exposing care providers. Particular attention should be paid to addressing any immediate threat to the victim’s airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs). Once the ABCs have been assessed, and no intervention is needed for initial stabilization, further assessment can continue. If the patient is conscious, with normal mental status, ongoing assessment can then be directed towards the exposure. While continuing further decontamination, the care team should gather information on what chemical agent(s) the victim was exposed to and the extent. Collecting more patient-specific details like medical history, medications, allergies, surgical history, last meal, etc., can be taken as ocular irrigation occurs. Once the patient has been stabilized and ocular irrigation has commenced, further investigation into the properties of the offending chemical agent(s) can ensue. Safety data sheets (SDS) and The Poison Control Center are available resources for more information on the acute management of dangerous chemical exposures.

Once the eyes and associated structures have been adequately irrigated and the pH of the ocular surface reaches neutral (7.0 to 7.2) by litmus paper assay, attention can be directed to assess how much of the ocular surface and associated structures are involved. Visual acuities should now be evaluated if possible. Pain due to superficial ocular nerves being exposed may cause significant blepharospasm and limit assessment. Applying a topical ocular anesthetic may be necessary prior to biomicroscopy (slit lamp evaluation). Particular attention should be given to the extent of limbal and conjunctival/episcleral ischemia, corneal clarity, and total surface area involved. Assessment of surface area involvement requires staining the eye with an agent such as sodium fluorescein. The extent and severity of involvement of these tissues have prognostic value.