There are many absolute and relative contraindications for laser refractive surgery, as proposed by the FDA and the American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO). Patients should have stable refraction between +/- 0.5 D for at least one year before PRK.

**Absolute Contraindications:**

PRK is not a desirable therapy in patients with significant cataract, unstable glaucoma, and/or uncontrolled external disease such as blepharitis, dry eye syndrome, and atopy/allergy. Keratoconus and other abnormalities of the cornea such as corneal ectasias, thinning, edema, interstitial or neurotrophic keratitis, and extensive vascularization are considered absolute contraindications. However, one study found that PRK in patients with keratoconus who had predicted central corneal thickness over 450 micrometers resulted in improvement in visual outcomes and did not lead to keratoconus progression.

**Relative Contraindications:**

PRK is relatively contraindicated in pregnant women or nursing mothers as hormonal influences may result in changes in refractive error; furthermore, medications received postoperatively may be transmitted indirectly to the fetus or nursing infant. Caution is also necessary for patients with functional monocularity, ocular conditions that limit visual function, excessively steep or flat corneas, abnormal corneal topography, significant irregular astigmatism, inadequately controlled dry eye, uveitis, and glaucoma. History of herpes simplex keratitis (HSK) may be considered a relative contraindication, though preoperative treatment with systemic antivirals for several months postoperatively will minimize the risk of HSK reactivation. Patients with uncontrolled diabetes are at higher risk of refractive instability or poor wound healing. Patients taking medications with a high risk of ocular side effects (amiodarone, isotretinoin, sumatriptan, etc.) are generally advised to avoid refractive surgeries.