The INR is commonly used as a surrogate for the PT value. PT/INR can be prolonged in:

- VKAs: Warfarin inhibits the gamma-carboxylation of the vitamin K-dependent factors, including factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X. The full anticoagulation effect is reflected approximately one week after administration of warfarin as the factors with the shortest half-life (factor VII) is initially depleted, but the factors with a longer half-life (e.g., prothrombin) takes a longer time to be depleted.

- Other anticoagulants: Heparins (unfractionated or low molecular weight), direct factor Xa inhibitor administration (rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban),direct thrombin inhibitor administration (argatroban, dabigatran), and fondaparinux can cause prolongation of PT and the aPTT by acting on the common pathway factors.

- Liver dysfunction: Liver synthesized both vitamin K-dependent and vitamin K-independent clotting factors. Also, warfarin metabolized in the liver. Thus, the liver disease is associated with prolongation of PT/INR. However, even with elevated PT/INR, these patients are not "auto-anticoagulated," because they often reflect homeostatic abnormalities in the coagulation factors and thus increase thrombotic risk.

- Vitamin K deficiency: Malnutrition, prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics and fat malabsorption syndrome can prolong the PT/INR.

- DIC: Prolonged PT/INR results from the consumption of the coagulation factor in the clotting process.

- Factor deficiency: Coagulation factors deficiency in the extrinsic pathway or acquired inhibitors (autoantibodies) of fibrinogen and factors II, V, VII, or X, or a combined deficiency involving one of these factors can lead to prolongation of PT/INR

- Antiphospholipid antibodies: Lupus anticoagulants can prolong the PT/INR if it has the specificity for factor II (prothrombin). However, isolated prolongation of the aPTT is more common.

In contrast, shortening of PT usually reflects a technical error in specimen collection and preparation technique.