Many patients turn to injections for their CTS when conservative therapies fail. Corticosteroid solutions are the predominant injectate used. Controversy exists over the safest injection site. A comparative study of several locations found that injecting within the flexor carpi radialis tendon proximal to the carpal tunnel might be the safest.

The patient may be seated or supine during the injection. The affected wrist is supinated in slight dorsiflexion using a rolled-up towel and taping the fingers down. An ultrasound linear array probe can be used to scan the wrist for any anatomical variants such as volar ganglion cysts, flexor tendon tenosynovitis, and tumors.

Using sterile technique, the needle is introduced most commonly on the ulnar aspect of the carpal tunnel. The initial trajectory is shallow and superficial to the ulnar artery and nerve penetrating the flexor retinaculum.

Studies have shown that 75% of corticosteroid injections were accurately placed solely using landmarks, while 8.7% penetrated and damaged the median nerve.

Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) injections have recently risen as a new modality for long-lasting pain relief. PRP contains concentrated platelets and growth factors that have been shown to alleviate CTS symptomatology. PRP promotes axonal regeneration, thereby restoring the function of the median nerve. A systemic review of five studies, including three randomized controlled trials, one case-control, and one case report showed the efficacy of PRP for patients with mild CTS