Hemolytic anemia can affect multiple organ systems throughout the body. As RBCs are destroyed, their products cause a chain of reactions that lead to further complications.

In SCD, the chronic hemolysis that occurs decreases the amount of oxygen that can be delivered, further leading to tissue hypoxia. As tissues are deprived of blood and, therefore, oxygen, patients can experience fatigue and muscle pain. The worse the degree of anemia has shown worse clinical outcomes in patients with SCD.

The risk of ischemia and thrombotic complications can be seen in any case of hemolysis as there are more complications being studied from the toxic effects of circulating free hemoglobin and iron.

Thromboembolism is the most common cause of death in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). 15% to 44% of these patients will have at least one thromboembolic event during their disease course. Thalassemia and SCD both are found to have a hypercoagulable state caused by an abnormal phospholipid membrane asymmetry, which has been linked to increased hemolysis and thrombosis.

Excess hemoglobin and iron from hemolysis also are seen to cause complications in the kidneys. Iron and hemosiderin deposition in the kidneys with intravascular hemolysis, such as in PNH, have shown decreases in kidney function.

Both liver disease and neurological deficits can be seen in Wilson disease if it is not diagnosed and treated early. Hemolysis is one of the most important presenting symptoms in a child or young adult with Wilson disease.

Many people with HS are not diagnosed until adulthood when they begin to present with complications. They can often be seen to have recurrent cholelithiasis, and in the most severe cases, which are often found to be recessive, will need regular blood transfusions.