Treatment of hyperamylasemia will be directed at the suspected underlying etiology. Asymptomatic isolated hyperamylasemia without suspicion of any underlying etiology is benign and does not warrant treatment.

In acute pancreatitis, treatment is directed toward fluid resuscitation with an isotonic crystalloid solution (i.e., normal saline or lactated Ringer solution), pain control, and nutrition. Fluid resuscitation is typically provided at a rate of 5 ml/kg/hr to 10 ml/kg/hour for all patients. In patients with severe volume loss, rapid repletion should be given with up to 20 ml/kg of fluid over 30 minutes, followed by 3 ml/kg/hour for 8 to 12 hours. Reassess fluid requirements every 6 hours over the next 24 to 48 hours based on clinical assessment of volume status, creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) values. The target heart rate should be less than 120 beats/minute with mean arterial pressure between 65 mmHg to 85 mmHg and urine output of at least 0.5 ml/kg/hour to 1 ml/kg/hour. Pain control should be managed with analgesics and in severe cases of pain. For most mild cases of acute pancreatitis, patients can be managed with intravenous (IV) fluids and resume a low-fat solid diet within 24 hours as tolerated if pain and nausea/vomiting symptoms are improving.

Post-ERCP hyperamylasemia is one of the most common complications that can lead to substantial morbidity.

In patients where the cause of hyperamylasemia is a parotid disease, appropriate management should be started to treat the underlying parotid illness. With treatment, the inflammation of the parotid gland reduces and serum amylase levels return to baseline.