Catheter-directed thrombolysis (CDT) offers improved clinical outcomes in patients with severe, hemodynamically unstable, massive, or submassive PEs. Without CDT, these patients are at a higher risk of morbidity and mortality. The current guidelines recommend all healthcare facilities treating PEs set up a pulmonary embolism response team (PERT).

The PERT team is an interprofessional team consisting of specialists from various clinical fields, including emergency medicine, critical care, cardiology, internal medicine, radiology, and specialty-trained nurses from critical care, radiology, and emergency care. Clinical pharmacists, especially those trained in critical care, cardiac care, and anticoagulation, are an essential part of this team as well. Working as a collaborative team, they can help deliver CDT efficiently and effectively to improve patient care. [Level 5]

Once CDT is chosen as a management course, the team should counsel the patient and family regarding the procedure's risks and benefits. A trained clinical provider knowledgeable in the risk and benefits should have this discussion with the help of the nurses to ensure informed consent has been obtained. An anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist should then evaluate the patient to determine the need, mode, and safety of anesthetic delivery. An imaging specialist or structuralist may consult for further recommendations on the size and burden of the pulmonary embolism. The emergency care and critical care nurses must assist in monitoring the patient during the procedure as well as during subsequent infusion therapy to monitor for hemodynamic or neurologic complications. The clinical pharmacists assist the interventional team by providing appropriate medication and dosing for the procedure. The critical care pharmacist must assist the team in adjusting other concurrent medications to minimize adverse side-effects.

Multiple studies have shown that institution of a PERT team can reduce adverse events in regards to PE care.