Aortic stenosis is managed symptomatically with beta-blockers (atenolol, nebivolol, etc.), calcium channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem), or diuretics (furosemide, thiazides, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, etc.). The following are commonly used indications for aortic valve replacement.

- Patients with stage D1 aortic stenosis (symptomatic high grade).

- Patients with stage C2 aortic stenosis (aymptomatic high grade) with < 50% left ventricular ejection fraction.

- Patients with stage C1 aortic stenosis (asymptomatic severe) with low exercise tolerance.

- Patients with stage C1 aortic stenosis (asymptomatic severe) and aortic velocity > 4.5 m/s with low surgical risk.

- Patients with stage C or D aortic stenosis undergoing any other cardiac surgery.

Similarly, for aortic regurgitation, diuretics, and vasodilators (nifedipine, ACE inhibitors, etc.) are used for symptomatic management, the following are common indications for valve replacement,

- Patients with stage D aortic regurgitation (symptomatic severe).

- Patients with stage C2 aortic regurgitation (asymptomatic severe) with < 50% ejection fraction or > 50 mm end-systolic dimension or > 65mm end-diastolic diameter.

- Patients with stage B, C, or D undergoing any other cardiac surgery.

There is insufficient data to indicate a specific type of prosthesis for aortic valve replacement. But the following points favor a bioprosthetic heart valve.

- Contraindications, non-compliance, or refractory to anticoagulant drugs.

- Fully informed patients' desire.

- Patients with mechanical valve thrombosis.

- Low risk of valve redo-operations.

- Future pregnancy plans.

- Age of more than 65 years.

Autograft aortic valve replacement is done with the Ross procedure. This technique is preferred in children, and young adults as pulmonic valves used as graft have the potential to grow and regenerate and have a lower risk for endocarditis.