Retrograde urethrography (RUG) is generally accepted as the gold standard modality for evaluation of the urethra. The RUG has good utility among trauma patients and is easily performed at the bedside.  The procedure involves injecting 20 to 30 mL of diluted, water-soluble contrast into the urethral meatus and then obtaining an x-ray. A positive RUG study will demonstrate extravasation of contrast outside of the serpentine cylinder of the urethral tract.

Several other imaging modalities can be options to evaluate urethral injuries. Computed tomography (CT) is the test of choice to assess the intra-abdominal urinary system, including the kidneys, ureters, and bladder.

The use of magnetic resonance imaging is theoretically attractive but often logistically challenging. Some have advocated for its use among children with a urethral injury where advanced imaging is warranted and this is not unreasonable.

Using ultrasonography as a preliminary screening tool for urethral injury is another possibility.

Classification and proper description of urethral injuries are important in the development of treatment plans and inter-provider communication. Several classification systems exist. Perhaps the most common is the Unified Anatomical Mechanical Classification of Urethral Injuries and is as follows:

- Type 1:   Posterior urethra is stretched but intact

- Type 2:   Pure posterior urethral injury with a tear of the membranous urethra above the urogenital diaphragm (UGD); partial or complete

- Type 3:   Combined anterior and posterior urethral injury with the involvement of UGD; partial or complete

- Type 4:   Bladder neck injury with extension into the urethra

- Type 4a: Injury of the base of the bladder with periurethral extravasation

- Type 5:   Pure anterior urethral injury; partial or complete