The etiology behind PPCM is still unclear but is likely multifactorial. In the literature, potential factors that may contribute to the etiology of PPCM have been evaluated.

Significant hemodynamic changes occur during pregnancy. There is an increase in preload secondary to the increase in red cell mass and blood volume. This also increases the cardiac output by 20% to 30% due to an increase in heart rate and stroke volume by 15% to 25%. All these changes present during the first and second trimester, the moment when the patient with structural heart disease will develop symptoms. Compared with PPCM, these symptoms develop during the peripartum. For this reason, it is not clear that hemodynamic stresses are the main reason for PPCM.

Other etiologies such as myocarditis has been hypothesized due to the presence of viral genomes in biopsy of patients with PPCM as echovirus, Coxsackie, and parvovirus B19. A discrepancy amongst other studies exists, and for this reason, the specificity of this findings is poor, and further studies are necessary.

Studies have improved our understanding of the etiology of PPCM as the role of a toxic hormonal environment that generates in late pregnancy and the relationship with genetic factors that can contribute to the development of PPCM.

Significant hormonal changes occur at the end of pregnancy. Prolactins levels increase during late pregnancy and in the puerperium stage. Several analysts have been studying the effect of prolactin metabolism in the mouse model of PPCM. One of these models had a knockout expression of STAT3; an enzyme was found in the myocardium of patients with end-stage heart failure secondary to PPCM. This enzyme protects the heart from reactive oxygen species that, when increased, generates by a mechanism not known the secretion of a peptidase known as cathepsin D that cleavage prolactin into an angiostatic N-terminal 16 kDA prolactin fragment that promotes apoptosis in endothelial cells and cardiomyocytes apoptosis.

Genetic factors also have been implicated in the etiology of PPCM. Evidence of cluster of families with PPCM has been observed, and it is possible that the expression of the genes with the toxic environment during late pregnancy due to oxidative stress can increase the susceptibility of PPCM. Several studies have identified mutations in some patients with PPCM.

A pro-inflammatory state might play a role in the development of PPCM. Increased levels of cytokines such as TNF-alpha and interleukin-6 have been found in patients with PPCM and heart failure.

Concern for an autoimmune response as a possible cause of PPCM has been described, especially because high levels of antibodies against certain cardiac tissue could be the cause autoimmune myocarditis as the etiology behind PPCM. The evidence supporting this theory is based on another theory that described changes in the immune system of the mother during pregnancy (immunosuppression) leading the mother's body exposed to antigens from the fetus that can cause generation of an immune response after pregnancy when the immune system recovers.