**Ranges**

In healthy, non-smoking adults, CEA is considered within normal limits at a level of <=3.0 µg/L. Smokers may have elevated CEA, and therefore it is considered within normal limits at a level of <5 µg/L. Pre-treatment serum CEA levels of greater than five µg/L but less than ten µg/L suggests localized disease and a low likelihood of recurrence, hence a favorable prognosis. A serum level of >10 µg/L indicates a higher likelihood of recurrence and poor prognosis.

Serum titers of >20 µg/L are usually associated with metastatic disease in breast and colon cancers. However, given the variability in CEA expression or secretion, values <2.5 µg/L do not necessarily rule out primary, recurrent or metastatic cancers, either. For colorectal cancers, a CEA threshold of 2.5 µg/L carries a sensitivity of 82% and a specificity of 80%, while a threshold of 10 µg/L carries a sensitivity of 68% and specificity of 97%.

**Advantages**

Serum-based CEA testing is a cost-effective surveillance method in various cancers and is part of various national and international surveillance guidelines. It is also an equally important tool to assess ongoing response to palliative treatments in metastatic cancers, along with imaging studies. It is a very easy and widely available tool, even in a community setting.

**Drawbacks**

Due to low sensitivity and specificity, it cannot be used as a screening test to detect malignancies. Although used for detecting recurrence of cancer after primary surgical and adjuvant treatments, a single value (one-time measurement) is inadequate due to low sensitivity (high false-positive rate), and serial measurements (trend) are essential. Raising CEA cut-off (>10 µg/L) and combining it with other modalities such as CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis at 12 months intervals is recommended instead of using it as a sole test for monitoring recurrence of colorectal cancer.

People exposed to certain animal antigens may develop antibodies to CEA that might affect CEA levels and lead to unreliable results. Smokers are highly likely to get false-positive results; therefore, the test is unreliable in active smokers. It is not recommended to use CEA for follow-up in active smokers with colon cancer after primary treatment.