The importance of addressing the issue of pediatric obesity is substantial, for it is often associated with various health complications, including type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia.

Thirty-two percent of US children and adolescents aged 2 to 19 are overweight, and 17 percent of them are obese.

**Causes of Pediatric Obesity**

Genetics play a role in the development of childhood obesity but only accounts for less than 5 percent of its cases. It often has to be combined with environmental or behavior factors to influence weight. Thus it is not considered the major cause that is responsible for the dramatic increase in pediatric obesity.

Multiple environmental factors significantly contribute to the rising rates of childhood obesity. Decreased activity level among children and adolescents is significantly associated with obesity. In 2007, only 36 percent of US children and adolescents met the recommended levels of physical activity.

**Pediatric Nutritional Guidelines**

An article by Gidding et al.

- Balanced dietary calories with physical activity (60 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity every day)

- Daily consumption of vegetables and fruits and limited consumption of juice

- Reduced consumption of sugary drinks and foods

- Increased consumption of whole-grain bread and cereals instead of refined-grain foods

- Increased consumption of oily fish

- Reduced salt intake

Other dietary recommendations for children include carbohydrate reduced or restricted diet and low calorie and fat foods.