Herpes zoster is generally self-limiting in nature. Therefore, the main goals of treatment are to decrease the incidence of late complications, including spastic facial paralysis and postherpetic neuralgia. Multiple studies have shown a significant decrease in long-term complications with the use of oral antivirals and steroids.

High-dose corticosteroids, either oral or intravenous, should be co-administered with antiviral treatment. There is no overall consensus regarding the total duration of steroid treatment, which can vary from 4 to 37 days, but steroids should be prescribed at a high dose.

Notably, the clinician should have an appropriate and comprehensive patient-specific discussion before prescribing high-dose corticosteroids. Common side effects include mood changes such as depression or irritability, insomnia, gastritis, gastroesophageal reflux, increased blood pressure, and hyperglycemia.

Symptomatic management is also critical, particularly for two aspects of Ramsay Hunt syndrome: pain and corneal exposure. Analgesia is often needed with zoster; a multimodal approach with acetaminophen, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and long-acting opioids can all be used. If steroids are prescribed, concomitant NSAID use should generally be avoided to mitigate the risk of enteropathy, ulcer formation, and subsequent gastrointestinal bleeding. Tricyclic antidepressants and gabapentin are useful for the treatment of neuropathic pain and postherpetic neuralgia. Meclizine and benzodiazepines can be effective for managing acute vertigo as well. Artificial tears throughout the day and ocular lubricant ointment at night are helpful for the prevention of exposure keratopathy, and patients with frank lagophthalmos should be instructed in how to stretch the eyelid and how to tape the eye closed at night in such a way as to avoid scratching the cornea in the process (see videos). Patients with multiple comorbidities, such as diabetes, old age, hypertension, and immunocompromise, may take longer to recover than most, and they may benefit from the placement of an upper eyelid weight to aid eye closure and prevent exposure keratopathy during the recovery period.

Further surgical intervention in Ramsay Hunt patients in the acute setting is controversial. Generally, surgical decompression is considered to be beneficial in Bell's palsy patients if electrodiagnostic testing shows >90% degeneration of the facial nerve without the presence of voluntary motor potentials, the affected side is completely paralyzed, and if surgery is performed within 14 days from paralysis onset.

In the long term, the management of synkinesis can be accomplished with both conservative and surgical approaches.