Sickle cell disease affects nearly every organ system, and the management of patients with this condition depends on effective interprofessional communication. Splenic sequestration crises are managed primarily in the emergency department setting. However, many children may first present to their primary care provider who must be able to recognize this potentially fatal condition quickly. The emergency department must have nursing protocols in place to promptly triage and evaluate children with sickle cell disease. After triage and initial evaluation are complete, emergency physicians should communicate closely with the patient's primary hematologist, who can provide consultation and assist with the coordination of care. In the case of sequestration crises, the blood bank staff must be available to type and crossmatch blood for transfusion if necessary quickly. Long-term management of children with splenic sequestration crises may include splenectomy, which would require consultation from a surgeon as well as the child's primary hematologist. Overall care coordination for children with sickle cell disease is complex and should be led by the child's primary hematologist in conjunction with their primary care provider. Nursing will assist the team by providing ongoing monitoring, and assist in the event of surgical intervention, counseling parents, and assessing compliance. With interprofessional collaboration, children with splenic sequestration can achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]