The treatment and management of neuropathic ulcers require a two-fold approach; the underlying cause of the neuropathy must be treated, and the ulceration itself must be treated. Both treatment strategies are multifactorial. To treat the underlying cause of neuropathy, the testing performed, as discussed previously, can help dictate treatment guidelines depending on the patient's deficiency or disorder.

Ulceration treatment includes a multimodal approach. This is because after the ulceration heals (or before it begins), the efforts must be focused on preventative medicine. Understanding the biomechanical evaluation behind the structures at risk help inform clinical practice guidelines, including orthotic prescriptions and modifications, as well as possible surgical intervention and reconstruction of underlying deformities to decrease plantar loading.

The ulceration itself should be treated based on the physical exam, clinical evaluation, and laboratory findings. The ulceration should be evaluated for surgical intervention for proper irrigation and debridement. Debridement of any necrotic or hyperkeratotic peri-wound tissue, proper cultures if an infection is suspected for microbiological analysis, and possible biopsy of underlying tissue (bone) for pathological evaluation should be done even if surgical intervention is not pursued. If an underlying infection is suspected, this should include proper culture and sensitivity-directed antibiotic therapy as well as proper wound care techniques. If an underlying bone infection is suspected, the gold standard approach for evaluation is bone biopsy with both pathology and microbiology analysis for osteomyelitis; however, the sensitivity and specificity of the provider evaluating these remains debated.

All ulcerations should be offloaded to decrease the pressure and redistribute forces to the surrounding tissues. This has been evaluated in many studies and shown to help prevent the recurrence of neuropathic ulcers and promote healing in current ulcerations. Offloading treatment comes in many forms and is usually clinician-dependent. It can include total contact casting, felt offloading, controlled ankle motion (CAM), boot therapy with custom orthoses, forefoot casting, etc., and is increasingly important in plantar wounds.

A recent article published in May of 2019 of the guidelines for offloading the foot in patients with neuropathic ulcers recommends non-removable knee-high devices as first-line therapy for offloading, removable knee-high devices as second-line, removable ankle-high offloading as the third line, and felted foam or custom footwear as the fourth line for offloading ulcerations.