The most distinctive feature of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is the coexistence of upper and lower motor neuron signs and symptoms. Upper motor neuron (UMN) findings include hyperreflexia and spasticity, lower motor neuron (LMN) findings include muscle atrophy and fasciculations. Weakness can be attributed to either UMN or LMN. There are different phenotypes that determine the pattern of the above-mentioned symptoms and signs, as well as having prognostic significance:

- Limb onset ALS (LO) is the predominant type, presenting in 70% of patients.

- Bulbar onset ALS accounts for 25% of patients and is characterized by UMN and LMN involvement of the cranial nerves, usually manifesting as speech difficulties and dysphagia followed by limb involvement in later stages.

- Although debated, some experts believe progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) represents a form of ALS. The disease is progressive, initially exclusively involving the LMN. Many patients go on to develop clinical signs and symptoms of UMN disease, at which point it is called lower motor neuron-onset ALS. Interestingly, even in those patients who never show clinical evidence of UMN involvement, corticospinal tract involvement is detected at autopsy in up to 50% to 66% of patients with an antemortem diagnosis of PMA.

- Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is a disorder of initially exclusive UMN disease. These patients have slower progression, lacking weight loss, and LMN symptoms/signs in the first four years of the disease. Most will eventually develop them, however, and at this point is known as upper motor neuron-dominant ALS.

- If there are any additional symptoms/signs besides LMN and UMN disease, such as dementia (mostly frontotemporal), extrapyramidal, autonomic dysfunction, ocular motility disturbance, and/or sensory loss, these patients are considered to have ALS-plus syndrome.

FTD, in particular, has a significant coincidence with ALS, with approximately 15% of patients with ALS demonstrating criteria for FTD. Many patients (about 30% to 50%) diagnosed with ALS will go on to develop varying degrees of cognitive impairment. While not overt dementia, patients can experience changes related to executive function and fluency, as well as behavioral changes such as apathy and disinhibition.

Progression of ALS is usually linear, without remissions or exacerbations. Whereas the rate of progression varies between individuals, the pattern of progression is relatively predictable. The most common pattern in patients with unilateral limb onset (again, the predominant form), progresses to include the contralateral limb, then the other ipsilateral extremity (i.e., the leg if the initial weakness was in the arm), followed by the other contralateral extremity, before ultimately affecting the bulbar muscles.