**Fentanyl**can be administered via intravenous, intraosseous, intramuscular, intranasal, sublingual, transdermal, and oromucosal routes. When given IV, it is usually administered over 30 to 60 seconds to reduce the risk of respiratory depression. When given IV, effects begin within 2 to 3 minutes with a duration of action lasting 30 to 60 minutes.

**Midazolam**can be administered via IV, intraosseous (IO), intramuscular (IM), intranasal (IO), and oral routes. Its onset of action is about 2 minutes after IV injection with maximal effects occurring in 5 to 10 minutes. It is usually given over 2 minutes (IV).

**Atropine**is occasionally used as a premedication. Its anticholinergic effects reduce ACH-mediated bradycardia that can accompany endotracheal intubation.

**Etomidate**is given IV over 30 to 60 seconds. Its actions are seen within 1 minute of IV administration.

**Ketamine**is given via IV, IM, and IO routes when used for induction. The onset of action is within 30 seconds of IV administration, with anesthetic effects lasting 5 to 10 minutes. IM dosing has an onset of action ranging from 3 to 4 minutes with anesthetic effects lasting 12 to 25 minutes.

**Rocuronium**onset is about 1 to 2 minutes after IV administration, and duration of action is 30 to 60 minutes. It is minimally metabolized in the liver and may have a longer duration of action in the setting of hepatic dysfunction.

**Succinylcholine**is preferably given via the IV route, though it can be given IM. When given IV, the onset of action is 30 to 60 seconds, with a duration of action 8 to 15 minutes.