In the case of retinal macroaneurysm, it is important to rule out diabetic retinopathy, retinal telangiectasia, von Hippel-Lindau disease, radiation retinopathy, retinal capillary angioma, cavernous hemangioma, malignant melanoma, polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy, Valsalva retinopathy, and hemorrhagic pigment epithelial detachment of age-related macular degeneration.

Vitreous hemorrhage in RAM can be confused with retinal vein occlusion, acute posterior vitreous detachment, or proliferative diabetic retinopathy. In contrast, Coats disease, Leber miliary aneurysms, and angiomatosis retinae should be excluded in case of predominant exudation. Similarly, causes of submacular hemorrhage include choroidal melanoma, age-related macular degeneration, polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy, presumed ocular histoplasmosis, high myopia, trauma, and Valsalva retinopathy.

Conditions associated with subretinal hemorrhage are angioid streaks, coagulopathies, tumors, diabetic retinopathy, CRVO (central retinal vein occlusion), CNV (choroidal neovascularization), or drugs like aspirin, warfarin, and clopidogrel.

Besides retinal artery macroaneurysm, hemorrhage at multiple levels in the retina can be seen in cases of trauma (shaken baby syndrome), anemia, leukemia, and high altitude retinopathy.

Retinal capillary macroaneurysms are associated with diabetic retinopathy and ischemia secondary to veno-occlusive disorders. Other systemic associations include infectious, inflammatory, hematologic, and radiation-related disorders.

Retinal venous macroaneurysm is usually coexistent with branch retinal venous occlusion, although isolated venous macroaneurysm with no ocular or systemic history may also be seen.

Retinal arterial aneurysms are also seen in IRVAN (idiopathic retinal vasculitis, aneurysms, and neuroretinitis) or 'idiopathic retinal arteriolar aneurysms (IRAA)' with a macular star.

Multiple retinal arterial macroaneurysms in an inflamed eye may occur in ocular sarcoidosis.

Yamanaka and colleagues noted that 14 of the total 1007 patients with uveitis had macroaneurysms. Peripheral multifocal chorioretinitis (PMC) was seen in 12 of these 14 patients. Among 12 patients with PMC, sarcoidosis was noted in 7 patients. In 2 patients without PMC, sarcoidosis was noted in 1 patient. Most (94.4%) of the macroaneurysms in this series were exudative, and only one macroaneurysm was hemorrhagic. Two patients had systemic hypertension.