COVID-19 in pregnancy and the puerperium poses a significant diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. The need for an interprofessional team cannot be overemphasized.[Level 5]

A routine follow-up with an obstetrician during pregnancy and further monitoring as per the patient’s presentation, when infected with COVID-19 for both maternal and fetal health is vital to successful outcomes. Decisions regarding the delivery and the best approach to the same are dictated by the experience of the obstetrician, guided by local policy.

Neonatalogists, like always, are an inevitable presence in the interdisciplinary team for managing a pregnant woman with COVID-19. A pulmonologist or a critical care specialist to evaluate the respiratory symptoms and initiation of appropriate therapy in time is crucial given the time-sensitive nature of the usage of several therapies. A radiologist can guide a physician with possible differential diagnoses in the event of a PCR negative patient with radiologic studies suggestive of COVID-19. Appropriate protective strategies from undue fetal radiation can be adopted by including a radiologist in the evaluation approach discussion.

Assessment of post-COVID sequelae on imaging is another important research area. Additionally, with complications such as pneumomediastinum, an interventional radiologist who can insert image-guided drains for these patients is crucial. With the high incidence of renal failure in patients with COVID-19, a nephrologist may be kept in the loop for cases with deranged renal function to assess the need for dialysis. For the more common complications, a cardiologist can evaluate the possibility of cardiac complications like myocarditis, and a hepatologist for decoding enzyme derangements, due to the disease and the treating drugs alike. A pharmacist is crucial to the treatment plan in the present age of emergency use authorizations, where tracking adverse events with drugs and remembering drug interactions should not be a single physician approach.

COVID-19 is a truly multi-systemic disorder, and one may need to call upon the services of practically any and every specialty. Thus, an interprofessional team effort is paramount for ensuring a good outcome.