# Introduction

The spinal cord measures roughly 45 cm in the adult male and 42 cm in the adult female.**conus medullaris**, which is around the first or second lumbar vertebra and can sometimes be lower.

The variation in the position of the conus in adults was studied by Saifuddin et al. via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and in children by Wilson et al.

# Structure and Function

As mentioned above, the conus medullaris is the distal tapering end of the spinal cord. It is continuous with the epiconus (L4 to S1 segments) superiorly and consists of S2 to S5 as well as the coccygeal segments.

The conus medullaris give rise to the lumbar sympathetic, sacral somatic and sacral parasympathetic nerves which continue downward within the cauda equina. These nerves have important functions which can be impaired by injury or ischemia.

# Embryology

The spinal cord, along with the rest of the CNS, develops from the neural plate which forms during the third and fourth weeks of intrauterine life.

Between post ovulation days 27 and 54, the caudal end of the neural tube experiences retrogressive differentiation causing it to become thinner, less well developed, and eventually it contains only a rudimentary mantle zone and no marginal zone. The caudal neural tube thinning makes it appear that the end of the conus, relative to the adjacent vertebral column is gradually ascending.

Beyond post ovulation day 54, retrogressive differentiation ends, and the further ascent of the conus is caused exclusively by a disparity in growth of the vertebral column compared to the spinal cord. Therefore the conus medullaris inhabits a position that is opposite to the progressively higher vertebral levels and nerve roots exiting a specific spinal cord level thus have to travel farther caudal in the thecal sac; towards their eventual exit foramina.

Eventually, the conus medullaris occupies its “adult level,” by birth or within 2 months after birth. This location is most commonly cranial to or opposite the L1–L2 disk space.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The conus medullaris receives vascular supply via the following vessels-

- The anterior spinal artery, which traverses the anterior median fissure and ends at the filum terminale.

- Two posterior spinal arteries; these traverse the posterolateral aspect of the spinal cord along with the posterior nerve roots.

- One or two small arteries arise from the anterior spinal artery and circumferentially connect it with the posterior spinal arteries at the lower end of the cord, this is called the arterial basket of the conus medullaris. This structure is frequently involved in arteriovenous fistulas and malformations of the conus.

- Radicular arteries: 8 anterior and 12 posterior arteries form longitudinal arterial trunks along with the anterior and posterior spinal arteries and supply the corresponding nerve roots. The anterior arteries at the T1 and T11 segmental levels are very large, termed the arteries of Adamkiewicz, which supply the lumbosacral region of the cord. These radicular arteries are clinically important as they are end arteries, and occlusion leads to spinal cord ischemia.

- The artery of Desproges-Gotteron is an uncommon anatomic variant that arises from the iliolumbar artery, courses along the L5 or S1 nerve roots up to the conus, and anastomoses with the conal basket.

# Nerves

The spinal nerves S3-S5 originate in the conus and provide motor and sensory innervation to the lower extremities, bowel, bladder, and perineum. They are also crucial for sexual function. Spinal nerves L2-L5, S1-S5, and Co1 continue inferiorly as the cauda equina. Compression of these nerves can produce cauda equina or conus medullaris syndromes.

# Physiologic Variants

Saifuddin et al. examined MRI images of 231 men and  273 women with a mean age of 46 and found the mean position of the conus to be at the lower third of L1, with a mean variation from the middle one-third of T12 to the upper one-third of L3. There were no significant variations related to gender or increasing age.

Wilson et al. studied MRI images of 184 children ranging from neonates to 20-year-olds. They found that the position of the conus in the 0 to 2 year age group was from T12 to L2-L3 with an average being L1-L2. For the 19 to 20 year age group, the range was L1-L2 with the average being L1-L2. Based on these findings, they concluded that the conus does not ascend throughout childhood as previously believed but attains the adult position sometime during the first few months of life. A conus located at L2-L3 or above is considered normal for any age.

# Clinical Significance

Lesions around the vertebral L2 level can affect the conus medullaris and is known as conus medullaris syndrome. Symptoms include sudden onset severe back pain, perianal anesthesia, symmetric lower extremity motor weakness with hyperreflexia, and early onset bowel and bladder dysfunction.

Tethered cord syndrome is a condition caused by an abnormal filum terminale that prevents the conus medullaris from ascending and restricts the mobility of the spinal cord. As a result, the spinal cord gets abnormally stretched, with neurologic symptoms referable to the lower cord.

Intramedullary lesions of the conus medullaris are numerous. Neoplastic lesions include glial tumors such as ependymoma, astrocytoma, and glioblastoma multiforme; non-glial tumors include primitive neuroectodermal tumor and hemangioblastoma along with lymphoma, melanoma, and metastases. Non-neoplastic lesions include granulomas such as tuberculosis and sarcoidosis, parasitic infections such as cysticercosis and schistosomiasis, demyelination in multiple sclerosis, vascular lesions such as vascular malformations, cavernoma, and amyloid angiopathy and dysembryogenetic lesions such as lipoma, dermoid cyst, epidermoid cyst, and teratoma.

The incidence of intramedullary tumors in the conus is roughly 10%, with the most common being myxopapillary ependymoma (50%), followed by lipoma, hemangioblastoma, and astrocytoma (11.5% each). Patients present with symptoms such as lower extremity pain, lower back pain, sensory disturbance, bowel and bladder problems, motor weakness, and saddle anesthesia. Sacral nerve root compression can cause severe perineal pain. Conus tumors can cause sacral nerve root compression similar to sciatica or cauda equina syndrome due to degenerative disc disease. Urinary abnormalities are present in 91% of patients and include decreased urge to void, sphincter dyssynergia, and detrusor areflexia. Treatment of all tumors is primarily surgical, with complete resection achieved in roughly 81% of patients. The highest resection rate is 90% for ependymoma and hemangioblastoma, and it is 50 to 76% for astrocytomas.

The artery of Desproges Gotteron can get compressed by L5-S1 disc herniation and lead to conus medullaris syndrome. It is also frequently involved in arteriovenous fistulas, which can be treated by microsurgery or embolization.