**Scoring and Parameters**

The Glasgow Coma Scale divides into three parameters: best eye response (E), best verbal response (V) and best motor response (M). The levels of response in the components of the Glasgow Coma Scale are ‘scored’ from 1, for no response, up to normal values of 4 (Eye-opening response) 5 ( Verbal response) and 6 (Motor response)

The total Coma Score thus has values between three and 15, three being the worst and 15 being the highest.

The score is the sum of the scores as well as the individual elements. For example, a score of 10 might be expressed as GCS10 = E3V4M3.

**Best eye response (4)
**

- No eye opening

- Eye opening to pain

- Eye opening to sound

- Eyes open spontaneously

**Best verbal response (5)
**

- No verbal response

- Incomprehensible sounds

- Inappropriate words

- Confused

- Orientated

**Best motor response (6)
**

- No motor response.

- Abnormal extension to pain

- Abnormal flexion to pain

- Withdrawal from pain

- Localizing pain

- Obeys commands

**Application of the Glasgow Coma Scale in Pediatrics**

The Glasgow Coma Scale can be used in children older than 5 years with no modification. Younger children and infants are not able to provide the necessary verbal responses for the practitioner to use the scale to assess their orientation or obey the commands to evaluate their motor response. Since a Pediatric Glasgow Coma Scale was initially described in Adelaide, there have been several modifications without any particular one becoming universally accepted.

**Children less than 2 years old (pre-verbal) / Children greater than 2 years old (verbal)                         
**

**Best eye response
**

- No eye opening / 1 No eye opening

- Eye opening to pain / 2 Eye opening to pain

- Eye opening to sound / 3  Eye opening to sound

- Eyes open spontaneously / 4 Eyes open spontaneously

**Best verbal response**

- None / 1 None

- Moans in response to pain / 2 Incomprehensible sounds

- Cries in response  to pain / 3 Incomprehensible words

- Irritable/cries / 4  Confused

- Coos and babbles / 5 Orientated - appropriate

**Best motor response 
**

- No motor response / 1 No motor response.

-  Abnormal extension to pain / 2 Abnormal extension to pain

- Abnormal flexion to pain / 3  Abnormal flexion to pain

- Withdrawal to pain / 4 Withdrawal to pain

-  Withdraws to touch / 5 Localises to pain

- Moves spontaneously and purposefully / 6 Obeys commands