Rifaximin is a synthetic antimicrobial derived from the parent compound, rifamycin. It has broad-spectrum bactericidal activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria.Cryptosporidium parvum and Blastocystitis hominis intestinal infections. The medication acts on and inhibits the bacteria's ability to synthesize proteins. The drug accomplishes this by irreversibly binding to the bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase called rpoB.

Because rifaximin is non-absorbable, it reaches high concentrations within the gastrointestinal lumen, allowing it to work effectively on various gastrointestinal diseases without systemic effects.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- **Absorption:**According to the manufacturer's information, the average time to reach peak rifaximin plasma concentrations in healthy subjects was about an hour. The mean Cmax ranged from 2.4 to 4 ng/mL after a single and multiple doses of rifaximin. Mean rifaximin exposure (AUC) in patients with hepatic encephalopathy was approximately 12-fold higher. A high-fat meal consumed 30 minutes preceding rifaximin dosing in healthy subjects delayed the time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) from 0.75 to 1.5 hours, increased the systemic exposure (AUC) by 2-fold but did not significantly impact Cmax.

- **Distribution:**The mean protein binding is 67.5% in healthy subjects and 62% in patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Metabolism:**Rifaximin is metabolized mainly by CYP3A4. In addition, Rifaximin accounted for 18% of the radioactivity in plasma, suggesting that the absorbed rifaximin undergoes extensive metabolism.

- **Excretion:**The half-life of rifaximin in healthy subjects at steady-state plasma concentration was 5.6 hours and was 6 hours in IBS-D patients. In a mass balance study, when 14C-rifaximin was administered orally to healthy volunteers, of the 96.94% total recovery, 96.62% of the administered radioactivity was recovered in feces largely as the unchanged drug, 0.32% was recovered in the urine primarily as metabolites with 0.03% as the unchanged drug. Biliary excretion of rifaximin was indicated by a further study in which rifaximin was present in the bile in patients with intact gastrointestinal mucosa after cholecystectomy.