Radiographic imaging is recommended to diagnose medial epicondyle fractures. The preferred initial imaging series includes anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral view plain radiographs of the elbow, including an oblique view. The oblique view helps distinguish displacement. X-ray findings suggestive of medial epicondyle fractures include cortical contour disruption on the AP view of plain radiographs. Other findings include loss of parallelism along apophysis smooth margins. Trochlear ossification seen on radiographs in children younger than eight years old may suggest an incarcerated fragment of medial epicondylar fracture as children younger than eight years old have not yet developed trochlear ossification.

Additionally, there are several classification systems present for medial epicondylar fractures. The Watson Jones classification can be useful to guide further treatment and management.  Watson Jone's classification consists of Type I through IV fractures. Type I includes fractures of less than 5 mm displacement with no rotation and are typically treated non-operatively. Type II fractures have greater than 5 mm displacement with rotation. Type III fractures have incarcerated fragments without dislocation. Type IV fractures are incarcerated with dislocation. Types III and Type IV receive operative treatment, while consideration is also given to patient factors for decision making in Type II fractures. Stress reaction or stress fractures in throwing athletes generally are treated conservatively and with a shutdown period to limit the chances of worsening the injury.