**Why Is This Important To Clinical Practice?**

The healthcare system is made up of individual players, but its ultimate goals of patient care and safety are accomplished through teamwork. Likewise, when medical errors occur, though they may result from an individual’s actions, the appropriate next steps fall on the institution to identify, learn from, and improve on the prevention of such events. This process focuses on systemic policy changes, not individual performances, to progress.

For example, consider an emergency room triage system that primarily relies on color-coded wristbands to stratify patients who present with various complaints. When given a red wristband, this signifies to a healthcare provider that a patient needs immediate medical care. A white wristband may signify that there is no real urgency, etc. Many hospitals utilize such systems to manage a hectic emergency department efficiently.

Imagine that a real estate conference is being held in a busy downtown. Attendees are required to wear a purple wristband for admission to the event. At one point in the evening, a 65-year-old conference attendee with a significant medical history for hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia begins to feel crushing, substernal chest pain. He drives himself to the local hospital and awaits care in triage. It is 7:00 PM on a Friday night, and a shift change has just occurred. Moments later, the patient stops breathing. The nurse who just began her shift rushes to the patient’s side and notices a purple wristband. Mistaking it for a Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) band, she doesn’t call the code.

It is clear to see that this was one individual’s medical error in misidentifying a patient’s wristband, resulting in a sentinel event. However, what if, to check in to the ED, a front desk employee’s responsibility was to give patients the appropriate, color-coded wristband and to check for any bracelets/bands that a patient may be wearing? Medical errors are likely to happen in this environment, but systems-based safety policies, though loaded with redundancies, can reduce the chances that such a medical error progresses any further.

How pervasive is this issue? In 1999, a monumental report was released by the U.S. Institute of Medicine that brought to light the significant issue of medical errors. By their estimates, between 44,000 and 98,000 patients die each year from preventable medical errors.