Peters anomaly is diagnosed clinically, and investigations are done to characterize other abnormalities and document ocular abnormalities.

**Ocular Investigations**

**Anterior Segment Photo**

Anterior segment photo is useful for clinical, academic, and research purposes. The clinical picture helps with the following:

- Evaluating the accurate size, shape, and location of the lesion

- Comparing the condition of both eyes

- Explaining to the patients and their relatives about the condition

- Comparing preoperative and postoperative photos

- Teleconsultations

**Ultrasonography Brightness (USG B) SCAN**

It helps in the evaluation of severity and diagnosis of the Peters anomaly.

**Ultrasound Biomicroscopy (UBM)**

UBM is a noninvasive and diagnostic investigation for the Peters anomaly.

At high resolution, it shows a shallow anterior chamber, iridocorneal adhesion, corneo-lenticular touch, hyperreflectivity at the posterior surface of the cornea, hyperechoic lens, and lens luxation.

**Intraoperative OCT**[iOCT, Spectral-domain OCT (SD-OCT)]

It is performed under anesthesia before corneal transplantation or during evaluation under anesthesia in a dark room. A total of 31 images of the limbal area were taken and analyzed in a study. It scans the central 6 mm cornea with an axial resolution of 5 micrometers.

It helps in:

- Evaluation of anatomical features and severity

- Making the surgical decisions

The Peters anomaly was classified into three groups based on SD-OCT: mild, moderate, and severe.

Mild disease: It has irregular corneal thickness with defects in the Descemet membrane and the corneal endothelial layer with no iridocorneal adhesion. The anterior chamber angle is open.

Moderate disease: SD-OCT shows the irregular corneal thickness and iridocorneal adhesion. Iridocorneal adhesion can be present in one to three quadrants. A variable extent of anterior chamber angle closure is present.

Severe Disease: In this group, SD-OCT shows lenticulo-corneal adhesion with complete closure of all quadrants of the angle of the anterior chamber.

**Histological Investigation**

It is useful in case of severe corneal opacity. It shows changes in every layer of the cornea. On histological examination, there is an absence of the Descemet membrane and endothelium at the site of corneal opacity. It shows disorderly arranged corneal stromal lamellae and iridocorneal adhesion.

**Radiological Investigation**

A neurological investigation like MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the brain and orbit helps in detecting associated intracranial involvement and involvement of optic nerve. MRI orbit also helps differentiate long axial length due to coloboma, glaucoma, and axial myopia.

**Systemic Evaluation**

- Echocardiography to rule out congenital abnormal development of the heart

- An abdominal ultrasound evaluation for renal malformation

- MRI and CT (computed tomography) scan of the brain and orbit to rule out cerebral and ocular involvement