During the clinical assessment for injury to CN XI (Spinal Accessory Nerve, SAN), the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid are assessed for strength and mass.  The trapezius is assessed by asking the patient to shrug his or her shoulders with and without resistance, and the sternocleidomastoid is tested by asking the patient to turn his or her head to the left or right against resistance. Inspection of the muscles may reveal wasting or fasciculations.

Trapezius muscle compromise or paralysis is most often is secondary to a neurogenic etiology as the SAN is vulnerable along its superficial course in the posterior triangle of the neck.  Injury can occur secondary to blunt or direct trauma.  Blunt trauma can cause injury during contact sports such as football or hockey.  Penetrating trauma from either a gunshot wound, or penetrating deep laceration from sharp objects or weapons can also compromise the SAN.

It is easier to find a nuanced disorder secondary to repetitive traction injuries or compression neuropathy.  If the clinician suspects scapular winging, abnormal/asymmetric neck rotational posturing, or atrophy of the trapezius muscle and shoulder pain and incapacity of shoulder abduction, scapular winging, it is worth evaluating the accessory nerve.

You can perform tests to analyze strength and reflexes. A small hammer is used in the clavicular area of insertion of the sternocleidomastoid to evoke its reflection.

The sternocleidomastoid strength is evaluated, by having the patient rotate his head from one side to the other while, overcoming the resistance posed by the operator. Similarly, to test the contractile trapezius reaction, the practitioner places his hands at the base of the patient's neck on the trapezius muscle, and the subject is asked to lift the shoulders.

**Instrumental Evaluation**

There are several options for investigating possible damage to the XI nerve. The use of X-ray (for the base of the skull and the styloid process), a video-cinematography, CT scan, magnetic resonance, angiography, and ultrasound. Electrophysiological procedures such as electromyography can be used to evaluate nerve function, electrical stimulation of spinal nerve roots, and transcranial magnetic stimulation.

**Lateral Scapular Winging (LSW)**

Trapezius muscle paralysis secondary to SAN injury causes the affected shoulder to droop and the scapular appearance is consistent with lateral winging.  Compared to the normal side, the clinician should appreciate inferior translation of the scapula, and the inferior angle is rotated laterally.  In subtle cases, the diagnosis can be elicited by asking the patient to push against the wall with his or her arms outstretched and the examiner can more readily observe these findings.

The workup for LSW begins with radiographs of the chest, c-spine, shoulder, and scapula.  EMG/Nerve conduction studies are valuable adjuncts to confirm physical examination findings.  Once confirmed, the clinician can serially monitor for SAN recovery in 3- to 6-month intervals.