A filarial hydrocele is an accumulation of fluid, due to true hydrocele (fluid), chylocele (lymph), or hematochylocele (blood with lymph), in the scrotum. The term "filaricele" is inclusive of all three and has been suggested as the all-inclusive term in recent years. The hydrocele may be of two types: communicating and non-communicating. Non-communicating hydroceles develop with filarial infections and may present as acute or chronic conditions. In filarial infections, migration of adult worms and then there persistence in the scrotal lymph system result in a hydrocele. Chylocele may result from the rupture of lymphatic vessels inside the scrotal cavity leading to lymph ('lymphocele') or milky (chylocele) fluid collection. This may contain variable amounts of red blood cells (hematochylocele).

Acute hydroceles result from the death of these worms, often after medical therapy. Acute filarial hydrocele can be triggered by post-treatment death and/or disintegration of the worm, the filarial antigen thus produced may lead to acute filarial lymphangitis (AFL). This is followed by temporary clogging of the lymphatics by the inflammatory reaction to disintegrating worms. However, the acute response may resolve over days and weeks.

Chronic hydroceles, on the other hand, develop due to poor functioning of the lymph system due to adult worms making their way to the scrotal lymphatics and forming scrotal nodules.

There is some evidence suggesting that superimposed bacterial infection may play a role in triggering immune response due to the death and disintegration of the parasite. Wolbachia is an intracellular bacteria, in the filarial parasite, that gets released on the death of the parasite W. bancrofti. It is thought that the bacteria release causes an immune response leading to an increase in the patient's blood levels of IL-6, IL-10, and also sTNF-alpha receptors. The exact role this plays in the development of hydrocele is not understood. Recent research has implicated the endosymbiotic bacteria Wolbachia as a possible trigger in the immune reaction following the death of adult worms.