Polytrauma patients may present unexpectedly to any hospital, including non-trauma centers hospitals. It is therefore vital that these patients are managed systematically by an interprofessional team, with a view to further treatment and possible transfer once the patient is stable. Many hospitals have designated levels of trauma service according to the clinical and scholar capabilities of the hospital. Trauma bay of variable beds and all the necessary supplies are available in the emergency department of the trauma centers. Trauma teams are available to initiate trauma care once trauma codes are activated. Trauma teams consist of members from emergency departments, general surgery, neurosurgery, orthopedic surgery, intensive care, anesthesia, radiology department, nursing, and lab. Pharmacists may also have involvement depending on the medical needs of the individual patient and must be prepared to rapidly deploy medications in conjunction with the trauma or emergency room clinicians. This is why many facilities have a pharmacist on duty dedicated to the emergency department. Trauma nurses will also be on the front lines, collaborating directly with the trauma clinicians in providing the interventions needed, monitoring patient status, and collecting information from the patient (if possible) or other witnesses or family members. This type of interprofessional teamwork is essential in polytrauma emergencies. [Level 5]

Trauma activation commences upon the arrival of the injured patient. Occasionally, trauma activation may take place before the patient's arrival in critical injuries. Upon arrival, the patient enters the trauma bay, where the transfer from the prehospital team to the trauma team takes place. Effective handover is critical at all stages of the patient journey. Essential information that is required by the trauma team is:

- Mechanism of the injury

- Name (if available), age and sex of the patient

- The patient's injuries with most life-threatening mentioned first

- Airway, breathing, and circulation assessment and interventions

- Consciousness level and spinal status