Treatment of prurigo nodularis should be tailored to the patient's age, comorbidities, the severity of prurigo, quality of life and expected side effects.

First Line

- Class 1 topical steroids ( Clobetasol propionate 0.05%, halobetasol propionate 0.05%) Long term applications can lead to adverse effects like skin atrophy, folliculitis, miliaria, delayed wound healing, tachyphylaxis.

- Intralesional injections of triamcinolone acetonide (40mg/ml). This may be accompanied by cryotherapy.

- Topical menthol solution in a concentration of less than 5%.

- Systemic antihistamines: fexofenadine 180mg, levocetirizine 5mg or desloratadine 5mg during daytime and sedating antihistamines like hydroxizine25mg at night time. The first generation antihistamines cause side effects like sedation, hyperexcitability, impaired cognitive function, dry mouth, constipation, dysuria, tachycardia, and arrhythmias.

Second-line

- Phototherapy: PUVA, long-wavelength UVA, Narrowband UVB, monochromatic excimer light of 308nm

- Systemic immunosuppressives: Cyclosporine 3mg/kg daily. Adverse effects include nephrotoxicity, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hyperkalemia, hyperuricemia. Methotrexate 5-20mg/week. Common adverse effects are nausea, gastrointestinal symptoms, and transaminitis.

- Thalidomide 300-400 mg daily yields good response within 3 months, followed by tapering the dose to 50mg daily. However, complete cessation of the drug leads to recurrences. Adverse effects are teratogenicity and peripheral neuropathy. Lenalidomide 5-10mg daily is less neurotoxic than thalidomide.

- Opioid receptor antagonists : Naltrexone 50mg daily. Adverse effects are restricted to the first 2 weeks of treatment and include nausea, fatigue, dizziness, heartburn, and diarrhea.