Upon evaluation, the patient history should investigate substance use, mental health, family history for substance use and mental health disorder, medical history, medications, substance use amongst social circles (particularly in adolescents), and environmental stressors.

The individual's mental status is a critical part of the exam and can point at the phase of cannabis use. Intoxication can include euphoria, anxiety, uncontrollable laughter, increased appetite, inattentiveness, forgetfulness, restlessness, tachycardia, conjunctival injection, and dry mouth. And less commonly may include delusions, hallucinations, and derealization. Prolonged continuous use or withdrawal typically causes a depressed mood characterized by apathy, lack of motivation, irritability, loss of interest in typical activities, difficulty concentrating, and isolation. (Side note: Cognition can quickly be assessed by testing three-word recall, asking multi-step math problems, or recalling details from a brief fictional story as demonstrated on the St. Louis University Mental Status Exam.) This depressed mood can also include the differential persistent depressive disorder and major depressive disorder. Substance use and a mood or anxiety disorder are not necessarily mutually exclusive and frequently co-occur.  Even suicidality and homicidal tendency can result from dysregulated mood, a recent stressor, or substance use. Differentiation requires an understanding of the intensity and temporality of the symptoms; persistent symptoms during periods of sobriety can indicate a comorbid primary psychiatric disorder.

Classifying cannabis use in the US is dictated by the DSM-5. Generally, it can be understood as the acute and chronic effects. The acute phase includes intoxication and withdrawal states, along with secondary complications - delirium, psychosis, anxiety, and insomnia. Chronic regular use can be characterized by disordered behavior.

Pending on the setting (i.e., emergency department, office visit, or rehabilitation program), different effects of cannabis may be of focus. The diagnostic criteria of the varying effects of cannabis are listed below, as defined by the DSM-5.     ****

**Cannabis Intoxication**

- Recent use of cannabis

- Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., impaired motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, a sensation of slowed time, impaired judgment, social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after, cannabis use

- At least two of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of cannabis use: conjunctival injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, tachycardia.

- Symptoms not due to a general medical condition and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder.

- Specify if perceptual disturbances are present: hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of delirium.

**Cannabis Withdrawal**

- This accompanies cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and prolonged (i.e., usually daily or almost daily use over a period of at least a few months). Three or more of the following signs and symptoms develop within approximately 1 week after cessation of heavy, prolonged use:            

- Irritability, anger, or aggression           
- Nervousness or anxiety            
- Sleep difficulty (i.e., insomnia, disturbing dreams)            
- Decreased appetite or weight loss            
- Restlessness            
- Depressed mood

- At least one of the following physical symptoms causing significant discomfort: abdominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or a headache.

- The signs or symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

- The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from another substance.

It should be noted that evidence suggests that withdrawal only occurs in a subset of patients.

**Cannabis Intoxication Delirium**

This diagnosis relies on the definition of delirium and is appropriate when the following two symptoms predominate in someone who has taken cannabis:

- Disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct focus, sustain, and shift attention) and awareness (reduced orientation to the environment)

- An additional disturbance in cognition (i.e., memory deficit, disorientation, language, visuospatial ability, or perception).

**Cannabis-induced Psychotic Disorder**

- Presence of delusions or hallucinations.

- Evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of either one of the following:

- 
              
- The symptoms in the first criterion developed during or soon after cannabis intoxication or withdrawal.            
              
              
- The disturbance is not accounted for by a psychotic disorder that is not substance-induced.
              
              
- Evidence that the symptoms are accounted for by a psychotic disorder that is not substance induced might include the following:            
              
              
- 
                  
- The symptoms precede the onset of substance use (or medication use).      
                  
                  
- The symptoms persist for a substantial period (e.g., about a month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication or are substantially more than what would be expected, given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use.      
                  
                  
- Other evidence suggests the existence of an independent non–substance-induced psychotic disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non–substance-related episodes).      
                  
                  
- The disturbance does not occur exclusively during delirium.    
                  
                  
- The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning.

**Cannabis-induced Anxiety Disorder**

- Panic attacks or anxiety predominate in the clinical picture.

- Evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of either of the following:                

- The symptoms in the first criterion developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal.                
- The disturbance is not better accounted for by an anxiety disorder that is not substance-induced. Evidence that the symptoms are better accounted for by an anxiety disorder that is not substance induced might include the following:                    
- The symptoms precede the onset of substance use.                    
- The symptoms persist for a substantial period (e.g., about a month) after cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication or are substantially more than expected given the type or amount of the substance used or the duration of use.                    
- Other evidence suggests the existence of an independent non–substance-induced anxiety disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non–substance-related episodes).                
- The disturbance does not occur exclusively during delirium.               
- The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

**Cannabis-induced Sleep Disorder**

- A prominent and severe disturbance in sleep.

- There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both of the following:

- 
              
- The symptoms in the first criterion developed during or soon after cannabis intoxication or after withdrawal from or exposure to it.          
              
              
- The disturbance is not better explained by a sleep disorder that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sleep disorder could include that:               
              
              
- The symptoms precede the onset of cannabis use.          
              
              
- The symptoms persist for a substantial period (i.e., about a month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication.         
              
              
- There is other evidence suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced sleep disorder (i.e., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).           
              
              
- The disturbance does not occur exclusively during delirium.                
              
              
- The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.

**The Chronic Effects: Cannabis Use Disorder**

Cannabis abuse and dependence were combined in the DSM-5 into a single entity capturing the behavioral disorder that can occur with chronic cannabis use and named Cannabis Use Disorder; it is defined as:

- A problematic pattern of cannabis use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:

- Cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.

- There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control cannabis use.

- A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain cannabis, use cannabis, or recover from its effects.

- Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis.

- Recurrent cannabis use results in failure to fulfill role obligations at work, school, or home.

- Continued cannabis use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of cannabis.

- Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of cannabis use.

- Recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.

- Cannabis use continues despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by cannabis.

- Tolerance, as defined by either: (1) a need for markedly increased cannabis to achieve intoxication or desired effect or (2) a markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the substance.

- Withdrawal, as manifested by either (1) the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for cannabis or (2) cannabis is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

It has the following specifiers:

In early remission - After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder has been met for at least three months but less than 12 months (with an exception provided for craving).

In sustained remission - After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder has been met at any time during 12 months or longer (with an exception provided for craving).

Severity is graded as either Mild, Moderate, or Severe, pending if 2 or 3, 4 or 5, or 6+ of the above criteria are present.