Different CT modalities that are options in stroke imaging include non-contrasted CT (NCCT), CTA, CTV, and CTP.

Pros: CT scan has fast image attainment, which is not sensitive to motion (except for CTP, which is motion-sensitive). CT scan is widely available in the emergency rooms these days, and it makes high-resolution images of the brain.

Cons: All CT modalities, except for NCCT, require intravenous administration of ionized contrast agents, and is challenging in a patient with renal impairments or allergy to contrast agents.

**Non-contrasted computed tomography**

NCCT is the first imaging technique done in all patients suspected of stroke mainly to exclude hemorrhagic stroke. Besides, NCCT is sensitive to identifying calcification, which is vital in the detection of any lesion. NCCT should be done immediately as the patient has stabilized in the emergency room. NCCT findings in ischemic stroke depend on the age of infarction: hyperacute (less than 12 hours), acute (12 to 24 hours), subacute (24 hours to 5 days), and old (within weeks after stroke). In the "hyperacute phase," the main role of non-contrast brain CT is to exclude intracranial hematoma. Sometimes an intra-arterial thrombus has high attenuation in NCCT and can be detected. This phenomenon is called "hyperdense vessel sign." In "acute" infarction NCCT can show subtle loss of gray-white matter interface (differentiation) due to the rise of water content result of cytotoxic edema.

Non-contrast CT is essential in the management of patients with ischemic stroke. In patients with a large infarction, thrombolysis is not helpful but can increase the risk of post-treatment intracranial hematoma, a severe complication with the risk of brain herniation and death. In this context, different criteria and scoring systems have been developed to exclude the patients with very large infarction from treatment. The most common one is the “Alberta stroke program early CT score (ASPECTS).” In ASPECTS, 10 different areas of MCA territory are evaluated visually on non-contrast CT. For any area with subtle hypodensity, 1 point is subtracted from 10. Patients with an ASPECT score of less than 7 usually demonstrate worse outcomes.

**Computed tomography angiography**

CTA is performed by administration of intravenous CT contrast through a line in antecubital fossa. In the acute stroke setting, CTA is done to identify any vessel thrombosis or occlusion, vascular malformations, dissection, vasculitis, and aneurysm. Maximum intensity projection (MIP) images and 3D reconstructions are suitable for the rapid detection of distal vascular stenosis and cloth length. CTA is a reliable method to detect any stenosis or occlusion in the large intracranial vessels such as internal carotid artery and middle cerebral artery trunk in the secondary (M2) or tertiary (M3) branch vessels.

**Computed tomography perfusion**

CTP is done with rapid injection of contrast in the peripheral vein (usually antecubital vein) and repeating brain CT many times and observe the brain parenchymal enhancement. The speed of parenchymal enhancement is proportional to the blood perfusion. The CTP is capable of measuring different perfusion parameters in the brain including the cerebral blood volume (CBV), cerebral blood flow (CBF), mean transient time (MTT), time to peak transient time (TTP), and time to maximum (T max). CBV is the total volume of blood in a unit volume of the brain, which includes blood in the arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins. CBF is the volume of blood moving through a given unit volume of the brain per unit time. MTT is the average of the transit time of blood through a brain region. MTT is calculated using the CBV and CBF according to MTT = CBV / CBF. The CBV and CBF are used to detect the core infarction. Usually, the decrease of CBF more than 30 percent of normal parenchyma is considered consistent with “core infarction” by many CTP software. On CTP “ischemic penumbra” is considered as areas of preserved CBF and CBV but increased MTT, TTP, or Tmax around the “core infarction.” For detection of ischemia Tmax more than 6 seconds is the most commonly used parameter by many CTP software. CTP is a functional test, rich in functional data but low in anatomic data. There are many challenges and artifacts in CTP which the radiologist must consider for interpretation. (Figure 3)