As previously discussed, the BBB is relatively impermeable under normal physiologic conditions. However, in pathologic conditions, several chemical mediators that increase BBB permeability may be released, including glutamate, aspartate, taurine, ATP, endothelin-1, ATP, NO, MIP-2, TNF-alpha, and IL-beta, which are produced by astrocytes. Other agents that increase BBB permeability include bradykinin, 5HT, histamine, thrombin, UTP, UMP, substance P, quinolinic acid, platelet-activating factor, and free radicals.

**Tumor-mediated Changes**

A major driver in BBB compromise, particularly in high-grade gliomas, is tumor-secreted VEGF. High-grade gliomas have an increased metabolic rate, resulting in local hypoxia and upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1, which stimulates the production of VEGF. Secreted VEGF then induces the breakdown of existing BBB architecture and the growth of structurally altered capillaries from the existing vessels. This tumoral-induced vascular endothelium displays an abnormal expression profile of transporters and receptors to accommodate the high metabolic demands of tumor cells. Unlike the brain vessels from which they originate, newly formed capillaries are structurally altered and more permeable than non-BBB peripheral capillaries. Ultimately, tumor-mediated changes in the BBB vary with tumor type, volume, stage, and anatomical location. The severity of barrier compromise ranges from serious disruption comparable to solid, non-brain neoplasm vasculature to mild compromise as found in neurodegenerative disease, stroke, diabetes, and obesity.

**Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy (HIE)**

HIE is a severe birth complication affecting full-term infants in which the brain does not receive adequate blood flow due to a hypoxic-ischemic event during the prenatal, intrapartum, or postnatal period. With impaired cerebral blood flow and oxygen delivery to the brain, severe disabilities can ensue, with up to 60% of affected infants dying by the age of 2 years or ending up with severe disabilities such as cognitive disability, developmental delay, cerebral palsy, and epilepsy. The exact cause may not always be known, but known precursors include uterine rupture, abruptio placenta, placenta previa, cord prolapse, maternal hypotension, shoulder dystocia, or breech presentation.

The extent of injury in HIE can be determined by the biochemical cascades that trigger the apoptosis-necrosis continuum of cell death in the brain parenchyma and by the breaching of the BBB by pro-inflammatory factors. Following a neonatal hypoxic injury, raised levels of tight junction proteins in both cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma indicate BBB dysfunction. This is likely due to direct molecular damage to the endothelial TJs during a hypoxic insult. BBB breakdown releases TJ proteins, and BBB function may be assessed by measuring these proteins in the circulation.

**HIV**

Breakdown of the BBB occurs in response to HIV or the viral proteins Tat and gp120. This disruption results in alterations in TJ protein expression, leading to enhanced paracellular compound flux across the BBB. Exposure to HIV and viral proteins also enhances monocyte migration across the BBB, leading to alterations in the expression and function of active efflux transport proteins such as P-glycoprotein. This breakdown of the BBB can lead to neurocognitive dysfunction, including decreased concentration, memory, information processing, learning, psychomotor speed, incoordination, and tremor. HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders can range in severity from asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment to full-blown HIV-associated dementia.

**Multiple Sclerosis**

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the CNS associated with demyelination of axons, eventually leading to neurodegeneration. MS exhibits many of the hallmarks of an autoimmune inflammatory disorder, including the breakdown of the BBB. Among the earliest cerebrovascular abnormalities seen in the brains of patients with MS are dysregulation of the BBB and transendothelial migration of activated leukocytes.

**Alzheimer Disease**

BBB dysfunction is closely associated with the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD). BBB dysfunction results in the failure of A-beta transport from the brain to the peripheral circulation across the BBB, leading to the accumulation of A-beta in the brain. Changes and dysfunction of the BBB structural components, including pericytes, astrocytes, vascular endothelial cells, and TJs between endothelial cells, are associated with an increased risk of AD. BBB dysfunction triggers neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, enhances the activity of beta-secretase and gamma-secretase, and ultimately promotes A-beta generation. A vicious cycle between A-beta pathology and BBB damage is well-established and will continue to destroy the neurons and glial cells and damage the neural networks. Thus, the progressive accumulation of A-beta in the brain and BBB dysfunction can become a damaging feedback loop that gives rise to cognitive impairment and the onset of dementia.

**Vasogenic Edema**

Vasogenic edema is the extracellular accumulation of fluid resulting from the disruption of the BBB and extravasations of serum proteins, such as albumin, into the cerebral parenchyma. The extravasated fluid accumulates outside the cells, and the excessive extracellular fluid accumulation increases brain volume and intracranial pressure (ICP).

**Hepatic Encephalopathy**

Typically, ammonia enters the portal circulation and is converted by the liver to urea. However, when a hepatocellular disease is present, such as hepatic encephalopathy, ammonia does not get converted to urea. Instead, it is shunted through the portosystemic collateral vessels into the systemic circulation, traversing the BBB and inducing neuronal edema and resultant hepatic encephalopathy. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters prevent the brain from accumulating toxins by pumping them out of the brain. Accumulation of toxins such as ammonia during hepatic encephalopathy or other cases of severe liver disease supports the conclusion that liver diseases alter the expression and function of ABC transporters at the BBB. There is growing evidence to suggest that altered ABC transporter expression is implicated in the development of hepatic encephalopathy.

**Neuromyelitis Optica****(Devic Disease)**

Neuromyelitis optica is a disease involving the synchronous or near-synchronous development of bilateral optic neuritis and spinal cord demyelination. It results in elevated serum levels of aquaporin-4 antibodies, a protein found in astrocytic foot processes surrounding blood vessels that are involved in maintaining the blood-brain barrier.

**Intraventricular Hemorrhage (IVH)**

IVH in premature infants is caused by dysfunction of the TJ seal and immaturity of the BBB in the germinal matrix. A lack of TJs or pericytes, coupled with incomplete coverage of blood vessels by astrocyte endfeet, may explain the fragility of blood vessels in the germinal matrix of premature infants.