Diagnosis of influenza can be reached clinically, especially during the influenza season. Most cases will recover without medical treatment, and they would not need a laboratory test for the diagnosis. In high-risk patients, initiation of treatment should not be delayed until test results are obtained. Influenza laboratory tests should be ordered for cases where testing would inform clinical action or public health interventions, such as outbreak situations where the diagnosis of the causative agent is necessary for therapeutic and prophylactic recommendations.

Laboratory tests available for diagnosis of influenza include rapid antigen, rapid molecular assay for nucleic acid detection, conventional molecular assay for nucleic acid detection using PCR, direct and indirect immunofluorescence for antigen detection, and viral culture.

Rapid or conventional molecular assay testing is preferred. Both have high sensitivity and specificity and can differentiate between influenza A and B. Conventional assays can differentiate influenza A subtypes, and results are available within 1 to 8 hours. Rapid molecular assay results are available within 15 to 30 minutes.

Rapid antigen results are available within 15 minutes and have high specificity. However, sensitivity is only low to moderate.

Viral culture has a moderately high sensitivity and the highest specificity of all available testing. However, results can take several days. Therefore, it is not helpful for the rapid diagnosis and management of influenza.

A chest x-ray should be obtained in patients with pulmonary symptoms to exclude bacterial pneumonia.