**Operative Management**

Parathyroid surgery is the only definitive treatment for primary hyperparathyroidism, whether it is normocalcemic or hypercalcemic. There are no known medical treatments that can fully reproduce the benefits of a successful surgery. Among the recommendations and indications for parathyroid surgery by the expert panel on Asymptomatic Primary Hyperparathyroidism: (age less than 50 years, osteoporosis, creatinine clearance <60 ml/min, urinary calcium >400 mg/24 hours, and nephrolithiasis) can be equally applied to nPHPT, and studies have shown improvement in bone mineral density (BMD) after parathyroidectomy.

Parathyroid surgery performed by experienced parathyroid surgeons tend to have higher success rates, lower complications, and shorter hospital stays.

Intraoperative PTH (ioPTH) monitoring with a rapid assay using the Miami criterion of a fifty percent drop from baseline to check for completeness of removal of abnormal parathyroid tissue has been tested in nPHPT patients and found to be equally predictive as in cPHPT.

In rare cases, selective jugular venous sampling to localize the diseased glands may be considered.

The intraoperative gamma probe relies on tracer retention of more than 20 percent in diseased glands has also been utilized, but it is inferior to ioPTH and needs specialized equipment and personnel not always available at all centers.

The most common surgical finding is a single adenoma but encountering multiple parathyroid adenomas is more common in normocalcemic (12%) than in hypercalcemic (4%) hyperparathyroidism.

Long-term data on post-operative nPHPT patients is still lacking.

**Medical Management**

Patients without an indication for surgery, who are unacceptable risks, or who refuse surgery can generally be managed by medications and serial observation.

The only bisphosphonate that has been tried in a study in nPHPT with osteoporosis is alendronate. In this study, 15 patients with osteoporosis were given alendronate plus vitamin D, and 15 matched controls were given vitamin D alone. After treatment, the alendronate group showed greater improvement in BMD. Serum calcium, P, and PTH levels were unchanged. Further studies are needed to recommend this therapy routinely, but it can be considered for those whose only complication of nPHPT is reduced bone mineral density.

The calcimimetic cinacalcet causes allosteric modification of the calcium-sensing receptors in the parathyroid and increases the set point for PTH secretion. In the calcium-sensing receptors of the renal tubules, it prevents calcium reabsorption. It is used in parathyroid carcinoma and SHPT in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients on dialysis. It can also be used in those with intractable hypercalcemia in classical PHPT, hypercalcemic patients after failed parathyroid surgery, and those who refuse surgery or are at high risk for surgical procedures.

Cinacalcet results in a modest reduction in calcium, less so in PTH, and no significant changes in BMD or urinary calcium. A small prospective randomized pilot study involving ten patients treated for ten months, which included nPHPT patients, showed safety and benefit with cinacalcet in reducing the number and size of calculi. This study had very few numbers and was unblinded. More studies with larger numbers in a blinded fashion with a crossover should help address these unanswered questions. There are gastrointestinal side effects, and the drug is expensive.

In summary, bisphosphonates can significantly increase bone mineral density but have relatively minimal effect on serum calcium levels. Calcimimetic agents can effectively lower serum calcium and especially PTH levels but have minimal effect on bone mineral density. Oral phosphate binders can be used selectively if necessary.

Other drugs used in PHPT are estrogen (which increases BMD while maintaining serum calcium and PTH while mildly decreasing urinary calcium) and raloxifene, which in the short term reduces serum calcium but does not affect urinary calcium or PTH. BMD data are not available for the latter, and additional studies in nPHPT are warranted.

Etelcalcetide is FDA-approved in the US for secondary hyperparathyroidism in end-stage renal failure patients. There is no information on its use in primary hyperparathyroidism. Evocaclet is another calcimimetic agent but is only approved in Japan.

Rank ligand inhibitors like denosumab have been used to treat hypercalcemia and are the most effective anti-resorptive agents, but there are no studies of their use in primary hyperparathyroidism.

Calcitonin may occasionally be used cautiously in cases of severe secondary hyperparathyroidism, as in some patients with end-stage renal failure. This is not the situation in normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism, so calcitonin generally has no place in treatment.

Those patients not requiring or not opting for surgery should be monitored with yearly serum calcium, P, intact PTH, eGFR, 24-hour urinary calcium excretion, and periodic renal imaging (for high-risk patients), with DEXA scans for BMD measurement at the lumbar spine, hips, and distal third of the radius every 1-2 years. If deterioration occurs (worsening bone density, nephrolithiasis, or fractures), then surgery is recommended. For those patients who cannot be relied upon to follow up, surgery may be offered in the beginning in hypercalcemic PHPT, but there is no consensus for those with nPHPT.