Many steps occur for the development of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. There are critical points in hematopoietic lineage pathways. The highly penetrating, specific mutant alleles isolated are of genes that directly affect cell survival and function (routes essential for normal hematopoiesis), in addition to other genetic modifying processes such as cytokine signaling hyperactivity isolated in the pathogenesis of acquired autoimmune aplastic anemia. Lineages most affected are those with frequent division (hematopoietic, gastrointestinal, and integumentary cells), providing the basis behind marrow and extra-marrow pathology observed in inherited bone marrow failure syndromes.

Fanconi anemia involves genomic instability due to mutations in genes coding for DNA damage repair proteins. DNA repair proteins are not oncogenic; however, DNA repair is important in maintaining the integrity of the genome, and any abnormalities allow mutations in other genes during the process of normal cell division. Fanconi anemia is part of a group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by hypersensitivity to other DNA damaging agents (others include Bloom syndrome and ataxia-telangiectasia, both of which are sensitive to ionizing radiation). Of the 13 genes that make up the  Fanconi anemia complex, FANC is the most common mutation. A subset of patients has BRCA2 mutations (FANCD1, FANCG, FANCJ, FANCP), associated with an increased risk of breast and ovarian cancer. These proteins are responsible for DNA damage repair via homologous recombination of intrastrand and interstrand DNA crosslinks due to chemical crosslinking agents. When these genes are mutated, crosslinks remain unrepaired, and when they are exposed upon strand separation during cell replication, the chromosomes break. These exposed ends lead to the activation of salvage nonhomologous end-joining pathways, bridge-fusion-breakage cycles, and massive aneuploidy. Some proteins also participate in the stem cell survival pathway in a direct or indirect manner, further influencing cell survival.

Dyskeratosis congenita has mutations in genes responsible for encoding proteins and RNAs involved in telomere maintenance (DKC1, TERC, TERT, NOLA2, NOLA3, WRAP53). These are only half of the genes found in patients. Other less commonly inherited bone marrow failure syndromes and 5% to 10% of adult-onset aplastic anemia have mutated telomerase enzymes. Telomerase is involved in cell replication; defects in telomerase result in short telomeres, leading to premature hematopoietic stem cell exhaustion and marrow aplasia. Moreover, short telomeres are present in half of all patients with aplastic anemia due to a combination of mutated telomerase or excessive stem cell replication.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome involves mutations in Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome (SBDS) gene, responsible for proteins implicated in ribosome biogenesis and mitotic spindle function.

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia is not associated with chromosome fragility; however, mutations in MPL (myeloproliferative leukemia virus) oncogene leads to thrombocytopenia from absent or reduced megakaryocytes in the bone marrow. MPL is responsible for coding thrombopoietin receptor c-MPL, a regulator of megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production.

Blackfan-Diamond anemia includes mutations in gene families RPL and RPS. They are responsible for ribosomal proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis. Similar to those in dyskeratosis congenita, they account for only half of the genes found in patients.

Reticular dysgenesis is one of the rarest and most severe forms of severe common immunodeficiency (SCID) and occurs from a mutation in mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2 (AK2). Patients develop profound leukopenia, especially neutropenia.