There are three fascial layers and three spaces where hematoma or infection can collect and lead to airway compromise. These layers and spaces, listed in anterior to posterior order, are (1) buccopharyngeal fascia, retropharyngeal space, (2) alar fascia, alar “danger” space, and (3) prevertebral fascia, prevertebral space.

The retropharyngeal space extends craniocaudally from the base of the skull to the posterior mediastinum and is enclosed by the buccopharyngeal and alar fascia. Retropharyngeal abscess is a suppurative collection within this space. Although infections of the prevertebral and alar spaces also can occur, infections of these anatomic spaces will not be discussed here.

The retropharyngeal space contains chains of lymph nodes that drain the nasopharynx, adenoids, posterior paranasal sinuses, and middle ear. These lymph node chains are present in young children, but atrophy and involute typically by age four to five years old. In one-half of cases of retropharyngeal abscess, patients report an antecedent upper respiratory tract infection. Upper respiratory tract infections result in suppurative adenitis of these retropharyngeal lymph nodes and eventual abscess formation.

Trauma to the posterior pharynx resulting in retropharyngeal infection and eventual abscess formation is typically the etiology of retropharyngeal abscess in adults and older children. One-fourth of retropharyngeal abscesses are attributed to the trauma of the posterior pharynx resulting in inoculation of the retropharyngeal space, cellulitis, phlegmon formation, and eventually, retropharyngeal abscess.

Risk factors for retropharyngeal space infection include poor oral hygiene, diabetes, immunocompromise, and low socioeconomic status.