**What are Miller Fisher and Guillain-Barre syndrome?**

Miller Fisher Syndrome (MFS) is one of the rare forms of a spectrum of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). It is a neurological condition that causes mild to severe muscle weakness. It is caused by an immune system reaction against certain proteins in our nerves important for movement, sensation, and function. This syndrome can begin after certain bacterial or viral infections found in our food, or the environment infects us. The body confuses the nerves with the bacterial or viral proteins leading to nerve damage, resulting in symptoms observed. The most common bacterial trigger for GBS and MFS is Campylobacter jejuni which can cause abdominal pain and diarrhea. Viruses that may cause MFS and GBS include HIV infection, Epstein-Barr (mononucleosis), and Zika virus.

**What are the symptoms of Miller Fisher syndrome?**

Miller Fisher syndrome causes eye and muscle weakness on both sides of the body. It may cause trouble walking and balance problems. It can start in the legs and slowly spread to the arms and face. Some people lose the ability to move their legs, arms, or face. Some people may have trouble breathing because it affects their respiratory muscles. Other symptoms of MFS can include:

- Tingling or numbness in the hands or feet

- Pain in the back, legs, or arms

- Problems with eye movement and/or blurry vision

- Loss of coordination in the arms and legs

**What are the tests for Miller Fisher syndrome?**

The doctor or nurse will ask about symptoms and do an exam. He or she will also do tests to be sure you have MFS and differentiate from other possible illnesses. Tests can include:

- A lumbar puncture (spinal tap): A procedure where the doctor puts a thin needle in the lower back and removes a small amount of spinal fluid. Spinal fluid is the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. That fluid is sent for further testing.

- Antibody testing: The doctor may send a blood test to determine whether the patient has MFS. There are specific sugar chains in the nerve called a ganglioside that the body attacks. This antibody is present in most, but not all, patients.

- Nerve conduction studies: This test can show whether the nerves are carrying electrical signals the correct way.

- Electromyography (EMG): This test shows whether the muscles are responding to the electrical signals from the nerves in the correct way.

- Neuroimaging CT/MRI of the spine: This test can show whether the body is attacking the nerves cells in the spinal cord. It would light up if it is positive.

- Other blood tests to rule out other illnesses

**How is Miller Fisher syndrome treated?**

Treatment for Miller Fisher syndrome is the same as GBS and involves different components depending on severity:

- Treatments for problems caused by the MFS: People with MFS are usually treated in the hospital to rule out a more life-threatening version of GBS. In the hospital, the doctor will monitor a heartbeat, breathing, and general health. If breathing problems are present and begin to get worse, you may need a breathing tube. A breathing tube goes down the throat and into the lungs and provides oxygen to your body.

- Treatment for pain: Doctors can use different medicines to treat pain, always watching that they do not use medication that could make breathing harder

- Treatment for the condition itself: There is no immediate cure for MFS and GBS. However, there safe and effective treatments that can help the body improve in a shorter time. These treatments are immunoglobulins (IVIG) and plasma exchange. IVIG is a medicine that helps the body rid itself of the proteins (antibodies) that damage the nerves. Plasma exchange is an alternative procedure where a machine pumps blood from the body and removes the proteins attacking the nervous system. Then the machine returns the blood to the body clean.

- Physical rehabilitation of affected muscles: People whose muscles get very weak may need to go to a facility for physical and neurological rehabilitation. It usually consists of 1 to 2 weeks of intense rehabilitation with a comprehensive team of health professionals. Their goal is to strengthen the body’s muscles as close to the previous function as possible.

**How long does Miller Fisher syndrome last?**

Acute MFS usually lasts a few weeks and can be shortened with appropriate treatment. Complete resolution of symptoms lasts several weeks to few months depending on the severity of presentation. The good news is that MFS tends to have a more benign course compared to other forms of GBS. Therefore, most people will recover completely and have no long-term muscle weakness. Very few people have muscle weakness that lasts years.

**What can I do to prevent Miller Fisher Syndrome?**

Certain bacterial and viral infections can cause these disorders. Some measures can be followed to reduce contact with eliciting agents including:

- Improve sanitation: Washing hands thoroughly with soap and water before and after handling poultry and generally when touching raw meat

- Cooking poultry products thoroughly

- Disinfecting water supply

- Avoiding raw milk consumption

- Safe sex practices

- Immunocompromised patients must adhere to medication regimen to avoid certain viral infections