A careful assessment of the patient's history, examination, and focused diagnostic evaluation are essential for an accurate diagnosis. First, the health provider must obtain a thorough history from the patient which includes: presence/absence of trauma, mechanism of injury, nature of pain (type), duration, exacerbating and improving factors, recent instrumentation as well as medical (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, rheumatologic illness, cancer) and surgical history. Any nonsurgical treatments, including activity modifications, physical therapy, and oral medications.

Physical examination should begin with documentation of vital signs. Febrile patients with hip pain must be evaluated for possible septic hip arthritis. Attention should be paid to the position in which the patient keeps the hip while at rest. Patients with synovitis or a hip effusion will often keep the hip in a flexed, abducted, and externally rotated position, as this position places the hip capsule at its largest potential volume.

A systematic and reproducible physical examination of the hip is described below in four parts: the standing, seated, supine, and prone examinations.

**Standing**

The examination includes general body habitus (BMI, alignment), gait stability/ alignment, and leg stance. Clinical observation of abnormal gait patterns must be evaluated, such as antalgic gait, abductor deficient gait (i.e., Trendelenburg gait), pelvic wink, excessive internal or external rotation, short leg limp, and abnormal foot progression. An antalgic gait will have a shortened stance phase, and it is indicative of hip, pelvic, or low back pain. A Trendelenburg gait is characteristic of abductor weakness. During the evaluation, the pelvis will drop on the contralateral side during the stance phase of gait. The gluteus medius and minimus are not strong enough to keep the pelvis level, as this weakness progresses, a compensatory shift of weight toward the affected side may occur. The single-leg stance phase stance is similar to the Trendelenburg test and helps identify a patient with weakened abductor muscles. Single leg stance evaluates the mechanics of the hip abductor musculature and proprioception.

Exam: while standing, the patient lifts the unaffected leg forward to 45° of hip flexion and 45° of knee flexion while holding this position for 6 seconds. A positive test is a pelvic shift or a decrease of more than 2 cm.

**Seated**

The seated exam evaluates motor function, sensation, and circulation. Motor functions include the assessment of muscles that are supplied by various nerves: femoral, obturator, superior gluteal, and sciatic nerves.

**Supine**

While the patient is placed in a supine position, evaluate the hip range of motion with specific concentration on flexion, extension, adduction, and abduction. The internal rotation at the hip evaluates the stability of the pelvis with flexion in 90 degrees with a neutral abduction angle. The range of motion is dictated by a firm endpoint or by the patient's pain.

There are specific provocative maneuvers that can enhance the physical examination:

- FADDIR: Performed by flexion, adduction, and internal rotation of the thigh at 90 degrees. A positive test results when there is anterior or anteromedial pain. This occurs due to the impingement of the anterior and anterolateral part of the femoral neck against the superior and anterior acetabular rim.

- Superiorolateral impingement test: This is performed with passive movement of the thigh into flexion and external rotation. A positive test results when there is the recreation of anterolateral pain. This indicates the impingement of the superior and superolateral part of the head-neck junction against the superior or acetabular rim.

- DEXRIT/DIRI: (Dynamic external rotatory impingement test/dynamic internal rotatory impingement test). Both tests consist of flexing the contralateral leg while bringing the affected hip to a 90° degree flexion. In the DEXRIT test, the hip is passively ranged through a wide arc of abduction and external rotation. In the DIRI, the hip is passively ranged through a wide arc of adduction and internal rotation. For both maneuvers, the reproduction of a patient's pain in a specific position will correlate with the site of bony impingement in a clockwise fashion.

- FABER: This test is performed with flexion, abduction, and external rotation of the hip. It facilitates the differentiation of hip pain in the abducted position. It is performed by palpating the greater trochanter, with resisted hip abduction, and resisted external derotation.

- Posterior rim impingement: The patient is positioned at the edge of the bed, legs are hanging freely. The patient draws up both legs toward the chest, which eliminates lumbar lordosis. The affected leg is then extended off the table while also abducting and externally rotating the hip into full extension. This allows the evaluation of the congruence of the posterolateral part of the femoral neck against the posterior acetabular rim. A positive test is noted when posterior pain is recreated at this position; if anterior pain is recreated, the patient may be diagnosed with hip instability.

**Prone**

The prone position is optimal for identifying the precise location of pain related to the SI (sacroiliac) joint region and assessing femoral anteversion. Craig's test is performed by flexing the knee to 90, and while using the leg as a lever, the hip is internally rotated until the greater trochanter is felt to be most prominent. Femoral anteversion (normally between 8° and 15°) or retroversion is measured by the angle between the tibia and an imaginary vertical line. If there is a significant difference in IR in the extended and seated flexed position, the examiner should differentiate between osseous and ligamentous causes.

**Imaging**

After a thorough history and physical examination have been performed, clinicians should obtain plain film radiographs of the pelvis to rule out fractures or other osseous abnormalities. In the setting of trochanteric bursitis/GTPS, films will be unremarkable.

Due to the high prevalence of sport-related activity, it is critical to rule out trauma-related causes of hip pain, such as femoral neck fractures. Although rarely necessary in its diagnosis, advancements in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have broadened the differential diagnosis of pain around the hip joint and improved the treatment of these problems. MRI can distinguish between extra-articular and intra-articular causes of hip pain in patients.