The lacrimal gland plays a prominent role in the formation of the tear film, a trilaminar structure that performs the following functions: 1) provides a protective barrier for the ocular surface; 2) provides a smooth optical surface at the air-cornea interface; 3) functions as a medium for removal of debris.  The tear film is composed of an inner mucin layer that interfaces with the corneal surface, a middle aqueous layer, and an outer lipid layer. Serous acini are the predominant tissue found in the lacrimal gland, secreting the aqueous component, which forms most of the tear film fluid volume. The corneal surface is hydrophilic in composition, necessitating an additional component, soluble mucin, to bind to its hydrophobic surface and establish a hydrophilic character, allowing uniform adherence of the aqueous layer to the corneal surface. Mucin is secreted principally by the conjunctival goblet cells and the stratified squamous cells of the conjunctival and corneal epithelia. The contribution by the lacrimal glands of Henle and Manz is minimal.

Within the lacrimal gland, interlobular ducts connect the orbital lobe with the palpebral lobe. Tear fluid is secreted in the upper conjunctival fornix from both lobes via excretory ducts, and between 2 and 5 ducts from the palpebral lobe secrete fluid into the lower conjunctival fornix.

Tear fluid originating from the lacrimal gland and other tissue drains into the nose via the nasolacrimal duct system. All tear fluid drains initially drains from the eye through the lacrimal puncti, followed by the lacrimal tubular canaliculi, nasolacrimal sac, nasolacrimal duct, the valve of Hasner, and finally into the nose.

In addition to its contribution to the aqueous portion of the tear film, the lacrimal gland has adaptive immune function through myoepithelial cell secretion of IgA and IgG antibodies. It is associated with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) and is susceptible to autoimmune-inflicted damage commonly seen to affect MALT.