Historically, sleep apnea, or upper airway resistance syndrome, has been diagnosed by a sleep medicine physician. However, as discussed in his article, its management is multidisciplinary. The primary care providers, otolaryngologists, and dentists have the vital role of first screening patients for OSA or URAS risk factors. Risk factors for OSA or UARS include retrognathia, a palate with an extremely high arch, consistently enlarged tonsils, or a tongue larger than normal for the patient's oral anatomy. Probing questions asked by the patient-physician regarding poor sleep, sleep position, obesity, hypertension, morning headaches, or orofacial pain are also necessary identifiers. Most importantly, as discussed at length in this article, the more critical identification of upper airway examination. Next, the clinician is responsible for referring to an appropriate health professional, as the case indicates.

The monitoring is one of the most critical steps because if a patient isn't comfortable with the appropriately chosen treatment regimen, the patient isn't going to use it, resulting in the patient not benefiting from treatment, potentially leading to cardiovascular and metabolic consequences. In addition to an adequately chosen oral appliance based on the patients' needs and goals, it requires provider expertise in all fields of medicine to appropriately and successfully treat our patients suffering from UARS. Oral appliance effectiveness is vital in managing OSA caused by UARS.