Deterrence of bacterial tracheitis is more useful in both pediatric and adult tracheostomy-dependent patient populations compared with patients without tracheostomy. Outside of general hygiene including appropriate hand washing or facial mask-wearing, there is no way to completely prevent acquiring bacterial tracheitis in patients without tracheostomies. Vaccinations against both bacterial and viral pathogens including Haemophilus Influenzae B, Streptococcus Pneumoniae, and Diphtheria can help reduce tracheal infections and inflammation. Patients and their caregivers should have a low threshold for physician evaluation in any cases of dyspnea or concerns for airway obstruction and should consider being seen by their primary care physician, urgent care, or local emergency department.

In patients with tracheostomies, patient and caregiver education is crucial to deterring bacterial tracheitis. Interprofessional teams including surgery, otolaryngology, respiratory therapy, nursing, speech therapy, social work, and case management should educate tracheostomy-dependent patients on proper cleansing and maintenance of their ostomy sites and devices. Patients should be cleaning their inner cannulas with hydrogen peroxide, saline bullets, and suction multiple times daily to prevent mucous plugging or entrapment of skin or respiratory flora. Humidification is also important to prevent crusting and obstruction. Local wound care including barrier ointments and dressings, crust removal, and local skincare are extremely important to prevent skin breakdown, cellulitis, abscess formation, or tracheal contamination with external pathogens.