Chronic pain is a significant condition that affects millions of people. It is an important public health concern with considerable morbidity and mortality, especially if associated with opioid diversion and misuse. Without proper management, the patient's quality of life can have a deleterious impact. Thus chronic pain is best managed with an interprofessional approach.

Chronic pain correlates with several severe complications, including severe depression and suicidal ideation and attempts. The lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide was shown to be between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

These complications often require psychiatric intervention and advanced pharmacological or interventional therapies. Severe symptoms must receive treatment immediately, leading to an increase in healthcare costs. It is of the utmost importance to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient with chronic pain and monitor for the progression of symptoms. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the effects of chronic pain and its complications via the following recommendations:

- Evaluation of a patient with acute pain by the primary care provider to prevent the progression of chronic pain is the recommended first step.

- Conservative chronic pain management should begin when symptoms are mild or moderate, including physical therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and pharmacological management.

- A pharmacist or other knowledgeable clinician should evaluate the medication regimen to include medication reconciliation to preclude any drug-drug interactions and alert the healthcare team regarding any concerns.

- Regularly follow up with a primary care provider and pain specialist as necessary to assess and effectively manage the patient's pain.

- Clinicians must address comorbid psychiatric disorders. Depending on the severity of the patient's symptoms, this action may require the involvement of a psychiatrist.

- If symptoms worsen on follow-up or there is a concerning escalation of pharmacological therapy, such as with opioids, a referral to a pain medicine specialist merits consideration.

- If the patient has exhausted various pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatment options, interventional procedures can be a consideration.

- If the patient expresses concern for suicidal ideation or plan at any time, an emergent psychiatric team should evaluate the patient immediately.

- Patients who have developed opioid dependence secondary to pharmacological therapy should be offered treatment and possibly referral for addiction treatment or detoxification if indicated. The patient should be put on a medication weaning schedule or medications to treat opioid dependence.

- Based on CDC recommendations, patients on high-dose opioid medications or patients with risk factors for opioid overdose (e.g., obesity, sleep apnea, concurrent benzodiazepine use, high daily opioid dosages) should receive naloxone at home for the emergent treatment of an unintentional overdose.

Effective, open interprofessional communication is crucial in the optimal management of chronic pain and in minimizing the negative effects of chronic pain on the patient.

**Interprofessional Team Case Study #1**

**CC: Syncope and Confusion**

**HPI:**A 70-year-old confused female is brought to the hospital after being unconscious on the bathroom floor. The husband reports a history of morbid obesity, diabetes, kidney disease, and chronic right hip pain, for which hip replacement surgery has been delayed until she can better control her weight. She has been prescribed a combination of hydrocodone-acetaminophen for pain control to allow for ambulation and daily pool exercises. Lately, the pain has been getting worse, and the husband mentions that occasionally she takes more medicine than prescribed.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.7 degrees F, Bp 100/70, HR 110, RR 14, and O2 Saturation 92%.

Physical exam reveals a somnolent female that is arousable to painful stimuli. Her cardiac and pulmonary exams are normal. There are no focal neurologic deficits.

**Work-up**

Laboratory studies, including a complete blood cell count, chemistry panel, and urinalysis, are normal except for a moderate elevation of the blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. A chest and pelvic radiographs are negative for fracture. The ECG was normal. The urine drug screen is positive for opioids and cannabinoids.

The patient is given naloxone and becomes awake and conversant.  She states that the event she can remember was urinating on the toilet and feeling faint. She indicates that she has difficulty sleeping and walking due to chronic hip pain, and she has severe pain with exercise in their home pool. She denies suicidal ideation. She admits to taking an extra pain pill and “smoking a joint” prior to the episode.

A PDMP inquiry reveals her orthopedic surgeon has prescribed her three times daily dose of her hydrocodone-acetaminophen for the last six weeks.

**Treatment**

The patient is admitted to the hospital, and orthopedic surgery, pain management, pharmacy, physical therapy, and dietician are consulted. A subsequent workup by the interprofessional team concludes the incident was caused by an accidental overdose of her opioid medication combined with her comorbid conditions.

The family and husband were informed that due to age, diabetes, and kidney disease, the opioid she is taking was cleared less efficiently. With the doubling of her dose, she developed acute toxic encephalopathy. The family and patient have a limited understanding of the potential side effects of opioids in treating pain and a poor understanding of exercising and dieting for weight control.

The interprofessional team recommends opioids at the prescribed dose without any additional doses, NSAIDs sparingly for breakthrough pain, monitored physical therapy and exercise, a planned diet, use of a TENS unit, and follow-up with a pain specialist and orthopedic surgeon for surgical intervention as soon as possible.

A written treatment and management plan is presented to the patient and family for discussion and consent at discharge. The goals include pain control, increased exercise, weight loss, and surgical intervention for hip replacement.

The patient is scheduled for outpatient pain management, physical therapy, and dietician appointments. Before discharge, the pharmacist counsels the patient and family regarding the safe use, dosage regulation, side effects, and proper disposal of opioid medication. Naloxone is prescribed, and the family is educated on its use.

**Follow-up**

Three months after discharge, the patient has successfully lost 40 pounds (18 kg) and was cleared for surgery. Following hip replacement, the patient's pain has dramatically diminished, and she is gradually tapered off of her opioid medications. She continues to maintain regular exercise and diet. She reports that she feels better, is enjoying life, and is encouraged by her progress.

An interprofessional approach to diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up provides a positive outcome.

**Interprofessional Case Study #2**

**CC: Request For Increased Pain Medicine**

A 76-year-old woman presents to the pharmacy to fill a prescription for acetaminophen-codeine. The pharmacist asks if this is a new prescription. The patient says she has been on it for months ever since she tripped over her hungry cat between her legs and broke her back. The patient says she recently moved from her own home to live with her daughter just down the street from the pharmacy.

The pharmacist asks if the patient has been having any problems, and she states she “has the runs,” “sleeps as much as her cat,” and “hurts all over.” She also indicates she would like to return to her volunteer job as a librarian. However, due to her ongoing pain and feeling unhappy all the time, she cannot bend over to put books on the shelves and does not have the energy or drive to do the work. The pharmacist notes the patient is a bit agitated.

The pharmacist accesses PDMP and confirms this is the only narcotic the patient has been prescribed for the last six months, with a recent drop in frequency from four times daily dosing to two times daily dosing. The pharmacist is concerned about chronic pain, and long-term treatment with an opioid is a risk factor for opioid use disorder.

The pharmacist calls the orthopedic surgeon prescriber and presents the concerns regarding the development of opioid use disorder. The clinician concurs. The dose is increased to three times daily dosing, and the clinician agrees to see the patient in the office the next day.

**Work-up/Treatment**

During the visit, the orthopedic surgeon obtains a follow-up X-ray and is reassured the lumbar vertebral fracture has healed. In addition to the three times daily dose of the opioid, the surgeon adds a low-dose NSAID for another 30 days and refers the patient for physical therapy. She also instructs the patient to apply hot and cold ice packs to her lower back, get a weekly massage, and start gentle stretching exercises. The patient is instructed to follow up in two weeks with the clinician's nurse practitioner.

**Follow-up**

The patient sees the nurse practitioner fourteen days later. The patient's pain is under control, and her signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder have resolved. The patient is instructed to continue the opioid at a BID dose and is placed on a long-term NSAID with a higher safety profile. She is instructed to return in 14 days.

The orthopedic surgeon sees the patient on the next visit and reviews the report of the physical therapist. The patient feels much better, and the opioid is decreased to once per day. For 14 days, and then she is instructed to stop the medication and return for a follow-up visit 2 days later.

The patient is in minimal pain on this visit and has no symptoms of opioid withdrawal or use disorder. She is kept on the NSAID at a once-daily dose and continues to see the physical therapist for another month.

The patient follows up with the nurse practitioner, who prescribes a low-dose, high-safety profile NSAID. She sees the pharmacist who refills the NSAID, and she reports she is back to work at the library, she is feeling much better, and she now feeds the cat on the counter to avoid tripping over it during feeding.

An interprofessional approach to diagnosis, treatment, and dispensing provides a positive outcome.

**Interprofessional Case Study #3**

**CC: Chronic Leg Pain**

**HPI:**A 60-year-old male presents with a history of progressive neuropathic leg pain with an unclear etiology. Physical therapy, relaxation therapy, massage therapy, and acupuncture have been tried without relief. Gabapentin, SSRIs, NSAIDs, and tramadol controlled the pain for the last year, but the pain is now worse and inhibits the patient's mobility. The clinician tried a short-acting opiate for the last 2-weeks, and the pain was relieved.

**PE:**Vital signs T 98.6 F (37 C), BP 120/80, HR 90, RR 16, and O2 Saturation 98%.

Physical exam reveals a male in no apparent distress. The heart, lung, and extremity exam is normal. A neurologic exam revealed hyperalgesia and hyperpathia of the lower legs.

**Work-up**

Prior EMG studies were consistent with severe neuropathy. Laboratory blood tests reveal no vitamin deficits or toxicities.

Treatment: The clinician, a neurologist, decides to transition the patient from short-acting to long-acting opioids and discusses the risks and benefits. The nurse provides a hand-out and discusses monitoring, understanding, signing required documentation, safe opioid use, safe storage, expectations, addiction risks, and required regular follow-ups. The nurse also discusses the signs and symptoms of opioid overdose and the use of naloxone.

The clinicians prescribe a long-acting narcotic at a low dose and for naloxone. The patient is asked to follow up in 7 days.

The pharmacist is familiar with the patient. The pharmacist accesses PDMP and confirms the prior narcotic order, the new long-acting order, and that no other potentially interactive medications have been prescribed. The pharmacist educates the patient on narcotic and naloxone use.

**Follow-up**

The patient follows up at 7 days, and the pain is now under control with no complications. The prescriber completes appropriate documentation and provides for a 30-day course with monthly follow-ups.