# Continuing Education Activity

The Bennett fracture is the most common fracture involving the base of the thumb. This fracture refers to an intraarticular fracture that separates the palmar ulnar aspect of the first metacarpal base from the remaining first metacarpal. The injury is typically caused by axial loading on a partially flexed metacarpal and may be associated with other carpal bone fractures or ligament injuries. This activity describes the presentation, cause, and diagnosis of Bennett fracture and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its treatment.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the cause of Bennett fracture.
- Describe the history and physical exam of a patient with Bennett fracture.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for Bennett fracture.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by Bennett fracture.

# Introduction

Bennett fracture is the most common fracture involving the base of the thumb. This fracture refers to an intraarticular fracture that separates the palmar ulnar aspect of the first metacarpal base from the remaining first metacarpal.

# Etiology

This fracture is due to an axial load that occurs on a partially flexed metacarpal and may be associated with fractures involving the adjacent carpal bone (trapezium) and/or associated ulnar collateral ligament injuries of the thumb metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint.

# Epidemiology

Bennet fracture is a subtype of fractures involving the thumb. Total fractures that involve the thumb have been found to occur most commonly in children and the elderly. In children between ages of infant to 16 years, 22% of all tubular bone fractures involved the first ray; whereas in patients older than 65 years, 20% of hand fractures occurred in the thumb. In the elderly population, the thumb was the most common tubular bone fractured with the fracture pattern tending to be oblique and intraarticular.

# Pathophysiology

The fracture pattern is distinct. The base of the first metacarpal is fractured with intraarticular extension due to the palmar ulnar fragment of the first metacarpal held in place by its ligamentous attachment to the trapezium (known as the anterior oblique ligament) during the axial loading with the rest of the metacarpal moving in the opposite direction and the main fracture line occurring along this point of weakness.

# History and Physical

The findings include pain and swelling localized to the base of the thumb.

# Evaluation

Standard hand radiographs include anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique views.  Additional dedicated views of the thumb can be obtained to provide additional information about the injury, including Robert's view.

Based upon the radiographic appearance, Gredda classified Bennett fractures into three types, with type 1 being a fracture with a single ulnar fragment and subluxation of the metacarpal base, type 2 an impaction fracture without subluxation of the first metacarpal, and type 3 an injury with a small ulnar avulsion fragment in association with metacarpal dislocation.

# Treatment / Management

Proper reduction requires traction in an axial direction with palmar abduction, and pronation while applying external pressure over the first metacarpal base.

In the initial article by Bennett, he described the treatment of these fractures with closed reduction and splinting, which remained the preferred method of treatment until the 1970s.

There is a debate in the literature regarding the amount of articular step-off at the fracture site that is acceptable in the nonathlete populations. Some authors have found no correlation between the quality of articular reduction and radiographic or subjective outcomes,

# Differential Diagnosis

Rolando fracture which is a comminuted fracture at the base of the first metacarpal with a maintained volar carpal ligament, preventing displacement of the volar fragment.

# Prognosis

The range of motion exercises may begin 5 to 10 days post screw fixation and after four weeks after pinning (after the pins are removed).

Definitive treatment algorithms are lacking due to the small number of patients that are encountered with this fracture, lack of long-term imaging follow up, and lack of randomized prospective data.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Despite a relatively simple appearance on radiographs, Bennett fractures are considered unstable.

- In evaluating and treating these fractures positioning the patient with thumb extension (hitchhikers position) should be avoided as this will cause further fracture displacement.

- Favorable long-term outcomes are based upon the degree of anatomic reduction with most patients having less than 1 mm articular surface step off having no residual symptoms.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of Bennet fracture is complex and best done with an interprofessional team that includes a hand surgeon or orthopedic surgeon, specialty care nurse, and physical therapist. When the fracture is encountered by the emergency department physician and nurse practitioner, it is important to refer the patient promptly to a hand surgeon. Poorly treated bennet fracture has very high morbidity. Even after adequate treatment, extensive rehabilitation is required. An orthopedic nurse provides patient and family education, assists with referrals, and provides status updates to the team. The outcomes for Bennet fracture are guarded.