# Continuing Education Activity

A dilated pore of Winer (DP), first described by Louis H. Winer in 1954, is a commonly occurring benign adnexal tumor of follicular differentiation. Although most commonly located on the head and neck, a dilated pore of Winer can also be found on the trunk of middle-aged and elderly individuals. This activity reviews the cause of DP, its presentation, and its treatment.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the causes of dilated pore of Winer.
- Review the presentation of dilated pore of Winer.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for dilated pore of Winer.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care and outcomes in patients with dilated pore of Winer.

# Introduction

A dilated pore of Winer (DP), first described by Louis H. Winer in 1954, is a commonly occurring benign adnexal tumor of follicular differentiation.  Although most commonly located on the head and neck, a dilated pore of Winer can also be found on the trunk of middle-aged and elderly individuals.  These clinically present as an asymptomatic, solitary, enlarged pore with a keratin plug and normal surrounding skin.  Prognosis is excellent for these lesions as they are benign and typically do not require any further testing or work-up.  Histopathologic evaluation can confirm the diagnosis in uncertain cases.  Removal can be performed via excision for cosmetic purposes.

# Etiology

Some have considered the dilated pore of Winer to simply be an epidermal inclusion cyst with reactive hyperplasia of its epithelial lining and others proposed it to be a variant of nevus comedonicus (NC).

# Epidemiology

Although it occurs in both sexes, a dilated pore of Winer occurs more frequently in males compared to females and is also more frequent in whites.  Most cases occur at the age of 40 and older; however, there are reports of dilated pores occurring as early as 20 years of age.

# Histopathology

A dilated pore of Winer is characterized histopathologically by a markedly dilated follicular infundibulum extending deeply into the dermis.  The cavity is filled with lamellar keratin material.  It is lined by epithelium that is atrophic near the ostium and acanthotic at the deeper portion of the invagination.  Radiating off of the epithelium are regularly spaced, small, finger-like epithelial projections pushing into the surrounding dermis.  These finger-like projections do not contain keratin cysts, ducts, or hair shafts.

# History and Physical

A dilated pore of Winer will present as a single, enlarged pore. The pore may be occluded by a keratin plug with softer, white, keratin material beneath.  They are asymptomatic, and the surrounding skin appears normal however a background of actinic damage may be noted.  Inflammation or infection along with pain and swelling can occur with manipulation.  Although they have a predilection for the head and neck, particularly the face, they can also present on the trunk, most commonly the back.  Patients are usually middle-aged or older and may report a previous history of severe acne.

# Evaluation

A dilated pore of Winer is usually a clinical diagnosis.  Histopathologic examination is not required but can be performed if the diagnosis is uncertain or in cases where the lesion is excised for cosmetic purposes.  No other testing or work-up is needed.

# Treatment / Management

No treatment is required for a dilated pore of Winer.  Removal can be performed for cosmetic concern. Excision in an elliptical fashion or by punch biopsy is usually curative.

# Differential Diagnosis

A dilated pore of Winer and a typical nevus comedonicus can be easily differentiated clinically as the latter is a group of multiple keratin-filled openings.  A solitary lesion of a nevus comedonicus and a DP may only be differentiated histologically. The age of onset differs between the two lesions in that a dilated pore of Winer presents in the middle-aged to elderly while an NC presents at birth or during childhood.

# Prognosis

Complete excision of the lesion is curative. Incomplete excision can result in recurrence from the remaining infundibular lining.  To date, there have been no reports of death associated with a dilated pore of Winer.  Also, there have been no reports of syndromes associated with this entity. There have been rare case reports of other malignant cutaneous neoplasms such as basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinomas arising in dilated pores of Winer. However, these are most likely coincidental.

# Complications

Complications of surgical removal include scarring, infection, and bleeding.  Infection risk after surgery can be minimized by using proper aseptic or clean technique.  Infection prior to or following surgery can be treated using topical or oral antibiotics depending on severity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A dilated pore of Winer is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a dermatologist, primary care provider, and nurse practitioner. Although these lesions are benign, a biopsy may be required to rule out malignancy in individuals who have an atypical presentation. The majority of patients seek medical help for cosmesis. The prognosis for most patients is excellent.