Initial management consists of aggressive resuscitation, oxygen therapy, intravenous fluids, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. A nasogastric tube should also be placed. Intravenous analgesia and PPIs should be given as necessary. A urinary catheter enables close monitoring of urine output. Surgical management is the mainstay of treatment for most stomach perforations. Emergency surgical repair (open or laparoscopic) is indicated in nearly all cases.

Broad-spectrum antibiotics have been shown to reduce the risk of wound infection. Metronidazole and either a cephalosporin or an aminoglycoside will suffice.

Definitive surgical treatment should be done at the earliest possible time. In a gunshot or stab wound the posterior, as well as the anterior wall, may be injured simultaneously. Accordingly, exploration of the posterior wall is obligatory in every instance by adequately detaching the gastrocolic ligament and pulling the stomach upward. There are cases where the posterior wall alone was injured by GSW or a stab wound to the anterior abdominal wall. This can happen if, at the time of the accident, the stomach was so tightly filled that the greater curvature rotating around the longitudinal axis of the stomach, has turned forward and upward

**Surgical Management**

- Primary repair: The defect is primarily closed with suture, this is appropriate for most traumatic perforations

- Graham patch repair: The defect is simply plugged with a well-vascularized omental pedicle

- Modified Graham patch repair: primary closure of the defect then application of the flap.

- Wedge resection: The perforated area may be resected from healthy tissue, particularly if it is on the greater curvature and distant from the gastroesophageal junction or the pylorus

Options for reconstruction:

- Billroth I: Gastroduodenostomy, anastomosis between the gastric remnant and the duodenum

- Billroth II: Gastrojejunostomy, side to side anastomosis between gastric remnant and loop of jejunum with the closure of duodenal stump

- Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy: The creation of jejuno-jejunostomy forming y shaped figure of the small bowel.