Most cases of acute urolithiasis will present to the emergency department and require effective communication between the ED provider and urologist. The presentation of a patient with urolithiasis can range from an uncomplicated condition to a critically ill patient. Appropriate, prompt labwork, urinalysis, and imaging are critical interventions in patients presenting with a greater degree of illness. Nurses play a critical role in the initial assessment of the patient by obtaining prompt vital signs which determine triage levels and can assist in anticipating the complexity of patient care. Pharmacists can play a key role in dosing anti-emetics, pain medications, and antibiotics, especially for patients with acute or chronic renal failure related to the acute condition. Radiologists assist with providing detailed reports of stone location, size of the stone, and complications of obstruction if present. Quality communication between the urologist, radiologist, and ED provider allows for optimal management of the patient's care and disposition from the emergency department. Consultation with an intensivist may be crucial in patients that are critically ill and require emergent surgical interventions. In pediatric and pregnant patients, special considerations must be made to optimize care, and consultation should be placed with a pediatric urologist and an obstetrician. An interprofessional approach using effective communication and prompt consultation with specialists allows for improved patient outcomes in patients presenting with urolithiasis.

In cases of uncomplicated urolithiasis, patients should be provided with prompt outpatient follow-up to manage long-term care and prevent recurrence of this condition.