Patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria have no symptoms; thus, it is important to screen for the disease. These patients may have a history of frequent UTI or may have experienced ASB in a prior pregnancy.

Cystitis presents with the same symptoms seen in non-pregnant individuals. Symptoms may include pain or burning with urination (dysuria), urinary frequency or urinary urgency. Suprapubic pain and tenderness may be noted.

Likewise, patients with pyelonephritis exhibit symptoms seen in non-pregnant patients with the same disease. Symptoms may include flank pain, fever, and chills. Non-specific symptoms such as malaise, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting may be reported thus the differential diagnosis on initial presentation is often broad. Differential diagnosis includes acute intraabdominal processes such as appendicitis, cholecystitis, and pancreatitis as well as pregnancy complications including preterm labor and placental abruption. Patients may report contractions or contractions may be seen with uterine monitoring. This uterine activity often is due to smooth muscle irritability caused by infection. Patients should be assessed, and if cervical dilation is not found, treatment is typically not needed for preterm labor. Patients should be monitored closely however as preterm labor may develop.

Signs and symptoms of sepsis may be present. These include tachycardia and hypotension. Such patients require prompt evaluation and interventions.

A full physical examination should be performed with special attention to vital signs and exam of the heart and lungs. An abdominal exam may reveal tenderness, and costovertebral tenderness is usually able to be elicited. A genitourinary (GU) exam should be performed to assess for cervical infection and assess cervical dilation on admission. Even when pregnancy complications are not a concern initially, it is still reasonable to evaluate if contractions or other abnormalities occur during hospitalization.