**Structure**

The aortic valve is a semilunar valve (diameter of about 20 mm) that generally has three leaflets. Common congenital differences include a bicuspid valve. More rarely, unicuspid valves can be present. The valve can be visualized via ultrasound. The valve divides one of the highest pressure differentials of the cardiopulmonary system and, as such, is subject to wear and tear injury. The leaflets of the aortic valve connect to the aortic root via the aortic annulus. They are also suspended by fibrous structures called commissures. The leaflets are also referred to as cusps. The leaflets and their corresponding sinuses traditionally derive their names from the coronary arteries that arise from the sinuses (left coronary, right coronary, and non-coronary). However, normal anatomical variations can obfuscate this naming convention. Anatomic descriptions usually name the leaflets/cusps/sinuses as the left posterior instead of the left coronary, anterior instead of right coronary, and right posterior instead of non-coronary.

The aortic valve is often described relative to the aortic root. The aortic root consists of the left ventricular outflow tract until it meets with the ascending aorta. The following descriptions detail the anatomy of the aortic root as they relate to the aortic valve.

**Annulus**

The aortic annulus serves as an anchor point for the valve.

**Interleaflet Fibrous Triangles**

The interleaflet fibrous triangles (also known as just interleaflet triangles, intervalvular trigone, fibrous trigones, inter-annular trigones, or Aranzio's nodules) are attached to the left ventricular wall between the bases of the sinuses.

**Sinus of Valsalva**

The aortic sinuses are also called the sinus of Valsalva, named after Italian anatomist Antonio Valsalva. They ensure that the aortic leaflets do not occlude the ostia of the coronary arteries during systole.

These sinuses are mostly made up of the wall of the aorta. At the base of the two coronary sinuses is ventricular musculature. In the non-coronary sinus, the base consists of a fibrous piece that continues from the aortic and mitral valves.

**Sinotubular Junction**

The sinotubular junction lies at the top of the sinuses. This point marks the transition from the aortic root to the ascending aorta. The sinotubular junction also marks the top of the attachments of the aortic leaflets.

**Function**

When the pressure in the ventricle is greater than that of the aorta, the aortic valve leaflets open, allowing blood to exit the ventricle and enter the ascending aorta. In a healthy heart, this happens during systole. Conversely, the aortic valve leaflets close when the left ventricle pressure decreases to less than the ascending aorta; this typically occurs during diastole. The sinuses ensure that the ostia (openings) of the coronary arteries are not occluded when the aortic valve leaflets are open.

**Cusps**

The cusps are made up of three layers:

- Ventricularis

- Spongiosa

- Fibrosa