The management of Bacteroides fragilis infection requires collaboration among healthcare professionals. It usually starts with the clinical suspicion of anaerobic infection in the setting of underlying trauma, recent surgical intervention, or malignancy. The proper specimen collection usually improves the diagnosis of Bacteroides fragilis infection. Anaerobic cultures obtained from sterile sites have the highest diagnostic yield. For example, cerebrospinal fluid cultures, blood cultures, and pleural fluid cultures growing Bacteroides fragilis are clinically significant and warrant treatment for meningitis, bloodstream infection, and empyema.

On the other hand, wound cultures wound swabs, or stool cultures will have very low diagnostic yield and may represent colonization that would not require any treatment. Anaerobic cultures must be collected in the appropriate containers and transported immediately to the microbiology laboratory. The handling of anaerobic infections in the microbiology lab is costly and requires expertise and proper equipment. The clinical interpretation of Bacteroides fragilis cultures usually requires the skill of Infectious disease physicians and pharmacists to help decide the clinical significance and to direct the targeted antimicrobial therapy. Bacteroides infections are typically severe infections and part of a polymicrobial invasion. The management strategy has two major goals: targeted antimicrobial therapy and adequate source control, and that usually involves coordination between the treating healthcare provider and surgical and interventional radiologist consultations. The interprofessional team, including physicians, nurses, lab technicians, and pharmacists, can improve outcomes. Pharmacists review medication selection, dosage, and drug-drug interactions and inform the prescriber of any concerns. Nurses are often involved in specimen collection and administration of antibiotics, as well as patient counsel, follow-up for compliance, and reporting their findings to the clinical staff. Pathologists and lab technicians must ensure proper specimen processing. All these examples of interprofessional collaboration and communication will contribute to better patient outcomes. [Level 5]