A bland diet is a useful tool in the process of advancing the diet after surgery and might be a new permanent diet. The soft, low fiber, easily digestible foods create less stress on the GI tract and allow it to heal more effectively. Furthermore, specific patient populations, like post-gastric bypass patients, also have a new lifestyle and mode of eating to which they must adhere to so that to decrease the risk of complication and help facilitate long term weight loss. The bland diet is a useful tool in this regard and can be a good starting point while counseling patients about dietary modifications. A bland diet is designed primarily to help patients recover from gastrointestinal conditions or surgeries in which gentle digestion would be beneficial. However, it is not as effective as the sole long-term weight loss diet solution. The bland diet must be used along with strict portion size control to achieve an initial weight loss goal. Overall, the bland diet is an excellent choice for patients that have gastrointestinal complaints or are post-surgical.

Most patients have a pre-existing knowledge that when they are having gastrointestinal complaints such as nausea and vomiting, they should limit food intake to a BRAT diet. A BRAT diet is bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. However, most people do not understand that this is not synonymous with a bland diet. A bland diet is more extensive and focuses on decreasing the amount of work required by the entire GI system. In addition to the foods included in the bland diet, it also requires the total elimination of certain foods from a patient's food intake. Fried and high-fat foods, strong cheeses, and whole grains need to be eliminated or minimally consumed. Additionally, medications like aspirin and ibuprofen are to be avoided or minimized while on this diet to decrease gastric ulcer formation risk. Postoperative patients that have undergone esophagus, stomach, or intestinal based surgical procedures can also benefit from the bland diet.

Although all these might be true and common sense, there is little in the shape of actual factual evidence and clinical trials confirming it. Clinical trials of this sort (to focus on diets and specific elimination and inclusion) are notoriously hard to perform and can be costly and prone to confounding. Nevertheless, it is a potentially good area for possible research, and it is a "sexy" topic since almost all humans are interested in food intake and different kinds of food.