As it is difficult to discern the underlying histopathology of a gastric polyp from visualization under endoscopy alone, biopsy and en-bloc resection are required to guide management. It is well known that malignant potential increases with an increased size of the lesion, and as such, it is advised that all lesions greater than 10 mm be removed by endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). A more conservative approach taken by some practitioners suggests the removal of all polyps greater than 5 mm. Prior to any manipulation of the mucosa, a dose of intravenous proton pump inhibitor is administered to reduce the acidity of the environment and improve hemostasis. In many cases following endoscopy with biopsy, a PPI is continued for 4 to 8 weeks to improve healing at the biopsy/resection sites. If pathology reveals H. Pylori infection, antibiotic therapy is initiated. When polyps are removed or biopsied, or there is a finding of gastritis, it is common for the endoscopist to perform concurrent gastric mapping to determine the etiology of gastritis involving mucosal biopsy via cold forceps at multiple locations within the stomach.

Management and follow-up after biopsy is guided by the histopathologic findings of the polyps removed during esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). For GHPs removed by EGD without finding dysplasia, a single repeat EGD is recommended at one year of follow-up. If H. Pylori is found in biopsies associated with GHP, then a repeat EGD is often performed in 3-6 months for repeat biopsy to confirm eradication of infection and to track the regression of gastric polyps. For FGP, if there is a history of chronic PPI use, then discontinuation when possible is recommended, and 1-year follow-up EGD is performed when lesions greater than 5 to 10 mm were found on initial EGD and to track response to therapy. The finding of adenoma on microscopic evaluation of gastric polyp indicates the need for 1-year follow-up EGD. In a patient less than 40 years old where multiple adenomas are seen on EGD, extensive family history taking and colonoscopy is recommended to rule out FAP. If dysplasia or early adenocarcinoma is detected on microscopic evaluation of a gastric polyp, repeat EGD is performed at 1 year and again at 3 years from initial endoscopy.