It is not only the clinical characteristics that mislead the diagnosis process, but microscopic findings can be similar to other neoplasms as well. Since MNTI usually presents with only an asymptomatic rapidly growing mass, this will rule out other neoplasms that usually present with other accompanying symptoms.

- Neuroblastoma: Since this neoplasm also originates from the neural crest cells, it can be misdiagnosed initially, especially in small biopsies. However, neuroblastoma forms clusters of cells in a rosette formation, which is not seen in MNTI. Additionally, the large pigmented epithelial cells that are present in MNTI are not found in the neuroblastoma, which will make neuroblastoma negative for cytokeratin and HMB-45. Moreover, neuroendocrine markers of neuroblastoma are absent in MNTI.

- Ewing sarcoma: Compared to MNTI, Ewing sarcomas lack the biphasic appearance of the MNTI. It does not have the melanin-containing cells like MNTI. Also, Ewing sarcoma has its special genetic arrangement (e.g., t(11;22) or (q24;q12)).

- Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma: This tumor can present in the head and neck region. However, considering its muscular differentiation, this tumor will be positive for desmin and react with myogenin. Necrosis is also present in this tumor, which is rarely present in MNTI.

During the evaluation of a pigmented mass in the head and neck, the differential diagnosis list should also include but not be limited to lymphomas, malignant melanoma, and clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue.