For the extended SMAS technique, the patient should be placed under general anesthesia or deep sedation. The patient should be arranged in a supine position, and the surgical table should be rotated if possible to allow for more comfortable access to the patient’s face. At this time, the patient’s face and neck should be prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion. Traditional tumescent solution may be infiltrated along the planned incisions while attempting to avoid distortion of the tissues. A mixture of 0.25% bupivacaine and 0.5% lidocaine can also be injected in the plane of the intended flap elevation to achieve hydrodissection and hemostasis.

A beveled incision is made with a #10 blade at the temporal hairline to preserve hair follicles; electrocautery in coagulation mode may be used for hemostasis, while avoiding hair follicles in order to prevent alopecia. The incision then travels caudally into a posttragal incision in females (pretragal in males), curves around the ear into the postauricular sulcus, and then runs along the posterior hairline. Male patients should be informed that posttragal incisions will bring bearded skin to the tragus, so the pretragal is the preferred incision.

After the incision is completed, a skin flap is elevated anteriorly towards the cheek, and inferiorly from the mastoid towards the neck; this dissection takes place subcutaneously, above the SMAS and third layer. Flap dissection is, on average, carried 4 cm radially from the inferior aspect of the tragus. Raising this flap too thick may lead to a weak SMAS flap, whereas raising this flap too thin may compromise the vascularity of the skin. Mindful dissection must also be done to not damage the main trunk of the great auricular nerve, which lies above the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Jowl fat should be kept on the SMAS, so this can be repositioned cephalad eventually when raising the SMAS flap.

The SMAS is incised horizontally over the zygomatic arch and then caudally, extending from 2 cm anterior to the tragus to just behind the angle of the mandible. At this time, the tissue is undermined through the sub-SMAS plane. Most of the dissection can be carried out with careful spreading of scissors or the Trepsat facial dissectors. Once platysmal muscle fibers are identified, blunt dissection can be performed in the subplatysmal plane; lateral platysmal attachments should be released.

Dissection continues anteriorly in the face over the masseteric muscle, releasing the masseteric ligaments. The buccal fat pad, or the boule of Bichat, is usually seen in the anterior aspect of the dissection, having an “egg yolk” appearance. Treatment of the fat pad can be done at this time if needed. The dissection is then turned to the zygomatic area. Dissection is performed in the sub-SMAS plane just below the orbicularis oculi muscle and over the distal third of the zygoma to avoid the temporal branch of the facial nerve. Also, care must be taken to stay over the zygoma and avoid its inferior border. The temporal branch of the facial nerves lies about 1 cm anterior to the tragus, and a midfacial branch runs parallel to the zygomatic arch to innervate the zygomaticus major muscle.

Careful hemostasis with bipolar cautery, if needed, can be performed in these areas if the bleeding is significant, but it is best avoided. Through this dissection, the zygomatic ligament is released using electrocautery or cold instruments; dissection should stay over the zygomaticus major muscle. From the midface, the dissection should continue inferiorly over the parotidomasseteric fascia to join the previously developed inferior flap. Once joined, the flaps should be dissected anteriorly until all ligaments are released. When indicated, a submental incision is occasionally used to release the mandibular ligament, perform submental lipectomy, subplatysmal fat dissection, and partial digastric muscle resection. The modiolar peninsula is excluded from the dissection. At all times, an assistant is observing the face for muscle movements.

After the dissection culminates and definitive hemostasis is achieved, the flap can be mobilized and fixated. The SMAS is pulled and anchored to the pre-tragal area, and posteriorly to the mastoid periosteum. Polyglactin 2-0 suture is used for suspension. About 10 to 12 sutures are placed on each side, fixating the SMAS and platysma. Careful trimming of the jowl fat and submandibular fat can be performed to enhance the jawline and add volume to the face. The skin must then be checked for dimples; occasionally, additional supra-SMAS dissection must be performed to eliminate these. Excess skin is excised with a #15 blade.

Burow's triangles may be used to bring the skin edges together smoothly. The incision is then closed by placing 5-0 polypropylene at the root of the helix and the cephalad part of the postauricular incision. The rest of the incisions are then closed with sutures depending on the surgeon's preference. Usually, 4-0, 5-0, or 6-0 absorbable sutures are utilized. Once finished, a topical antibiotic is applied to the incisions, and a compression dressing is placed.