The ventilator liberation process is long and involves many factors that require the attention of multiple members of the patient interprofessional care team. This team includes clinicians, nursing, and respiratory technicians. Coordination between different providers is essential.

The SBT cannot be conducted without first conducting a spontaneous awakening trial.

Communication between all team members is crucial so everyone knows their roles and responsibilities. A team-centered, interprofessional approach to care during extubation that includes physicians, nursing, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists is the best approach to achieving a positive patient outcome, irrespective of the events during extubation.

Several studies have demonstrated a significant reduction in the ICU length of stay and ventilatory days if the team follows certain protocols and policies, although other studies have argued against using protocolized weaning. In practical terms, protocols save significant time in the decision-making process and facilitate quicker liberation. All patients need to have a respiratory therapy-driven liberation pathway in place, followed by all patients except when ordered by the physician-in-charge not to follow.

**The American Thoracic Society and the American College of Chest Physicians Clinical Practice Guidelines for Liberation from Mechanical Ventilation in Critically Ill Adults**

The summary of these clinical practice guidelines applicable to acutely hospitalized adults on mechanical ventilators for more than 24 hours is as follows:

- Management with a ventilator liberation protocol is suggested.

- Protocolized rehabilitation directed towards early mobilization is suggested.

- Performance of the cuff-leak test is suggested in those who meet the criteria for extubation but are deemed a high risk for the complication of post-extubation stridor.

- Administration of systemic steroids for at least 4 hours before extubation is suggested in those who fail the cuff-leak test but are otherwise ready to be extubated.

Although the recommendations suggested by the American Thoracic Society and the American College of Chest Physicians, published in 2017, are conditional and not strong, they certainly will benefit healthcare professionals in decision-making in the ICU setting. The chapter on the approach to extubation from mechanical ventilation by Alistair Nichol and colleagues in the book "Evidence-Based Practice of Critical Care" is an essential reference for healthcare professionals involved in managing critically ill patients.