Surveillance plan strategies have a history of being arbitrary and not validated by strong prospective clinical studies with a 2014 study, even concluding that there is no association between surveillance and decreased EAC-related deaths. Based on their systematic review of the literature and evaluation of the level of evidence, the ACG made several changes to the recommended management of BE in its newest guidelines. High-definition white-light endoscopy is a novel endoscopic technology that is now recommended for routine use in surveillance beyond electronic chromoendoscopy. For non-dysplastic BE, the current ACG recommendation after the initial diagnosis is to follow up with surveillance every 3 to 5 years. The patient should also be placed on once-daily proton pump inhibitor therapy, regardless of the presence of reflux symptoms, due to evidence of a chemopreventive effect of proton pump inhibitors, where the risk of progression to neoplastic BE is reduced compared to no acid suppression or H2 blockers. Due to the significant impact on management, if BE is associated with dysplasia, the ACG emphasizes the importance of confirming a dysplasia diagnosis with a second pathologist with extensive experience in BE-related neoplasia. Patients with confirmed low-grade dysplasia can now be considered for endoscopic ablative therapy or can follow a 6 to 12-month interval surveillance plan.  For patients with confirmed high-grade dysplasia with endoscopic mucosal abnormalities, endoscopic mucosal resection followed by ablation of the remaining BE mucosa is recommended.  If no mucosal abnormality is visible, in other words, the mucosa is flat; radiofrequency ablation therapy is considered sufficient for low- or high-grade dysplasia as well as carcinoma. Cryotherapy is another option of ablative therapy.  It is necessary to continue surveillance of patients after ablative therapy, as multiple treatments are often required to ensure complete elimination of the lesional tissue. Surgical therapies such as esophagectomy are not the preferred initial approach to management for high-grade dysplasia or intramucosal cancer, as the procedure has a high risk of morbidities, though should be considered if intramucosal cancer has poor prognostic factors, such as lymphovascular invasion or poor differentiation or if cancer involves the submucosa. Patients with significant comorbidities that limit their likely survival may not benefit from endoscopic therapies, with risks of the procedures being greater than potential gains.