Adverse effects of trihexyphenidyl are frequently seen as dose-dependent but usually decrease over time as tolerance develops and the body adapts to the drug. Even with all of the adverse effects considered, trihexyphenidyl demonstrated dramatic and consistent improvement of neurologic defects in people between the ages of 16 to 86 over a 5-year course. Confusion and delirium frequently occur in older patients or patients with psychiatric disorders.

Adverse effects of trihexyphenidyl according to system organ classification(SOC) include but are not limited to:

**Ocular Effects:**Mydriasis may present in patients with and without photophobia. This condition can lead to blurred vision or precipitate narrow-angle glaucoma by angle closure, which increases intraocular pressure.

**CNS Effects:**Frequently reported adverse effects are headache, dizziness, drowsiness, and vertigo. Anxiety, nervousness, confusion, and agitation occurred in patients on higher doses. Trihexyphenidyl also produces a short-acting euphoric and mood-elevating effect, which is why it is a drug of potential misuse.****Long-term use has the potential to develop Alzheimer's disease in preclinical studies.

**Peripheral Adverse Effects:**As with other anticholinergics, impaired sweating, dry mouth, abdominal discomfort, nausea, urinary retention, and constipation are frequently seen (patients require monitoring for long-term use).

**Tolerance:**Tolerance could develop with prolonged drug use, and dosing adjustments may be necessary.

**Drug-Drug Interactions:**Potassium chloride is contraindicated in patients with inadequate gastric emptying. Anticholinergic agents impair motility and increase the contact time of potassium chloride with gastric mucosa, leading to gastritis, peptic ulcer, and increased risk of upper GI bleeding.