**Bedside**

Pulse oximetry can be useful in assessing the severity of an asthma attack or monitoring for deterioration. Note that pulse oximetry lag, and the physiological reserve of many patients means that a falling pO2 on pulse oximetry is a late finding, indicating a severely unwell or peri-arrest patient.

Peak flow measures also can be used to assess asthma and should always be checked against a nomogram as well as the individual patient's normal baseline function. The different severities of acute asthma attacks have an associated peak flow measurement, recorded as a certain percentage of expected peak flow.

**Laboratory**

Urea and electrolytes (kidney function) should be taken if the patient has a high dose or repeat salbutamol, as one of the side effects of salbutamol is to cause potassium to shift into the intracellular space transiently, which can induce a transient, iatrogenic hypokalaemia. Eosinophilia is common but is not specific for asthma. Recent studies show that levels of sputum eosinophils may guide therapy. In addition, some patients may have an elevation of serum IgE.

Arterial blood gas may reveal hypoxemia and respiratory acidosis. Studies indicate that periostin may be a marker for asthma, but its clinical role remains unsettled.

An ECG will reveal sinus tachycardia, which may be due to asthma, albuterol, or theophylline.

**Imaging**

A chest x-ray is an important test, especially if patients have a history of risk of the potential foreign body or possible infection. A Chest CT scan is done in patients with recurrent symptoms who do not respond to therapy.

**Special Tests**

Spirometry is the diagnostic method of choice and will show an obstructive pattern that is partially or completely resolved by salbutamol. Spirometry should be done before treatment to determine the severity of the disorder. A reduced ratio of FEV1 to FVC is indicative of airway obstruction, which is reversible with treatment. Reversibility testing is done by giving the patient inhaled short-acting beta 2 agonists, and after that, the spirometry test is repeated. If there is a 12% or 200ml improvement in FEV1 from the previous value, then it shows reversibility and diagnostic for bronchial asthma. Peak expiratory flow measurement is common today and allows one to document response to therapy. A limitation of this test is that it is effort dependent.

In some patients, a methacholine/histamine challenge may be required to determine if airway hyper-reactivity is present. This test should only be done by trained individuals.

Exercise spirometry may help identify patients with exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.