Exercise training focusing on endurance, strength training, and flexibility is the cornerstone of pulmonary rehabilitation. The load during exercise is assessed based on initial assessment and also individual requirements. The load must reflect an individual's daily requirements and escalate as the exercise program progresses incrementally with close monitoring. The goal is to improve patients' aerobic capacity and muscle strength.

Cycling and walking exercises remain the most common form of endurance exercises.

Resistance training/strength training is another modality of exercise used in pulmonary rehabilitation. It involves training with resistive loads with repetitions, and loads are increased progressively to achieve maximal benefits.

The exercise load and repetitions are increased over time in a supervised fashion to help build up strength, muscle mass, and endurance.

Pulmonary rehabilitation is not limited to exercise only. Education, psychosocial support, and nutrition are crucial to achieving patient well-being. Advanced lung diseases have significant psychological and social impacts. It may be more severe if patients need supplemental oxygen.

Alterations in functionality and social life can worsen deconditioning and motivation needed to participate in pulmonary rehabilitation exercises. Hence, it is equally important to focus on the psychological impact of the disease. Pulmonary rehabilitation confers significant benefits in anxiety and depression associated with COPD and also other chronic lung diseases.

Nutrition and education are other aspects of pulmonary rehabilitation that are integral to the success of the program. Weight loss and muscle mass loss is a common occurrence in advanced pulmonary diseases. This is multifactorial, often related to increased load on respiratory muscles and also poor oral intake.

A written individualized action plan is part of the educational component of the pulmonary rehabilitation program. It involves understanding the symptoms of exacerbations and triggers. It has management strategies for early exacerbations.

A maintenance strategy is essential in a pulmonary rehabilitation program. Without a maintenance plan, the benefits appear to diminish by 6-12 months. Quality of life is maintained slightly better than exercise capacity.