An adult human body contains 25 g or 1,000 mmol of magnesium.

Magnesium homeostasis involves the kidney (primarily through the proximal tubule, the thick ascending loop of Henle, and the distal tubule), small bowel (primarily through the jejunum and ileum), and bone. Hypomagnesemia occurs when something, whether a drug or a disease condition, alters the homeostasis of magnesium.

Magnesium is important for many functions, including the following:

- Cofactor activity for > 300 enzymatic reactions

- Platelet function (clotting and/or thrombus formation)

- Maintenance of vascular tone

- Platelet-activated thrombosis

- Muscle contraction/relaxation

- Insulin regulation

- Neurotransmission

- Cardiac conduction

- Bone formation

**Acquired Hypomagnesemia**

Magnesium deficiency also can cause hypocalcemia, as the two are interrelated. Decreased magnesium causes impaired magnesium-dependent adenyl cyclase generation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), decreasing parathyroid hormone (PTH) release. In turn, calcium levels are decreased as well, as PTH regulates calcium levels.

Magnesium also affects the electrical activity of the myocardium and vascular tone, which is why patients with hypomagnesemia are at risk for cardiac arrhythmias. In addition, when magnesium is low, there is inhibition of renal outer medullary potassium channels, leading to increased urinary excretion and depletion of intracellular potassium levels. This reduces the threshold required for generating an action potential in the cardiac myocyte. Moreover, reduced intracellular potassium levels also prolong the time to repolarize the cell membrane, increasing the risk of arrhythmias.

**Inherited Hypomagnesemias**

**Gitelman syndrome:**It is caused by recessive mutations in the gene that codes for the thiazide-sensitive sodium chloride cotransporter (SLC12A3) in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT). Transcellular reabsorption of magnesium in the DCT is impaired, leading to increased calcium reabsorption and the subsequent hypocalciuria and fluid loss have the tendency to lower blood pressure. In addition, fluid loss activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and increased aldosterone causes increased potassium secretion in exchange for sodium and subsequent hypokalemia.

**Hypercalciuric hypomagnesemias:**Mutations affect the reabsorption of magnesium and calcium ions in the thick ascending limb of Henle (TAL), leading to hypercalciuric hypomagnesemia that ultimately results in nephrocalcinosis or chronic kidney disease.

**EAST (SeSAME) syndrome:**It is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the potassium channel, KCNJ10 (Kir4.1), on the basolateral membrane of the DCT. It results in hypomagnesemia, salt wasting, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia. The mechanism, however, is poorly understood.