There are several characteristic symptoms of hypoglycemia. Initial symptoms would be varied and non-specific. There is the activation of the autonomic nervous system leading to both adrenergic and cholinergic responses. Adrenergic symptoms include pallor, tremors, anxiety, and arterial hypertension. Anxiety and arterial hypertension are secondary to catecholamine release. Increased glucagon secretion leads to increased glucose production. The cholinergic response predominantly involves sweating, hunger, and paraesthesia.

There is the production of counter-regulatory hormones, including reduced insulin production in insulin-independent hypoglycemia with increasing glucagon production. There is also the production of growth hormone and ACTH-induced cortisol in response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia. If hypoglycemia persists, it leads to neuroglycopenia symptoms comprising drowsiness, confusion, and visual impairment, followed by motor deficit, seizure, and loss of consciousness. Prolonged severe hypoglycemia can lead to multiple organ failure, cardiac arrhythmias, cardiac arrest, and permanent neurological damage.

Iatrogenic hypoglycemia can be secondary to exogenous insulin or sulphonylureas. Therefore, there will be raised insulin and suppressed C-peptide levels in the former. In contrast, both insulin and C-Peptide will be raised with a positive sulphonylurea screen in the latter.

Pathophysiology of non-insulin mediated hypoglycemia varies depending upon causative factors and is described as follows:

- Alcohol: It inhibits gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. Patients intoxicated with alcohol have relatively low glycogen reserves, and alcohol also inhibits the shivering reflex, which leads to a poor endogenous response to hypoglycemia.

- Liver failure: It leads to diminished glycogen stores and impaired gluconeogenesis.

- Renal failure: Hypoglycemia is rare but combined with the loss of renal gluconeogenesis and malnutrition, reduced insulin clearance by the kidney, and reduced metabolism of medication, can cause hypoglycemia.

- Primary adrenal failure: Due to a lack of glucocorticoid hormone, there is decreased glucose production and increased insulin sensitivity.

- Cerebral malaria: It is poorly understood. However, it is proposed that hypoglycemia can occur due to possible glucose consumption by parasites or the effect of quinine.

- Anterior pituitary failure: Hypoglycemia can occur due to corticotropic and somatotropic hormone deficiency.

- Drug-induced hypoglycemia: The cause of hypoglycemia can be multifactorial and varies with the type of drug.

- Infection: Severe infection can cause decreased glycogen storage and gluconeogenesis with excessive utilization.

- Neoplasia related (Non-Islets cell tumor): Hypoglycemia due to non-islet cell tumor is mediated via increased production of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-2). IGF-2 stimulates insulin receptors due to its similarity to Insulin.

- Glycogen storage disease: Hypoglycemia occurs due to impaired glucose regulation by the liver.

- Insulin/insulin receptor antibodies: Hypoglycaemia occurs with elevated insulin levels and incompletely suppressed C-peptide levels. Insulin levels are more markedly elevated in those with insulin antibodies, whilst they are mildly elevated in those with insulin receptor antibodies.

- Gastric bypass surgery: The pathophysiology is still unclear. Hypoglycemia occurs in the postprandial phase. The mechanism is likely due to an altered rate of digestion and secretion of insulin.