Obstetrical examination mode minimizes radiation exposure and should be used for all obstetric evaluation in accordance with the "As Low As (is) Reasonably Achievable" (ALARA) practice standard.

The base technique for both the transabdominal and transvaginal evaluation for ectopic pregnancy is the routine obstetric evaluation, as identifying a live intrauterine pregnancy greatly decreases the chances of an ectopic pregnancy being present as previously discussed.

**Transabdominal Examination**

The transabdominal view is obtained with the patient in supine position on a stretcher with a full bladder. The probe is placed in the longitudinal plane (indicator towards the head of the patient) in the midline above the symphysis pubis. If the probe is placed too far cephalad, the bladder will not be able to be optimally used as an acoustic window and bowel gas may obstruct the view. The bladder and uterus should be identified.  Probe position and depth should be adjusted to center the uterus in the visual field. An adequate view of the uterus will have the length of the uterus on the screen with the cervix and part of the vagina being visualized. The endometrial stripe is a hyperechoic structure in the center of the uterus. Caution should be taken when identifying fluid surrounding the suspected pregnancy. If this is the focus of the examination instead of the endometrial stripe, an ectopic pregnancy may be mistaken as an intrauterine pregnancy. In the longitudinal view, the endometrial stripe and uterus will have elongated appearances. When switching to the transverse view, the uterus will be circular. While in the transverse view, the entire length of the uterus needs to be swept through, paying attention to the uterine tissue as well as the area around the uterus. This is the most difficult step as it is difficult to avoid bowel gas and follow the uterus through the entire length of the sweep. The bladder will be at the top of the screen and the uterus will be a round structure just far field to the bladder. The distal portion of the field the uterus to be centered in the screen so the entire area around the uterus can be visualized. A common mistake is incorrectly identified in the vagina as the uterus. To distinguish this, it is important to recognize that the endometrial stripe, while in the transverse view, will be a dot or oval while the vaginal stripe will appear to be a line going across the screen. If the uterus is anteverted, both the vagina and the uterus may be visualized in the same image. To ensure that uterine tissue is being visualized, use the bladder as a landmark, as this should be immediately adjacent to the uterus. This is one advantage of the abdominal approach, as the bladder is more easily visualized and any masses between the bladder and uterus should be clearer than with the transvaginal view. Free fluid between the bladder and uterus, a mass between the bladder and uterus, or free fluid anywhere around the uterus is a concerning finding for possible ectopic pregnancy in the transabdominal views. Masses posterior to the uterus may be more difficult to identify. If an intrauterine pregnancy is identified in the transabdominal view in a patient with a low index of suspicion for heterotopic pregnancy, the transvaginal views may not be necessary unless further diagnostic workup is desired for the pregnancy.

**Transvaginal Examination**

The initial approach is with the probe in the sagittal plane, with the indicator pointed towards the ceiling. There should be a tactile indicator on the handle of the probe to assist in orientation of the ultrasound. The probe should be inserted approximately 4 to 5 centimeters. The first step during the transvaginal examination is identified in the bladder, and subsequently of the juxtaposition between the bladder and the uterus. Confirming this juxtaposition is a critical step, as it makes it much less likely that the examination is being performed in the adnexa. To identify the bladder, the handle should be moved towards the stretcher thereby directing the probe head towards the ceiling. The opposing handle and probe head directions of movement make this a more difficult exam to maintain spatial awareness. The area of interest of the examination will be the uterine tissue in the endometrial stripe in the center. In the sagittal view, with the indicator towards the ceiling, the uterus will be oblong, and the endometrial stripe will be a line. Similar to the transabdominal view, the uterus needs to be centered on the screen, so the fundus and the surrounding tissue is not excluded from the field-of-view. When the uterus is centered, a side-to-side sweep is performed in the sagittal plane. This should be done slowly to visualize the entire uterus adequately. This needs to be done until the uterus completely disappears from the screen in each direction. After this, the probe will be rotated 90 degrees with the indicator pointing towards the patient's right in a coronal plane. The length of the uterus should be swept through again, this time with the probe handle moving up and down rather than right and left.  If there is no intrauterine pregnancy identified in a pregnant patient with a beta hCG greater than 2000, the patient should be considered to have an ectopic pregnancy until proven otherwise. Signs of free fluid around the uterus, masses between the uterus and the bladder, masses in the adnexa, or an identifiable pregnancy outside of the uterus are concerning or diagnostic of an ectopic pregnancy.