The blood supply of the choroid is from the ophthalmic artery, the first branch of the internal carotid artery.

The innermost layer of the choroid is Bruch membrane. The Bruch membrane is composed of five sublayers- the basement membrane of retinal pigment epithelium, the inner collagenous layer, the middle elastic layer, the outer collagenous layer, and the basement membrane of choriocapillaris. Outside the Bruch membrane, there are three vascular layers- the inner choriocapillaris composed of a highly anastomosed capillary network, the middle Sattler layer formed by medium-sized arterioles, and the outer layer of larger arterioles, the Haller layer.

The functional lobules are more evident during the filling and draining phases of the fluorescein angiogram.

The blood supply to the choroid is probably the highest among any tissue in the human body per unit of tissue weight. It is ten times higher than that of the brain. This extremely high blood flow helps maintain higher oxygen tension in the choroid than in the retina. This helps in the diffusion of oxygen from the choroid to the retina. The choroidal circulation is the major supply of oxygen to the retina. During the dark, when the photoreceptors are highly metabolically active, up to 90% of the blood supply to the retina is from the choroidal circulation. The walls of the choriocapillaris are fenestrated, which allows high permeability of glucose and other small molecules.

But larger proteins are not permeable through the fenestrations. ICG  is 98% protein-bound making it largely impermeable through the choriocapillaris wall.