The mechanism of injury should agree with the magnitude and nature of the injury. If this is not the case, suspicion should be raised for pathologic fracture due to tumor or infection, as well as the potential for physical abuse.

Gross observation may reveal rotational or angular deformity arising from the phalangeal shaft or near any of the nearby articulations.

Palpation reveals tenderness overlying the fracture site and injured soft tissue structures. Meticulous examination of the soft tissue envelope should be performed about the hand and fingers as soft tissue injury from these mechanisms can be quite robust.

The active range of motion of the affected finger at nearby articulations is often limited secondary to pain and early swelling. Local anesthetic in the form of a hematoma or digital nerve block can help relieve pain and be beneficial to evaluate alignment, range of motion further, and strength; however, it should not be performed before a careful neurovascular exam.

Neural status can be evaluated with general sensation, two-point discrimination, and motor function. Findings may range from fully intact to any deficit, pending the soft tissue injury that occurred. Digital nerves on the radial and ulnar aspects of the finger tend to supply sensation from one half the digit; however, some overlap may occur on dorsal and volar surfaces.

Vascular status supplied by digital arteries on the radial and ulnar aspects of the finger can be examined by looking at skin coloration as well as capillary refill of the distal skin and the nail bed. In general, a finger with a single digital artery laceration will still have a brisk capillary refill, though it may be slowed with dusky skin coloration.