# Continuing Education Activity

Gilbert syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder of bilirubin metabolism within the liver. Reduced glucuronidation of bilirubin leads to unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and recurrent episodes of jaundice. This activity addresses the epidemiology, triggers, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, testing, treatment, and prognosis of patients who have Gilbert syndrome. Additionally, the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in evaluating and managing patients with Gilbert syndrome will be addressed.

**Objectives:**
- Review triggers that are associated with Gilbert syndrome. 
- Describe the epidemiology of Gilbert syndrome.
- Review the pathophysiology of Gilbert syndrome. 
- Review the clinical manifestations, diagnostic testing, treatment, and prognosis of patients with Gilbert syndrome.

# Introduction

Gilbert syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder of bilirubin metabolism within the liver.

Disorders of hepatic uptake, storage, conjugation, and excretion can cause unconjugated and conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Crigler-Najjar syndrome is characterized by marked unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

Other acute and chronic liver diseases typically present with both unconjugated and conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.

# Etiology

Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice in patients with Gilbert syndrome can be precipitated by a variety of triggers. Fasting, hemolytic reactions, febrile illnesses, menstruation, and physical exertion are common precipitants.

Several theories have been proposed to explain unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia following dietary manipulation. Increased cycling of bilirubin by the enterohepatic circulation, decreased conjugation due to a decrease in the levels of UDP-glucuronic acid, which is a co-substrate in glucuronidation, and release of bilirubin from fat cells.

# Epidemiology

Gilbert syndrome has a prevalence rate between 4 and 16%.

# Pathophysiology

As previously mentioned, Gilbert syndrome is generally thought to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Uridine diphosphoglucuronate-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UG1A1) is important for converting unconjugated to conjugated bilirubin.

Homozygosity for a defect in the TATAA box within the promoter region of the gene for UG1A1 leads to a mutation of UG1A1 called UG1A1*28. The molecular defect inserts an additional dinucleotide sequence (TA) into the transcription initiation sequence: A(TA)6TAA to A(TA)7TAA.

# Histopathology

Liver biopsy is generally not required for patients suspected of having Gilbert syndrome unless other confounding diagnoses merit consideration. Histopathology typically reveals non-specific lipofuscin pigment found within the centrilobular region of the biopsy specimen; otherwise, the histology is normal.

# Toxicokinetics

UG1A1 is involved in the metabolism of estrogen and several other drugs through glucuronidation. Hence, individuals with Gilbert syndrome may be susceptible to toxicities from medications that require glucuronidation. Irinotecan is well-known to cause toxicity in patients with Gilbert syndrome.

# History and Physical

Gilbert syndrome typically appears during adolescence.

The provider needs to consider other acute and chronic liver diseases based upon the history and physical examination. Patients should be questioned about a history of significant alcohol use, which can lead to fatty liver, steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease should be considered for patients with a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and obesity.

# Evaluation

Gilbert syndrome is associated with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia; the bilirubin is typically below 4 mg/dL; however, the bilirubin level can fluctuate depending on exacerbating factors.

Diagnostic imaging of the liver and biliary tree is generally not required unless the provider is considering another diagnosis. As previously discussed, liver biopsy is rarely indicated unless one suspects another acute or chronic liver disorder. Provocative testing with a 48 hour fast or low-calorie diet is generally not indicated. Genetic testing with assays of UG1A1 activity and polymerase chain reaction to identify gene polymorphisms in the TATAA box of UG1A1 should be considered for diagnostic uncertainty.

The provider should have a low threshold to consider other liver diseases that may cause hyperbilirubinemia before diagnosing Gilbert syndrome, as outlined above. If viral hepatitis is suspected, serologic tests for hepatitis A, B, and C should be considered.

# Treatment / Management

Patients with Gilbert syndrome do not require treatment.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

- **Increased bilirubin production:**extravascular and intravascular hemolysis, resorbing hematoma, dyseryrthopoiesis, Wilson disease

- **Impaired hepatic bilirubin uptake:**heart failure, portosystemic shunts, Gilbert syndrome, medications

- **Impaired bilirubin conjugation:**Gilbert syndrome, Crigler-Najjar syndrome types I and II, advanced liver disease

**Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia**

- **Defect of canalicular organic anion transport:**Dubin-Johnson syndrome

- **Defect of sinusoidal reuptake of conjugated bilirubin:**Rotor syndrome

- **Extrahepatic cholestasis:**choledocholithiasis, pancreaticobiliary malignancy, primary sclerosing cholangitis, pancreatitis, parasitic infection

- **Intrahepatic cholestasis:**viral hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, primary biliary cholangitis, drugs and toxins, sepsis, infiltrative diseases, parenteral nutrition, sickle cell disease, pregnancy, end-stage liver disease

# Prognosis

Patients with Gilbert syndrome have an excellent prognosis.

# Complications

Gilbert syndrome is a benign, autosomal recessive inherited disorder of bilirubin metabolism.

# Consultations

Primary care clinicians and associated practice professionals can diagnose and follow Gilbert syndrome.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with Gilbert syndrome should be informed about potential triggers such as fasting, intercurrent illness, menstruation, overexertion, hemolytic reactions, and dehydration that may cause a rise in unconjugated bilirubin.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Bilirubin is known to exert an antioxidant effect which may be protective.

In summary, Gilbert syndrome is a benign, inherited disorder of bilirubin metabolism without the risk of progressive liver disease, hepatic decompensation, or increased mortality. Unnecessary testing should be avoided, and patients should be followed conservatively. Moreover, patients with this disorder may benefit from enhanced cardioprotective and anti-neoplastic effects for the reasons discussed above.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Gilbert syndrome may be encountered by the primary care clinician, associated practice provider, emergency department physician, pediatrician, gastroenterologist, or hepatologist.