The majority of patients presenting with typical symptoms of GERD are usually recognized and managed by primary care providers. Patients with medically refractory GERD and alarm symptoms are generally referred to gastroenterologists.  The management of GERD requires an interprofessional approach involving primary care providers, gastroenterologists, otolaryngologists, pulmonologists, bariatric surgeons, and pharmacists.  Primary care physicians should obtain a good history to evaluate for any alarm symptoms or intrinsic cardiac causes and should promptly refer patients for further cardiac evaluation.  Considering lifestyle modifications are the cornerstone of GERD management, patients should be counseled about weight loss, tobacco and alcohol cessation, and avoidance of late meals.  Bariatric surgery should be discussed with morbidly obese patients presenting with GERD symptoms and should be promptly referred for bariatric surgery evaluation.  Otolaryngologists and pulmonologists should consider GERD in their differentials when evaluating patients presenting with atypical symptoms that include chronic cough, laryngitis, asthma, and hoarseness.  Cases of patients with medically refractory GERD should be discussed in a multidisciplinary approach with the surgeons, pharmacists, and endoscopy nurses. Complications of GERD should be promptly recognized, evaluated, and treated to prevent long-term morbidity. This interprofessional approach helps in the management of GERD, resulting in improved patients outcomes and increased quality of life.