Family dynamics play a significant role in health outcomes and therefore, merit attention in clinical settings. Unhealthy family dynamics can cause children to experience trauma and stress as they grow up. This type of exposure, famously known as adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), is linked to an increased risk of developing physical and mental health problems. Specifically, ACEs increase an individual’s risk of developing heart, lung, and liver disease, depression, anxiety, and more.

A literature review of the effect of family dynamics on sleep health and cardiovascular health demonstrated negative family dynamics correlate with poor sleep outcomes, increased heart rate, and increased blood pressure, which leads to an increased risk of developing hypertension. In the same study, they also found evidence that mutuality among family members is associated with better sleep outcomes in children.

Family dynamics are also important determinants of health and wellness for elderly patients. For example, healthy family dynamics that facilitate supportive interactions among family members increase the likelihood that older patients will elect to receive hip and knee replacement surgeries.

Several pathways can help explain how family dynamics affect health. For example, stressful relationships among family members are associated with impaired immune function and increased allostatic load. In contrast, supportive relationships correlate with lower allostatic load. Behavioral pathways have also been implicated. Stressful relationships may lead to poor coping mechanisms that can be detrimental to an individual’s health, whereas those in supportive relationships have family members that encourage them to behave in healthier ways and assist them in medication compliance if applicable.

The ways in which family dynamics influence health are not limited to the ones listed here. The long list of short- and long-term health outcomes associated with unhealthy family dynamics and the positive associations between healthy family dynamics and well-being illustrates the clinical significance of family dynamics. As such, providers must assess patients’ family dynamics through social history taking and other means before they develop a plan of action. To help patients develop and maintain healthy family dynamics, clinicians can suggest different intervention programs like family sculpting and family therapy.