The adverse effects of clonazepam derive from its property to act as a central nervous system depressant like all the other BZD drugs.

**Common Side Effects**

The use of clonazepam is most commonly associated with lethargy, fatigue, sedation, drowsiness, and motor impairment (impaired coordination, impaired balance, dizziness).

**Less Common Side Effects**

Clonazepam can cause blurred vision, confusion, irritability, loss of libido, lack of motivation, psychomotor agitation, hallucination, worsening of depression, short-term memory loss, and anterograde amnesia, especially with high doses.

**Occasional Side Effects**

Occasional adverse effects of clonazepam include personality changes, behavioral disturbance, ataxia, increased frequency of seizures, thrombocytopenia, and dysphoria.

**Rare****Side Effects**

Rare but important side effects of clonazepam include paradoxical disinhibition, i.e., excitement, rage, and impulsive behavior. Older patients are especially prone to this side effect. Other side effects are suicide, psychosis, and incontinence.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- Concurrent use of benzodiazepines and opioids may result in sedation, respiratory depression, coma, and death. Avoid combination.

- The use of clonazepam along with kratom may lead to increased CNS depression and death. Avoid combination.

- Concurrent use of clonazepam with antidepressants, antipsychotics, hypnotics, antiepileptic drugs, and antihistamines leads to increased sedation due to pharmacodynamic synergism. Monitor the therapy.

- Concurrent administration of clonazepam with CYP3A4 inducers like carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and primidone can reduce the concentration of clonazepam.

- Concurrent administration of clonazepam with CYP3A4 inhibitors like clarithromycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nirmatrelvir/ritonavir, telithromycin, and voriconazole can increase the serum concentration of clonazepam.