There is a linear relationship between the relative amount of formaldehyde exposure and the severity of potential side effects. People may experience various symptoms upon first exposure, including eye irritation, upper airway irritation with coughing, wheezing, chest pain, bronchitis, and allergic skin reactions. However, many people may not experience any side effects at all during the first exposure. The irritation of the eyes and nose is attributed to activation of cation channels of the transient receptor potential gene superfamily in the trigeminal nerve via covalent binding to cysteine residues on the channel.

Though the allergic reaction may suggest the role of IgE, it has previously been shown that formaldehyde exposure does not induce IgE production but rather has been hypothesized to induce inflammation and act as an adjuvant for other allergens.

Asthmatic patients are especially prone to acute exacerbations when exposed to formaldehyde.

Chronic contact with formaldehyde poses additional health risks beyond the irritation and allergic reactions of short-term exposures. The most worrisome risk is that formaldehyde is considered a carcinogen for both animals and humans and is classified as a Group 1 carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer.

The carcinogenicity is multifactorial but is commonly attributed to the direct genotoxicity observed during in vitro and in vivo studies and DNA damage, formation of micronuclei exchanges of sister chromatids, and other chromosomal abnormalities in both the lymphocytes and nasal mucosa cells of people with occupational exposure to formaldehyde.

The most common cancers linked to formaldehyde exposure are nasopharyngeal cancers which implicate inhalation as the likely predisposing mechanism as formaldehyde is water-soluble and highly reactive, thus allowing it to be retained in the nasal mucosa upon inhalation.

Recent reports have shown an increased risk of leukemia and Hodgkin lymphoma with formaldehyde exposure, each having a dose-dependent relationship.

Cardiovascular disease is also linked to formaldehyde exposure like lymphocyte-derived myeloperoxidase interacting with formaldehyde during myocardial infarction, direct contact with the sinus node, which can induce arrhythmias, and formaldehyde produced by semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase, like in diabetic patients, causing endothelial cell damage and increasing the risk for atherosclerosis, stroke, congestive heart failure, and death.

Other diseases that have recently been linked to formaldehyde exposure include neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.