Further evaluation of chylothorax depends on the suspected cause and the availability of resources.

**Chest X-ray**

Chest radiographs routinely done to evaluate dyspnea, particularly in postoperative and traumatic patients, can detect unilateral pleural effusion. Chylothorax appears as a homogenous density obligating the costophrenic and cardio phrenic angle. A routine chest x-ray cannot differentiate chylothorax from other causes of pleural effusion.

**Thoracic Ultrasound**

Ultrasound is being increased used for the evaluation of patients with pleuropulmonary pathology. Like other effusions, it appears as an isodense echoic region without any septation or loculation.  However, ultrasound cannot differentiate chylothorax from other causes of pleural effusion.

**Chest CT Scan**

CT scan is more sensitive than chest x-ray and ultrasound for the diagnosis of chylothorax. Routine CT chest can show cisterna chyli in around 2% of cases. Due to the high amount of fat content, it is seen as a low-attenuation tubular area in the posterior mediastinum. CT scan also may show the cause of chylothorax like mass lesions or obstructive lesion in the posterior mediastinum, thoracic malignancy, or evidence of trauma.

**MRI**

MRI of the chest can show cisterna chyli in 100% of the cases and can be used for better evaluation of chylothorax. However, as MRI of the chest is not an optimal investigation for the thoracic pathology, it is rarely used in clinical practice.

**Conventional Lymphangiography**

Lymphangiography is a technique used to delineate the lymphatic system. In modern medicine, this test is rarely used due to the availability of less invasive alternatives that are equally precise. In this technique, dye like methylene blue that stains the lymphatics is injected into the web spaces between the toes. A longitudinal or transverse cutaneous incision at the base of the first metatarsal bone is made to expose a lymphatic vessel with blue staining after dissection of the surrounding tissue. The isolated lymphatic vessel is then cannulated using a 30 gauge needle.  After accessing the lymphatic vessel, 10 mL of Lipiodol is slowly injected at the rate of 0.2 mL/min to 0.4 mL/min. Serial fluoroscopic spot images are obtained upwardly every 5 to 10 minutes over the course of the injected Lipiodol. If Lipiodol does not reach the area of interest, normal saline at the same rate can be injected to push Lipiodol further into the area of interest. This can reliably show any leakage in the thoracic duct leading to chylothorax. A further modification of this called nodal lymphangiogram has been developed in recent times. A targeted lymph node is selected, and ethiolised oil is injected into the cortex of the lymph node at a rate of 1 ml per min for a total of 10 ml. Serial spot radiographs of the pelvis, abdomen, and thorax are then acquired to follow the progression of the dye. This Intranodal lymphoscintigraphy is sensitive, technically easier, and also has fewer complications. Lymphogram can be therapeutic in up to 40% of cases. The high-density oil used in the procedure can close in leak during the procedure.

**Nuclear Lymphoscintigraphy**

This technique has been used more commonly than traditional lymphangiography to delineate the lymphatic system. In this procedure, Tc99m labeled human diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (HAS-DTPA) is injected into the subcutaneous lesions of the dorsum of the foot bilaterally. Sequentially anterior and posterior images of the chest are obtained using a gamma camera to identify the leak. This technique can be combined with integrated low-dose CT scan with single-photon emission computed tomography combined to get the more accurate SPECT/CT images. Radio nuclear localization using lymphoscintigraphy has been shown to correlate with traditional lymphangiography and surgical localization of leaks.

**Laboratory Testing**

**Thoracentesis and analysis of the fluid is the diagnostic study of choice for chylothorax**

All fluid samples should be sent for white blood cell count, differential, glucose, Lactic dehydrogenase, total protein level, cytology, microbiology smear, and culture. If chylothorax is suspected based on the color of the fluid, then additional tests like Ph, total triglycerides levels, and cholesterol levels should be sent.

**Color**

Based on the amount of fat content in chylothorax, the appearance of fluid can (white) milky, serous, or serosanguineous. The absence of a milky appearance does not exclude a chylothorax. In chylothorax, after the centrifugation of the pleural fluid, the supernatant is opaque in chylothorax and cholesterol effusions and clear in empyema. In this case the milkiness is caused by suspended leukocytes and debris.

Chyle is rich in lymphocytes accounting for 80% of all the cells. The lymphocytes are predominately polyclonal population of T cells.

**Lipid Analysis**

Measurement of the pleural fluid triglyceride content is key to the diagnosis of suspected chylothorax. Unlike in any other body fluids, chylothorax is very rich in large chain fatty acids absorbed from the small intestine. The pleural fluid triglyceride concentration greater than 110 mg/dL confirms the diagnosis of chylothorax. However, 15% of chylothorax are known to have triglyceride concentrations less than 110 mg depending on the time of the last meal and the fat content of the diet. If clinical suspicion of chylothorax is high, then lipid electrophoresis of the pleural fluid should be done. Detection of chylomicrons in the pleural fluid by lipoprotein electrophoresis confirms chylothorax. Typically, the total cholesterol level in a chylothorax is less than 200 mg/dl.

**Others Compositions**

The other fluid composition is similar to plasma. Chylothorax is usually alkaline, with PH ranging from 7.4 to 7.8.

Pseudo-chylothorax or chyliform effusion. Effusions with a gross appearance similar to chylothorax, milky white are called pseudo-chylothorax. These are less common than the classical chylothorax and have been reported being in long-standing exudate pleural effusion of various causes. They contain a high concentration of cholesterol, giving them that characteristic milky or white appearance. In long-standing exudative pleural effusion, the cell undergoes slices releasing the cholesterol from the cell membrane into the fluid, which gets trapped in the pleural cavity. However, unlike classical chylothorax, they do not contain chylomicrons or long-chain fatty acids. Pseudo- chylothorax is commonly associated with tuberculosis and chronic rheumatoid pleural effusion due to the high cell concentration. Other causes described and literature are yellow nail syndrome and paragonimiasis. The cholesterol concentration in pseudo-chylothorax is typically more than 200 mg; triglycerides level is less than 110 mg/dL, and cholesterol to triglycerides ratio is always more than 1. Cholesterol crystals may be visible in dried slides from pleural fluid when viewed under polarized light and appear rectangle plates with notched edges. The presence of cholesterol crystals is virtually diagnostic of pseudo-chylothorax.