Consensus recommendation on managing uremic pruritus is lacking, contributing to clinicians' difficulties in managing these groups of patients. Some strategies employed include:

**Optimizing Serum Calcium and Phosphate Levels**

Clinicians may try optimizing serum calcium and phosphate levels to alleviate symptoms of itching. Optimizing serum calcium and phosphate levels should be part of the overall care of patients with CKD. However, with the DOPPS trial showing no relationship between serum phosphate levels and uremic pruritus, the efficacy of this strategy in addressing uremic pruritus has come under scrutiny. Furthermore, no target levels are available to guide treatment.

**Dialysis Optimization**

It is proposed that this strategy lowers the levels of pruritogens in the body. However, no target Kt/V is available to guide treatment, but the suggestion is to use the target Kt/V recommended for optimal clinical outcome. Optimizing dialysis may involve increasing the frequency of dialysis and switching patients from low-flux dialyzers to high-flux dialyzers.

**Topical Agents**

Beyond optimizing dialysis, serum calcium, and serum phosphate, skin care, especially hydration, is essential. Topical therapy for treating uremic pruritus include:

- Emollients are widely recommended. Patients with CKD often have xerosis, and emollients have shown benefits in CKD-associated pruritus. Different kinds of emollients have been studied, including paraffin and glycerol.

- Gamma linoleic acid cream may be helpful.

- Topical analgesics like capsaicin and pramoxine lotion have shown a superior response to placebo in studies.

- Tacrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor and suppresses the production of IL 2 and is demonstrated to have benefits in uremic pruritus.

**Antihistamines**

These are typically used, but their benefits are questionable. Sedating rather than non-sedating antihistamines seem more beneficial, but the use of sedating antihistamines raises safety issues, especially in the elderly.

**Gabapentin and Pregabalin**

These anticonvulsants used for neuropathic pain are also effective in CKD-associated pruritus. One systematic review found that gabapentin or pregabalin provided superior benefits compared to a placebo.

**Mast Cell Stabilizers**

Hydroxyzine, cromolyn sodium, and nicotinamide have been explored as potential therapeutic agents in combating uremic pruritus. Hydroxyzine antagonizes the histamine 1 receptors, while nicotinamide and cromolyn sodium stabilize mast cells.

In a randomized, double-blind prospective 4-week study, 60 patients with ESRD were randomized to receive either cromolyn sodium cream or placebo, and cromolyn sodium showed some benefits.

**Phototherapy**

UV-B modulates immune response by altering cytokine production. Narrowband UV-A, broadband UV-B, and narrowband UV-B therapy benefits patients with uremic pruritus. However, broadband UV-B treatment has demonstrated a superior response over UV-A therapy in treating uremic pruritus.

**Opioid Receptor Modulation**

An imbalance in mu and kappa is linked to pruritus. Kappa agonism and mu antagonism are found to relieve itching, and these mechanisms are explored as potential therapeutic options.

- Difelikefalin is a selective kappa-opioid receptor agonist indicated for treating CKD-aP in adult hemodialysis patients. It does not cross the brain-blood barrier and so does not cause the severe characteristic central nervous system adverse effects linked with opioids. The potential for abuse is low since it does not act on the mu receptors, which mediate euphoria. In a randomized, double-blind controlled trial of 174 hemodialysis patients with moderate to severe pruritus, difelikefalin improved itching and sleep disturbance scores compared with patients on placebo.

- Nalfurafine is another selective kappa-opioid agonist that shows promise in treating uremic pruritus.

- Nalbuphine acts on both kappa and mu-opioid receptors and has also proved beneficial in hemodialysis patients with pruritus. Extended-release nalbuphine has been used at a dose of 120mg to achieve response among hemodialysis patients.