Aortic valve replacement with the Manougian technique for placement of a larger aortic valve can be life-changing for patients as it allows them to have increased cardiac output while allowing placement of a larger aortic valve to help avoid patient prosthesis mismatch.

While there have been multiple studies performed looking at the increased operative time, increased cross-clamp time, and safety of aortic root enlargement procedures, they have proven to add minimal cross-clamp time and do not add to the cost of the procedure. Many studies have shown that enlarging the aortic root even in the setting of calcified aortic walls is worth the risk of avoiding patient prosthesis mismatch as enlargement of the aortic root has proven to be safe and reproducible.

If patients have undergone previous mitral valve surgery, they are not candidates for the Manougian or Nicks technique. They could possibly undergo a Konno procedure, which does allow previous mitral valve replacement.

Avoid enlarging the annulus too much as this can cause aortic valve dysfunction postoperatively. Likewise, if you put in a valve that is too large for the annulus, this can cause excessive pressure to be placed on the surrounding conduction system and cause cardiac dysfunction or heart block.

Postoperatively all patients should undergo transthoracic echocardiography to not only view the new valve that was placed but to determine the new indexed effective orifice and pressure gradient across the valve.

Careful planning in the preoperative and intraoperative settings will allow the best overall outcome for aortic root enlargement techniques along with other operative interventions that need to be performed.