Ejaculation is controlled by the spinal ejaculatory generator center, located at the L1-L2 level. This center receives parasympathetic and sympathetic inputs from the penile nerves and communicates via sensory and motor nerves. In addition to the spinal ejaculatory center, the central, spinal, and peripheral nervous systems also work together for emission and ejaculation.

Normal ejaculation is a complicated but well-coordinated series of physiological events typically involving three phases: emission, expulsion, and orgasm.

**Emission**involves the introduction of seminal fluid from the seminal vesicles, prostate, and vas into the posterior urethra. This action coordinates with the tightening of the internal sphincter, which closes the bladder neck and prevents retrograde ejaculation of semen into the bladder. This phase of ejaculation is dependent on smooth muscle contraction but generally has voluntary control. Neurological control is primarily via sympathetic nerves from the pelvic plexus (inferior hypogastric plexus), hypogastric nerves, and the caudal paravertebral sympathetic chain, which is located in the retroperitoneum on either side of the rectum and postero-lateral to the seminal vesicles.

**Expulsion**describes antegrade ejaculation, where the seminal fluid travels from the posterior urethra to the urethral meatus. This function is primarily a spinal reflex and occurs as the process reaches the "point of no return." The pressure for this comes from pelvic floor musculature contractions and the rhythmic contractile activity of the ischiocavernosus and bulbospongiosus muscles. The contractions typically occur at about 0.8-second intervals. These contractions increase the intraurethral pressure in the prostatic urethra, which results in the expression of semen from the urethral meatus. Neurological control is still basically a sympathetic reflex through the somatomotor efferent innervation of the pudendal nerve and the motor neurons located in the nucleus of Onuf, but the exact mechanism is not well defined. Spinal control is at S1-S2. One theory is that the expulsion reflex initiates by the presence of semen in the bulbar urethra, but clinical and experimental data on this are conflicting.

**Orgasm**is involved in both ejaculation and the human sexual response cycle (desire, arousal, orgasm, and resolution). While extremely pleasurable, it is also quite short. It is primarily a brain or cerebral process associated with various physical events, including contractions of accessory sexual organs. Interestingly, the feeling of orgasm can occur even after radical prostatectomy and can occur without any genital sensory input or ejaculation.

**Classification**

Premature ejaculation (PE) may be classified in several ways, such as the following:

- Primary PE is lifelong and begins as soon as the patient becomes sexually active; it typically involves an intravaginal ejaculation latency time (IELT) of <1 minute in 80% to 90%.

- Secondary or acquired PE begins later in life and usually has an IELT of <3 minutes.

- Variable PE is generally considered more or less a normal variant.

- Premature-like ejaculatory dysfunction occurs when patients become obsessed or unusually preoccupied with ejaculatory function or loss of control, but the IELT is normal.

A more helpful classification may be a clinical one:

- Primary or Secondary:

- Primary (Lifelong: present since the first sexual experience. Often due to conditioning, upbringing, or an early, traumatic sexual event.)
- Secondary: (Acquired: developing after a period of relative normal sexual functioning)

- Global or Situational:

- Global: (Constant: all the time, not limited to specific types of stimulation, partners, or situation)
- Situational: (Intermittent: varies with partner, stimulation, situation, masturbation, location, or other factors)

- Severity:

- Mild (occurs within approximately 30 seconds to 1 minute of vaginal penetration)
- Moderate (occurs within approximately 15 to 30 seconds of vaginal penetration)
- Severe (occurs before or during foreplay, at the start of sexual activity, or within approximately 15 seconds of vaginal penetration)