Acute tissue damage from ocular burns depends on several factors. These include the chemical and physical characteristics of the offending agent (mainly the pH), concentration, volume, temperature, the force of impact, and how the chemical interacts with ocular tissue. Alkaline agents are lipophilic and more likely to penetrate deeply into the eye than acidic agents. Alkaline chemical injuries cause liquefactive necrosis of tissue. As more superficial tissues undergo liquefaction, the chemical agent may penetrate deeply and damage intraocular structures such as the trabecular meshwork, lens, and ciliary body. Acidic agents coagulate proteins in superficial structures, limiting their penetration depth. Hydrofluoric acid is a notable exception to this and can cause damage to the anterior chamber structures. Despite their different characteristics and manners in interacting with ocular tissues, both acids and alkalis can cause severe tissue damage.

The pathophysiology and disease course has been proposed to be divided into four distinct clinical phases: immediate, acute (0 to 7 days), early reparative (7 to 21 days), and late reparative (after 21 days).

Once the immediate insult has been attended to, care must be taken to initiate a therapeutic plan to minimize inflammation and promote re-epithelialization. Limbal and conjunctival ischemia, persistent inflammation, ocular surface exposure due to adnexal burns, and elevated intraocular pressure can inhibit re-epithelialization if not adequately managed. Specific therapeutic and surgical management of the underlying burn pathophysiology will be discussed in the treatment/management section.