According to the manufacturer’s labeling, the following are the reported adverse reactions that occur more frequently in single-agent erlotinib therapy compared to placebo. Adverse reactions that occurred in less than 3% of patients do not appear here.

**General**

- Fatigue (9.0% any grade)

**Gastrointestinal**

- Diarrhea (20.3% any grade)

- Anorexia (9.2% any grade)

- Weight loss (3.9% any grade)

**Dermatologic**

- Rash (49% any grade)

- Pruritis (7.4% any grade)

- Acne (6.2% any grade)

- Dermatitis acneiform (4.6% any grade)

- Xerosis (4.4% any grade)

- Paronychia (3.9% any grade)

Adverse effects of erlotinib are similar to the rest of the EGFR TKI family, the most notable being diarrhea and rash. Chest pain is also commonly seen. One multicenter, open-label, phase 3 clinical trial demonstrated that 13% of erlotinib vs. 0% on standard chemotherapy developed a rash during treatment. Another phase 3 open-label study found that 50% of the erlotinib treatment group reported rash vs. 5% in the chemotherapy group. This study also observed that 18% of patients in the erlotinib treatment group reported any diarrhea vs. 2% in the chemotherapy group. One must note that serious adverse events are less common in erlotinib treatment groups compared to standard chemotherapy treatment groups.

**Serious Adverse Effects**

According to the manufacturer’s package insert, the following are the serious adverse events reported in patients taking erlotinib:

- Acute renal failure and renal insufficiency (recommendations are to withhold erlotinib if a patient becomes dehydrated)

- Cardiac arrhythmias in patients taking erlotinib with gemcitabine

- Hepatotoxicity and hepatorenal syndrome, including fatalities

- INR elevations in patients taking erlotinib and Warfarin concomitantly

- Exfoliative skin disorders.

- GI perforations, including fatalities

- Corneal perforation

- In patients with comorbid pancreatic cancer, myocardial infarction, myocardial ischemia, CVA, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia with thrombocytopenia