Vitamin A plays an integral role in the differentiation and proliferation of epithelial cells in the eyes, salivary glands, and genitourinary tract. Vitamin A is a precursor to the nuclear hormone all-trans retinoic acid, which heterodimerizes with retinoic acid receptors (RAR) in the nucleus. RAR-retinoid X receptor heterodimers serve as transcription factors that bind certain elements in promoters of genes. These genes encode important structural proteins, extracellular matrix proteins, and enzymes throughout the body. Retinal, a component of vitamin A, derives its name from its ability to produce rhodopsin in the retina, thereby aiding in vision, especially in low light settings. Additionally, vitamin A stimulates T-lymphocyte differentiation and B-lymphocyte activation in response to immune stimuli.

The primary function of vitamin D is to raise plasma calcium and phosphate concentrations, which promotes the mineralization of osteoid in the bone. The ability to elevate calcium levels is necessary for the proper functioning of the neuromuscular junction, nerve transmission, and secretion and actions of hormones. Vitamin D3 from the skin and vitamin D2 from the diet are prohormones that undergo hydroxylation to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol in the liver via the enzyme 25-hydroxylase. 25-hydroxycholecalciferol becomes further hydroxylated in the kidney to its biologically most active form, 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. Hydroxylation in the kidney into a biologically active form occurs via 1-a-hydroxylase, an enzyme under tight regulation by parathyroid hormone. The active form of vitamin D increases the duodenal absorption of calcium and phosphate and calcium reabsorption from the distal convoluted tubule by upregulating calcium transporters that move calcium across epithelial cells. Importantly, vitamin D activates osteoclasts, our body’s bone-resorbing cells. The human body maintains equilibrium with bone formation and resorption. To effectively mineralize bone, some level of bone resorption is necessary.

Vitamin E, exclusively acquired from the diet, is best known for its antioxidant activity. Vitamin E inhibits the generation of reactive oxygen species during fat oxidation. It protects polyunsaturated fatty acids in cell membranes from oxidative destruction, thereby maintaining membrane fluidity and stability. While it inhibits lipid peroxidation, including oxidation of LDL, supplementation has not resulted in a reduction in cardiovascular events.

Vitamin K is necessary to activate certain clotting factors in the liver, which are responsible for coagulation. For activation to occur, the clotting proteins must bind calcium. Vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylation of certain glutamic acid residues allows the proteins to bind calcium and carry out the coagulation cascade. Specifically, vitamin K serves as a cofactor for gamma-glutamyl carboxylase and catalyzes the post-translational synthesis of gamma-carboxy-glutamyl residues. This process activates prothrombin and factors VII, IX, X, protein C and S. Oxidation of vitamin K hydroquinone supplies energy for these carboxylation reactions. Regeneration of vitamin K hydroquinone relies on vitamin K epoxide reductase and vitamin K quinone reductase.