Due to the high energy nature of pelvic ring injuries, associated morbidities require thorough assessment. Incidence of associated trauma includes:

- Chest trauma 63%

- Long bone fractures 50%

- Head injuries 40%

- Visceral organ damage 40%

- Spinal fractures 25%

- Intestinal injuries 14%

- Genitourinary injuries 6 to 15%

- Open fractures 5%

- Mortality of open pelvis fractures is around 50%; urgent antibiotic administration is necessary
- Perform a rectal and vaginal exam and look for breaks in the skin around the perineum

A pelvic ring injury can be a life-threatening injury or may be associated with a life-threatening injury, and a thorough exam is necessary.

- Advanced trauma life support (ATLS)

- Motor and sensory exam

- Physical exam of the pelvis including push/pull test and lateral compression test

- Look for leg length inequality not explained by a limb fracture.

- A high riding prostate or blood at the urethral meatus may indicate a genitourinary injury.

- Rectal and/or vaginal exam

- Perineum exam may reveal swollen and/or mobile genitalia.

**Destot Sign**– Palpable hematoma in the perineum above the inguinal ligament or proximal thigh may represent pelvic fracture with active bleeding.

**Grey Turner Sign**– Flank bruising indicative of retroperitoneal bleeding.

**Morel-Lavallee Lesion**– Internal degloving injury from skin shear at time of injury, may require intervention and may affect surgical planning, look for significant soft tissue abrasions, ecchymosis, or subdermal hematoma. May also be identified on CT scan with the assessment of soft tissues.