Despite tremendous accumulated knowledge of the vascular anatomy, the understanding of the arterial development in the human embryo from the branchial to the postbranchial stage is still relatively poor. Key considerations in the area of blood supply to the orbit include the presence of both internal and external carotid contributions, with this dual "circuit" arrangement structured on embryological origins. In the majority of cases, communication between the middle meningeal artery and the ophthalmic artery is present, passing through the superior orbital fissure in most cases. Less commonly, an additional meningo-orbital foramen (foramen of Hyrtl) may be present lateral to the superior orbital fissure, with the connecting branch known as the sphenoidal artery, recurrent meningeal artery, or orbital branch of the middle meningeal branch.

Among clinically relevant, practical anatomy, important anomalies pertinent to the ophthalmic artery warrant being mentioned at this juncture. Dilenge and Ascherl (1980) reported on 42 anomalies of the ophthalmic and middle meningeal arteries. In that study, approximately 2.4% of anomalies involve the separation of ocular branches of ophthalmic artery from extraocular intraorbital branches. The same figure (2.4%) has been noted for the presence of accessory ophthalmic artery. In approximately 7.1% of cases, the ophthalmic artery arises from the middle meningeal artery. Approximately 17% of anomalies involve the ophthalmic artery arising from an extradural portion of the carotid siphon. The most common anomaly of this vascular circuit (about 40% of cases) is the middle meningeal artery arising from ophthalmic artery.

In summary, the ophthalmic artery can arise from the middle meningeal artery, middle cerebral artery, or the posterior communicating artery. In addition, the middle meningeal artery can arise from the ophthalmic artery. Furthermore, the cavernous origin of the ophthalmic artery has been reported. Finally, the presence of persistent stapedial artery has been well described by neurovascular anatomy experts. All of the above anatomic variations must be recognized at the time of invasive procedures involving related blood supply to this critically important body region. For example, embolization of a tumor supplied by the external carotid artery may result in loss of vision if the eye depends on the anatomically anomalous routing of blood to maintain retinal perfusion.