New classifications of blood pressure according to the 2017 ACC/AHA guidelines:

**Normal****Blood Pressure**

- SBP less than 120 mmHg and DBP less than 80 mmHg

- Promote lifestyle modification

**Elevated Blood Pressure**

- SBP 120 to 129 mmHg and DBP less than 80 mmHg

- Initiate nonpharmacologic therapy and reassess in three to six months

**Hypertension Stage 1**

- SBP 130 to 139 mmHg or DBP 80 to 89 mmHg

- Patient without ASCVD or 10-year ASCVD risk less than 10%: Initiate nonpharmacologic therapy for all patients and reassess in three to six months

- Patient with ASCVD or 10-year ASCVD risk equal to or greater than 10%: initiate nonpharmacologic therapy and single oral antihypertensive agent and reassess patient in one month

**Hypertension Stage 2**

- SBP more than 139 mmHg or DBP less than 89 mmHg

- Initiate nonpharmacologic therapy and single oral antihypertensive agent and reassess patient in one month

*If the blood pressure goal is not met, assess and optimize adherence to therapy or consider intensification of therapy.

*If the blood pressure goal is met, reassess in three to six months.

Several clinical trials such as hypertension in the very elderly (HYVET) and systolic hypertension in the elderly program (SHEP) have shown that active treatment of isolated systolic hypertension in older adults resulted in significant reductions in the all-cause mortality (13%), cardiovascular mortality (18%), and stroke (30%) and coronary (23%) events as compared with placebo.

Treatment of hypertension can be divided into nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic therapy.

**Nonpharmacologic Therapy**

- Recommended for all patients, regardless of the reading of the blood pressure.

- Restrict dietary salt (aim for 1.5 g or less per day). Randomized controlled trials have shown that moderate sodium reduction can result in an average blood pressure reduction of 4.8/2.5 mmHg).

- Weight loss (every 1 pound or 0.45 kg of weight loss will result in a reduction of 1 mmHg blood pressure).

- Start dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) diet (rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, fish, and low-fat dairy products). A clinical trial has shown that the DASH diet helps to reduce blood pressure by an average of 6/4 mmHg.

- Increase physical activity. Aerobic and resistance training can reduce blood pressure by an average of 4/3 to 6/3 mmHg, irrespective of body weight.

- Limit alcohol intake to no more than one alcoholic drink per day for women and two for men.

- Take a potassium supplement (unless contraindicated in chronic kidney disease patients).

- Quit smoking.

- Use stress management.

**Pharmacologic Therapy**

- In general, start off with a single-agent oral antihypertensive drug therapy, especially in the elderly because of the risk of orthostatic hypotension.

- An exception to the above is when the initial SBP is above 160 or blood pressure is 20/10 mmHg above the goal of blood pressure, which often needs the initiation of two oral antihypertensive agents.

- The four major classes of oral antihypertensive agents include thiazide-like diuretics (chlorthalidone and indapamide), dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (CCBs: amlodipine, nifedipine, nitrendipine), angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi: lisinopril, ramipril), and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs: losartan, valsartan).

- Randomized controlled trials have shown that thiazide-like diuretics and CCBs are the preferred first-line agents in reducing the risk of stroke and other morbidities in patients with isolated systolic hypertension.

- The dose of the single oral antihypertensive agent should be titrated to the maximum before initiating a second oral antihypertensive agent.

- In patients who require two oral antihypertensive agents, a combination of thiazide-like diuretic and CCB is the preferred strategy.

- ACEi or ARB is often used in the patient with compelling indications such as heart failure reduced ejection, post-myocardial infarction, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease.

- A combination of either ACEi or ARB with CCB or a thiazide-like diuretic can be considered.

- It is important to note that ACEi should never be used concomitantly with ARB under any circumstances.

- Patients with secondary causes of hypertension should have their respective diseases addressed concurrently.

- Studies have shown that the use of beta-blockers in the management of hypertension is inferior compared with ARB, ACEi, or CCB for cardiovascular and stroke risk reduction.

B**lood Pressure Goals**

- SHEP and HYVET trials have shown significant benefits of antihypertensive treatment in patients with the goal of SBP less than150 mmHg.

- The valsartan in elderly isolated systolic hypertension (VALISH) trial showed no significant difference in the primary outcome of sudden death, fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction and stroke, heart failure death, or other cardiovascular death among patients with strict (less than 140 mmHg) and moderate (140 to 150 mmHg) SBP control.

- However, the VALISH trial was underpowered due to the low number of events.

- Hence, the optimal SBP in patients with hypertensive disorder remained a controversial topic.

- The most recent systolic blood pressure intervention trial (SPRINT) has shown that an intensive SBP target of less than 120 mmHg improved the cardiovascular outcomes and the overall survival compared to the standard SBP target of 135 to 139 mmHg.

- However, aggressive SBP lowering may be harmful in the elderly and incite more adverse effects such as hypotension, end-organ hypoperfusion (causing acute kidney injury, and intracranial hypoperfusion which may link to cognitive decline), and polypharmacy.

- It is suggested that a goal blood pressure of less than 130/80 mmHg is appropriate as long as the patient tolerates it.

- Otherwise, less than 140/90 mmHg is considered reasonable in patients who are in the elderly population and patients with labile blood pressure or polypharmacy.

- Management strategies should always be patient-centered, with the aim of optimizing blood pressure control and avoiding polypharmacy, especially in the elderly.

**J-curve Phenomenon**

- Various studies have shown a J-curve association between blood pressure with risk of myocardial infarction and death.

- Patients with isolated systolic hypertension who receive antihypertensive treatment may precipitously drop their DBP as well.

- As myocardial perfusion occurs mainly during diastole, an excessive drop in DBP may increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and death.