Other therapies used by psychotherapists and well-qualified clinicians include:

- Behavioral therapy is used to reinforce or extinguish a behavior with less emphasis on its thought process. The addition of a reinforcing stimulus or positive reinforcement is usually more effective for behavior change than negative reinforcement. Positive reinforcement can include verbal praise or behavioral contracting for non-food-related rewards.

- Cognitive therapy - Some patients with obesity may verbalize thoughts lacking in validity, known as cognitive distortions. Cognitive therapy aims to target these cognitive distortions and guide them towards less maladaptive thinking, behavior, and emotional reactions. Compared with MI, the cognitive shift is the key mechanism of change.

- Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) - includes cognitive therapy and utilizes the relationship between thoughts, emotion, and behavior. The goal is to change behaviors through cognitive restructuring, reinforce desirable behaviors, and extinguish undesirable ones.SMART goals – specific, measurable, assignable, realistic, and time-related.

- Interpersonal therapy is a short-term, focused form of psychotherapy that improves interpersonal functioning to relieve symptoms. It is especially useful in treating depression, which has a high prevalence in persons with obesity.

- Acceptance-based therapy - this is considered a third-generation behavioral intervention. With the prevalence of obesity being higher among non-Hispanic black adults than other races, it is crucial to ensure that recommended behavioral therapies work just as effectively in these groups. At least one randomized control trial has shown that rates of achieving clinically significant weight loss were higher among non-Hispanic black adults who received acceptance-based therapy in addition to traditional behavioral therapy, compared with behavioral therapy alone.