Patellar dislocations tend to occur in a lateral direction, partly because the direction of pull of the quadriceps muscle is slightly lateral to the mechanical axis of the limb. Medial instability is rare and more likely to result from congenital conditions, quadriceps atrophy, or iatrogenically. Intra-articular dislocation is also uncommon, but can occur following trauma where the patella is avulsed from the quadriceps tendon and is then rotated. Superior dislocations can occur in elderly patients where forced hyperextension causes the patella to lock on an anterior femoral osteophyte.

Individuals with an increased Q angle are predisposed to dislocation. The Q angle is measured by drawing a line from the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) through the center of the patella, and a second line from the center of the patella to the tibial tubercle. Normal Q angle measurement is typically higher in females than in males, 18 degrees compared to 14 degrees. Measurements that exceed those normals predispose the patient to patellar instability.

There are several static and dynamic stabilizers of the patella. The medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL) is the primary static restraint to lateral patellar instability during the first 20 degrees of knee flexion. This ligament is almost always torn with patellar dislocations. The bony structure of the patellofemoral joint is another static stabilizer, especially during deeper knee flexion angles. Anatomical factors that predispose to dislocation include patella alta (high riding patella), trochlear dysplasia or lateral femoral condyle hypoplasia, and excessive lateral patella tilt. Distortion of the normal patellorfemoral joint anatomy places the patella at higher risk for instability and dislocation. The main dynamic stabilizer of the patella is the vastus medialis obliquus (VMO) muscle. This is the most distal portion of the quadriceps muscle, and exerts a medially directed pull which helps maintain the patella well positioned. Weakness or dysplasia of this muscle increases the risk for dislocations.