Evaluation of patients with IAN and LN injuries can be divided into subjective and objective evaluations. Perception of sensation varies among patients; therefore, recording neurosensory deficit quality, extent, and location at each patient visit improves longitudinal assessment of recovery or lack thereof. Additionally, patient-reported outcomes, such as the McGill pain questionnaire and visual analog scales, are also useful for outcome tracking.

After collecting subjective data, there is a variety of objective tests that can be conducted to assess neurosensory deficit after IAN and LN injuries. These tests can be divided into two categories: mechanoreceptive and nociceptive.

The static light touch test assesses the integrity of A-beta fibers; a cotton wisp or a Semmes-Weinstein monofilament can be used to perform the test.

There is no universally accepted method of evaluating IAN and LN injury; however, the following is the grading system that characterizes the extent of nerve injury based on responses from the abovementioned tests. This grading system divides neurosensory deficits into three different levels: Level A (direction and two-point discrimination - A-alpha and A-beta fibers), Level B (contact detection - A-beta and A-delta fibers), and Level C (pain sensitivity - C fibers).

For a normal patient without any deficit, no altered sensation should be noted. For a patient with mild impairment, abnormal response to level A testing but intact responses to level B and C testing will be noted; a patient with this constellation of findings should make a complete recovery. With moderate nerve injury, abnormal level A and B test results will be noted with normal level C test responses; patients in this situation may recover partially or completely. With a severely impaired or severed nerve, abnormal responses will be noted on all levels, and complete recovery should not be expected.