The many processes involved with wound healing create a large metabolic demand that is met with oxygen and glucose carried to the wound site by newly formed endothelial vessels. Factors leading to vasoconstriction limit this blood supply and thus prevent proper wound healing. Healthcare providers attending to patients with healing wounds should be aware of these factors and control for them when possible. Causes of vasoconstriction include pain, cold, fear, nicotine, alpha-1 agonists, beta antagonists, and hypovolemia. Patients should be screened for the use of substances and medications and counseled regarding their potential for impairing or delaying wound healing.

Smoking is particularly detrimental to wound healing and affects multiple stages of the healing process. It has vasoconstrictive effects and decreases oxygen supply to the wound. Nicotine also increases the risk of thrombus formation due to increased platelet activation and decreases erythrocyte, fibroblast, and macrophage proliferation. Impairments of fibroblast and macrophage migration delay collagen production and thus wound repair. This delay puts the patient who smokes at an increased risk for infection as well. For patients undergoing elective procedures, discussion of smoking cessation is important in regards to proper wound healing.

Diabetes, a growing concern for all physicians, can negatively impact wound repair as well. Patients with diabetes have an increased risk of microvascular disease which can impair blood flow to the wound site. Hyperglycemia affects basement membrane permeability and impedes blood flow as well. Elevated blood sugars along with decreased immunity place this population at risk for infection.

Successful wound healing relies on several factors and involves multiple high energy processes. Knowledge of the basic physiology of wound healing is vital for predicting possible complications and minimizing poor outcomes. Chronic wounds, keloids, and hypertrophic scars can be difficult to manage once they occur. Therefore, it is best to avoid these problems entirely. Awareness of and screening for common risk factors related to such complications can lead to better patient care.