Most infections occur in healthy children under the age of four or immunocompromised older children and adults.K. kingae are usually mild with or without mild fever, except in case of rapidly progressive endocarditis when high fever, back pain, night sweats are common. Preceding or current upper respiratory tract symptoms or diarrhea is typical and may be a clue to initial suspicion.

**Skeletal system infections**

K. kingae is the most frequent etiology for skeletal system infection in children under the ages of four

**Septic arthritis**

This condition is the most common form of osteoarticular disease of K. kingae. The infection tends to affect the lower extremity the most, and the knee is often involved. There may be involvement of more than one joint. Patients may present with the common symptoms of septic arthritis, such as localized pain, swelling, warmth, erythema, immobility, or joint effusion. Fever may be less pronounced.

**Osteomyelitis**

Most often present in a subacute form, and affects long bones of the lower extremity the most. Bones like the clavicle, sternum, and the calcaneus may be involved, highlighting K. kingae association with atypical locations.

**Spondylodiscitis**

Spondylodiscitis is an infection of the intervertebral disk space and adjacent vertebrae resulting in difficulty in walking or sitting. Children also present with back pain or stiffness, and abnormal gait. A single interverbal disk, most often the lumbar region, is most frequently affected. Spondylodiscitis of K. kingae may also correlate with intervertebral and spinal subdural abscess formation.

**Bacteremia**

K. kingae may be isolated from the blood without any focal infection (occult bacteremia), or concomitantly with other invasive infections. Occult bacteremia is the second most common form of presentation in pediatrics patients.

**Soft-tissue infections**

Kingella kingae may present with a wide range of soft tissue infections such as cellulitis, bursitis, tenosynovitis, and dactylitis, and abscesses in different locations.

**Endocarditis**

Kingella kingae is a significant cause of endocarditis in pediatric patients. It is one of the HACEK organisms (Haemophilus species, Aggregatibacter species, Cardiobacterium hominis, Elkenella corrodens, and Kingella species). Kingella endocarditis typically affects adults and older children, unlike the skeletal system infections, which are predominantly in younger children. Antecedent dental health or procedures are the risk factors for HACEK endocarditis. Other predisposing factors are cardiac anomalies and rheumatic fever. A native valve is affected in more than 90% of the cases in young children, whereas native and prosthetic valves have similar incidence in older children and adults.

**Meningitis**

Meningitis may result from hematogenous spread of the organism to the brain or from septic embolism from the heart.

**Other clinical manifestations**

Other symptoms of invasive Kingella include ocular infections like keratitis, endophthalmitis, urinary tract infections, and pericarditis.