When treatment is appropriate, there are three recommended removal methods: cerumenolytic agents, irrigation, and manual removal.

Cerumenolytic agents are liquid solutions that help thin, soften, break up, and/or dissolve ear wax. These are typically water- or oil-based compounds, with water-based solutions being the most commonly used. Typical ingredients found in water-based cerumenolytics include hydrogen peroxide, acetic acid, docusate sodium, and sodium bicarbonate. Docusate sodium appears to be the most effective, particularly when used as a pre-treatment before irrigation.

A commonly prescribed cerumenolytic is carbamide peroxide. Five to 10 drops are placed twice daily for up to four days. The drops work by releasing oxygen to soften and encourage spontaneous extrusion of cerumen and also have a weak antibacterial effect.

Irrigation is another method to safely and effectively remove unwanted cerumen, provided the tympanic membrane can be visualized first. Several irrigation methods may be used in the clinical setting. Commonly, warm water alone or a 50/50 mix of water and hydrogen peroxide is placed into a syringe and discharged into the ear canal with a basin underneath. It is important to use water that is similar to the patient's body temperature because overly warm or overly cool fluid can cause a convection current in the semicircular canals and result in vertigo, particularly if there are pressure equalization tubes or a tympanic membrane perforation present; this is the mechanism behind caloric testing of the vestibular system.

An alternative to using a syringe is a standard oral jet irrigator, with or without a modified tip. Although these methods are inexpensive and generally safe, they can be potential causes of trauma, including perforation of the tympanic membrane. Electronic irrigators are also available; however, there are no controlled trials to compare the different irrigation methods. Regardless, it appears that ear irrigation is less effective than manual removal under visualization in patients over the age of 70 years.

Manual removal is the final method recommended by the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery to remove unwanted cerumen. Manual removal often requires specialized instrumentation for better visualization, such as a binocular microscope and a handheld speculum. Cerumen removal may involve a metal or plastic loop or spoon, curette, or alligator forceps. Some products have illuminated tips to improve visualization during the procedure. The advantage of this method is a decreased risk of infection because the ear canal is not exposed to moisture. However, it does pose a small risk of perforation and local trauma, especially if the patient is uncooperative or the clinician is inexperienced. This method requires more clinical skills and greater cooperation from the patient, especially when anatomical anomalies are present, such as exostoses or a mastoid bowl.

To prevent further accumulation of cerumen in patients with recurrent cerumen impactions more often than once per year, patients may apply mineral oil to the external canal for 10 to 20 minutes weekly. Patients with hearing aids should remove them for eight hours daily to reduce cerumen buildup.