# Introduction

Healthcare quality improvement is a dedication to working towards better performance and patient outcomes in the field of medicine. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Health Resources and Services Administration's article "Quality Improvement" from April 2011 defines quality improvement (QI) as "systematic and continuous actions that lead to measurable improvement in healthcare services and the health status of targeted patient groups." (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Resources and Services Administration, 2011). Over the past two decades, the Institute of Medicine has had significant involvement in driving quality improvement efforts to improve healthcare outcomes for patients and populations. In their 2001 publication, "Crossing the Quality Chiasm: A new Health System for the 21st Century," they describe six core aims including safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, efficient, and equitable patient care, and also put forth strategies for systems redesign to prevent errors and address outcomes (Institute of Medicine, 2001).

To quote one of the founding fathers of healthcare simulation, Dr. David Gaba, "Simulation is a technique—not a technology—to replace or amplify real experiences with guided experiences that evoke or replicate substantial aspects of the real world in a fully interactive manner."

# Function

Healthcare simulation takes many forms. Simulation training may occur in a designated center during protected education time, in actual patient care areas (in-situ), use technology-enhanced programs such as computer-based or virtual reality, involve standardized patients, or use procedural task-trainers. Any of these modalities may serve as a tool for quality improvement.

Simulation provides a unique “safe sandbox” opportunity to highlight communication issues. Many of the events leading to patient harm are related to communication failures.

# Issues of Concern

**Identifying Latent Safety Threats**

The concept of latent safety threats (LST) has origins within the aviation industry, in which latent failures were entities that could have a damaging consequence but may lie dormant.

Another study describes the process of using simulation following an adverse event to identify latent safety threats.

In another study at a single institution, 49 in situ simulation exercises yielded identification of 56 latent safety threats (LST), for an average of 1.1 per scenario, suggesting that every single simulation had the opportunity to improve the quality of care.

# Clinical Significance

Simulation provides a means for improving healthcare readiness, particularly concerning the care of pediatric patients.  The National Pediatric Readiness Project (NPRP) collaborative created a survey to measure pediatric readiness in U.S. EDs.

On an individual level, simulation can improve confidence and competence, making providers more personally ready for the task at hand. In one study, 12 low-fidelity simulations for nursing staff over three months helped improve Mean Clinical Performance scores by 74%.

Simulation can also serve as a marker for discrepancies in quality between institutions. A multi-centered prospective simulation study at 30 hospitals compared deviations from best practices of management of hypoglycemic seizure in 8 pediatric EDs and 22 general EDs. They found that pharmacologic errors were more frequent in general EDs, particularly related to dextrose concentration, dosing, and maintenance dextrose.

# Pearls and Other Issues

There are many challenges in researching the role of simulation and quality improvement. Those involved in the simulation are a heterogeneous group and may have quite variable outcomes depending on the participants, the setting, and the scenario.

Simulation can be viewed as a tool in the greater quality improvement process. Simulation activities are an opportunity to work on communication and team factors. Simulation also can be used to streamline protocols or processes without involving patients. Multidisciplinary simulation exercises in the practice setting can be used to identify latent threats and improve readiness. Finally, there is growing evidence that simulation may be a tool that improves patient outcomes, the ultimate measure of quality. In the future, simulation should be thoughtfully integrated into quality assessments and systems improvements to achieve the highest possible standards for patient care.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**Team-Based In-situ simulation**

In situ simulation (ISS) can improve team performance and highlight the need for changes in systems.

**Streamlining Protocols**

Healthcare simulation offers an opportunity to streamline protocols to improve patient care. A simulated patient or mannequin can be used as a prop in the workflow to highlight deficiencies. For example, Ajmi and colleagues used simulation to reduce door to needle time in stroke patients.

**Patient outcomes**

It is challenging to link simulation efforts to quality-based patient outcomes. Studying simulation-related patient outcomes is complicated by multiple confounders. One prospective study of in situ to improve arrhythmia detection in the ED increased rates of detection from 5 to 55%.

Outcomes have also been demonstrated in procedural simulation training. A study comparing residents trained using simulation-based education and those without showed that those receiving simulation-based training had fewer needle passes, arterial punctures, catheter adjustments, and overall higher success rates for catheter insertion.