A simulation technician has a core set of responsibilities. In a survey-based study, "equipment setup and breakdown, programming scenarios into software, operation of software during simulation, audiovisual support for courses, and on-site simulator maintenance" were the most common responsibilities reported as core to the simulation technicians who responded to the survey.

- Equipment setup and breakdown includes setting up patient simulators, task trainers, hospital equipment, supplies, and audiovisual equipment.

- Patient simulators come with proprietary software to control all of the anticipated physiological changes. Simulation technicians program these changes and anticipated interventions. They also operate this software during simulation activities.

- Operating the software can either be on-the-fly (without or with minimal programming) or using existing programmed scenarios.

- Audiovisual support for courses can include the audiovisual equipment primarily used for live streaming and reviewing simulation activities, video production equipment, and other types of media for content delivery.  Many programs strongly suggest the use of recordings during debrief sessions or for individual self-review.

- Regardless of the type of simulator, all simulators need some level of on-site maintenance. Necessary maintenance could be as simple as the regular cleaning and replacement of disposable parts, or as complex as tracking down an electrical or networking issue (within warranty guidelines).

Outside of these core responsibilities, simulation technicians engage in many other responsibilities based on the type of center and programs supported by that center. Additional responsibilities include, but are not limited to:

- Inventory management and ordering of soft supplies and assets

- Technology (desktops, laptops, mobile devices) management, maintenance, and implementation within warranty guidelines

- Software (operating systems, applications, simulator software) management, maintenance, and implementation

- Administration and operation of learning/center management systems to record simulations, manage case information, collect faculty and standardized patient evaluations, track learner contact hours, and report on center data and utilization.

- Scheduling simulation activities and resources

- Utilizing and maintaining medical equipment such as IV pumps, ventilators, anesthesia machines, standard defibrillators, and automated external defibrillators (AEDs.)

- Preparing and applying moulage - simulated injuries, wounds, bruising - to standardized patients and simulators

- Development and maintenance of case scenarios, setup guidance, utilization tracking, and center management documentation

- Research, purchase, and implementation of new technologies, simulators, and task trainers

- Leading or assisting with technology and simulation best-practice training for faculty and staff, including safe simulation practices.

Simulation in settings outside of academic or standalone simulation centers may have different responsibilities that are specific to each setting.

- In-situ simulation responsibilities may include:

- supporting hospital quality improvement initiatives,
- interfacing with department schedulers to ensure room/space availability,
- utilizing portable audiovisual devices
- stringent accounting of simulation supplies and equipment to prevent mixing accidental inclusion of simulated supplies, medication, or equipment from reaching real patients
- recruitment of confederates or participants.