Hypoaldosteronism can be differentiated from global adrenal failure by the presence of genital ambiguity in female infants and a high 17 OHP in both sexes in CAH. Addison's disease in older children and adults will have decreased serum cortisol and increased ACTH, present dramatically, and have physical findings like hyperpigmentation. Infants with congenital adrenal hypoplasia (AHC) present with salt-wasting and hyperpigmentation; cortisol deficiency appears later. It may be necessary to perform a cosyntropin stimulation test to confirm cortisol deficiency. Deficiency of cholesterol side-chain cleaving enzymes produce deficiencies in all three adrenal axes. Thus, salt-wasting, low cortisol, and ambiguous genitalia in male infants are seen.

Decreased ALD and increased PRC is a feature of ALD synthase deficiency, whereas PHA has very high PRC and ALD, although both conditions have low Na, high K+, and acidosis.

In the two forms of ALD synthase deficiency, 18 OHC is low to normal in type 1 and high in type 2 ALD synthase deficiency, and the urinary tetrahydro-aldosterone (THA), the metabolite of ALD is decreased in type 1 and low normal or normal in type 2 ALD synthase deficiency.

A definitive diagnosis of biosynthetic defects causing HA is by gene sequencing.

A preoperative aldosterone contralateral suppression index (CSI -see image 1) during adrenal venous sampling (AVS) is the ratio of ALD to Cortisol in the ipsilateral adrenal vein divided by a similar ratio in the external iliac vein. Patients with a contralateral suppression index of <0.47 are at risk for prolonged adrenal suppression and require close monitoring of serum K+ after unilateral adrenalectomy for Conn syndrome.

HA in the critically ill is not clinically significant due to high cortisol levels acting on the MR compensating for the absence of mineralocorticoid.

Some conditions have a low ALD level due to Na+ retention, hypertension, hypokalemia, suppressed PRC, and volume expansion. They should be distinguished from salt-losing causes of HA by the features mentioned. Examples are Liddle syndrome and the syndrome of mineralocorticoid excess due to 11 beta HSD2 inhibition. In Gordon syndrome, hypertension is accompanied by hyperkalemia, hyperchloremic acidosis, and suppressed renin due to volume expansion.