# Continuing Education Activity

Ionizing radiation has been proven to be a risk factor for malignancy in the future. Evidence from studies conducted following the Chernobyl accident, nuclear tests, environmental radiation pollution, and accidental indoor contamination reveals consistently increased chromosome aberration and micronuclei frequency in those exposed to ionizing radiation. Ionizing radiation is of significant concern in the United States due to ubiquitous and often unnecessary imaging of patients with computerized tomography and x-rays. With the advent of multi-slice CTs, the indications for this imaging modality and its use is increasing. Although CT scans are often helpful for the clinician in making a diagnosis, they are not without risks. This risk of cancer later in life is most important for children. Ionizing radiation is cumulative. Once received, the effects remain in the body for life. As such, with increased levels of exposure to ionizing radiation to an individual, the greater the risk of malignancy later in life. Because children have more years of life remaining than adults, their cumulative risk of malignancy due to ionizing radiation is higher. This activity reviews current knowledge about ionizing radiation and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating the potential effects on patients that have received radiation exposure.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the untoward effects of ionizing radiation.
- Describe the sources on ionizing radiation in the treatment of patients.
- Identify the patient population at greatest risk of untoward consequences of ionizing radiation.
- Summarize the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating the potential affects of ionizing radiation on patients that have been exposed to it.

# Introduction

Ionizing radiation has been proven to be a risk factor for malignancy in the future. Evidence from studies conducted following the Chernobyl accident, nuclear tests, environmental radiation pollution, and accidental indoor contamination reveals consistently increased chromosome aberration and micronuclei frequency in those exposed to ionizing radiation. Ionizing radiation is of significant concern in the United States due to ubiquitous and often unnecessary imaging of patients with computerized tomography and x-rays. With the advent of multi-slice CTs

# Function

Electromagnetic and particulate radiation are both capable of producing ion pairs by interaction with matter. Through ionizing radiation, high-quality images can be obtained by physicians to assist in helping to make a diagnosis. Ionizing radiation uses gamma, x, alpha particles, neutrons, beta rays, charged nuclei, and positron radiation. Ionizing radiation can be found in consumer products, radioactive substances, improper disposal of radioactive waste.

# Issues of Concern

The lifetime cancer mortality risk from a pediatric CT scan has been determined to be higher than for adults, and the lifetime attributable risk to children of CT-induced cancer is estimated to be 1 in 1000.

# Clinical Significance

Over the past several decades, there has been mounting evidence regarding the carcinogenic risk of exposure to ionizing radiation. Several studies utilizing data from nuclear disasters have attempted to estimate cancer risk based on specific doses of ionizing radiation. Reducing radiation dose during imaging at a hospital is one means by which to limit excess exposure to ionizing radiation to patients. Children are at increased risk of receiving higher doses of ionizing radiation than adults due to their body habitus. Appropriateness of imaging must be evaluated by every physician ordering those images to minimize future harm to the patient

The effect on the human body is cell damage. While the majority of the time the cell can repair itself, the damage to core DNA and repair mechanisms can render it unable to operate normally. Cells die and can slough off the mucosa. A high radiation dose over a short span spread across multiple doses is thought to be better for cell repair as compared to prolonged exposure at a low dose.

Teratogenic effects are associated with ionizing radiation. Direct radiation, especially to a fetus in early stages of development (first trimester) exhibits a high level of teratogenicity and may even result in fetal death.

Cellphones, AM/FM radio, microwaves, sunbathing, and lighting sources are all sources of nonionizing radiation. However, these are of extremely low doses of ionizing radiation with no detectable health effects. However, long-term exposure may lead to cancer and other adverse health effects.

# Other Issues

Ionizing radiation is being evaluated not only as a risk factor for malignancy but as one of the sources of excessive healthcare costs

Radiation exposure to healthcare workers is higher than in the general population. The measurement of the effective dose of radiation on the human body is in roentgen equivalent man (or rem). The average dose of radiation per year in a healthcare worker is 5 rem/year compared to a member of the public which is  0.1 rem/year. It is important for healthcare workers to limit their radiation exposure time whenever possible. When not possible, these workers should use appropriate shielding and distance themselves during imaging procedures where ionizing radiation is in use.

Note that radiation has beneficial uses in healthcare. Radiation therapy in cancer treatment is shown to decrease recurrence rates and minimizes the need for increased tissue resection, which would leave the patient with potentially increased levels of physical disfiguration (as with breast cancer).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Every healthcare professional must strive to decrease ionizing radiation exposure to themselves and their patients, with particular emphasis on pediatric patients. Exposure reduction can be facilitated by avoiding the utilization of unnecessary imaging studies and increasing reliance on clinical exam. One way to decide whether or not a test is needed is to ask yourself: Will this extra imaging test change the outcome or treatment for the patient? If yes, then the test may be indicated, but employ radiation minimizing strategies described above. If the answer is no, consider that the imaging test may be superfluous.

Protocol-based healthcare implementations such as protocols to decrease the dose of ionizing radiation administered is a great way to improve outcomes and patient safety as well as enhance team performance.