The anterior spinal artery (ASA), supplies the anterior two-thirds of the medulla/spinal cord. Two arteries branch from their respective vertebral arteries and form a single ASA at the foramen magnum level. The ASA runs as an uninterrupted artery located within the anterior median sulcus up to the conus medullaris.

The anterior spinal artery gives off small sulcal and penetrating arteries that enter the spinal cord's body at each level to supply blood to the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord.

At cervical regions, the ASA connections from radiculomedullary arteries can be variable. Usually, the cut off is above the aortic arch, from either the vertebral or subclavian arteries. At thoracic and lumbar regions, the intercostal arteries give rise to the radiculomedullary arteries, supplying the ASA. They supply the spinal cord at and below their level of entry. The spinal cord has, on average, from 7 to 8 radiculomedullary arteries. The largest of all radiculomedullary arteries is called the great anterior radiculomedullary artery or artery of Adamkiwiecz.

The artery of Adamkiwiecz is the largest and most common radiculomedullary artery occluded and results in the ischemia of ASA and ASAS development. It supplies the lower two-thirds of the spinal cord. It originates from the intercostal artery most commonly from the left side (70% to 80%).

To understand the clinical presentation of ASAS, it is essential to know the spinal cord's anatomy to explain the pathophysiology behind this condition. The spinal cord subdivides into three portions. The posterior part of the cord contains the fasciculus gracilis and cuneatus responsible for proprioception, vibration sense, and fine touch. This area is supplied by the two posterior spinal arteries that run in the spinal cord's posterior lateral sulcus, and it is why these modalities are preserved in ASAS.

The anterolateral portion of the cord contains the spinothalamic and spinocerebellar tracts responsible for transmitting pain and temperature sensation from extremities to the brain.

The lateral horns exist from the T1 level to the L2 level. They contain the cell bodies of the sympathetic nervous system. The anterior spinal artery is responsible for the vascular supply to these areas. If an infarction occurs at these levels, the sympathetic network is affected, for which patients may present with neurogenic bladder/bowel and sexual impairments.

After the ASA flow becomes reduced or absent, several events at the cellular level occur. This disruption of blood flow starts a signaling cascade that results in neuronal destruction. It begins with the ischemic insult in which there is a decrease in blood flow and oxygen to the spinal cord. There is immediate activation of astrocytes and microglia, tissue edema/inflammation, disruption of the brain-blood-barrier, and neutrophil influx.