Treat HIV patients with a disseminated cryptococcal disease with Amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg/d to 1.0 mg/kg/d intravenously (IV)) and flucytosine (100 mg/kg/d to 125 mg/kg/d divided into four oral doses) for two weeks, which is the induction phase. Follow this therapy with fluconazole (400 mg [6 mg/kg] per day orally) for a minimum of eight weeks which is the consolidation phase. All forms of amphotericin preparations work equally well, but liposomal amphotericin (AmB) may be preferred in the setting of renal dysfunction. Fluconazole 200 mg daily by mouth is then used as suppressive or maintenance therapy. The duration of maintenance therapy can extend from six months to two years. If the patient is on antiretroviral therapy (ART), then it is reasonable to stop suppression after 12 months of therapy when the viral load is undetectable, and CD4 count is over 100 for three months.

In organ transplant patients with disseminated disease, the regimen is the same, although liposomal amphotericin (AmB) (3 mg/kg/d to 4 mg/kg/d IV) may be preferred. If there is a large fungal burden, a higher dose of AmB (6 mg/kg/d) should be used. If flucytosine is not available for use in the induction phase, then amphotericin therapy should be extended to four weeks. After that, fluconazole maintenance therapy should be continued for at least six to 12 months. Immunosuppressive management should include gradual withdrawal of immunosuppressants, beginning with corticosteroids.

In immunocompetent patients, the principles of therapy are the same. Begin induction therapy with AmB (0.7 mg/kg to 1.0 mg/kg per day IV) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day orally in four divided doses) for at least four weeks. Follow this with eight weeks of consolidation therapy with fluconazole (800 mg [12 mg/kg] per day orally) for eight weeks. After that, continue maintenance therapy with fluconazole (200 mg [3 mg/kg] per day orally) for six to 12 months.