**Prophylaxis/Prevention**

**Vaccine Prevention**

Monovalent capsular group C meningococcal conjugate vaccines (MenC) are used in Europe, Australia, and Canada for routine immunization of infants and toddlers. They are highly effective, although a booster at adolescence is advocated.

Quadrivalent meningococcal A, C, Y, W conjugate vaccines (Men ACYW) are used for adolescent immunization in North America. It is being used as a vaccine for high-risk groups and travelers in many countries. It is also replacing Men C as an adolescent booster outside the United States.

Booster doses of Men ACYW are advocated in the United States for high-risk children and persons immunized at younger than 15 years of age. Capsular group B outer membrane vesicle (OMV) vaccines are used for outbreaks involving single clones.

Two capsular group B vaccines (Men B-4C, 2 doses, and Men B-FHbp, 3 doses) are licensed for people older than 10 years of age. In the United States, it is recommended for at-risk patients and outbreaks and can be given at 16 to 23 years of age at clinical discretion.

**Chemoprophylaxis for Contacts of Patients of Meningococcal Disease**

**Antibiotic Dose**

Rifampin: 10 mg/kg per dose; Orally every 12 hours for 4 doses (for infants younger than 1 month of age, 5 mg/kg per dose)

Ceftriaxone: Single injection of 125 mg for less than 15 years and 250 mg for older than 15 years*

Ciprofloxacin: 20 mg/kg (max 500 mg) older than 1 month of age*

* From American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Red book 2015 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 30th edition. Elk Grove, IL, American Academy of Pediatrics 2015.