A thorough history and physical should be performed.  All patients should be asked about family history of HOCM and of sudden cardiac death. A majority of patients are asymptomatic.  Dyspnea is the most common complaint among symptomatic patients.  Patients may also complain of presyncope, syncope, angina, palpitations (secondary to arrhythmia), or dizziness.  Symptoms will frequently be exacerbated by exertion. Severe cases will present like congestive heart failure with paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, leg edema, and orthopnea.  The most devastating presentation is sudden cardiac death.

Physical Exam will not provide a definitive diagnosis, but it should provide clues to increase clinical suspicion.  Patients may present with a jugular venous pulse with prominent A wave, S4 heart sound, split-second heart sound (may paradoxically split in severe outflow tract obstruction), double carotid pulse, systolic ejection crescendo-decrescendo murmur, laterally displaced apical precordial impulse that may be abnormal forceful or enlarged, and/or a holosystolic murmur at the apex and axilla of mitral regurgitation with systolic anterior wall motion.  The lung exam should be normal.

The murmur and the gradient across the LVOT will decrease with an increase in preload (Squatting)  or an increase in afterload (handgrip). In addition, the gradient and the murmur will increase with a decrease in preload (Valsalva maneuver, diuretics, standing).

- Certain maneuvers can affect murmurs auscultated in HOCM.

- Handgrip will increase ventricular volume decreasing LV outflow gradient and decrease murmur intensity.

- Valsalva maneuver will decrease ventricular volume increasing LV outflow gradient and increase murmur intensity.

- Beta-blockers will increase ventricular volume decreasing LV outflow gradient and decrease murmur intensity.