Adenosine is a purine nucleoside base, most commonly recognized with the molecule adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, and is used thoroughly throughout the entire body in general metabolism.

Adenosine further classifies as a miscellaneous antiarrhythmic drug outside the Vaughan-Williams classification scheme. It acts on receptors in the cardiac AV node, significantly slowing conduction time.

Usually narrow complex, SVT consists of several specific arrhythmias, which are difficult to diagnose at a high rate (greater than 150 beats per minute). Adenosine has a role in slowing down the heart rate enough to assist in diagnosis. It can also terminate specific reentrant tachycardia involving the AV node, including AV nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), orthodromic AV reentrant tachycardia (AVRT), and antidromic AVRT. However, extreme caution is necessary when administering adenosine for antidromic AVRT as it should be used only if the diagnosis is certain.

The objective of a cardiac stress test is to evaluate the patient for significant, stable coronary artery disease and/or prognosis through the induction of ischemia. Adenosine’s role in the cardiac stress test is a pharmacologic component of stressing the heart through vasodilation, causing ischemia through a mechanism called a coronary steal.

**Drug Metabolism**

Adenosine has a rapid onset of action with a very short half-life and undergoes rapid intracellular metabolism, either by phosphorylation, forming adenosine monophosphate, or deamination. Phosphorylation via adenosine kinase allows adenosine to be further metabolized as cellular energy, while deamination occurs by adenosine deaminase, eventually forming xanthine and further metabolizing into uric acid.

Adenosine and its chemical analogs have potential anticancer properties.

Epilepsy affects about 70 million patients worldwide. Endogenous adenosine is thought to play a role in the pathophysiology of epilepsy or seizures.

Adenosine receptors have a role in glucose and lipid metabolism. Adenosine receptor agonists and antagonists can affect the balance between glucose and lipid metabolism

Researchers conducted a small clinical trial on eleven (nine men and two women) conscious subjects.