Gut microbial populations can be modified through various therapeutic and surgical approaches, and this presents several methods of treating obesity. One such avenue is using probiotic supplements to provide live bacteria to restore the gut microbiota biodiversity lost in patients with obesity.Bifidobacterium is a common microbial species in probiotics that appears to reduce intestinal permeability, which can be expected to protect against harmful bacteria and other toxins entering the circulation, causing inflammation.

Recently, more research is exploring the potential use of certain strains of Lactobacillus to treat obesity.Bifidobacterium and other species to improve intestinal barrier integrity.

Surgical interventions that alter gut microbiota composition may also serve to treat obesity. Gastric bypass surgery decreases food intake and body weight. This surgical procedure also increases the population of A. muciniphila and other species. These same therapeutic effects have been shown when these bacteria species are transferred to germ-free mice. This suggests that gut microbiota changes may at least partially explain the impact of gastric bypass on reducing obesity.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a method whereby microbiota populations within fecal material from lean individuals are transferred to patients with obesity. This is being explored as a potential method of treating obesity by mitigating dysbiosis. Still, more research is needed to refine its limitations and confirm its safety and efficacy in treating obesity.

Lifestyle and diet may play an essential role in maintaining gut microbiota homeostasis. Dietary changes can influence the microbial population in early life, which can have a long-term impact on the individual. Non-dietary factors can also impact GIT microbiota. For example, smoking has been associated with increased Bacteroides-Prevotella and may contribute to Crohn disease.

More research is needed into the use of dietary changes, prebiotics, and probiotics to modify GIT microbiota positively. Lifestyle modification should usually be introduced along with any pharmacologic interventions which are planned. These changes include diet modification and smoking cessation.