Serial measurements of height are an essential parameter, remembering that growth, while continuous, is not always linear and that each phase is different (infantile, childhood, and pubertal). The infantile stage (0 to 24 months) is when the baby starts to grow at its own pace, there are no maternal factors, so it is natural for them to cross percentile curves (down or up). At this period the correlation to adulthood height will be 0.80 vs. intrauterine correlation is only 0.25.

Remember to calculate the Z-scores and the mid-parental height with the following equation:

- For girls, subtract 13cm (5 inches) from the father’s height; that value is added to maternal height and averaged

- For boys, add 13 cm (5 inches) to the mother’s height; that value is added to the father’s height and averaged

After having accurate measurements and a good mid-parental height, one proceeds actually to answer the question; is the child truly short? If the child is below the 2.3 percentile, the diagnosis of short stature is made; below the 1 percentile is extreme short stature; then proceed to determine the etiology.

Any patient diagnosed with short stature should undergo further evaluation to determine if it's just constitutional growth delay or short familial statute. Further workup includes an endocrinology panel and bone age determination; this is done with an image of the left hand and wrist, most used methods to establish bone age are Greulich, Pyle atlas, and Tanner-Whitehouse 3 (TW3), this last one is believed to be the most accurate one. It’s important to remember that African Americans tend to have an advanced bone age and southeast Asians tend to have delayed bone age when compared to their peers.

As far for lab workup, it should begin with a full endocrinologic panel that will include other causes of short stature, including TSH, T4, bone age, IG1, IGFBP3, karyotype (if suspected), bone age, even imaging like MRI can be a consideration, and at last, the stimulation GH test is done. To get to this point, the clinician will need low serum concentrations of GH, IGF-1, and IGFBP-3.

GH stimulation test is the closest to there is to a gold standard to diagnose constitutional growth delay through ruling out GH deficiency. This is true for idiopathic short stature diagnosis as well. Some limitations of the study important to remember are that, increase BMI influences GH response as well as recent steroid use.

There are three approved drugs to do the stimulation, clonidine, glucagon, and cosyntropin; the test is done in a controlled environment (onsite clinic) and takes about 6 hours. Stimulant drugs are given (some IV other by mouth) and test for GH levels every 30 minutes (0, 30, 60, and 120) and then repeated with another stimulant. To diagnose GHD, there is a failure of GH to rise above 10 mcg/L with two stimulants.