**Prophylaxis**

The approach to prophylaxis involves identifying patients with high risk of developing HO. Routine prophylaxis is not recommended. Current recommendations for prevention of HO are gentle ROM exercises, indomethacin, etidronate, and external beam radiation, which is primarily used after joint arthroplasty. It is also important to manage risk factors, such as spasticity, in the prevention of HO. Indomethacin is the most commonly used NSAIDs used for prophylaxis

Etidronate is a bisphosphonate that has been approved for prevention of heterotopic ossification in spinal cord injuries and complication of total hip arthroplasty. For spinal cord injury associated HO, the recommended treatment is 20 mg/kg per day for 2 weeks then 10 mg/kg per day for 10 weeks for a total treatment period of 12 weeks. For total hip arthroplasty, recommended treatment is 20 mg/kg per day for 1 month preoperatively and then the same dosing for 3 months postoperatively

External beam radiation is most commonly used after total joint arthroplasty. A single dose of 700 to 800 g (centigray) is administered up to 24 hours preoperatively or within 72 hours postoperatively

**Treatment**

Current treatment recommendations consist of mobilization with ROM exercises, indomethacin, etidronate, and surgical resection.

Indomethacin and etidronate are also used to help arrest bone formation in HO, but efficacy in the traumatic brain injury population has not been clearly proven. The most effective treatment option in the TBI population is surgical resection. In the SCI population, the most effective NSAID treatment regiments are either Rofecoxib 25 mg per day for 4 weeks or indomethacin 75 mg daily for 3 weeks.