The suprascapular nerve comprises motor and sensory fibers originating from the 5th and 6th cervical spinal nerves; occasionally, fibers from the 4th cervical spinal nerves also contribute.

Before entering the suprascapular canal, branches in the supraspinous fossa provide motor innervation to the supraspinatus muscle. Afterward, emerging from the spinoglenoid notch, branches in the infraspinous fossa to innervate the infraspinatus muscle.  In this way, the suprascapular nerve contributes to the abduction of the arm via the supraspinatus muscle and external rotation of the shoulder via the infraspinatus muscle.  Sensory branches innervate both the acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joints, but other nerves also contribute to the sensory innervation of the shoulder joints.  The glenohumeral joints also receive sensory innervation from the axillary nerve, the lateral pectoral nerve, and the nerve to the subscapularis. The acromioclavicular joint also receives sensory innervation from the lateral pectoral nerve.

Positioning a high-frequency ultrasound probe anterior to the scapular spine in the coronal plane will produce an image slicing through skin, subcutaneous tissue, trapezius muscle, and supraspinatus muscle before it is reflected by the floor of the scapular spine. Tilting the ultrasound probe in the cephalo-caudad direction should reveal the suprascapular nerve and artery within a slight depression of the scapula (see Figure 1)

The anterior approach identifies the suprascapular nerve just lateral to the supraclavicular brachial plexus below the omohyoid muscle. See Figure 2 for the relevant sonoanatomy.