In the context of self-examination, the discussion of breast anatomy should focus on gross and superficial components with attention to associated lymphatics and with an understanding of variability among individuals, age groups, stages of development, and timing within menstrual and gestational cycles.

Breast tissue extends superiorly from the level of the second and third ribs, inferiorly to the inframammary fold, and transversely from the sternum to the midaxillary lines. A peninsula of breast tissue may project into the axilla; this is known as the tail of Spence. Two fascial layers enclose the breast tissue properly, the superficial layer beneath the dermis and the deep layer overlying the pectoralis major muscle fascia. Lobes and lobules of branched tubule-alveolar epithelial glands constitute the functional breast parenchyma supported by the more prevalent stromal elements, mainly adipose tissue.

The breast’s lymphatic system, which is the primary conduit for metastatic dissemination of breast cancer, is composed mostly of axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes.

Breast development begins in puberty as epithelial proliferation and increased adipose deposition results in hormonally induced breast enlargement. During pregnancy, the breast prepares for lactation with tissue growth, venous dilation, and darkening of the nipple-areolar complex. After weaning of the infant, involution of breast tissue occurs as glandular and stromal proliferations regress, and the breasts return to approximate pregestational size.

Menopause results in breast tissue atrophy, decreased breast volume, and relaxation of Cooper's Ligaments, resulting in diminished suspension and breast ptosis.