Neonatal abstinence syndrome is a clinical diagnosis based on pertinent signs and symptoms in the setting of a high index of suspicion. A verbal history from the mother about drug use or abuse, taken in a non-judgmental, non-threatening, and caring manner, helps identify the majority of the NAS cases. However, this history may not be readily available, and hence, testing the infant may be necessary. Several methods are available to identify and/or confirm the in-utero drug exposure; the infant's urine, meconium, cord blood, or hair can be useful options. Testing the infant's urine or meconium for drugs is most commonly practiced because of its ease of collection and timely results. Urine testing can identify drug exposure only a few days before delivery. Depending on the type, the timing of the last dose, and the cumulative amount of drug exposure in-utero, the maternal drugs may be identified in the infant's urine between 2 to 4 days. If there is a delay in collecting neonatal urine, there is a high chance of false-negative results. Hence it is important to collect the urine as soon as possible, preferably the first void urine. Meconium testing can identify drug exposure dating back to 20 weeks of gestation and hence, more sensitive than the urine test. Internal metabolism and clearance of drugs in both the mother and the fetus can also affect the result. Most opioids can be identified by either of these tests, except for synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids, which require a specialized test to identify. Although these immunoassay screening tests are easy to perform in most hospitals, confirmatory mass spectroscopy tests are expensive and require advanced expertise. Hair and umbilical cord testing for drugs have also been evaluated but found to be less sensitive, with practical difficulties, and hence, its clinical utility is limited. All of the above tests have false positive and false negative results and require cautious interpretation. False-positive results are common with amphetamine exposure, when there was soap or alcohol used before collecting the specimens or when meconium has urine contamination. Maternal usage of analgesics during the peripartum period can positively result in the infant's test and hence also require cautious interpretation. False negatives can occur after marijuana exposure or improper storage of meconium. The best yield for confirmation is a combination of maternal urine and infant meconium testing.

The assessment for babies with known or suspected fetal exposure must start at birth. Several tools have been developed over decades to assess the severity and the need to start, adjust and wean interventions, specifically pharmacological agents. The Finnegan Neonatal Abstinence Scoring System (FNASS) and its modified versions have long been considered the "gold standard" for NAS assessment.

To overcome the limitations of FNASS, multiple scoring tools have undergone development.

Alternative assessment approaches have also been attempted. A new approach called the "Eat, Sleep, Console" model was recently developed based on the basic functioning of infants, the family's involvement in the infant's care, and maximizing the non-pharmacological treatments before starting medications.