Aortic dissection is a serious complication that can affect the aortic arch. It is defined as the separation of the innermost layer, the tunica intima, from the other 2 layers of the aorta. This separation allows blood to flow into the tunica media layer. Aortic dissection is commonly grouped into Stanford type A and type B depending on its location along the aorta. Stanford type A dissection involves the ascending aorta and the aortic arch. Aortic dissection is classically described as severe, tearing chest pain that radiates to the back. This is diagnosed with computed tomography angiography. While chest x-rays may show mediastinal widening, this diagnostic test has a low sensitivity for aortic dissection. Many serious complications result from an aortic dissection, including rupture of the aorta. Additionally, the the tear in the tunica intima may extend into the aortic valve, causing aortic regurgitation. Although uncommon, dissections of the aortic arch may lead to decreased blood flow to the head and/or upper extremities due to an intimal flap blocking one of the three major branches of the aortic arch.

Aneurysms are defined as localized dilation of an artery. They can develop nearly anywhere along the aorta and commonly involve the aortic arch. Aneurysms of the aortic arch are often asymptomatic and are found incidentally. They need to be closely monitored and may require surgical intervention to ensure that an aneurysm does not rupture, which is a complication that is often fatal. Aneurysms that are significant enough and are localized to the aortic arch without the involvement of the descending aorta may require a complete aortic arch replacement.

The isthmus is the narrowed portion of the aortic arch located just before the descending aorta begins. When the narrowing of the isthmus is significant, this can result in aortic coarctation. Individuals with coarctation of the aorta may be asymptomatic until later in life. Symptoms may include syncope, shortness of breath, epistaxis, headache, and chest pain. It is twice as common in males and commonly associated with Turner syndrome.