Congenital lobar emphysema should be differentiated from:

- Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation. Congenital lobar emphysema and congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation type III have similar findings on ultrasound, which shows a highly echogenic mass. Congenital lobar emphysema is devoid of cystic lesions as compared with cystic adenomatoid malformation.

- Pneumonia. Patients with pneumonia present with fever, chest retractions, and cyanosis. The affected lung on chest x-ray may present with collapse consolidation, and it usually improves with antibiotics, unlike congenital lobar emphysema, the affected lung in pneumonia is not hyperinflated.

- Tension Pneumothorax. Like congenital lobar emphysema, patients with tension pneumothorax also presents with respiratory distress, the physical examination will reveal hyperresonance and decreased breath sounds on the affected lung, and the chest x-ray will show that the mediastinum deviates to the contralateral lung. Tension pneumothorax is a medical emergency, and patients have hypotension, and it needs prompt decompression. The chest x-ray of the affected lung in tension pneumothorax shows depression of the hemidiaphragm, which is not seen in congenital lobar emphysema.

- Congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Congenital lobar emphysema and congenital diaphragmatic hernia present with hyperlucent lung on chest x-ray. It can be differentiated with congenital lobar emphysema because of the gas-filled loops of bowel in the chest.