Clinical examination in cases of canaliculitis should include slit lamp examination of the upper and lower puncta, medial canthal area, conjunctival fornices, and lacrimal syringing. Although the diagnosis of canaliculitis is clinical in most cases, supportive investigations would help to confirm the diagnosis or assist in making a conclusive diagnosis in patients with ambiguous symptoms.

The following investigations may be done in patients with canaliculitis.

**Microbiological Culture**

Cultures of the punctal discharge, concretions, abscesses, and conjunctival swabs may be obtained. Usually, aerobic and anaerobic cultures are requested. However, in recurrent or atypical cases, fungal and mycobacterial cultures may also be done.

**Histopathology**

Histopathological examination is most commonly performed on the expressed concretions. They may show the presence of actinomyces or may consist of sterile necrotic tissue. In secondary canaliculitis, histopathological examination of an extruded foreign body may show an inflammatory reaction at the margins. Histopathological features of pyogenic granuloma also may be seen.

**Ultrasound Biomicroscopy (UBM)**

UBM, with a frequency of 50 MHz and a resolution of 40 microns, is one of the best methods for investigating the canalicular system. Its noninvasive nature adds to its advantages. It can demonstrate canalicular changes and canaliculith.

**Dacryoendoscopy**

This is an important investigation, especially in cases of secondary canaliculitis, to localize migrated punctal plugs.

**Dacryocystography**

This may demonstrate signs of canaliculitis like filling defects, dilatation, raggedness, beading, and diverticula formation.