Peripheral arterial disease (PAD), caused by atherosclerosis, is the primary clinical issue associated with the peroneal artery.  Mild cases of PAD correlate with mild leg pain with exertion (for example – walking).  The term for pain with exertion is claudication.  Moderate cases of PAD demonstrate severe pain with walking, and severe PAD presents with leg pain at rest.

Radiographic evaluation of PAD can be performed with multiple different modalities.  Plain radiographs (x-rays) can diagnosis atherosclerosis by identifying vascular calcifications.  However, plain radiographs are not considered to be a suitable method of evaluating for PAD due to the very low sensitivity that x-rays have in being able to identify atherosclerosis when present.

Vascular ultrasound enjoys extensive use in the evaluation of PAD.  Vascular ultrasound is often the first step in the evaluation of patients with symptoms of claudication.  Atherosclerosis of lower extremity arteries can be identified with ultrasound with good sensitivity.  Vascular ultrasound is a non-invasive method of evaluating the lower extremity arteries.  Another non-invasive radiographic evaluation of PAD is CT angiography (CTA).  MR angiography (MRA) is also a non-invasive radiographic modality to evaluate for PAD.

Vascular ultrasound, CTA, and MRA allow for the evaluation of arterial stenosis, occlusion, as well as evaluation of abnormal collateral circulation in the lower extremities.  The presence of abnormal collateral circulation indicates the presence of longstanding significant atherosclerotic disease.

Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is an invasive radiographic modality that can evaluate for PAD and has high specificity. Digital subtraction angiography requires intravenous contrast to be injected into the arterial system to evaluate for stenosis, occlusion, and abnormal collateral circulation.

Digital subtraction angiography also allows for therapeutic intervention to be performed in addition to diagnosis (unlike vascular ultrasound, CTA, and MRA which are diagnostic only).  Arterial balloon angioplasty with stenting of areas of stenosis caused by atherosclerosis can be performed as a treatment for PAD at the same time as diagnostic DSA analysis.