Buspirone is available in 5 mg, 7.5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, and 30 mg oral tablets. The initial recommended dose for GAD treatment is 15 mg daily, given as either 7.5 mg twice per day or 5 mg three times per day. Every 2 to 3 days, the dosage may be increased by 5 mg until the desired clinical response is achieved. The maximum daily dosage is 60 mg per day. In clinical trials, a typical range of therapeutic effects was between 20 to 30 mg per day in divided doses.

Buspirone has seen occasional off-label use for pediatric anxiety disorders. The dosage has not been well established. In a pilot study of children aged 6 to 14, they were started on a daily dose of 5 mg and increased by 5 mg every week to a maximum daily dose of 20 mg. Another more extensive study with patients aged 6 to 17 had a higher maximum daily dose of 60 mg.

Food increases the bioavailability of buspirone; hence clinicians should counsel the patients to take buspirone with food or take it on an empty stomach. Consistency of dosage patterns is important.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**The measured bioavailability (using the steady-state area under the curve) increased 13-fold in patients with hepatic impairment; consider dose reduction in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment: The bioavailability**of buspirone is increased fourfold in patients with renal impairment (creatine clearance=10 to 70 mL/min/1.73 m); consequently, consider dose reduction in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Buspirone is a Category B risk in pregnancy. On June 30, 2015, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began implementation of the Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling Rule (PLLR), which replaced the pregnancy letter category system (A, B, C, D, and X) with integrated narrative summaries of the risks of using a drug or biological product during pregnancy and lactation. The effect of buspirone use during pregnancy on labor and delivery is unknown. However, reproductive studies in rats did not cause any adverse effects on animals.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Limited data indicate that maternal doses of buspirone up to 45 mg daily produce low levels in milk. No information is available on the long-term use of buspirone during breastfeeding; an alternate medication may be preferred, particularly while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.