Depending upon the variation in the height range and the morphology of the longitudinal and transverse arches of the foot, the physiological variant may include pes rectus, pes planus, and pes cavus.

**Pes Rectus**

The height of the arches of the foot lies within normal range, and when we bisect the posterior surface of the calcaneum, it passes perpendicularly with respect to the ground.

**Pes Planus / Flatfoot**

In children, flatfoot is seen as an asymptomatic physiological deviation. The height of the arches of the foot lies below the normal range and is associated with an everted calcaneus. Due to the presence of a fatty pad in the sole, the foot touches the ground nearly completely. Later on, because of the further growth of the skeleton, the arches of the foot can be visible.

**Pes Cavus**

The height of the arches of the foot lies above the normal range and is associated with an inverted calcaneus.

Every child has an individual timeline for developing arches of the foot, which can also be influenced by gender and obesity-like risk factors.

**Gait Cycle**

Everybody has different gait cycles, which consist of two phases, e.g., the stance phase and the swing phase. The majority (60%) of the gait cycle consists of the stance phase, while the swing phase makes up 40%. The stance phase ranges from heel strike to toe-off, whereas toe-off to heel strike is the swing phase.

- The momentarily occurring transition from heel strike to the flat foot is known as the initial rocker. On heel strike, ground reaction forces act posterior to the ankle joint, which leads to ankle plantarflexion. In this controlled movement, eccentric contraction of the tibialis anterior plays a key role in the first rocker of the stance phase.

- The period between a flat foot to heel off marks the second or ankle rocker. The whole body moves over the foot in this phase leading to ankle dorsiflexion of 10 degrees. The eccentric contraction of the gastrocnemius and soleus muscle control this ankle dorsiflexion

- The third rocker, also known as the forefoot rocker, begins with the heel-off and concludes with the toe-off. The ankle moves from dorsiflexion to abrupt plantar flexion, which requires concentric contraction of the triceps surae. The point of ground reaction forces stays anterior to the ankle joint in both the second and third rocker phases.

Ankle dorsiflexion is required in the swing phase to clear the ground. However, ground reaction forces have no role in this phase as the foot is off the ground.

**Applied Anatomy**

Ankle dorsiflexion of 10 degrees and plantarflexion of 15 degrees are necessary for normal walking. The talus is a wedge-shaped bone with a broad anterior articulating surface and has a longer lateral wall than the medial aspect. In ankle dorsiflexion, prolonged movement on the lateral aspect of the talus results in the talus external rotation. In addition to that, ankle dorsiflexion is linked with subtalar eversion. The wide joint contact area during dorsiflexion is inversely proportional to joint stress forces. Plantarflexion is coupled with subtalar inversion, talar internal rotation, and high joint reaction forces. When loaded, the fibula displaces 1 to 3 mm distally and rotates internally.

In the first and second rockers, the foot acts as a shock absorber and movable adaptor, while in the third rocker, it serves as a rigid lever. When the ankle joint's plantar flexion drives the foot to the ground, the soft forefoot pad absorbs energy. The eversion of subtalar joints makes transverse tarsal joints parallel to each other, resulting in a flexible and adaptable foot in the second rocker. The plantarflexion of the ankle in the third rocker leads to an inversion of the ankle and subtalar joints. The transverse tarsal joints (talonavicular and calcaneocuboid articulations) are rotated by the subtalar inversion into a non-parallel alignment, creating a stiff foot that aids in the body's forward propulsion. The windlass effect is created by toe dorsiflexion and tightening of the plantar fascia, which provides a stiff high arched foot.