**Posterior Column Osteotomy**

- Pedicle screw fixation

- Removal of the lamina, facet, and posterior ligaments (supraspinous, intraspinous, and ligamentum flavum)

- Posterior-only release with compression during rod placement to restore kyphosis

- Requires a mobile disc space anteriorly

**Pedicle Subtraction Osteotomy**

- Generally requires pedicle screw fixation at least two levels above and two levels below the PSO.

- Posterior elements are widely exposed.

- A detachment of the paravertebral muscles from the lateral portion of the vertebral body occurs after resection of the transverse process. Attention must be paid to the segmental vessels, which course the lateral wall of the vertebral body.

- Resection of the inferior articulating process the level above, pars, and the superior/inferior facets of the PSO level is performed. This technique also removes the lamina.

- Pedicles are resected either with a bone scalpel, osteotomy, or high-speed eggshell drilling.

- The temporary rod can be placed in cases of significant kyphosis or instability.

- The lateral portion of the pedicle and vertebral body, as well as the thin rim of the posterior vertebral body, are left for last.

- The posterior wall of the vertebral body can be taken down with a down-pushing curette or a deformity-specific instrument. Great care is taken not to violate the thecal sac anteriorly.

- The osteotomy is then closed with posterior compression.

- Final rod placement is then obtained with a minimum three rod and usually four-rod construct across the PSO.

**Vertebral Column Resection**

- Generally requires pedicle screw fixation at least four levels above and four levels below the VCR.

- Posterior elements are widely exposed.

- A detachment of the paravertebral muscles from the lateral portion of the vertebral body occurs after resection of the transverse process; Attention must be paid to the segmental vessels, which course the lateral wall of the vertebral body.

- The posterior elements are removed completely. The exiting nerve root should be well exposed and, at the thoracic level, it may be tied off.

- Resection of the rib head is also necessary at the thoracic levels, generally up to 4 cm.

- Pedicles are resected either with a bone scalpel, osteotomy, or high-speed eggshell drilling. The vertebral body is then removed in piecemeal, generally leaving a very thin rim of cortical bone anteriorly.

- A temporary rod is placed as the pedicles are resected.

- The lateral portion of the pedicle and vertebral body, as well as the thin rim of the posterior vertebral body, are left for last.

- The posterior wall of the vertebral body can be taken down with a down-pushing curette or a deformity-specific instrument. Great care is taken not to violate the thecal sac anteriorly.

- The osteotomy is then closed with posterior compression.

- Final rod placement is then obtained with a four-rod construct across the VCR.