Diagnostic evaluation of these patients should focus on delineating the level and complexity of anorectal malformation and identification of any associated defects. These patients have a high incidence of associated genitourinary and musculoskeletal (usually sacral) malformations, especially if a high anorectal malformation is present. Evaluation of vertebral and spinal cord defects is essential. The approach to these patients involves an interprofessional team, including pediatricians, neonatologists, pediatric surgery, and pediatric urology.

Ultrasound of abdomen and pelvis is a valuable screening modality for the diagnosis of associated gastrointestinal and genitourinary anomalies and should take place early. Ultrasound of the perineum helps estimate the distance between the rectal pouch and the perineum.

Once abdominal distension has developed, a lateral film radiograph in prone position should be done to determine the location of the distal bowel air bubble from the anal dimple (marked by the placement of a lead marker). A distance of less than 1 cm usually indicates a low defect, and greater than 1 cm distance may indicate a high defect.

A plain radiograph of the entire spine, including the sacrum and both iliac wing, should be done to detect vertebral anomalies and sacrum adequacy. X-rays of the extremities are necessary if there are abnormal findings on the physical exam. Evaluation of any associated cardiac defects should take place with an echocardiogram.

In an infant where diverting colostomy has occurred for complex ARM (esp. cloaca), a contrast study of distal colon (distal colostography) is beneficial in identifying the real height of the distal rectal pouch and its fistulous connection. It needs an injection of water-soluble contrast via distal mucous fistula under pressure. If there is a connection to the urinary bladder, a voiding cystourethrogram may be done at the same time to delineate the anatomy of the urinary bladder and any associated vesicoureteric reflux. Experienced hands should perform this procedure; there have been reports of bowel perforation as a complication.

An MRI of the pelvis is beneficial for delineating the anatomy of pelvic floor muscles, the location of the rectal pouch, and any fistula. Recent advances in MRI imaging have allowed high-resolution imaging of pelvic structures. These findings may significantly influence the planned surgical approach. MRI may also serve to evaluate for a tethered cord or abnormal attachment of the spinal cord to the vertebrate, as well as for the assessment of anatomical development after surgical correction of ARM.