**Volume Infusion**

This method can be used when a patient needs a certain amount of IV fluid over an amount of time in minutes. This fluid can be by itself, or it can have medication mixed in the bag. The overall goal is to give the fluid over a particular time in minutes. The answer to the formula will be in drips per min.

(Volume (mL) x (gtt/set)) / Time (min) =  gtt/ min

Example: 250 mL of normal saline over 30 minutes with a ten gtt/set is needed. Plugging these numbers into the formula would tell the clinician that they need to set the drip rate at approximately 83 gtt/min or about 1.5 gtt/sec.

Example: The clinician places 150 mg of amiodarone into a 100 mL bag of D5W with a ten gtt/set. The clinician is going to deliver the entire 150 mg over 10 minutes; therefore, it is irrelevant that the medicine is in the bag. The goal has become to give the 100 mL bag over 10 minutes. When you are using the formula with (100 mL x 10 gtt/set) divided by 10 minutes, you get 100 gtt/min or about 1.5 gtts/sec.

**Bolus**

This method is used when the clinician must obtain a specific amount of medicine out of a container. The answer obtained from the formula will be the amount in mL.

(Drug ordered / Drug Available) x  total mL in vial =  mL

Example: The clinician is to deliver 0.2 mg of epinephrine (adrenaline) to a pediatric patient in a bradycardic rhythm. If using a 1:10,000 epinephrine concentration (1 mg in 10 mL), the formula would indicate that they must draw 2 mL from the vial.

**Continuous Infusion**

When giving a constant amount of medication every minute for an extended period, continuous infusion calculation can be used. Once the clinician calculates the correct drips per minute but wants to change the dose, they can just run the calculation again with the new formula.

(Drug ordered dose (per min) x (gtt/set) / Total drug available) x total mL in infusion bag = gtt/min

Example: The clinician is treating a hypotensive patient with an epinephrine (adrenaline) infusion at 2 mcg/min. The clinician needs to obtain the bag of fluid and the vial of epinephrine. They use one vial of epinephrine 1:1,000, place it into a 250 mL bag of normal saline (NS), and use a 60 gtt/set. The formula would yield 30 gtt/min.

Example: The clinician is giving dopamine at 5 mcg/kg/min to a 43-year-old man who weighs 100 kg. The clinician has a 500 mL bag of normal saline (NS), 400 mg of dopamine in a vial, and a 60 gtt/set. The formula would yield 37.5 gtt/min. They would, in fact, not be able to obtain 37.5 gtt/min, but one drop every 1 to 1.5 seconds will get close.