**Measles**: Typically, measles presents with the classic three “C”s: cough, coryza (inflammation of the mucous membranes lining the nasal cavity) and conjunctivitis. Fevers are common, along with a generalized maculopapular rash. The three “C”s usually appear the first 10 – 12 days after infection, followed by the rash. On physical exam, the Koplik spots, tiny grains of white papules surrounded by red halo on the buccal mucosa, can be noted a day or two prior to the maculopapular rash on the skin. The rash spreads on the face first, then caudally. The disease usually resolves on its own within a week after the onset of rash.

**Mumps**: Mumps has a nonspecific prodrome that occurs a few days prior to parotitis. Prodrome symptoms may include fever, headache, myalgias, weakness, malaise, and anorexia. Parotitis is present in 70% of Mumps infection, as it is the most common manifestation. Inflammation of the parotid glands causes cheek swelling, usually bilateral, along with inflammation of the mucosa of Stenson’s ducts.  The submaxillary and submandibular glands may be involved as well. One of the common complications of parotitis is recurrent sialadenitis.

**Parainfluenza/Croup**: Croup typically presents with a "seal-like barking" cough, hoarseness of the voice, stridor, and difficulty breathing.  This results from subglottic edema which narrows the upper airway. Other nonspecific syndromes may include fever, an increased respiration rate, and and increased heart rate

**RSV**: RSV typically causes upper respiratory symptoms, which may including, fever, chills, myalgia, rhinorrhea, congestion, and cough. Occasionally, conditions could progress to lower respiratory infections that leads to bronchiolitis and in severe cases, viral pneumonia with dyspnea, usage of accessory muscles, and wheezes.