Meconium plug syndrome is a condition that often responds to conservative treatment, should be swiftly recognized and treated. However, several other potentially more critical disorders present similarly in the neonate with the inability to pass meconium within 24 to 48 hours of birth. As a result, interpersonal communication is of paramount importance between the parent - in case the child is handed over to the parents or the neonatal care nurse - in case the child is in the care of a neonatal inpatient unit. Prompt recognition of clinical signs like abdominal distension, bilious vomiting could lead to timely execution of treatment and better clinical outcomes.

It presents a diagnostic dilemma as radiologically, as it is challenging to diagnose by using abdominal plain film and requires a contrast enema to diagnose. Therefore, proper interdepartmental communication between the radiologist and the consulting pediatrician can result in a swift diagnosis and earlier scheduling of contrast enemas.

The pediatric gastroenterologist may also be called upon to perform contrast enemas and rectal biopsies, while a pediatric anesthetist might be required to anesthetize the baby and monitor it during the procedure. A pediatric surgeon may be necessary to consult for ongoing bowel obstruction or perforation or to perform the rectal biopsy. A geneticist can help to rule out cystic fibrosis. Interprofessional coordination between nurses, nursing practitioners, anesthetists, neonatal care workers is also necessary to properly coordinate neonatal care.