Since functional endoscopic sinus surgery was introduced, the indications for performing this procedure have been expanding. The advances in the endoscopes, the camera, instrumentation, and navigation have laid the groundwork for an ever-expanding world of endoscopic surgery to access the skull base, optic nerve, cavernous sinus, pituitary, orbit, pterygopalatine fossa, and many other spaces and structures.

The initial and most common indication for FESS is chronic rhinosinusitis. Rhinosinusitis is an inflammatory process of the paranasal sinuses; it is categorized into different groups based on the duration of the inflammatory process:

- Acute rhinosinusitis: less than four weeks

- Subacute rhinosinusitis: between 4 to 12 weeks

- Chronic rhinosinusitis: longer than 12 weeks

These pathologies are some of the most commonly seen conditions by physicians.  Sinus disease is also a significant financial burden on the health care system. For instance, there is, on average, a yearly expenditure of $8.3 billion for chronic rhinosinusitis in the United States.

In addition to cost, CRS has a major negative implication on the quality of life of patients emotionally and physically.

In addition to CRS, FESS plays a role in the management of complicated acute rhinosinusitis (ARS). Extracranial and intracranial complications of ARS are often categorized according to Chandler's classification. They include in order of increasing severity: pre-septal cellulitis, orbital cellulitis, subperiosteal abscess (SPA), orbital abscess (OA), and cavernous sinus thrombosis. In cases of pre-septal and orbital cellulitis, FESS is considered when there is visual impairment or increased intraocular pressure, and in situations that do not improve with medical treatment.

It also plays a fundamental role in the management of SPA (especially those that are larger than 1 cm) and of OA. The abscess is drained, the sinuses are opened and drained to restore patency, and cultures are taken for targeted antibiotic therapy.

Given the intimate association between the ethmoid sinuses and the orbit, Endoscopic Sinus Surgery has also been used to access certain orbital pathologies trans-nasally while avoiding skin incisions. Some of the indications for an endonasal approach to the orbit include decompression of the orbit and optic canal in Graves disease or post-traumatic optic neuropathy, lesions of extraconal medial orbital apex or space, benign sinonasal tumors invading the orbit medially, and medial orbital wall fractures.

ESS has also become the standard procedure for mucoceles, invasive and non-invasive fungal sinusitis, silent sinus syndrome, pituitary tumors, cerebrospinal fluid leaks, benign and malignant sinonasal tumors, and ventral skull base lesions, lesions of the petrous apex, or pterygomaxillary fossa. Expanded sinus surgery plays a role in cases of malignancies in the nasal and paranasal spaces, even for those that extend through the anterior skull base.

Navigation-guided endoscopic sinus surgery has gained much recognition in the world of rhinology. It guides the surgeon intraoperatively based on imaging obtained before surgery. The tracking system in image-guided surgery helps achieve a more thorough and complete dissection of the sinuses, better visualization of tumor borders to obtain negative margins, and with a lower risk of complications.

The indications for using the navigation system include:

- Revision sinus surgery

- Distorted sinonasal anatomy

- Benign or malignant sinonasal tumors

- Repair of the cerebrospinal fluid leak; skull base defects or lesions

- Pathologies close to the optic nerve, orbit, carotid artery, or skull base

- Pathologies involving frontal, sphenoid, or ethmoid sinuses

- Extensive polyposis