**Pre-operative Evaluation**

Patient selection plays a key role in successful surgical outcomes. A detailed preoperative examination with a focus on the cardiac and respiratory function is essential to ensure that the selected candidates will tolerate one-lung ventilation (OLV). Preoperative ASA physical status assessment, spirometry, plethysmography, diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) measurement, computed tomography (CT), and cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) should be reviewed.

Preoperative assessment is aimed at assessing lung mechanics (FEV1, MVV, FVC, RV/TLC ratio), parenchymal function (DLCO, PaO2, PaCO2), and cardiopulmonary reserve (VO2 max, exercise tolerance).

The predicted postoperative FEV1 (ppo FEV1%) is a commonly used predictor of postoperative pulmonary reserve. An FEV1 greater than 60% generally suggests that a patient will tolerate an anatomic lobe resection. In case FEV1 is less than 60%, a ventilation-perfusion (VQ scan) scan may be used to calculate the ppo FEV1. A ppo-FEV1 greater than 35%-40% is a good predictor of adequate post-operative pulmonary reserve and surgery may proceed. An FEV1 less than 30% suggests postoperative ventilator or supplemental oxygen dependence

Another common indicator of pulmonary reserve is the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). DLCO is a measure of the rate of diffusion of carbon monoxide particles across the alveolar membrane. A DLCO greater than 40% is a good marker for adequate post-operative pulmonary reserve.

For cases in which FEV1 and DLCO are borderline, cardiopulmonary exercise testing is used to predict the reserve of the entire cardiopulmonary axis. Maximal oxygen consumption (VO2) is calculated. A VO2 greater than 10ml/min/kg is required to proceed with surgery

A complete blood count may reveal polycythemia due to pulmonary diseases or an elevated white cell count suggestive of infection or inflammation. Chest x-ray and CT scan provide relevant anatomical details required for the relevant procedure. Arterial blood gases may help identify patients at increased risk of postoperative complications. Patients with PaCO2 greater than 50 mmHg or PaO2 less than 60 mmHg are vulnerable.

Preoperative optimization of patients undergoing VATS may also include smoking cessation, treatment of underlying infections and pulmonary rehabilitation.