The patients usually complain of photophobia related to the severity of aniridia and poor vision (due to many reasons, including foveal hypoplasia and optic nerve head hypoplasia) since early childhood. Parents may bring the child for the abnormal appearance of the eyes.

Nystagmus and strabismus are common due to poor vision since childhood.

Other ocular findings include:

- Aniridia- The iris may be partially absent (detectable with retroillumination), or there may be an apparent complete absence of iris on external observation. However, most cases have small hypoplastic iris tissue visible on gonioscopy. All cases have some hypoplastic iris tissue on histopathological examination.

- Bilateral ptosis

- Meibomian gland dysfunction

- Aniridia associated keratopathy (AAK)- There is limbal stem cell deficiency, corneal pannus, corneal epithelial irregularity, and conjunctivalization of the cornea. Corneal opacity, corneal scarring (subepithelial fibrosis), and vascularization are seen peripherally and may encroach the central cornea. Corneal portends a bad prognosis after penetrating keratoplasty and predisposes to graft rejection and failure. There is dry eye and tear film instability. The ocular surface may be very poor and unstable predisposing to epithelial defect and/or infective keratitis. A classification of AAK into three stages (mild, moderate, and severe limbal insufficiency) has been suggested.

- Microcornea

- Glaucoma - The corneal thickness is usually high, which might influence the measurement of the intraocular pressure. In the early years of life, the angle of the anterior chamber is generally open on gonioscopy, and congenital glaucoma/buphthalmos is rare in aniridia. However, within 2nd-decade angle closure due to peripheral anterior synechia is noted, which may lead to an increase in the intraocular pressure.

- Persistent pupillary membrane

- Rudimentary iris stump on gonioscopy - Gonioscopy may show iris fibers which lie at the space between the rudimentary small hypoplastic iris and the trabecular meshwork. These fibers contract and pull the rudimentary iris forward thereby causing synechial angle-closure glaucoma

- Superior subluxation of the lens (clear or cataractous), ectopia lentis (noted in up to 56% of cases),

- Cataract or opacities of the crystalline lens or its capsule may be present in 50% to 85% of patients.

- Microspherophakia

- Optic nerve head hypoplasia is present in 75% of cases in a series of 12 patients with aniridia.

- Foveal hypoplasia - Foveal hypoplasia, characterized by the absence of a defined foveal avascular zone, the absence of pigmentation at the fovea, and blood vessels may cross through the area where fovea is presumed to be present. Foveal depression is absent, and inner retinal layers are present all over the macular region. In a normal fovea, inner retinal layers are absent, and there is a depression corresponding to the foveola.

- Fundal coloboma

- Aniridic fibrosis syndrome

Other associations of aniridia include:

- Sensory deficiency including

- Abnormal olfaction
- Hearing loss

- AGR triad (aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities, mental retardation)

- Absent or hypoplastic patella (OMIM 106220, aniridia and absent patella) in family