Diabetes insipidus, based on the site of pathology, can be caused by two different defects, i.e., central and peripheral (nephrogenic) types.

The **central DI**is secondary to Inadequate/ impaired secretion of Vasopressin (AVP) from the posterior pituitary gland in response to osmotic stimulation and a decrease in blood pressure. AVP is synthesized as a precursor complex in the supraoptic and periventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus and encoded by the AVP-neurophysin II gene. It is released by calcium-dependent exocytosis. The osmoreceptors are found in the hypothalamus, arterial baroreceptors, and the atrial stretch receptors. In most cases, the neurohypophysis is destroyed by various acquired or congenital anatomic lesions secondary to pressure or infiltration. The resulting hypotonic diuresis depends on the degree of destruction of the neurohypophysis, leading to complete or partial deficiency of AVP secretion.

Despite the wide variety of lesions that can potentially cause CDI, it is much more common not to have CDI in the presence of such lesions than to produce the syndrome. This apparent inconsistency can be understood by considering several common neurohypophyseal physiology principles and pathophysiology relevant to all these causes. Lesions contained within the sella turcica that destroy only the posterior pituitary generally do not cause CDI because the cell bodies of the magnocellular neurons that synthesize AVP remain intact, and the site of release of AVP shifts more superiorly, typically into the blood vessels of the median eminence at the base of the brain. Perhaps the best examples of this phenomenon are large pituitary macroadenomas that completely destroy the anterior and posterior pituitary.

DI is a distinctly unusual presentation for such pituitary adenomas because the destruction of the posterior pituitary by such slowly enlarging intrasellar lesions merely destroys the nerve terminals, but not the cell bodies, of the AVP neurons. As this occurs, the site of release of AVP shifts more superiorly to the pituitary stalk and median eminence. The development of DI from a pituitary adenoma is so uncommon, even with macroadenomas that completely obliterate sellar contents sufficiently to cause panhypopituitarism, that its presence should lead to consideration of alternative diagnoses, such as craniopharyngioma. This often causes damage to the median eminence because of adherence of the capsule to the base of the hypothalamus, more rapidly enlarging sellar or suprasellar masses that do not allow sufficient time for shifting the site of AVP release more superiorly (e.g., metastatic lesions, acute hemorrhage), or granulomatous disease, with more diffuse hypothalamic involvement (e.g., sarcoidosis, histiocytosis).

A second general principle is that the capacity of the neurohypophysis to synthesize AVP is greatly in excess of the body's daily needs for maintaining water homeostasis. Carefully controlled studies of the surgical section of the pituitary stalk in dogs have demonstrated that the destruction of 80% to 90% of the magnocellular neurons in the hypothalamus is required to produce polyuria and polydipsia in these species. Thus, even lesions that cause destruction of the AVP magnocellular neuron cell bodies must produce a large degree of destruction to produce DI.

As the name suggests, in **Nephrogenic DI**, the site of action of AVP at the levels of kidneys is the V2 receptors are defective.

Various mutations cause several different defects in cellular processing and function of the receptor but can be classified into four general categories based on differences in transport to the cell surface and AVP binding and/or stimulation of adenylyl cyclase, as follows: (1) the mutant receptor is not inserted in the membrane; (2) the mutant receptor is inserted in the membrane but does not bind or respond to AVP; (3) the mutant receptor is inserted in the membrane and binds AVP but does not activate adenylyl cyclase; or (4) the mutant protein is inserted into the membrane and binds AVP but responds subnormally in terms of adenylyl cyclase activation.

The two principle negative feedback loops associated with body water homeostasis and the effects of DI are quite drastic. The osmoregulation negative feedback loop responds to changes in serum osmolality, with normal serum osmolality being between 285 mOsm/kg and 295 mOsm/kg. When osmolality is greater than 295 mOsm/kg, a loss of body water occurs, and the blood is more concentrated. The baroregulation negative feedback loop responds to changes in blood volume and blood pressure. The hypothalamus responds to the baroreceptor changes by suppressing or increasing ADH synthesis and release from the posterior pituitary gland. Even slight changes, such as a 5 to 10% decrease in blood volume or a 5% decrease in mean arterial pressure, can stimulate ADH release. In general, the body first regulates ADH secretion in response to osmoregulation. In severe volume depletion, baroreceptor stimulation of ADH takes precedence over osmoregulation.

**Gestational Diabetes Insipidus**

Gestational DI occurs in about 1 in 30,000 pregnancies due to the degradation of AVP by the enzyme cysteine aminopeptidase. Vasopressinase levels are typically higher in pregnant women (up to 300 times higher), more so in twin pregnancies.[