SIG is considered a type of secondary open-angle glaucoma caused by increased resistance to the aqueous outflow at the TM level. In this condition, there is increased production and decreased destruction of the extracellular matrix of the TM.

**Cortisone Treatment Route**

The route of administration is also very important in the effects of IOP elevations. Cortisone therapy can be administered topically on the ocular surface, periocular, intraocular, orally, intravenously, nasally, inhaled, transcutaneous, and via endogenous production. The most common forms of SIG are caused by topical routes, representing about 75% of cases.

**Topical**cortisones are often used for conjunctivitis, allergies, ocular inflammations, and treatment regimens after laser and surgery procedures.**.**

The**intraocular**routes, in which GC is administered using intravitreal injections or by sustained-released intravitreal implants, have grown considerably in the past decade to treat choroidal, macular, and retinal diseases.

Studies have shown that about 75% of patients with fluocinolone acetonide implants required IOP lowering medication, and one-third required glaucoma surgery.

The **periocular**routes involve injection within various spaces, which include the sub-Tenon, subconjunctival, orbital floor, or retrobulbar spaces. The sub-Tenon option is the periocular route most used in a clinical setting and represents a higher risk of OHT and SID in responders, possibly due to the closeness to the anterior chamber angle.

**Systemic**GC is typically prescribed for a variety of chronic inflammatory diseases. The systemic route comprises oral ingestion, local application of creams and ointments, intravenous therapy, nasal spray, and pulmonary inhalation. The risk of OHT and SIG with systemic therapy tends to be less than via ocular routes; however, clinically important IOP elevations can be seen for months and years in individuals treated with long-term systemic cortisone.

The odds ratio of developing elevated IOP after chronic system cortisone use has been reported to range from 1.4 to 1.9 based on doses administered, with a mean increase of 1.4 mmHg for each 10 mg increase in the daily dose of cortisone.

The excess production of **endogenous**cortisone due to endocrine disorders rarely causes SIG.