The management of aortic regurgitation with aortic valve repair is challenging and complex. High volume centers with adequate expertise seem to a pre-requisite to gain procedural and long-term success. To derive good outcomes, the goals and objective of the aortic valve repair have to be defined prior to taking the patient to surgery. In some cases, a complication may necessitate further re-operation, thus requiring close coordination with the critical care teams for adequate patient recovery. As with any other complex procedure, the preoperative workup must be thorough, and the patient should be seen by a pulmonologist and cardiologist to optimize lung and cardiac function. Because of the potential risk of injury to the native valve, an intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE), and a postoperative TEE monitoring is required.

Aortic valve repair has been reported to have good intermediate and long-term results. A perfect and standardized technique ensures the success of the procedure. Complications can occur immediately in the operating room, emphasizing the need for a continuous echocardiographic evaluation up to sternal closure. With the patient still on the operating table, it remains possible to go back to the bypass to immediately correct the problem.

In the postoperative period, the role of the nurse and pharmacist is critical. The nurses will assist the team by monitoring the patient for pain, bleeding, worsening of breathing, and a variety of common postoperative complications such as atelectasis, deep vein thrombosis, ileus, and pain. The pharmacist may be involved in preoperative and intraoperative medication reconciliation. The procedural success is dependent on close coordination between physicians, nurses, and pharmacists in in-patient and outpatient settings to detect both early and delayed complications and addressing them on time. Thus, further emphasizing the need for an interprofessional approach to the management of aortic insufficiency. The need for meticulous planning and discussion with other professionals involved in the management of the patient is highly recommended to lower the morbidity and improve outcomes.

The repair of bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) repair deserves a special mention. In 1% to 2% of the patient population, a BAV is present. It may present as AI at a relatively young age.