**The Tube**

The endotracheal tube has a length and diameter. The endotracheal tubes size (“give me a 6.0 tube”) refers to its internal diameter in millimeters (mm). The ETT will typically list both the inner diameter and outer diameter on the tube (for example, a 6.0 endotracheal tube will list both the internal diameter, ID 6.0,  and outer diameter, OD 8.8). The narrower the tube, the greater resistance to gas flow. Medical providers thus should select the largest tube that is appropriate for the patient; this is critically important to the spontaneously breathing patient who will have to work harder to overcome the increased resistance (a size 4 ETT has 16 more times resistance to gas flow than a size 8 ETT). The ETT is measured from the distal end of the tube and is typically marked in 2 cm increments. After successfully intubating the patient the depth of the endotracheal tube ending at the teeth or lips should be noted. This depth provides a baseline measurement to ensure the tube has not traveled out of the trachea or deeper into the trachea with patient movement or transport. PVC is not radiopaque, and thus a radiopaque linear material is in included throughout the length of the tube to make it easier to visualize the placement on x-ray. Ideally, the distal tip of the ETT is 4 cm (+/- 2 cm) above the carina on chest x-ray in adults.

**The Cuff**

A cuff is an inflatable balloon at the distal end of the ETT. Pediatric ETTs are produced with and without cuffs. The inflated cuff produces a seal against the tracheal wall; this prevents gastric contents from entering the trachea and facilitates the execution of positive pressure ventilation. The cuff inflates by attaching an appropriate size syringe (10 to 20 ml for adult ETT) to the pilot balloon. The syringe provides air under pressure and inflates both the pilot balloon and the cuff. Once the cuff inflates, the syringe needs to be removed, or the air in the cuff may redistribute back to the syringe and deflate the cuff. Palpating the firmness of the pilot balloon is a good estimation to the pressure in the cuff. Cuff manometers are available but not common in clinical use.  Ideal cuff pressure should be 20 cm H2O or less. If the pilot balloon does not hold air, it must be assumed the cuff of the ETT has been damaged and is non-functional.  Some ETTs have a low volume high-pressure cuff, but it is more common to find high volume low-pressure cuffs on ETTs in current medical practice.

**The Bevel**

To facilitate placement through the vocal cords and to provide improved visualization ahead of the tip, the ETT has an angle or slant known as a bevel. As the endotracheal tube approaches the cords, the left-facing bevel provides an optimal view.

**The****Murphy's****Eye**

ETTs have a built-in safety mechanism at the distal tip known as Murphy’s eye, which is another opening in the tube positioned in the distal lateral wall. If the distal end of the ETT should become obstructed by the wall of the trachea or by touching the carina, gas flow can still occur via Murphy's eye,  This prevents complete obstruction of the tube.

**The Connector**

ETT connectors attach the ETT to the mechanical ventilator tubing or an Ambu bag. For adult and pediatric ETTs, it is customary to use the universal 15 mm connector.