Biopsies of ALK(-) ALCL are challenging and require exclusion of other malignancies. ALK(-) ALCL can mimic other non-hematologic malignancies such as sarcomas, carcinomas, germ cell tumors, and melanomas both cytologically and histologically. This is especially true in lesions characterized predominately by anaplasia and pleomorphism when “hallmark cells” with horseshoe-shaped or wreath-like nuclei are difficult to appreciate

In the absence of clear histologic clues to the cell of origin, a typical initial immunohistochemical workup will often attempt to broadly classify the lesion as carcinoma (with a pancytokeratin cocktail), melanoma (with S100 or more specific markers), or lymphoma (with CD45). If the initial round of stains is either negative or only positive for CD45, CD30 should be performed as part of a more directed panel. To differentiate between ALCL and metastatic carcinoma, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) staining should be avoided as it is more common in ALK-positive ALCL (83%) than in ALK(-) ALCL (43%)

Detection of diffuse and strong CD30 expression should raise a high suspicion of ALCL. Many other lymphoid neoplasms may be variably CD30 positive: classical Hodgkin lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, PTCL-NOS, enteropathy associated T-cell lymphoma (type 2), extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, and transformed mycosis fungoides. Non-neoplastic immunoblast proliferations show variable CD30 positivity as well. Other tumors such as embryonal carcinoma are typically CD30 positive but are excluded by keratin expression.  Although there are many entities which may express CD30, they typically not have the diffuse and strong pattern that is seen in ALCL.

Differentiating ALK(-) ALCL from other CD30 positive T cell lymphoproliferative disorders can be challenging because of shared morphologic and immunophenotypical features. This pattern of CD30 expression is important to distinguish ALK(-) ALCL from other peripheral T cell lymphomas that have variable CD30 expression. An exception to this rule is the variable CD30 staining seen in the small-cell variant of ALK-positive ALCL

IHC plays a relevant role in distinguishing ALK(-) ALCL from classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL). This is especially useful if there is a high concentration of malignant cells in a case of CHL, as is seen in the syncytial variant. CHL is recognizable for B-cell marker expression and dim PAX-5 positivity, CD15, and occasionally EBER. MUM1 does not distinguish between ALCL and CHL. Only exceptional cases of ALCL express PAX-5

There is no specific immunophenotypic or genetic features to define ALK(-) ALCL; the immunophenotype of primary cutaneous and systemic ALK(-) ALCL are indistinguishable