Meclizine administration is chewable or non-chewable by oral tablets. Chewable tablets must be crushed or completely chewed before swallowing. The drug can be taken without regard to food.

Meclizine's half-life is about 6 hours, the onset of action is about 1 hour, and the duration of action is approximately 8 to 24 hours.

**Adult and Adolescent Dosing**

Motion sickness – Orally, 25 to 50 mg one hour before embarkation for protection against motion sickness. Patients can take subsequent dosages once every 24 hours.

Vertigo – Orally, 25 to 100 mg daily, and subsequent dosages depend upon clinical response.

Radiation-induced nausea and vomiting – Orally, 50 mg two to twelve hours before radiotherapy treatment

**Pediatric Dosing**

The drug is not approved for children less than 12 because safety and efficacy have not been established. For children 12 and older, dosing is similar to that of adults and adolescents.

**Geriatric Dosing**

Patients 65 years or older may be more sensitive to the effects of the usual adult dose due to the anticholinergic properties of meclizine. Caution is advisable when dosing for this population.

**Pregnancy/Nursing Mothers**

Meclizine is an FDA Pregnancy Category B drug. Studies conducted in child-bearing women have not shown an elevated risk of developing fetal abnormalities when taking meclizine.

Renal impairment - There is limited data on how renal impairment affects the pharmacokinetics of meclizine. Because the drug is renally excreted, there is a potential for the drug/metabolite to accumulate. In such cases, meclizine administration requires caution in patients with reduced renal function.

Hepatic impairment - There is limited data on how hepatic impairment affects the pharmacokinetics of meclizine. Hepatic impairment could result in increased systemic exposure to the drug because the liver metabolizes meclizine. Caution is necessary when administering meclizine in patients with hepatic impairment.

Due to meclizine's anticholinergic and CNS depressant properties, this drug has the potential to interact with a variety of medications. Especially those that have anticholinergic and sedative properties.