The most common adverse reactions are related to the gastrointestinal tract. Diarrhea is the most commonly reported symptom (23%), followed by vomiting (17%) and nausea (4% to 17%). There are reports of central nervous system symptoms such as fatigue and headache. Endocrine and metabolic conditions such as gout have been reported when using colchicine, as has pharyngolaryngeal pain.

While less common, the following adverse reactions have been reported with colchicine and are thought to be reversible upon discontinuation of the medication or lowering the dose:

- Neurologic - sensorimotor neuropathy

- Dermatologic - alopecia, maculopapular rash, purpura, rash

- Gastrointestinal - abdominal cramping, abdominal pain, lactose intolerance

- Hematologic - leukopenia, granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia, aplastic anemia

- Hepatobiliary - elevated AST, elevated ALT

- Musculoskeletal - myopathy, elevated CPK, myotonia, muscle weakness, muscle pain, rhabdomyolysis.

- Reproductive - azoospermia, oligospermia

**Drug Interactions**

Colchicine is a substrate for the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein. Of the cytochrome P450 enzymes tested, CYP3A4 is the primary enzyme involved in the metabolism of colchicine. If administering colchicine with drugs that inhibit P-glycoprotein, most of which also inhibit CYP3A4 increased concentrations of colchicine are likely, and there are reports of fatal drug interactions.

When co-administered with drugs known to inhibit CYP3A4 and/or P-glycoprotein, the colchicine dose should be adjusted.

The following medications should be used with caution when co-administered with colchicine:

Potent CYP3A4 inhibitors – atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, and telithromycin

Moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors  - amprenavir, aprepitant, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, grapefruit juice, and verapamil

P-glycoprotein inhibitors – cyclosporine, ranolazine

**Food Interactions**

Grapefruit juice may increase the serum concentration of colchicine.  Therefore, the dose of colchicine may require adjustment when taking grapefruit juice. Patients should avoid grapefruit juice if they have hepatic or renal impairment and are taking colchicine.