**Clonidine Forms and Dosages**

Transdermal Patch (extended-release)

- Dosage: 0.1 mg/day, 0.2 mg/day, 0.3 mg/day. Change the patch every seven days

- Indications: hypertension, smoking cessation, cyclosporine nephrotoxicity, menopausal flushing, and opioid withdrawal

Tablet (immediate-release)

- Dosage: 0.1 mg, 0.2 mg, 0.3 mg

- Indications: hypertension, acute hypertension, opioid withdrawal, and pheochromocytoma

Tablet (extended-release)

- Dosage: 0.1 mg

- Indications: alcohol withdrawal, smoking cessation, restless-leg syndrome, ADHD, Tourette syndrome, menopausal flushing, dysmenorrhea, postherpetic neuralgia, and psychosis

**Injectable Solution**

- Dosage: 100 mcg/ml, 500 mcg/ml

- Indications: epidural infusion form in cancer pain not controlled by opioid analgesics and as an adjunct in anesthesia

- The initial dose of 30 mcg/hr and titration is necessary for pain management or potential side effects.

**Dosing Considerations**

Extended-release and immediate-release types of clonidine are not interchangeable.

In cases of conversion from oral to transdermal clonidine, the recommendation is:

- On day one: place a transdermal clonidine patch, and administer 100% of the oral dose.

- On day two: Administer only 50% of the oral dose.

- On day three: Administer 25% of the oral dose.

- On day four: Use of the transdermal patch continues without any further oral supplement.

**Renal Impairment Dosing Modification**

For renal impairment, the recommendation is to start a low dose and titrate the dose up with caution. The initial dose should consider the amount of renal impairment. Monitor carefully for hypotension and bradycardia.

Hepatic dosing is undefined.