The risk of gastric cancer in individuals is related to a combination of three different sets of etiologies: the primary H. pylori infection and the host’s ability of an immune response, the host’s susceptibility to atrophic gastritis from chronic inflammation, and environmental factors like cigarette smoking and high salt intake.

H. pylori may cause non-atrophic gastritis (NAG) initially that may be susceptible to cure by clearing the infection; however, severe NAG might lead to atrophy of the mucosa and pseudopyloric metaplasia. At this stage, progression to atrophy depends on the virulence of the bacteria like the presence of cag-positive vacA s1m1 strains vs. cag-negative vacA s2m2 strains in non-atrophic gastritis (NAG).

**Multifocal Atrophic Gastritis (MAG) or Type B Gastritis**

A prolonged inflammatory process, mostly due to H. pylori, leads to a gradual loss of glandular oxyntic mucosa. This starts in the body and antrum and then spreads throughout the stomach, and it is called multifocal atrophic gastritis (MAG). The reducing levels of pepsinogen 1 are an indicator of the degree of atrophy of the oxyntic cells. Pepsinogen 2 levels rise due to their contrasting stimulation by the inflammation by H. pylori and hyperplasia of the foveolar cells. Pepsinogen levels and pepsinogen 1/pepsinogen 2 ratio can predict extensive atrophic gastritis.

**Autoimmune Metaplastic Atrophic Gastritis (AMAG) or Type A Gastritis**

This elusive syndrome is uncommon and may also have concomitant H pylori infection. It is largely asymptomatic in the early stages. It involves severe diffuse atrophy of the oxyntic cells (parietal cells) in the body and fundus but not in the antrum due to an autoimmune reaction from anti-parietal cell antibodies. This causes hypochlorhydria raising the pH in the stomach. The intrinsic factor, which is essential for vitamin B12 absorption, is secreted from the parietal cells. Lack of intrinsic factor leads to pernicious anemia, the hematological manifestation of this autoimmune process.

**Intestinal Metaplasia**

The lost gastric epithelial mucosa is eventually replaced by intestinal-type mucosa, which may be small intestinal or colonic type depending on the morphology and immunohistochemistry. There may be small intestinal goblet cells amongst enterocytes and may have microvilli giving a ‘brush border’ appearance.

The colonic type of intestinal metaplasia shows a large bowel phenotype and mucin expression. The digestive enzymes are not detectable all the time and hence are termed ‘incomplete.’ This mucosa does not have microvilli and has a variety of mucin cells. Incomplete mucosa and a large area of involvement of this type of intestinal metaplasia carry a higher risk of being pre-malignant.