Clostridial myonecrosis or gas gangrene is an acute, rapidly progressive disease complicated by toxemia, edema, massive tissue death with gas production.

Trauma most commonly introduces clostridial organisms into deep tissue. Additionally, the tissue damage can disrupt blood supply, helping form an anaerobic environment with low oxidation-reduction potential and acidic pH. This setting is ideal for clostridial organisms with necrosis progressing within 24 to 36 hours of the injury.

C. perfringens produces more than 20 extracellular toxins. However, 2 toxins heavily mediate the disease process: alpha and theta.

Alpha toxin is essential to the development of gas gangrene. A hemolytic toxin, it has both phospholipase C and sphingomyelinase activity. Alpha toxin also stimulates platelet aggregation and upregulates adherence molecules on neutrophils and endothelial cells. This leads to the formation of occlusive intravascular aggregates composed of activated platelets, leukocytes, and fibrin which causes a rapid, irreversible decline in muscle blood flow and ischemic necrosis of tissue. Decreased perfusion promotes the development of the anaerobic environment and contributes to the rapidly advancing margins of tissue destruction characteristic of clostridial gas gangrene. Alpha toxin is also responsible for the characteristic absence of tissue inflammatory response. As previously mentioned, large aggregates of activated platelets and neutrophils reduce the ability of neutrophils to cross the endothelial cell barrier into infected tissues. This is accomplished by alpha toxin-induced activation of the platelet fibrinogen receptor, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa. Alpha and theta toxins also are cytotoxic to neutrophils; the toxins most likely destroy the small number of leukocytes that do successfully migrate into tissue.

Theta toxin, also known as perfringolysin O, is a member of the cholesterol-dependent cytolysin family of which members are characterized as pore-forming toxins. Theta toxin appears to contribute to pathogenesis by its effects on vascular and immune cells. One proposed mechanism is by neutrophil-dependent adherence molecules such as integrin CD11/CD18, promoting distal vascular injury with the activation of neutrophils and endothelial cells.

Shock associated with gas gangrene may be attributable to both direct and indirect effects of alpha and theta toxins. Alpha toxin directly suppresses myocardial contractility and may contribute to profound hypotension via a sudden reduction in cardiac output.