A simple approach to understanding how resistance and compliance play a role in outcomes is by comparing two medical conditions with the same fictitious patient that may result in the initiation of pressure support ventilation. It may then be hypothesized how each scenario may respond to treatment. The first scenario is a fictional patient. A post-surgical patient who is weaning from mechanical ventilation in pressure support mode with an unremarkable posteroanterior x-ray noted. Lung compliance is calculated to be 80 ml/cm H2O (within the normal range), and normocarbia is represented on the arterial blood gases. The patient’s ventilator is currently set with pressure support of 10 cm H2O yielding an average exhaled tidal volume of 550 ml. In comparison, in the second scenario, the patient's diagnosis deviated to postoperative pneumonia. The patient’s condition has improved and is being initiated on pressure support mode ventilation at 10 cm H2O to facilitate weaning. Posteroanterior x-ray noted fibrosis as a result of pneumonia. Lung compliance is calculated at 35 ml/cm H2O (low lung compliance) with slight hypercarbia based on blood gas results. The patient also presents with an exhaled tidal volume of 300 ml compared to 550 ml from the previous scenario. Based on this hypothesis, one may agree that the results of pressure support ventilation are directly related to the patients underlying diagnosis.

Pressure support ventilation as a key weaning strategy is noted in comparison to modes such as intermittent mandatory ventilation (IMV). Studies have shown that pressure support ventilation results in a decreased respiratory rate, increased tidal volume, reduced respiratory muscle activity, and decreased oxygen consumption than with IMV modes of ventilation. In 2000, an article from the United States National Library of Medicine noted benefits in utilizing pressure support to wean patients. The article states that a duration of 2 hours has been extensively evaluated, but the weaning outcome is the same when the duration is reduced to 30 min. Patients failing the initial spontaneous breathing trial need a gradual withdrawal of ventilator support. It is known that SIMV is the most ineffective method of weaning these patients. Pressure support mode can promote the strengthening of respiratory muscles by persistently allowing for the patient to spontaneously breathe without controlled breaths. Based on this understanding, it can be determined that increased exposure to a consistent spontaneous breathing mode allows for respiratory muscle conditioning, resulting in an overall better outcome than in comparison to IMV based modes.

One may also compare additional weaning methods such as T-piece and trach collar trials when attempting to liberate patients from the ventilator. Studies show that patients were more successful when pressure support was utilized for spontaneous breathing trials rather than t piece for a simple wean. T-piece trials are noted to have a less successful outcome partially because the pressure equalization provided by pressure support is removed and the patient is solely reliant upon his or her ability to overcome the resistance of the endotracheal tube. One of the biggest trials published in JAMA in 2019 compared 30 minutes of pressure support to 2 hours of T-piece weaning, of the total 1153 adults, the proportion of patients successfully extubated was 82.3% (n=557) in 30 minutes of pressure support ventilation group as compared with 74% (578) in 2 hours of T-piece ventilation group, a difference that was statistically significant

Patient-centered weaning is an important concept when utilizing pressure support as the primary mode of ventilation. Understanding that no two people are created equal will often determine the outcome of ventilation liberation. A ventilator liberation protocol that allows for an individualized approach has shown to have greater outcomes than with a one-size-fits-all approach. Instituting a pressure support level that stabilizes and patients' work of breathing is valuable in determining a baseline point for ventilation. A slow, gradual withdrawal to increase muscle strength and endurance will result in more favorable outcomes than with IMV modes of weaning.

Understanding when to discontinue pressure support is just as important as when to initiate it. If a patient is transitioning from a breath rate controlled mode to pressure support, it is imperative to monitor the patient's responsiveness to therapy. Assessing the rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI) is a good indicator of responsiveness. This calculation is simple. The patient's respiratory rate is divided by the average tidal volume in liters (L). If the number is greater than 105, weaning failure is virtually guaranteed. This quotient indicates that the patient is exhaling small tidal volumes at high frequency, indicating a struggle.

Many other factors play a role when pressure support is unsuccessful. Underlying issues such as congestive heart failure, chronic pulmonary disease, fluid overload, dehydration, or electrolyte abnormalities that result in hemodynamic compromise may all result in failed outcomes with pressure support weaning. Very low blood pressures may be a direct result of hypovolemia or potential sepsis. High blood pressure could be due to a cardiac, systemic condition or the result of the patient having distress due to intolerance of their spontaneous breathing efforts.

The patient’s presentation during the process can identify success in pressure support weaning. Monitoring of the RSBI and vital signs are a good indicator of patient tolerance. Although arterial blood gasses (ABG) may be drawn to determine tolerance, studies do not significantly reflect that an ABG altered the decision to extubate.

The introduction of systemic steroids has shown positive outcomes for those weaning from mechanical ventilation. Administration of steroids before and after extubation has demonstrated to aid in preventing upper airway obstruction and decrease the risk of reintubation in at-risk populations.

After extubation, monitoring a patient and mitigating the risk of reintubation is imperative to success. According to a study, visual assessment of the extubated patient as well as the addition of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation via mask may significantly reduce the risk of reintubation for patients with chronic lung disease. Allowing the patient to transition from an artificial airway on pressure support mode to a noninvasive bi-level pressure to provide assistance increases positive outcomes relative to weaning.