Within the class of reverse transcriptase inhibitors are two subclasses of drugs. The first class is the nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors, and the second class is the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.

The nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) were the first class of antiretroviral drugs to be approved by the FDA. NRTIs are taken as prodrugs and must be taken into the host cell and phosphorylated before they become active. Once inside the host cell, cellular kinases will activate the drug. The drug exerts its effect through its structure. NRTIs lack a 3’-hydroxyl group at the 2’-deoxyribosyl moiety and will have either a nucleoside or nucleotide as a base. Due to the missing 3’hydroxyl group, the NRTI prevents the formation of a 3’-5’-phosphodiester bond in growing DNA chains and can prevent replication of the virus. An interesting feature of these drugs is that their incorporation during RNA-dependent DNA or DNA-dependent DNA synthesis, which inhibits the production of either positive or negative strands of the DNA.

Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) are the second class of reverse transcriptase inhibitors. The primary mechanism of action is through the binding of the NNRTI to the reverse transcriptase and the creation of a hydrophobic pocket proximal to the active site. This pocket creates a new spatial configuration of the substrate-binding site to reduce the overall polymerase activity. By creating a different configuration, DNA synthesis becomes slowed overall. Because of the non-competitive inhibitor action of NNRTI, it is not effective against HIV-2 reverse transcriptase.