The workup should include laboratory examinations and procedures to identify any other disorders that can produce symptoms similar to interstitial cystitis. This typically includes standard blood tests (CBC, CMP, glucose, HbA1c), urinalyses (microscopic) and urine cultures, and appropriate sexual health screening, including testing for STIs as appropriate.

Urine cultures in patients with negative urinalysis are suggested to identify low or borderline bacteria levels that may still be clinically significant but escape detection on standard examinations.

Neither cystoscopy nor urodynamics is required for a diagnosis of IC/BPS. Neither is diagnostic, but they may be appropriate if the diagnosis is in doubt.

**Cystoscopy**is appropriate if there is a suspicion of bladder cancer, intravesical foreign bodies, outlet obstruction, strictures, or vesical calculi. There are no specific cystoscopic findings diagnostic of IC/BPS other than a Hunner ulcer which is more commonly found in patients over age 50 in whom a cystoscopy may therefore be justified.

Patients with Hunner ulcers generally respond well to treatment. Standard therapy of a Hunner ulcer includes immediate fulguration of the lesion and/or an injection of triamcinolone.

Cystoscopy primarily rules out malignancy, strictures, and bladder outlet obstruction.

- The appearance of lesions is very similar to malignancy, particularly carcinoma-in-situ.

- The bladder walls may show scarring or petechial hemorrhages known as glomerulations, but these are considered non-specific.

- During visualization of the distended bladder, there may be Hunner's ulcers, which are often described as a pale central scar with or without a fibrin clot and surrounded by erythematous mucosa, with small vessels radiating towards the center.

- Hunner's ulcers are considered diagnostic for interstitial cystitis, but they are uncommon and may only be present in 5% to 10% of cases.

- Reactive hemorrhages are also a sign of interstitial cystitis. (This is when the mucosa appears normal (distended) on an initial examination under cystoscopy, but when deflated and re-inspected, points of capillary bleeding are noted on a background of normal mucosa.

- Further investigations may also be performed during a cystoscopy, such as hydrodistention, lidocaine or intravesical cocktail instillation, or a biopsy.

**Urodynamics**can be helpful when patients are refractory to standard medical treatments, or there is evidence of bladder outlet obstruction, detrusor hypotonicity, neurogenic bladder, or other conditions that might otherwise explain the patient's symptoms.