The main aim of the treatment of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is to control episodes of acute inflammation and to limit progressive lung injury.

**Goals of treatment:**

• Controlling symptoms  • Preventing exacerbations  • Preserving normal lung function

**Drugs used for the treatment of ABPA**

- Anti-inflammatory drugs: corticosteroids

- Antifungal drugs

- Anti IgE therapy

- Antibiotics

**Corticosteroids:**Systemic corticosteroids are the primary therapy for ABPA. The steroids help to relieve the symptoms and decrease airflow obstruction, decrease serum IgE and reduce peripheral blood eosinophils. Moreover, there is a resolution of pulmonary inflammation, pulmonary infiltrates, and it prevents irreversible lung damage.

- Prednisolone is a commonly used drug for treatment.

- Dose: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg a day for two weeks, followed by 0.5 mg/kg every other day for 6 to 8 weeks. A subsequent taper (by 5 to 10 mg every two weeks) over the 3 to 5 months. The duration of treatment depends upon the activity and severity of the disease. A low maintenance dose (5.0 to 7.5 mg/d) may be required long term to control the disease and prevent recurrence in some patients.

- IgE levels should be monitored within a few months of an acute episode or exacerbation and require followup every two months. Escalation of steroid therapy should be an option if IgE levels rise more than 100%.

- Inhaled corticosteroids may help to control of bronchospasm and may minimize the dose of systemic steroids.

- Stage 1 & 3 requires oral/intravenous corticosteroids to control the acute stage and exacerbation.

- Stage 2 disease requires careful regular follow up.

- Stage 4 disease requires long-term steroids to control asthmatic symptoms and keep IgE levels at baseline.

- Stage 5 & 6 disease requires long-term corticosteroid use.

**Oral antifungal agents:**Antifungal agents act by decreasing the fungal load that reduces inflammatory activity and act as steroid-sparing agents. Antifungal therapy may help to decrease exacerbations.

- Itraconazole is a commonly used drug for treatment.

- Itraconazole (200 mg twice daily for 16 weeks) leads to significant reductions in corticosteroid dose, decreases IgE levels, resolves pulmonary infiltrates, improves exercise tolerance, and improves pulmonary function.

- Itraconazole treatment (200 mg/d or every other day) is generally recommended for patients with ABPA who are steroid-dependent, have frequent relapses, and where benefits of treatment outweigh the risks.

- Other antifungal agents, including nystatin, amphotericin B, miconazole, clotrimazole, and natamycin, are generally ineffective in controlling ABPA. Ketoconazole may be effective, but hepatotoxicity limits its utility.

- Newer antifungal drug: Voriconazole (300 to 600 mg/day) or posaconazole (800 mg/day) shows clinical improvement with a reduction in the requirement of oral glucocorticoids, improvement in asthma control, and decline in IgE levels. Cost is a major current limitation; however, the high rate of efficacy shows that treatment with these agents as second-line therapy is justified in specific patients.

- Nebulized lipid amphotericin B (AMB-L) requires further studies to determine efficacy; therefore, at this time, it is not used for the treatment of ABPA.

**Antibiotics:**To prevent or treat an associated secondary bacterial infection.

**Omalizumab:**An anti-IgE recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody which prevents binding of IgE to Fc-epsilon RI receptor on mast cells and basophils.

- It is mainly used to treat uncontrolled asthma on Step 4 GINA treatment guideline.

- Very expensive drug.

- According to various studies and cases, it is a good alternate option in patients of ABPA with CF in whom steroid dependency and with contraindications to steroids. It also has a steroid-sparing effect and decreases systemic inflammatory markers.

- Dosage: 375mg SC injection every two weeks for at least 4 to 6 months. The dosage depends upon the serum total IgE level. In ABPA, despite a high level of IgE, the routine dose of omalizumab is sufficient.

**Supportive measures:**

- Airway clearance treatment to ABPA-related bronchiectasis patients should be prescribed nebulization with hypertonic saline with salbutamol and mucus clearance valves or percussion vests.

- Avoid areas and environmental conditions with high mold counts, such as decomposing organic materials and moldy indoor environments.