Tofacitinib is available in tablet form in 5 mg and 10 mg dosages and extended-release (XR) 11 mg dosage for oral consumption for adults. Tofacitinib is also available as a 1 mg/mL oral solution for children 2 years of age or older.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

The recommended dose of tofacitinib in rheumatoid arthritis treatment is 5 mg twice daily or extended-release (XR) 11 mg once a day.

- Subjects with moderate to severe renal impairment or moderate hepatic impairment are recommended 5 mg once daily.

**Psoriatic Arthritis**

The recommended dose of tofacitinib in the psoriatic arthritis treatment is 5 mg twice daily or extended-release (XR) 11 mg once a day.

- Subjects with moderate to severe renal impairment or moderate hepatic impairment are recommended 5 mg once daily.

**Ulcerative Colitis**

The recommended dose of tofacitinib in the ulcerative colitis treatment is 10 mg twice daily for a duration of eight weeks initially, then decreased to 5 mg twice a day.

Important to note that tofacitinib 10 mg twice daily is only FDA approved for ulcerative colitis treatment. Tofacitinib treatment should be discontinued if an adequate therapeutic response is not achieved by 16 weeks of therapy at the 10 mg twice a day dosage. Subjects with moderate to severe renal impairment or moderate hepatic impairment are recommended half of the daily dosage of subjects receiving treatment within the normal renal and hepatic function range.

**Polyarticular Course Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis**

The recommended dose of tofacitinib in the polyarticular course juvenile idiopathic arthritis treatment is 5 mg twice daily (oral Solution) or weight-based equivalent twice daily.

Bodyweight greater than or equal to 10 kg and less than 20 kg: 3.2 mg (3.2 mL oral solution) twice daily

Bodyweight greater than or equal to 20 kg and less than 40 kg: 4 mg (4 mL oral solution) twice daily

Bodyweight greater than 40 kg: 5 mg (one 5 mg tablet or 5 mL oral solution ) twice daily

- Subjects with moderate to severe renal impairment or moderate hepatic impairment are recommended dosing modifications.