Laryngeal papillomatosis is a disease that is caused by a viral etiology. The virus that has been associated with LP is the human papilloma virus (HPV). HPV is a small deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) nonenveloped capsid virus of the Papovaviridae family, which has a predilection of infecting epithelial cells. Even though many subtypes have been identified, immunochemistry has found HPV 6 and HPV 11, also associated with condyloma lata, to be the most related. On the contrary to HPV 16 and HPV 18, LP has a low malignant potential.

The mode of transmission in juvenile-onset has been closely associated with vertical transmission during childbirth. However, the exact mode of transmission is still unknown. Risk factors are prima-gravid women, firstborn child, and recently acquired genital warts. A mother's first birth usually has a longer stage of labor, leading to a longer time of exposure to the neonate. In addition, recently acquired genital warts have a higher virulence. In adult-onset LP, the mode of transmission is speculated to be oral sex. Yet, research has demonstrated that other factors have to be implemented in the infection since the presence of HPV alone on the mucosa does not necessarily cause the condition.

Another mode of transmission that has been studied is through exposure to laser smoke on laser surgeons. Kashima et al. demonstrated high amounts of HPV 6 and 11 on gel foams that were soaked in the surgical area of LP. They concluded that the amount of active viral load in smoke is too small to cause transmission of the virus.