The mechanisms of genetic mutations can be divided into four categories: mutations induced by mutagens, molecular decay, errors during DNA repair, and errors during DNA replication.

**Mutagen-induced:**Mutagens alter the structure of DNA after direct contact and cause induced mutations either through sources of radiation or chemicals. The most common sources of radiation that act as mutagens include ultraviolet (UV) and ionizing radiation.

Ionizing radiation, such as x-rays or gamma rays, causes DNA damage either directly through single-strand or double-strand breaks or indirectly through the production of ROS or other free radicals.

Many chemical compounds can induce DNA damage and mutation through several different mechanisms. Alkylating agents, such as tobacco smoke, chemotherapeutics, and nitrogen gas, function through their high affinity to the nitrogen atoms of the nucleotide base, particularly N7 of guanine and N3 of adenine.

Other classes of compounds, such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), aromatic amines, and N-nitrosamines, often require activation by the cytochrome P450 system, after which they attain their mutagenic properties.

**Molecular decay:**DNA is not entirely stable as a molecule, and various spontaneous chemical reactions can occur. DNA can undergo depurination, in which the N-glycosyl bond between deoxyribose (the sugar-phosphate backbone) and adenine or guanine (nitrogenous base) is cleaved. Although less common, this can also occur with cytosine and thymine, termed apyrimidation. Both apurinic and apyrimidinic sites are commonly referred to as abasic sites. In the average human cell, 10,000 abasic sites are formed per day. Due to their instability and reactivity, apurinic sites alter DNA structure, converting into single-strand DNA through either beta-elimination or delta-elimination.

In addition to apurination/apyrimidation, nucleotides can undergo deamination in which they lose an amine group, or tautomerism, in which the nucleotide is changed by hydrogen atom repositioning.

Over 100 different ROS-induced base lesions have been noted, resulting in incorrect base-pairing. Furthermore, ROS can react with the DNA backbone and cause single-strand breaks (SSB). Although these can be repaired with the SSB repair pathway, this is error-prone and may result in the placement of the incorrect nucleotide. Other normal cellular agents apart from ROS can also result in DNA mutation. This includes s-adenosylmethionine, which acts as a methyl donor in several metabolic pathways, along with other methylating agents such as bile salts, choline, and betaine. These methylating agents can either cause transition mutations (e.g., G:C to A:T) or react further to generate apurinic sites.

**DNA replication-induced:**There are numerous polymerases and various other proteins involved in the copying of DNA as a human cell replicates. These polymerases have a very low error rate due to their proofreading capabilities, further supported by the mismatch repair (MMR) pathway, capable of correcting incorrectly paired nucleotides.

Other enzymes involved in the DNA replication process, such as topoisomerase, can result in mutation. Normally, they remove superhelical tension during replication and transcription as DNA unwinds by nicking and re-ligating the DNA. However, they can misalign the nicked DNA ends, resulting in the formation of lesions such as DNA adducts, abasic sites, or mismatches.**DNA repair-induced:**DNA can undergo double-strand breaks (DSBs) through endogenous or exogenous means, which can contribute to cancer formation if unresolved. Human cells can undergo both homology-directed repair (HDR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) as a mechanism to address the DSD.

Translesion synthesis (TLS) is another repair mechanism that allows the cell to continue DNA replication past certain lesions such as apurinic sites or thymine dimers.