**Preparation**

- Marking incisions: the exact incision pattern will vary from surgeon to surgeon, but a Blair incision will typically start either within or along the inferior border of the temporal hair tuft and approach the root of the helix, at which point it will follow the junction of the auricle and the facial skin towards the tragus. The incision may proceed just medial to the posterior margin of the tragus (post-tragal approach) or within a skin crease anterior to the tragus (pre-tragal approach). The post-tragal approach may hide the scar better but risks winging the tragus laterally postoperatively, while the pre-tragal incision may result in a more apparent scar. Male patients will usually require a pre-tragal approach in order to avoid pulling hair-bearing skin onto the tragus during closure. The incision will then curve around where the lobule meets the cheek, often 1-2 mm onto the cheek skin rather than directly in the sulcus to prevent webbing. From there, the incision proceeds superiorly up the posterior surface of the auricle, approximately 1/3 of the way from the postauricular sulcus to the helical rim; as the scar contracts postoperatively, it will be pulled into the middle of the postauricular sulcus if the incision is placed slightly onto the back of the concha during surgery, as described. The incision should then turn gently 90 degrees to enter the postauricular hairline at the narrowest portion of non-hair-bearing skin behind the ear, typically at the level of Darwin's tubercle. The incision then travels inferiomedially as far as necessary to prevent a standing cutaneous cone during closure.

- Some surgeons mark the extent of the skin flap as well

- 
              
- SMAS rhytidectomy: ~6 cm anterior to the tragus
              
              
- Deep-plane rhytidectomy: mark a line between the angle of the mandible and the lateral canthus, where the surgical plane will transition from subdermal to sub-SMAS

- Marking surgical landmarks: some surgeons find it helpful to identify the paths of the frontal, marginal mandibular, and great auricular nerves prior to the incision or to mark the angle of the mandible. Marking the vertical platysmal bands may also be helpful if a platysmaplasty is planned.

1.**Cervicofacial liposuction:**If needed, liposuction is performed prior to flap elevation; once flaps are elevated, maintaining suction with liposuction cannulae can be very challenging. Cannulae are introduced via stab incisions in the submental crease and inferior to the lobules within the marked rhytidectomy incisions. A 3 mm liposuction cannula is introduced with the ports facing away from the dermis, and gentle outward pressure is provided to tent the skin, thereby avoiding damage to the subcutaneous layer and the subdermal plexus.

2.**Incision and flap elevation:**With the #15 blade scalpel, the incision is carried down to the subcutaneous layer. A subcutaneous flap is then raised with facelift scissors. The operating room light is directed at the skin surface to aid with transillumination, which will help the surgeon maintain the appropriate and consistent thickness of the flap. Proper counter-tension retraction is critical for this dissection to avoid buttonholing the skin.

3.**SMAS rhytidectomy:**After the SMAS has been exposed, it can be reduced with either plication or imbrication.

- Plication (folding): The SMAS is not violated in this approach. SupraSMAS adipose tissue is excised from the periauricular region. The SMAS is folded onto itself and sutured in place with multiple superolateral and lateral vectors to achieve natural-appearing resuspension.
- Imbrication: Involves resection of redundant SMAS. The SMAS is incised 1 cm anterior to the ear in a "J" shape and undermined. The SMAS is then advanced in multiple superolateral vectors from the lobule to the zygomatic arch and sutured in place. If desired, the SMAS incision can be made to create an inferiorly-based flap that is then transposed postauricularly to apply tension along the margin of the mandible and efface the jowls (see images).
- 
- Blunt dissection vertically and along the course of the facial nerve is performed in the sub-SMAS plane to avoid damaging the facial nerve. Sutures should only pass through SMAS to avoid injury to the parotid gland deep into the dissection plane.

- The type of suspension sutures used is based on surgeon preference. Either a non-absorbable suture or a large absorbable suture can be used.

4.**Deep Plane rhytidectomy:**A similar subdermal skin flap is elevated until the SMAS is incised and the dissection dives deep (see image).

- An incision is made in the SMAS along a line from the malar eminence to the angle of the mandible. A blunt subSMAS dissection is then carried anteriorly over the parotidomasseteric fascia with its inferior limit at the inferior border of the mandible and the upper limit at the malar eminence. Violation of the parotid should be avoided in order to prevent sialocele and/or first bite syndrome postoperatively.

- The zygomaticus major muscle is identified and dissected on its superficial surface towards the MLF. As a result, the malar fat pad is elevated into the skin flap.

- The flap is suspended posterosuperiorly, taking care to ensure appropriate and symmetric repositioning of the malar fat pads.

5.**Minimal Access Cranial Suspension (MACS) lift:**As an alternative to aggressive elevation and suspension, subdermal elevation can be performed, and the soft tissue can be elevated with purse-string sutures.

- A thin, vertical loop of 0 polydioxanone suture suspends the SMAS overlying the parotid and the superior aspect of the platysma muscle to the fascia of the temporalis muscle.

- A broad, oblique loop suspends the SMAS above the jowl to the fascia of the temporalis muscle in order to improve mandibular definition.

- The malar loop suspends the malar fat pad to the deep temporal fascia just lateral to the orbit, effacing the MLF.

**Hemostasis:**This is performed in a meticulous fashion with bipolar cautery. Aggressive cautery can cause facial nerve injury, alopecia, and skin burns, while inadequate control of bleeding vessels may result in hematoma and flap necrosis.

**Flap trimming and closure:**The skin flap is redraped and secured at 2 to 4 points along the incision using staples or interrupted sutures. Excess skin is then removed, and skin edges closed, taking care not to excise too much skin, which can lead to winging of the tragus, a pixie ear deformity, or scar widening.

- Suture use is based on surgeon preference. Deep dermal sutures are optional. In general, finer sutures (e.g., 6-0) are used to close pre- and post-auricular skin, and the occipital hairline can be closed with skin staples or resorbable sutures.

- Care is taken not to disturb the natural hairline contour.

- Excessive tension on the closure at the inferior border of the lobule can cause a pixie ear deformity.

**Platysmaplasty:**This may be performed before or after the facial elevation.

- The previous submental liposuction incision is extended to 2 to 4 cm, and a supraplatysmal flap is raised. The medial borders are identified if the platysma is deficient in the midline. Excess fat is then sharply removed, and the platysmal bellies are sutured together in the midline down past the level of the hyoid bone; some surgeons will also divide the platysma transversely at the level of the hyoid to improve the acuity of the cervicomental angle with or without suspension of the cut platysma to the hyoid (see images). Excess skin can be removed prior to closure, as is performed in the facial rhytidectomy portion. If the anterior bellies of the digastric muscles are prominently visible through the skin, they may be debulked, likewise with the submandibular glands, which are often not apparent until the jowls have been effaced.

**Dressing**: Antibiotic ointment is applied to the incisions, and a compressive dressing is placed to help prevent hematoma formation.

**Postoperative care**: The patient is seen on postoperative day 1 to remove the dressing and drains, then on day 7 to remove sutures and staples. Cold packs and pain medications are suggested for comfort. Antibiotics beyond the first 24 hours postoperatively are used at the surgeon's discretion. Photographs are taken after three months of healing. The patient should avoid any heavy lifting or strenuous exercise and sleep with the head of the bed elevated. No nose-blowing is permitted.