The function of the gallbladder is to store and concentrate bile, which is released into the duodenum during digestion. Bile is an alkaline fluid continuously produced by the liver whose primary function is to aid in digestion and absorption of lipids, as they are not soluble in water. It is composed of cholesterol, bilirubin, water, bile salts, phospholipids, and ions. The cholesterol excreted into bile eliminates most of the cholesterol in the body.

Specialized enteroendocrine cells called I-cells are located in the duodenum and jejunum. When these cells are stimulated by fatty acids and amino acids released from the stomach, a peptide hormone called cholecystokinin (CCK) is released. CCK has two main functions pertaining to the gallbladder. Its first function is to stimulate the smooth muscle of the gallbladder to contract and release bile into the biliary tree. The second function of CCK is to simultaneously signal the muscular sphincter of Oddi to relax. After leaving the gallbladder, bile flows down the common bile ducts into a confluence with the main pancreatic duct called the ampulla of Vater. From there, it travels through an opening called the major duodenal papilla into the second portion of the duodenum. The flow through the papilla is controlled by the opening and closing of the sphincter of Oddi. When not stimulated by CCK, the gallbladder relaxes and fills with bile. Outside of the gallbladder, CCK stimulates pancreatic secretions necessary for digestion and delays further emptying of the stomach. Release of CCK is inhibited by the hormone somatostatin which functions to turn off digestion.

Bile acids are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol precursors. The rate-limiting step of bile acid production is catalyzed by cholesterol 7α—hydroxylase. The bile acids are conjugated to the amino acids glycine and taurine and become soluble bile salts. These bile salts are important in the process of emulsifying lipids in the intestine. As the lipids are metabolized into free fatty acids and monoglycerides in the digestive tract, they are then packaged into micelles made up of bile salts that act as surfactants. Bile salts are able to do this because of their amphipathic nature. Their hydrophilic portions interact with water making them soluble, while their hydrophobic portions keep lipids contained in the center. The hydrophilic portions are also negatively charged, which repels them from other bile salts and keeps the lipids small and easy to digest. Cholesterol and phospholipids are also contained in the structure of the micelles. The bile salts are reabsorbed in the distal ileum of the small intestine and recycled back to the liver in a pathway called the enterohepatic circulation.

Bilirubin is a yellow pigment that is produced as a breakdown product of heme contained in red blood cells. This compound is initially unconjugated and insoluble in water. The unconjugated bilirubin, also called indirect bilirubin, is taken up by the liver and conjugated with glucuronate via the enzyme UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. The then conjugated bilirubin, also known as direct bilirubin, is then excreted into the bile in a soluble form. The bilirubin contained in bile will eventually travel through the gastrointestinal system and give urine its yellow color and stool its brown color via the breakdown products urobilin and stercobilin, respectively. If bile is unable to enter the duodenum, the buildup of bilirubin leads to jaundice, which is the yellowing of the skin, eyes, and mucus membranes, as well as acholic (pale) stools.