Holding the scalpel with a steady grip, an incision is made directly over the center of the abscess until pus is expressed. The incision should be made parallel to skin tension lines in order to prevent scar tissue formation. A curved hemostat can then be used for blunt dissection to further disrupt loculations within the infected cavity. Manual expression can be used to facilitate drainage as well. After the abscess is drained, the wound should be copiously irrigated with sterile normal saline solution. Wound packing is not recommended for abscesses that are 5 cm or less in diameter, as it has not been shown to affect outcomes and may contribute to increased pain.

The next step is to cover the site with sterile dressing and tape. A follow-up visit is advised 2 to 3 days after the procedure for removal of the packing. Wounds are then left to close by secondary intention.

An alternative to I&D is needle aspiration, though this is much less commonly used, given that it is both more invasive and less effective than I&D. In a randomized clinical control trial comparing outcomes with I&D to ultrasound-guided needle aspiration, the overall success of producing purulent drainage with needle aspiration was 26% compared to an 80% success rate in patients who underwent I&D.

Another alternative to conventional incision and drainage is the loop drainage technique, which may reduce pain and scarring at the site of infection. Studies suggest that loop drainage is associated with a lower failure rate than conventional therapy, although it is not yet a widely used procedure.