The presentation of MM is quite variable. It is typically more subacute and insidious in onset but certainly can present with severe symptoms. With that said, it is often seen in an older adult with some variation of constitutional symptoms or CRAB (hypercalcemia, renal dysfunction, anemia, and/or bone pain with lytic lesions). In one retrospective single-institution study, it was found that in newly diagnosed MM, the following symptoms were most:  anemia (73%), bone pain (58%), elevated creatinine (48%), fatigue (32%), hypercalcemia (28%) and weight loss (24%).

More specifically, hypercalcemia caused by bone demineralization can result in increased thirst and urination, bone pain, abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting, and/or altered mental status. Renal failure resulting from light chain case nephropathy and/or hypercalcemia can lead to edema, acidosis, and electrolyte disturbances. Anemia develops likely secondary to bone marrow replacement, or decreased erythropoietin levels can result in fatigue, pallor, palpitation, and worsening previous heart failure or angina. Bone pain resulting from the osteolytic lesions often results in pathologic fractures and vertebral collapse, reducing height, spinal cord compression, radicular pain, or kyphosis.

Although rare, peripheral neuropathy and carpal tunnel syndrome may be present. If identified, further workup should be undertaken as this is typically more related to an underlying component of amyloidosis. Also uncommon, hyperviscosity symptoms may be present, including bleeding, confusion, neurologic symptoms, vision changes, or heart failure. Despite being rare, it is crucial to identify these findings as it is a medical emergency. Finally, MM patients seem to be more prone to infections, mostly pneumonia, and pyelonephritis, so assessing for recurrent illness is important.