# Continuing Education Activity

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the most common types of congenital heart defects, occurring in about 25% of children. An atrial septal defect occurs when there is a failure to close the communication between the right and left atria. It encompasses defects involving both the true septal membrane and other defects that allow for communication between both atria. There are five types of atrial septal defects ranging from most frequent to least: patent foramen ovale, ostium secundum defect, ostium primum defect, sinus venosus defect, and coronary sinus defect. Small atrial septal defects usually spontaneously close in childhood. Large defects that do not close spontaneously may require percutaneous or surgical intervention to prevent further complications such as stroke, dysrhythmias, and pulmonary hypertension. This activity describes the evaluation, diagnosis, and management of atrial septal defect and highlights the role of team-based interprofessional care for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of atrial septal defect.
- Outline the presentation of a patient with atrial septal defect.
- Describe the treatment and management options available for atrial septal defect.
- Explain the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication regarding the management of patients with atrial septal defect.

# Introduction

Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the most common types of congenital heart defects, occurring in about 25% of children.

# Etiology

Though atrial septal defects occur as singular defects, ASDs are associated with Mendelian inheritance, aneuploidy, transcription errors, mutations, and maternal exposures. Atrial septal defects are noted in patients with Down syndrome, Treacher-Collins syndrome, Thrombocytopenia-absent radii syndrome, Turner syndrome, and Noonan syndrome; these syndromes occur as a result of Mendelian inheritance. Maternal exposure to rubella and drugs, such as cocaine and alcohol can also predispose the unborn fetus to develop an ASD. Additionally, ASDs have been associated with familial genetic disorders and conduction defects. Transcription factors important during the atrial septation include GATA4, NKzX2-5, and TBX5. Holt-Oram syndrome ("heart-hand" syndrome) commonly characterized by a congenital heart defect (ASD in 58% of patients or VSD in 28% of patients), dysrhythmias and upper limb malformations usually involving the hands are associated with TBX5 mutations.NKX2-5 gene have been associated with congenital heart disease (ASD and Tetralogy of Fallot), AV blocks, and juvenile sudden cardiac death.

Atrial septal defects occur with other congenital heart defects (i.e., ventricular septal defects). In some patients with congenital heart disease, communication between the left and right heart circulations is crucial for survival. Patients with tricuspid atresia, transposition of the great vessels, variants of hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pulmonic/ tricuspid atresia with hypoplastic right heart, transposition of the great vessels, and total anomalous pulmonary venous return require the alternate blood flow that an ASD provides to survive the primary lesion until a more definitive solution is provided.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of congenital heart disease and ASDs has increased over the past 50 years.  In the 1930s congenital heart disease was diagnosed in less than 1 per 1000 live births.  In recent years, congenital heart disease is diagnosed in 9 per 1000 live births. Atrial septal defects were identified between 1945 and 1949 in less than 0.5 live births per 1000.  More recent epidemiologic data suggest that ASDs occur in 1.6 per 1000 live births.

# Pathophysiology

Atrial septation begins during the fourth week of gestation.

As the patent foramen ovale is a subclass of the ostium secundum defect, it is not a defect of the "true septum." The patent foramen ovale is the most common septal anomaly and occurs when ends the septum primum, and the septum secundum do not approximate and close the foramen ovale after the child breathes its first breath. The 4 types of atrial septal defects are

- Ostium secundum defect: This defect occurs when there is increased reabsorption of the septum primum in the atrium's roof, or the septum secundum does not occlude the ostium secundum. Ostium secundum defects are associated with pediatric syndromes such as Noonan, Treacher-Collins, and thrombocytopenia-absent radii syndrome.

- Ostium primum defect: The third most common defect of the atrial septum that occurs due to the failure of the septum primum to fuse with the endocardial cushions. Ostium primum defects result in atrioventricular communications and are best considered among the spectrum of atrioventricular septal defects.

- Sinus venosus defect: Superior and inferior defects occur, and neither involves the true membranous septum.

- Superior defect: This occurs when the orifice of the superior vena cava overrides the atrial septum above the oval fossa (the remnant of the foreman ovale) and drains both the left and right atria. The superior sinus venosus defect and a partial anomalous connection of the right superior pulmonary vein to the superior vena cava often occur together.
- Inferior defect: This occurs when the orifice of the inferior vena cava overrides both atria. The inferior sinus venosus defect and an anomalous connection of the right inferior pulmonary vein to the inferior vena cava can occur together.

- Coronary sinus defect: The coronary sinus is a vessel that runs along the groove between the left atrium and left ventricle and collects veins that represent the venous return of the heart muscle.  It normally drains into the floor of the right atrium above the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. A defect or hole in the common wall between the left atrium and the coronary sinus (called "unroofing" of the coronary sinus) creates a communication between the right and left atria.

Normally, the pressure in the right atrium is significantly lower than the left atrium; therefore, blood flows from the left atrium to the right atrium causing a left-to-right shunt. The size of the defect determines how significant the shunt is. Significant shunts have a ratio of pulmonary (Qp) to systemic flow (Qs) that is greater than 1.5:1 (Qp/Qs > 1.5).

# History and Physical

Atrial septal defects are frequently asymptomatic. The characteristic murmur is a soft, systolic ejection murmur over the pulmonic area (second intercostal space) combined with a wide, fixed splitting of S2.

Patients with smaller heart defects (less than 5 mm) might not develop any symptomology while patients with defects ranging between 5 to 10 mm will present in the fourth or fifth decade of life.

# Evaluation

Diagnostic imaging is important in determining the size of the defect and is crucial in determining treatment options. A transthoracic echocardiogram is the gold standard imaging modality. A transthoracic echocardiogram allows one to detect the size of the defect, understand the direction of blood flow, find associated abnormalities (involvement of the endocardial cushions and atrial-ventricular valves), examine the heart for structure and function, estimate pulmonary artery pressure, and estimate the pulmonary/systemic flow ratio (Qp/Qs).

Though echocardiography is the gold standard for evaluation of ASDs, other diagnostic modalities include cardiac CT and MRI. Both CT and MRI examine structures surrounding the heart and in the thoracic cavity. Chest x-ray findings are not as helpful diagnostically, though the chest x-ray assists providers to monitor clinical status by identifying cardiomegaly and pulmonary artery enlargement. Exercise testing can help determine the reversibility of shunt flow and the response of patients with pulmonary artery hypertension to activity.

# Treatment / Management

Patients with atrial septal defects less than 5 mm in size frequently experience spontaneous closure of the defect in the first year of life. Defects that are greater than 1cm will most likely require medical/surgical intervention to close the defect.

If an ASD requires closure, options include percutaneous and surgical intervention. Indications for treatment include stroke, a hemodynamically significant shunt greater than 1.5:1 and evidence of systemic oxygen desaturation.

In conclusion, atrial septal defects are common congenital heart defects and can range from clinically asymptomatic lesions to lesions that cause pulmonary hypertension, systemic cyanosis and vascular complications such as strokes. Most small defects will spontaneously close in the first year of life; however, large defects associated with significant systemic to pulmonary shunts and systemic oxygen desaturation require percutaneous of surgical intervention.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Atrioventricular septal defect

- Ventricular septal defect

- Cyanotic congenital heart disease (sinus venosus defects and coronary sinus defects)

- Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
- Pulmonary stenosis
- Truncus arteriosus
- Tricuspid atresia

# Complications

- Atrial dysrhythmias

- Pulmonary arterial hypertension

- Right-sided congestive heart failure

- Transient ischemic attack/stroke

- Eisenmenger syndrome

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Atrial septal defects are one of the most common types of congenital heart defects and are present in about 25% of live births.

- The most common type of ASD is an ostium secundum defect.

- The transcutaneous percutaneous approach to ASD closure is only indicated in patients with ostium secundum defects. Surgical intervention is required for the ostium primum, sinus venosus, and coronary sinus defects.

- Transcutaneous percutaneous closure of ASD is contraindicated in patients with increased pulmonary hypertension.

- Dysrhythmias occurring due to ASDs are treated with cardioversion followed by anticoagulation. If cardioversion is not successful, rate control with medications and anticoagulation are necessary.

- Eisenmenger syndrome is a late complication of ASD that occurs secondary to pulmonary hypertension.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Improving healthcare team outcomes in patients with atrial septal defects requires an interprofessional team with strong input from the patient's pediatrician, primary care physician and nurse practitioner. In most cases, ASD is first diagnosed by the primary provider and the patient referred to the cardiologist.

Adults and children with atrial septal defects require consistent follow up with cardiologists to monitor the heart structure, heart function, and the patient's hemodynamic status.

Asymptomatic patients should be followed by the clinicians and the patient educated that elective closure will reduce the risk of pulmonary hypertension.

When a patient requires intervention, cardiac interventionists and thoracic surgeons with experience caring for children and adults with congenital heart disease provide the best outcomes for patients with congenital heart disease.

Due to the challenges of the disease, and family concerns, it is important for the nurse to assist with family education. The family must be taught about the signs and symptoms of complications and when the patient should return for further evaluation. The nurse should assist in making sure the patient has regular follow-up appointments. In followup after the procedure, the nurse should monitor the patient for changes in vital signs and any development of a new murmur or insidious unexplained fever. Open communication between the interprofessional team is recommended to ensure the best outcomes with minimal complications.

**Outcomes**

If the ASD is closed, the outcomes are excellent; however, if the ASD is not treated, patients may develop arrhythmias and pulmonary hypertension with poor outcomes.