Research suggests the mechanism of action of viloxazine seems to be closely related to the reuptake inhibition of norepinephrine. However, viloxazine does not affect the release of norepinephrine. Studies have shown viloxazine can inhibit norepinephrine transport and increase norepinephrine levels in the amygdala, nucleus accumbens, and prefrontal cortex via reuptake inhibition. Viloxazine has also been shown to moderately increase dopamine levels in the prefrontal cortex and amygdala and very little in the nucleus accumbens. This appears to result from the norepinephrine transporter, which is also responsible for dopamine reuptake. Because viloxazine has very little effect on dopamine transmission in the nucleus accumbens, it may have a low potential for abuse compared to other drugs currently used to treat ADHD.

Increased dopamine activity in the D1 pathway in the nucleus accumbens has been linked to pathways related to addiction. Some early studies involving the self-administering of viloxazine to rhesus monkeys showed poor reinforcement and no physical drug dependence showing the addictive potential of the drug is low.

Early studies of viloxazine also suggest that it does not inhibit serotonin uptake in the brain and platelets. However, some other studies have shown increased serotonin release from rat neuronal slices after exposure to viloxazine.

Viloxazine did, however, increase the brain's sensitivity to serotonin resulting in 5-hydroxytryptophan, induced hind limb extensor reflex, and 5-hydroxytryptophan induced behavioral symptoms. These may be the results of increased serotonin receptor activation. Studies performed in vivo demonstrated that viloxazine could also boost serotonin levels in the amygdala, nucleus accumbens, and prefrontal cortex, respectively. Some other suggested mechanisms of viloxazine include weak antagonism at the 5HT7 receptor, 5HT2C receptors, and the 5HT2B receptor. Antagonism of the 5HT2B GABA interneurons removes inhibition of inhibitory neurons, ultimately leading to increased serotonin levels in the prefrontal cortex.

Finally, unlike other antidepressants, viloxazine has weak inhibition at H1 and H2 histamine receptors, M1-M4 muscarinic receptors, very little cholinergic activity, and weak inhibition of both MAO-A and B. The ability of viloxazine to increase serotonin levels in the brain may also contribute to its antidepressive effects. This may be why it was used as an antidepressant therapy in Europe in an immediate-release formulation during the early 1970s.