**Filler Selection**

The two main fillers used for non-surgical rhinoplasty are hyaluronic acid (HA) and calcium hydroxyapatite (CaHa), with HA being the more widely used. While several product variations exist for both HA and CaHa, choosing the correct filler depends on a variety of characteristics, three of which will be highlighted here, including the filler’s reversibility, duration, and stiffness. For a complete discussion of the types of filler available for injectable rhinoplasty, the reader can read the review article by Friedman and Wang.

Without a doubt, the safest fillers to use are those that are not only biodegradable but also reversible, such as HA fillers, which can easily and rapidly dissolve with hyaluronidase. Not only does this reversibility provide some level of increased safety given the potential for vascular occlusion events, but also reversible products can be dissolved if overfilling or misplaced injections occur.

The duration of the filler should also be a consideration when choosing a product. In general, HA fillers last for 6 to 12 months, while CaHa fillers last up to 12 to 18 months (with potentially longer duration after repeated treatments due to collagen synthesis). Nevertheless, it remains important to counsel patients that repeated injections will be required to maintain the effects of the non-surgical rhinoplasty, regardless of filler type.

Another filler characteristic to be considered includes the elastic coefficient, or G-prime, which represents a measure of the filler’s ability to resist flow (i.e., stiffness). Fillers with a high elasticity or G-prime, such as CaHa, are more resistant to deformation (i.e., remain more stable over time), tend to provide a more robust “filling” effect, and require less product to achieve a comparable result. On the downside, high G-prime fillers cause increased post-procedural edema and pain and may feel less “natural” than lower G-prime options, such as HA.

Permanent fillers (e.g., silicone and polymethylmethacrylate) are best avoided due to the risk of granulomas, uncorrectable irregularities, and irreversible complications (e.g., vascular injury).

In general, the ideal filler for non-surgical rhinoplasty would be one that is reversible, easy to inject, and provides long-lasting support to the nose. Additionally, many surgeons advocate for non-inflammatory fillers that cause minimal native tissue distortion and thus are easily removed during surgical rhinoplasty. For these reasons, approximately 80% of non-surgical rhinoplasty is performed with HA. Nevertheless, some authors still endorse CaHa as the filler of choice due to its longer duration, improved moldability, and increased stiffness.

**Cannula Versus Needle Injection Techniques**

Theoretically speaking, using a small blunt cannula (e.g., 27-gauge) to perform non-surgical rhinoplasty may decrease the risk of vascular occlusion; nevertheless, reports of tissue ischemia and blindness have been reported even with canula use. A technical advantage to using the cannula may be apparent when injecting large flat areas (e.g., for dorsal augmentation), which can help decrease local tissue trauma and increase efficiency by minimizing the number of injection points. Meticulous needle injection technique using a small caliber needle (e.g., 30-gauge), however, ensures pinpoint precision and accuracy.

NOTE: Regardless of the technique used (cannula versus needle), emphasis must be placed on proper injection techniques including injecting into an avascular sub-SMAS plane, routinely aspirating to assess for intravascular needle/cannula placement, injecting slowly, and placing small aliquots of filler (no more than 0.1 mL) at each site.

**Routine Materials**

Typical materials include disinfectant wipes (e.g., alcohol or chlorhexidine), topical anesthetic, a marking pen, gauze (for hemostasis), and a lubricant (for nasal molding).

**Emergency Kit**

Every clinician performing nonsurgical rhinoplasty with fillers should have a readily available emergency kit for vascular occlusion events containing: 2% nitroglycerin paste, sublingual nitroglycerin 0.6 mg, aspirin 325 mg, warm compresses, hyaluronidase, topical timolol 0.5%, systemic corticosteroids, and/or mannitol, and/or acetazolamide 500 mg.