# Continuing Education Activity

First-trimester ultrasonography is a commonly performed exam by an obstetrician or healthcare provider within the first 14 weeks post-conception. It may be utilized as a part of the standard evaluation during pregnancy or to elucidate other concerning signs and symptoms (e.g., vaginal bleeding, the suspected passage of fetal tissue, etc.). This activity outlines the assessment protocols and interpretation of ultrasonography and highlights the role of obstetrics and gynecology in evaluating and treating those who are within the 1st trimester of pregnancy.

**Objectives:**
- Review the sonographic signs of pregnancy.
- Describe the primary methods of sonographic dating during pregnancy. 
- Define the criteria used to determine viable versus non-viable pregnancy in the first trimester.
- Summarize commonly encountered abnormalities identified during 1st-trimester sonography.

# Introduction

Ultrasonography is a commonly used tool to evaluate the status of pregnancy. Complications arising from pregnancy are frequently-encountered complaints in emergency departments (EDs) and prenatal clinics. Though home pregnancy tests are increasingly popular, some women may discover they are pregnant for the first time in the outpatient setting. In the United States, approximately one-third of pregnant patients utilize the ED at least once during their pregnancy.

Pregnant women will typically have at least one ultrasound during their pregnancies. If only one ultrasound can be performed during pregnancy, it should be performed in the mid-second trimester (18 to 22 weeks) to detect fetal anomalies and growth abnormalities.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The uterus is bordered by the bladder anteriorly and the rectum posteriorly. In most women, the uterus is anteverted, which indicates that the uterus is superior/posterior to the bladder and anterior to the rectum, with the uterine fundus more anteriorly oriented. Women may also have anteflexed, retroverted, retroflexed uterine orientations.

The uterus has a hyperechoic stripe in the center of the fundus and communicates with the cervix. Distal to the cervix is the vaginal canal, which appears as a hyperechoic line when viewed with a transabdominal transducer.

In the adnexa to either side of the uterus, the right and left ovaries classically lie between the lateral uterine wall and the internal iliac vessels, a relationship more likely altered in multiparous women. The adnexa also includes the fallopian tubes connecting the uterus and ovaries, both of which should be carefully evaluated as they are the most likely locations of ectopic pregnancies.

The first sign of intrauterine pregnancy is the gestational sac, an anechoic structure that appears between the fourth and fifth gestational weeks but is small at 2 or 3 mm in the greatest dimension.

A fetal pole can be visualized in the sixth gestational week and appears as a hypoechoic structure immediately adjacent to the yolk sac.

# Indications

First-trimester ultrasonography may be performed for a variety of reasons. Typical indications include pelvic pain, suspected ectopic pregnancy, suspected twin pregnancy, vaginal bleeding, suspected trophoblastic disease, assessment for fetal growth abnormalities, measurement of nuchal translucency, evaluation of pelvic masses or uterine abnormalities, and as an adjunct to chorionic villus sampling.

Vaginal bleeding is a common complaint during early pregnancy, affecting approximately 25% of patients, and maybe traumatic or non-traumatic in etiology.

First-trimester ultrasonography may also be used to monitor the developing fetus. In certain health systems, screening for aneuploidy is performed using evaluations of nuchal translucency between 11+0 and 13+6 weeks gestation.

# Contraindications

There are no absolute contraindications to either transabdominal or transvaginal ultrasound in the 1st trimester, except for patient refusal. That said, performing providers should counsel patients on the limitations of a first-trimester ultrasound before conducting one.

# Equipment

When conducting a first-trimester ultrasound assessment, sonographers need a minimum of a two-dimensional ultrasound with the capability of adjustable power output, freeze, zoom, electronic calipers, and the ability to either store or print images to be saved.

If the transabdominal ultrasound is unsuccessful or further clarification of structures is needed, transvaginal ultrasound using an endocavitary transducer should be performed with a decompressed bladder.  Endocavitary transducers should be covered in a clean sheath; ultrasound gel inside is either preloaded or manually loaded, and lubricating jelly is used exteriorly.  Do not use ultrasound gel on the probe cover's exterior as it irritates mucous membranes. Following endocavitary examination, the used transducer must undergo high-level disinfection in accordance with local infection control, high-level disinfection standards. Cleaning wipes are insufficient for adequate disinfection.

# Personnel

Physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, ultrasound technicians, and other providers trained in diagnostic obstetric ultrasonography may perform this exam.

# Preparation

For the transabdominal ultrasound examination, place the patient in a position of comfort, supine, with the lower abdominal region exposed. The patient should have a full bladder for the transabdominal examination to maximize the visibility of the uterus and structures deep into the bladder. Tuck a towel into the waistband, and apply warmed ultrasound gel, if available, inferior to the umbilicus and superior to the pubic bone.

For a transvaginal ultrasound, ask the patient to empty her bladder before the start of the exam. An empty bladder allows the endocavitary probe to be as close as possible to the pelvic structures being evaluated, thus improving resolution and ease of evaluation. Using a bed with stirrups is ideal for patient positioning in the dorsal lithotomy position for ease of transducer movement. However, elevating the pelvis with towels or a bedpan may be adequate for examination and patient comfort. Endovaginal assessments require endocavitary transducer covers, either preloaded with gel or manually loaded with gel. Water-soluble lubricant should be used on the exterior of the transducer cover. As this is an invasive evaluation, a chaperone should be present for the duration of the examination.

# Technique or Treatment

To perform the transabdominal ultrasound, utilize the curvilinear probe and select the "obstetrics" setting. The obstetrics setting will load any requisite calculation and labeling packages needed to perform the complete evaluation. With the indicator oriented to the patient's head (midsaggital orientation), the transducer is superior to the pubic symphysis.  The bladder is usually easily visualized when distended, filled with anechoic fluid in a triangular shape. Between the bladder and rectum lies the uterus with its hyperechoic endometrial stripe. Identify the uterine fundus and trace the hyperechoic endometrial stripe caudally to the cervix. Next, identify the hyperechoic vaginal stripe caudal to the cervix. Make note if the cervical os is open or closed and if any products of conception/tissue are lodged in the cervical canal  Slide and fan the transducer completely through the uterus in the sagittal plane, moving from left to right or vice versa. Make a note of the borders of the uterus.

Rotate the transducer into the transverse plane to evaluate the pelvic structures in the short axis. With the probe marker to the patient's right slide, fan the probe superiorly and inferiorly, following the uterine fundus to the vaginal stripe behind the now square-shaped bladder. The transverse orientation is easiest to identify the ovaries due to the ease of finding the internal iliac vessels. Ovaries often lie between the internal iliac vessels and the uterus's lateral wall and can be found by fanning or sliding to the left and right of the uterus. Ovaries are hypoechoic, ovoid structures commonly seen with peripheral hypoechoic follicles.

A high-frequency linear probe may sometimes be used to evaluate the fetus in early pregnancy, as sometimes increased resolution is necessary for accurate evaluation.  The maximum depth of the linear transducer is approximately 6cm, so patients must have a body habitus conducive to utilizing that transducer to be effective. An endovaginal ultrasound should be performed if a gestational sac cannot be adequately visualized by transabdominal exam.

As opposed to the transabdominal ultrasound, transvaginal ultrasound should be performed with an empty bladder.  To complete the transvaginal ultrasound, utilize an endocavitary transducer with the "obstetrics" setting selected.  Cover the transducer with a clean probe cover, ensuring the sheath is loaded with ultrasound gel before application.  Use lubricating jelly only on the probe sheath's exterior as ultrasound gel irritates mucous membranes.  With the indicator marker pointed to the ceiling, insert the probe into the vaginal canal until the decompressed bladder comes into view.  As the endocavitary probe is inserted slightly farther, the bladder will disappear as the uterus appears. Similar to the transabdominal assessment, fan through the complete uterus in the sagittal plane. Ensure the cul-de-sac is visualized. Rotate the transducer 90 degrees to the coronal plane so that the indicator orients to the patient's right. Fan the transducer entirely through the uterus in the coronal plane. Evaluate the rectouterine pouch as well as both adnexa. The ovaries are best visualized during an endovaginal examination, typically located between the lateral uterine wall and the internal iliac vessels.  Slight compression to either adnexa is often helpful in discerning ovarian tissue from surrounding structures.

If and when a gestational sac is visualized with or without an embryo or fetus, the sonographer must confirm it is within the uterus itself, as some ectopic pregnancies may lie adjacent to the uterus.

The mean sac diameter (MSD) is the earliest method used to evaluate early pregnancy and requires using the sum of the length of the gestational sac (GS) + width of GS + depth of GS divided by 3. The first two measurements are taken in either the long or short axis and then the third measurement in the alternative axis. When measuring any cystic structure, such as a gestational sac, ensure that measurements capture all three dimensions, cranial-caudal, anterior-posterior, and right-left.  A common mistake occurs by measuring the anterior-posterior distance (transabdominal) or cranial-caudal distance (transvaginal) twice. The sonographer can avoid this mistake by utilizing the "plus and minus sign" strategy when measuring the gestational sac in the two planes; use a "plus sign" to measure in the first plane and a "minus sign" only in the second.

If a fetal pole (embryo less than ten weeks) or fetus (greater than ten weeks) is visible, further gestational age estimations are obtained by either crown-rump length or biparietal diameter.  In the first trimester, crown-rump length is the most accurate metric to determine gestational age.

Biparietal diameter may also be performed with similar accuracy to the crown-rump length between 12+0 and 13+6 weeks.

Utilize either a 2-dimensional cine clip or M-mode to document fetal heart rate.

# Complications

Discomfort, pelvic pain, vaginal bleeding, and infection are possible complications associated with first-trimester ultrasonography.

# Clinical Significance

The most common reasons to perform first-trimester ultrasounds are establishing pregnancy location, viability, and accurate gestational age. An intrauterine gestational sac is indicative of an intrauterine pregnancy. Still, the presence of fluid alone in the uterus can be misleading if other structures, such as the yolk sac or fetal pole, are not visible.

Ectopic pregnancies are responsible for 6% of maternal deaths and must be ruled out with early pregnancy bleeding, pain, or signs of nontraumatic shock.

In terms of pregnancy ultrasound, viability refers to an active embryo/fetus with a heartbeat at the time of the assessment.

Pregnancy failure is suggested when the yolk sac diameter is greater than 7 mm, when the amnion is seen next to the yolk sac without an embryo and when the gestational sac is disproportionally small compared to the embryo (<5 mm difference).

Accurate gestational age is determined by early pregnancy ultrasound, which can reduce post-term pregnancy and induction rates.

Nuchal translucency is being evaluated as an additional tool to aid in the early discovery of fetal aneuploidy and other fetal abnormalities.

Trophoblastic disease, also known as a molar pregnancy, is an uncommon but significant finding characterized by an intrauterine, echogenic mass with numerous internal cysts.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Ultrasound technicians, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and physicians must coordinate care for pregnant patients. Understanding the life-threatening causes of maternal death in the first trimester is essential for all clinicians as this achieves the best possible outcome for pregnant women. With the advent of home-pregnancy tests, pregnant women often know their pregnancy status before seeking care for a pregnancy-related complaint. Unfortunately, a positive pregnancy test may be associated with a nonviable pregnancy, as well as a life-threatening condition.

A pregnant female who presents to the emergency department due to syncope, abdominal/pelvic pain, or any other concerning symptom will first be evaluated by the triage nurse and have their vitals taken. If hypotension is noted, this information, in addition to the positive pregnancy result, will be relayed to the on-site provider, which may be composed of a nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or emergency medicine physician. Prompt recognition by the provider that this may be a life-threatening cause is vital at this time. Point-of-care ultrasound may be performed at the bedside, potentially including a FAST exam, a transabdominal ultrasound, and even a transvaginal ultrasound. If findings concerning an ectopic pregnancy are noted, an obstetrician should be immediately consulted to consider prompt surgical management.