The gold standard of diagnosis of C. sinensis is the detection of eggs in the stool which also provides insight into the intensity of infection.

Standard diagnostic tests include a direct fecal smear via the Kato-Katz method, which is a method of preparing stool samples where stool is pressed through a mesh, and the remaining sample is a piece of cellophane soaked in glycerol which clears the stool from the eggs. The sensitivity of the test correlates with the intensity of infection, and the sensitivity of the test in low-intensity infections can be increased with repetitive assessments of stool samples. As differentiation between Clonorchis sinensis and Opisthorchis viverrine eggs is difficult (they appear morphologically similar), other factors like geographic exposure have to be considered.

Alternatively, the formalin-ether centrifuge sedimentation method concentrates the eggs in the feces and has better sensitivity than the Kato-Katz method, especially in suspected low-intensity cases.C. sinensis. Specific antigens used in ELISA include ESPs and crude extract antigens, with the caveat that these assays can potentially cross-react with infections caused by other trematodes.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is also frequently used and has high sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing C. sinensis, but it might not be readily available. Newer diagnostic tools include loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), which targets C. sinensis DNA and is considered optimal for point of care diagnosis.C. sinensis is still a major issue due to the lack of diagnostic tools and training within the affected areas.

Imaging modalities like ultrasound, CT, and MRI are useful to determine the location, progression, and extent of the infection. On ultrasound, diffuse dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts is commonly seen in patients infected with Clonorchis sinensis, but the finding by itself is too unspecific for diagnostic purposes and is significantly operator dependent.