Basic components include a flow generator providing gas flow rates up to 60 liters per minute, an air-oxygen blender that achieves escalation of FIO2 from 21% to 100% irrespective of flow rates, and a humidifier that saturates the gas mixture at a temperature of 31 to 37 C. To minimize condensation, the heated humidified gas is delivered via heated tubings through a wide-bore nasal prong.

Currently, five physiologic mechanisms are believed to be responsible for the efficacy of high-flow nasal cannula. These include:

- Physiological dead space washout of waste gasses including carbon dioxide (CO2)

- Decreased respiratory rate

- Positive end-expiratory pressure

- Increased tidal volume

- Increased end-expiratory volume

Physiological dead space accounts for approximately one-third of the tidal volume of breathing. This allows for the accumulation of CO2 and a decrease in available oxygen (O2) for diffusion when ventilation is not effective in cycling inspired air with retained air within dead spaces. The high flow rates involved in high-flow nasal cannula delivers volumes of air over what a patient ventilates physiologically, which increases ventilation and allows for displacement of excess CO2 with excess O2. This allows for an increased PAO2 creating a greater oxygen diffusion gradient and potentially improving patient oxygenation.

A high-flow nasal cannula accomplishes a reduction of nasopharyngeal airway resistance, leading to improved ventilation and oxygenation through the application of a positive pressure environment.  The resistance of an airway follows the Hagen–Poiseuille law and is calculated as:

- R = 8nl / 3.14 r4

Where l equals the length of the airway, n equals the dynamic viscosity of air, and r equals the radius of the airway. Physiologically, the nasopharynx is a dynamic environment that allows for expansion and constriction of the airway radius. By creating a positive pressure environment, high-flow nasal cannula presses from the interior of the nasopharynx outwards. This dilates the radius of the nasopharyngeal airways and dramatically reduces the resistance to airway flow, thus increasing ventilation and oxygenation potential.

Several physiologic studies showed improvement in respiratory mechanics secondary to the above-stated hypothesis by decreasing respiratory rate and increasing tidal volume.

In addition to providing positive pressure support to the nasopharynx, a high-flow nasal cannula creates a positive end-expiratory pressure to the lower airways. This effect acts similarly to continuous positive airway pressure support in that it applies a splinting force to keep alveolar airways from collapsing under increased surface tensile stresses during exhalation. Additionally, this allows for improved alveolar recruitment, increasing the effective available surface area within the lungs for gaseous diffusion both to and from the blood. However, it is important to note that patients keep their mouths closed to gain the maximum benefit of PEEP from high-flow nasal cannula therapy. The approximate magnitude of PEEP generated with a closed mouth is about 1 cm of water pressure for 10 liters flow. There is a resultant increase in end-expiratory volume with an increase in PEEP.

Humidification and warming of inspired air are essential in creating an effective oxygenation system. Primarily, this is due to the human factor of comfort. Traditional low-flow nasal cannula blows cool, dry air directly into the nasal passages. This leads to drying of the mucosa, irritation, epistaxis, and cracking of the tissue barriers, which is uncomfortable and leads to poor compliance to therapy. Many high-flow nasal cannula systems are designed with inline warming and humidification systems that provide appropriately humidified and body temperature air that is non-irritating to the mucosa, increasing patient comfort (31 to 37  C). Increased comfort leads to improved compliance and, therefore, better outcomes of therapy.