The diagnosis of asbestosis is largely clinical. First, the history of asbestos exposure is central to the diagnosis. The overall clinical picture is characterized by progressive restrictive pulmonary disease with interstitial fibrosis on radiography. The pulmonary function test reveals characteristic restrictive disease.

**Pulmonary Function Tests**

- **Spirometry and Lung Volum:**This includes forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1), total lung capacity (TLC), functional residual capacity, and residual volume. Like any other restrictive lung disease, all earlier mentioned lung volumes are reduced. FEV1/FVC ratio is either normal or increased.

- **Diffusing Capacity:**Total carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) reduction is a common but nonspecific finding. Reduced total carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) is manifested earlier.

**Arterial Blood Gas**

Arterial oxygen tension (pao2) may be normal or may reveal hypoxia and respiratory alkalosis.

**Chest Radiograph and HRCT Chest**

Chest radiograph shows diffuse reticulonodular infiltrates at the lung bases causing shaggy heart borders. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) is often diagnostic of asbestosis.

**Lung Biopsy**

It shows interstitial fibrosis with characteristically peribronchial fibrosis. The distribution of fibrosis in asbestosis is from the center to the periphery, i.e., centrifugally. The microscopic view of asbestosis shows distinct asbestos bodies coated with iron-containing proteinaceous material and diffuse pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. Still, in contrast, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) displays patchy interstitial fibrosis. The profuse proliferation of fibroblasts, i.e., fibroblastic foci and subsistence of early and late proliferative lesions (temporal heterogeneity), is well defined in IPF and rare or absent in asbestosis.

**Bronchoscopy/VAT**

A lung biopsy can be achieved by endobronchial, transbronchial, and video-assisted thoracoscopic (VAT) approaches. The endobronchial biopsy is done with ultrasound-guided bronchoscopy to visualize the airway and adjacent structures. This technique has been routinely used in many centers due to its high diagnostic value and low risk. Endoscopically-guided forceps do transbronchial lung biopsy. Conventional transbronchial biopsy has a higher risk of complications and bleeding. The modern technique is the minimally invasive video-assisted thoracoscopic (VAT) guided biopsy. VAT has fewer complications, is more sensitive, specific, and has more diagnostic yield than transbronchial biopsy. So, VAT is preferred over transbronchial lung biopsy, though VAT has some discrepancies like cost and expertise requirement.

Bronchoalveolar lavage has a limited role. Samples can be taken from suspected patients for cellular analysis of asbestos bodies count, inflammatory cells like macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, and dust particles. Asbestos body formation is more common in amphibole fibers, while chrysotile fibers have a shorter half-life and have fewer chances of asbestos body formation. So the absence of asbestos bodies in chrysotile asbestosis leads to a false-negative result.

**Biochemistry**

Lab analysis shows elevated C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibodies.