There are 2 ovaries, each 2 to 3 cm in size, and they lie on the posterior pelvic wall, lateral to the uterus. They are supported by suspensory ligaments, the tuboovarian ligament, and the broad ligament. Along with the production of oocytes, ovaries also produce sex steroid hormones (estrogen and progesterone) in response to pituitary gonadotrophins (LH and FSH).

**Oogenesis**

Oogenesis is the formation of oogonium. Oogenesis begins in intrauterine life, and oogonia are converted into the primary oocyte. The primary oocyte then undergoes meiosis-I and forms the secondary oocyte and a first polar body. Meiosis-I gets arrested in the diplotene stage of prophase at puberty. The outer part where primary oocyte and follicles are present is called the cortex, and the inner part is called the medulla. It contains the blood vessels and stromal cells (known as theca cells). Follicular cells present in the cortex are known as granulosa cells. These granulosa cells surround the primary oocyte.

These theca cells also surround the primary oocyte. The primary oocyte, along with surrounding granulosa cells and theca cells, is known as the primordial follicle. The maximum number of follicles are present at the fifth month of intrauterine life. At birth, there are about 1 to 2 million follicles. At puberty, follicles decrease to 4 to 5 lakh. Follicles undergo apoptosis even before the HPO axis is functional.

HPO axis becomes functional only at puberty. Therefore, the initial recruitment of follicles is hormone-independent.

**Role of FSH**

At puberty, the HPO axis of a female becomes functional. GnRH acts on the anterior pituitary, and FSH is released. FSH prevents follicles from undergoing atresia and apoptosis. FSH stimulates follicle growth.

FSH acts on granulosa cells of follicles, which in turn release estrogen and inhibin B. Estrogen has three main functions:

- Negative feedback on FSH

- Positive feedback on LH

- The proliferation of the endometrium of the uterus.

Estrogen decreases the level of FSH; thus, all follicles stimulated by FSH undergo apoptosis under the influence of estrogen except one, which is called the dominant follicle. It is a follicle that has the maximum number of FSH receptors. Therefore, estrogen has positive feedback on the levels of LH. This sudden increase in the level of LH hormone due to estrogen is known as LH surge. Estrogen levels must reach the level of 200 picograms and remain for at least 48 hours for LH surge to occur. Due to LH surge, meiosis-I, which was arrested till now, gets resumed. Therefore, Meiosis-I is hormone-dependent. The conversion of the primary oocyte to secondary oocyte is known as ovulation. The remaining cells of the follicle get converted into the corpus luteum.

**Role of LH**

Receptors for LH hormone are present on the theca cells. LH acts on theca cells to produce androgens. These androgens are converted into estrogen under the effect of the aromatase enzyme. This conversion occurs in granulosa cells and adipose tissues as well. At the time of LH surge, LH acts on granulosa cells, causing luteinization of cells and release of progesterone in small quantities even before ovulation. Progesterone appears early in the menstrual cycle (at LH surge). In low concentrations, progesterone has a positive feedback effect on LH and FSH levels. Thus, levels of LH and FSH rise before ovulation. Ovarian steroidogenesis is explained by two cell two gonadotropin theory:

Theca Cell

Granulosa Cell

Aromatase enzyme absent

Aromatase enzyme present

CYP 17 present

CYP 17 absent

Receptors for LH are present

Receptors for FSH are present

**Follicular/ Proliferative Phase of the Menstrual Cycle**

The ovarian follicular cycle is initiated by the FSH hormone. FSH acts on the granulosa cells to release estrogen. Estrogen decreases the level of FSH by negative feedback. Estrogen increases the level of LH by positive feedback. Estrogen causes the proliferation of the endometrium. Ovulation occurs on day 14, after the LH surge. Due to the low level of FSH under the negative feedback of estrogen, all the follicles undergo atresia except one, which is called the dominant follicle. This mature follicle continues to grow in size till it reaches the size of 18 to 20 mm for ovulation to occur. LH surge begins around 32 to 36 hours before ovulation; however, the peak of LH surge is around 10 to 12 hours before ovulation. LH surge is initiated by estrogen.

The time interval from the peak of estrogen to the peak of LH hormone is around 14 to 24 hours, and from estrogen peak to ovulation is 24 to 36 hours. LH surge is maintained by both estrogen and progesterone. LH and FSH surges occur before ovulation; however, ovulation occurs only due to LH surge. Meiosis-I, which was arrested, is resumed due to LH surge. This phase of the female cycle is the follicular phase because major changes occur in the follicle. The main hormone of this phase is estrogen, which leads to the proliferation of the endometrium. Therefore this phase is also known as the proliferative phase.

**Ovulation**

Some granulosa cells also surround the primary oocyte, which is now known as cumulus oophorus. LH comes in antral fluid during mid-cycle after LH surge. If LH is present in the antral cavity from early in the cycle, it will lead to atresia of the follicle. Normally, LH surge causes ovulation, i.e., conversion of the primary oocyte to the secondary oocyte. The follicle left after the ovulation is called the corpus luteum. During the intrauterine life of a female, there are 7 million oogonia that reduce to only 1 million at birth.

**Luteal/Secretory Phase of the Menstrual Cycle**

Under the effect of LH, the corpus luteum starts growing, reaching its maximum size and maximum activity after 8 days of ovulation (Day 22 of the cycle). Corpus luteum releases progesterone mainly and also estrogen and Inhibin A. Progesterone has a negative feedback on LH. Progesterone supports the endometrium. At low concentration, progesterone increases LH and decreases FSH, but at high concentration, progesterone decreases LH levels and increases FSH levels. Due to an increase in progesterone, levels of LH decreases, and the corpus luteum also degenerate.

As a result, hormones secreted by the corpus luteum along with Inhibin A decreases. When the level of progesterone decreases, endometrial shedding occurs. This shedding of the endometrium is called menstruation. Progesterone is a smooth muscle relaxant, and a decrease in its levels causes a release of PGF2, which causes vasoconstriction. PGF2 alpha is also responsible for pain during menstruation, known as dysmenorrhoea. This phase is of the female cycle is known as the luteal phase, and the main hormone of this phase of the cycle is progesterone.