The area of the tongue posterior to the sulcus terminalis is known as the root or base (posterior one-third of the tongue).

The tongue's functions mainly include taste, speech, and food manipulation in the oral cavity. It also plays an essential role in breathing.

**Taste Functions**

Chemicals that interact with the taste buds in the tongue are referred to as "tastants." Taste buds themselves are found within the various papillae of the tongue. Tastants interact with gustatory cell receptors in the taste buds, resulting in the transduction of a taste sensation. The five broad categories of taste receptors are (1) sweet, (2) salty, (3) sour, (4) bitter, and (5) umami.

The taste buds are bulb-shaped structures responsible for taste perception, located within the lingual papillae and in the surface mucosa of the soft palate, oropharynx, epiglottis, and upper esophagus.****They are formed by basal cells and thin taste bud cells that converge into the taste pit.

The human tongue mainly has three types of gustatory papillae: vallate, fungiform, and filiform.

Vallate papillae, also known as circumvallate papillae, are arranged in a V-shape anterior to the sulcus terminalis and studded with numerous taste buds.

Fungiform papillae are mushroom-shaped papillae (thin neck and large head). Filiform papillae are intertwined among them.

Filiform papillae are the most abundant lingual papillae.

Foliate papillae are vestigial in humans, associated with the lingual tonsils, and located bilaterally on the posterior lateral borders of the tongue.

**Speech Functions**

Speech is partly produced by manipulating the tongue in the mouth against the teeth and palate. The intrinsic muscles of the tongue are involved primarily in changing the shape of the tongue,

**Food Manipulation Functions**

The tongue moves the food around the mouth with the help of the buccinator muscle, mixes it with saliva, and helps to separate undesired particles.****It also enables the formation of the food bolus in the oral preparatory phase of swallowing. It also takes part in the oral phase of swallowing by elevating and sweeping posteriorly to propel the food bolus past the anterior tonsillar pillar, triggering the swallowing reflex.