**Sputum Culture Procedure**

The sputum sample is added to a culture plate with a specific substance that promotes the growth of bacteria or fungi. Then cover the lid of the dish and place it in a 37 degree C incubator for bacteria and 30 degrees C for fungus. The lab specialist should check the bacteria or fungi growth in the sputum plate every day. Once the sputum culture is positive, microscopy, colony morphology, or biochemical tests of bacterial growth will be performed to identify the specific type of bacterium or fungus.

**Sputum Staining Tests Procedure**

The sputum specimen is a smear on a microscope slide. Different staining dyes are added to the cells, bacteria, or fungi of the sample on the slides and then washed with water, alcohol, or acid solutions. The slides are then diagnosed under a microscope. If the bacteria, fungi, or specific cells are identified in the specimens, the results are positive.

**Sputum Biochemical Tests Procedure**

To identify a suspected organism, at first, the bacteria will be inoculated in a series of differential media. Then use different indicators to observe the specific end products of metabolism inside of the medium.

**Sputum Cytology Examination Procedure**

The smear sputum slide is stained with different dyes according to the instructions. Then the pathology specialist examines the stained slide under the microscope to find the abnormal cells from the sputum specimen.

**Sputum Nucleic Acid Amplification Test Procedure**

The RNA or DNA is extracted from the sputum specimen according to the instruction of different commercial kits. The DNA or RNA is added to a PCR reaction tube with designed primers, Taq polymerase, deoxynucleoside triphosphates [dNTPs], and a fluorescent-labeled probe. Then the tube with RT-PCR reaction mixture is placed in a real-time PCR device for amplifying the molecules at specific temperatures.

**Sputum Antimicrobial Susceptibility Tests Procedure**

For the MIC method, the bacteria or fungi isolated from sputum specimens were diluted in saline and swabbed onto the MIC panels. For the dish diffusion method, selected different concentrations of antibiotics are placed directly onto the bacteria swabbed agar plates. Panels or plates are incubated at 35 degrees C for about 16 to 18 hours or longer. The minimal concentration of the antibiotic that inhibits the growth of organisms or MIC panel is read according to the guidelines of different manufacturers. Then the result is reported.