Oxycodone is widely available in tablet, capsule, and oral solution formulations.

- Immediate-release tablets are available in 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg, while capsules are 5 mg strength. Oral solution is available in 5 mg / 5 ml strength, and oral concentrate is available in 100 mg/5 mL strength. Manufacturers discontinued the 160 mg dose in May 2001 due to the high misuse potential.

- Extended release tabelts are available in 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg, 60 mg and 80 mg strengths. Tablets are intended to be taken whole and must not be broken, chewed, crushed, or dissolved in liquid.

- Abuse-Deterrent tablets are available in 9 mg, 13.5 mg, 18 mg, 27 mg, and 36 mg strengths.

- Oxycodone is available in combination with other analgesics, including acetaminophen, aspirin, or ibuprofen.

- In some countries, oxycodone may be available in intramuscular and/or intravenous forms.

**Adult Dosing**

- **Acute pain:**Initial recommended doses of oxycodone are in the 5 to 15 mg range, every 4 to 6 hours as needed for adequate analgesia of acute pain. Further dosing should titrate upwards for pain control, with attention and monitoring for potential side effects.

- **Chronic pain:**It is recommended to titrate dosage slowly upwards, starting at the lowest possible dose for analgesia (2.5 to 10 mg every 4 to 6 hours) for patients with chronic pain. However, the medication should be taken at regularly scheduled intervals for chronic pain management to prevent the reoccurrence of pain instead of treating the pain after it has started.

**Pediatric Dosing**

- **Acute pain:**Initial recommended doses of oxycodone are 0.05 to 0.15 mg/kg, every 4 to 6 hours as needed for adequate analgesia of acute pain. Further dosing should titrate upwards for pain control, with attention and monitoring for potential side effects.

- **Chronic pain:**It is recommended to titrate dosage slowly upwards, starting at the lowest possible dose for analgesia for patients with chronic pain. However, the medication should be taken at regularly scheduled intervals for chronic pain management to prevent the reoccurrence of pain instead of treating the pain after it has started.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Patients with Liver Impairment:**Dose reduction may be necessary for patients with hepatic failure. Initiating a starting dose at one-third to one-half the usual doses and close monitoring is recommended. Titration upwards should proceed at a careful rate.

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**If CrCl is more than 60 ml/minute, no dose adjustment is necessary. If CrCl <30 mL/minute, 75% to 50% of the usual dose is recommended.

- **Geriatric Patients:**Dose reduction may be necessary for the elderly; initiating a starting dose at one-third to one-half the usual doses and close monitoring is recommended. Titration upwards should proceed at a careful rate.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Maternal oxycodone use during pregnancy may result in serious and sometimes fatal events, as opioids can cross the placental barrier. These events may include preterm delivery, congenital abnormalities, and reduced fetal growth. In addition, with prolonged exposure, babies born to opioid-dependent mothers may suffer from potentially life-threatening neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. Therefore, clinicians should discuss the neonatal risks of oxycodone therapy in pregnant women or consider alternative treatments.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**Oxycodone is excreted in variable concentrations into human milk. There is a lack of study on oxycodone use in lactating women and its effect on milk production. Access the maternal need for oxycodone and perform a risk-benefit analysis of oxycodone use. Monitor for potential adverse reactions (excessive sedation and respiratory depression) in infants with maternal administration of opioids, including oxycodone. Monitor for withdrawal symptoms when breastfeeding is stopped, or oxycodone administration is stopped to mother.

**Opioid Overdose Prevention**

- Discuss the naloxone for the emergency treatment of oxycodone overdose with the patient and/or caregiver and assess the need for access to naloxone, especially when initiating and renewing a treatment with oxycodone. Naloxone is available by prescription from clinicians, as part of a community-based program, or directly from a pharmacist. Clinicians should consider prescribing naloxone based on the patient’s medical history, clinical need, and risk for overdoses, such as a history of an opioid use disorder or concomitant use of other CNS depressants. Providers can also prescribe naloxone when the patient has household members (e.g., children) or close contacts at risk for overdose or accidental ingestion.