According to Boyle’s Law of Gases, if the temperature of a gas is held constant, there is an inverse relationship between the volume of the gas and its pressure. A balloon that rises in the atmosphere will expand in volume as the ambient pressure decreases. Similarly, the compressed air held in a diver’s lung, if he holds his breath, will expand as the surrounding water pressure decreases on the ascent. Atmospheric pressure at mean sea level is 14.7 psi. This is also measured in millimeters of mercury as 760mmHg. Both of these measurements are equivalent to one atmosphere (1 Atm or 1 Barr). Due to the density of water, pressure during a dive increases one additional 1 Atm for every 33 feet of seawater depth. Barotrauma occurs most commonly while scuba diving, but also may occur during flying, mountain climbing, or skiing. During scuba diving, barotrauma may be caused by descending or ascending too rapidly. The ‘squeezes’ are caused by the inability to equalize pressure on the descent, classically across the face mask, sinuses, teeth, or ear. Mask squeeze can cause skin ecchymosis imprinting the mask pattern on the face, conjunctival hemorrhage, and rarely, orbital hemorrhage. Dental squeeze can cause an implosion of carious teeth. Ear squeeze can occur in the ear canal or middle ear. Sinus squeeze can be excruciating, usually in the setting of chronic sinusitis with occluded ostia. Barotrauma on ascent may similarly result in the ear, sinus, and dental trauma (tooth explosion). The most serious form of ascent barotrauma is pulmonary injury. Additionally, injury to the lung from positive airway ventilation is a special case of barotrauma. The most serious consequence of barotrauma is a pulmonary alveolar rupture with antecedent air gas embolism. Peripheral embolism of the gas bubbles occludes the circulation, with potential for cerebrovascular accident or cardiac ischemia. Risk factors for barotrauma include asthma, sinusitis, dental abscesses and caries, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), seizures, ear problems, syncope, panic disorders, vertigo, poor training, inexperience, and Eustachian tube dysfunction. Any patient receiving mechanical ventilation is at risk for barotrauma, but it is most commonly seen in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).