Sarcoidosis is a multisystem disease that predominantly involves lungs and thoracic lymph nodes. Patients may present with cough, dyspnea, and chest pain. Upper respiratory tract involvement leads to nonspecific rhinitis, recurrent sinusitis, and destructive lesions of the nasal septum and turbinates. Cutaneous manifestations include papules, nodules, plaques, ulcers, and erythema nodosum.

Cardiac involvement leads to the development of arrhythmias and heart blocks.

Ocular involvement in sarcoidosis is characterized by granulomatous inflammation of the eye and its adnexal tissues. Ocular involvement is the presenting feature in 30 to 40% of cases.

**Orbital Disease**

Involvement of orbital structures such as orbital fat, extraocular muscles, and optic nerve sheath leads to proptosis, globe displacement, pain, vision loss, and diplopia.

**Lacrimal System Disease**

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) is a common manifestation of ocular sarcoidosis.

**Eyelid and Ocular Surface Disease**

**Eyelid -**Erythematous eyelid swelling is seen in ocular sarcoidosis, which can vary in size from small papules to a large mass.

**Conjunctiva -**Conjunctival nodules are seen as white discrete conjunctival deposits predominantly affecting bulbar conjunctiva but can also be seen in the perilimbal area and palpebral conjunctiva.

**Sclera**– Scleritis is a rare manifestation of ocular sarcoidosis and can manifest as diffuse anterior, nodular anterior, or posterior scleritis.

**Cornea –**The most common corneal manifestation of ocular sarcoidosis is superficial punctate keratitis secondary to dry eye (keratoconjunctivitis sicca). Other manifestations include band-shaped keratopathy, peripheral ulcerative keratitis, and interstitial keratitis.

**Uveitis**

The mean age of presentation of uveitis is 42 years. Most sarcoid uveitis is bilateral, and approximately 90% are chronic.

**Anterior uveitis**– The patient presents with eye pain, redness of eyes, blurred vision, and photophobia. Sarcoidosis is characterized by granulomatous uveitis, with mutton fat keratic precipitates [figure 1], iris, or trabecular meshwork nodules. Busacca nodules are noted in the iris stroma, and the Koeppe nodules involve the pupillary margin. Berlin nodules are present at the angle of the anterior chamber. Hypopyon is usually not seen in sarcoidosis.

Without appropriate treatment, there is a development of peripheral anterior synechiae with raised intraocular pressure or posterior synechiae with complicated cataracts. Patients with ocular sarcoid uveitis tend to develop raised intraocular pressure due to outflow obstruction due to trabecular meshwork block by inflammatory cells, trabecular meshwork nodules, or development of peripheral anterior synechiae.

**Intermediate uveitis**– Patients complain of either floaters or blurred vision. The most common cause of vision loss is the development of cystoid macular edema or vitreous inflammation. Inflammation of pars plana leads to the development of snowballs in the inferior vitreous and snow banking near ora serrata.

**Posterior uveitis –**Choroidal inflammation leads to the development of choroidal granulomas, which may be unifocal or multifocal, and vary in size from small (like Dalen-Fuchs nodules) to significant (like choroidal tumors).

Choroidal neovascularization may develop from choroidal granulomas, which affect vision when present in the posterior pole. Mid peripheral periphlebitis is characteristic of ocular sarcoidosis. Occlusive vasculitis causing capillary nonperfusion and retinal new vessels may also occur. In severe cases, whitish-yellow perivascular exudates are seen along the retinal veins, classically described as "candle-wax drippings" or taches de bougie [Figure 2].

Posterior uveitis is complicated with the development of cystoid macular edema, epiretinal membrane formation, intraretinal hemorrhage, and vitreous hemorrhage.

**Neuro-ophthalmic Manifestations**

The optic nerve and facial nerve are the most commonly affected nerves in ocular sarcoidosis.

Some patients may complain of visual hallucinations, nystagmus, and pupillary abnormalities such as relative afferent pupillary defect or light near dissociation due to the involvement of optic pathways.

Facial nerve involvement leads to lower motor neuron facial paresis leading to epiphora, exposure keratopathy, and corneal ulcers. Facial nerve involvement occurs due to inflammation in the parotid gland or secondary to meningitic reaction or direct compression of the facial nerve.

**Syndromic Associations**

**Löfgren syndrome:**It manifests as a triad of polyarthritis, erythema nodosum, and hilar lymphadenopathy. Other features include fever, malaise, uveitis, and parotitis.

**Heerfordt-Waldenström syndrome (uveoparotid fever**): It manifests as swelling of the parotid gland, fever, uveitis, and facial nerve palsy.

**Blau syndrome:**It is an autosomal dominant disorder seen in children below the age of 4 years. Clinical features include arthritis, rash, and uveitis.