An above-knee amputation is associated with enormous morbidity; unlike a below-knee amputation, fitting a prosthesis for an above-knee stump is difficult. In fact, most patients cannot adapt to an above-knee prosthesis and eventually succumb to a wheelchair to get around. This leads to other complications like pressure sores, inability to perform daily living activities, and depression. When possible, clinicians need to avoid an above-knee amputation because of the high morbidity; if the procedure is elective, presurgical education of the patient is important. Both the pre and postoperative management of an above-knee amputation is best managed by an interprofessional team because there are functional and physical issues that need to be dealt with.

An interprofessional approach is essential in caring for patients who have undergone an amputation. Aside from the physician performing the procedure, specialists in other fields of medicine can play a role in improving a patient's outcome. Internal medicine physicians can control and treat comorbid conditions, which may otherwise slow a patient's progress. Nurses are essential to monitoring vital signs, assisting the patient with daily activities, and delivering medication. The wound care nurse is vital to ensure that the stump is healing; unless the wound has healed, a prosthesis cannot be fitted.

Pharmacists help with prescribing appropriate medications to control pain, prevent thrombosis, and decrease infection risk. Physical therapists guide the patient in rehabilitation protocols to restore muscle function and regain mobility in the absence of a limb. Prosthetists ensure the patient has an appropriate, well-fitting prosthetic. Psychologists and psychiatrists can be a valuable asset to the treatment team if the patient develops symptoms of PTSD or depression. One study, which reviewed 233 patients over 5 years, showed that a team approach to the care of amputees could decrease inpatient stay by 20 days, increase the number of patients discharged with a prosthesis by five-fold, and increase the effectiveness of rehabilitation in the long term setting by threefold.

The outcomes of patients with an above-knee amputation depend on the reason why the surgery was necessary. For those with peripheral vascular disease, the outcomes are guarded; many also have associated heart disease, which can often lead to death. For those undergoing amputation for trauma, the prognosis is good.

In summary, caring for patients with above-the-knee amputation requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, physical and occupational therapists, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results.