Gastrointestinal malignancies are a group of heterogeneous neoplasms encompassing diverse biological and physical behavior. The management options for these tumors vary based on their location, cell type, and growth pattern. Early precise diagnosis and accurate staging are critical to instituting appropriate treatment. Recent advancements in the imaging techniques for evaluating solid and hollow viscous organs have enabled the non-invasive assessment of these tumors, although histopathology remains the gold standard. Despite these refinements, no single imaging modality provides sufficient information, and often multiple investigations are judicially combined to offer strength from one modality where the other is lacking.

Positron emission tomography/Computerized tomography (PET/CT) is a hybrid molecular imaging technique that combines the functional imaging advantages of PET with anatomical imaging from CT. The cancerous cells of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) demonstrate preferential glucose metabolism to lactate in both aerobic and anaerobic environments; a phenomenon called the Warburg effect.

The energy produced through this pathway is insufficient to meet the demand of increasing growth resulting in a rise in their glucose requirement. The oncogenes on the cell structures and growth factors activated by malignant cells trigger glycolysis through upregulation of GLUT-1 transporters and cellular hexokinase, forming the biochemical basis of FDG-PET imaging.

Fluorine-18 labeled deoxyglucose (FDG) is an analog of glucose that accumulates in the cancerous cells but, unlike glucose, cannot be channeled towards ATP production. This entrapment of FDG in cancerous and some inflammatory cells is responsible for image production in PET scanning. The Gallium PET/CT imaging, in contrast, relies on overexpression of somatostatin receptors in the well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors and thus offers an exquisite assessment of the selected primary neuroendocrine tumors and their metastases.