The suprascapular artery and vein run along with the suprascapular nerve to provide the nerve its blood supply. The suprascapular artery can function either as a branch of the thyrocervical trunk or as a direct branch of the subclavian artery. The artery runs inferolateral to the anterior scalene muscles, phrenic nerve, subclavian artery, and brachial plexus, crossing posterolateral and parallel to the clavicle. Then the nerve passes superior to the transverse scapular ligament while the suprascapular nerve passes inferior to it, while entering the supraspinous fossa. Finally, the artery courses laterally to the scapular spine (deep to the acromion) and then gains entry to the infraspinous fossa, which is on the posterior surface of the scapula. The suprascapular vein travels parallel to the artery. The lymphatic drainage for the upper limb and area along the suprascapular nerve distribution is primarily from the subscapular (posterior) nodes.The subscapular nodes consist of six or seven lymph nodes that lie along the posterior axillary fold. These lymph nodes run along the course of the subscapular blood vessels. The subscapular, pectoral, and humeral nodes’ efferent drainage passes through the central nodes. The central nodes consist of three or four nodes found deep within the pectoralis minor near the base of the axilla, and in close proximity to the second part of the axilla. Efferent drainage from the central nodes passes to the apical nodes, which lie at the apex of the axilla by the medial side of the axillary vein and the first part of the axillary artery. Efferent vessels that arise from the apical group run across the cervico-axillary canal. These efferent vessels combine to form the subclavian lymphatic trunk. The subclavian lymphatic trunk may join the jugular and bronchomediastinal trunk to form the right lymphatic duct, or it may enter the right venous angle by itself.