**Causes of Pain**

Most patients who suffer from chronic pain complain of more than one type of pain.

There are multiple categories and etiologies of pain types, including neuropathic, nociceptive, musculoskeletal, inflammatory, psychogenic, and mechanical.

**Neuropathic Pain**

- Peripheral neuropathic pain, as in the case of post-herpetic neuralgia or diabetic neuropathy

- Central neuropathic pain - cerebral vascular accident or stroke sequella

**Nociceptive Pain**

- Pain due to actual tissue injuries such as burns, bruises, sprains, or fractures.

**Musculoskeletal Pain**

- Back pain

- Myofascial pain

**Inflammatory Pain**

- Autoimmune disorders (rheumatoid arthritis)

- Infection

**Psychogenic Pain**

- Pain caused by psychological factors, such as headaches or abdominal pain caused by emotional, psychological, or behavioral factors

**Mechanical Pain**

- Expanding malignancy

**Causes of Opioid Abuse and Associated Morbidity and Mortality**

Unfortunately, opioids as a pain treatment are associated with morbidity, mortality, and abuse of opioid therapy. Causes of opioid abuse include medical, social, and economic problems.

**Medical and Social**

Twenty years ago, a national shift occurred where clinicians were encouraged to treat pain more aggressively. Pain was considered the fifth vital "sign," and clinicians who undertreated noncancer pain potentially incurred liability, patient complaints, and licensing board complaints. At the same time, oxycodone was introduced and touted to have low addiction potential. Further, patients and clinicians concluded that it was better and safer to take prescription opioids than street drugs. The result was more than a decade of growth of prescription opioid use with severe adverse consequences for individual patients and communities.

**Economic**

Opioid use has increased due to direct marketing to consumers, promotion to physicians and pharmacists from sales forces, and illicit production and distribution of opioids. Due to the opportunity for enormous profits, "pill mills" developed where unscrupulous providers provided prescriptions for opioids that required little or no documentation. As these sources have gradually diminished, heroin use has made a resurgence.

**Manufacturers**

Since the early 2000s, various lawsuits have been filed against manufacturers and distributors of opioids, with claims that manufacturers did not provide adequate warnings regarding the addiction potential of opioids or, worse, knowingly withheld information about the risks of opioids.

**Prescribers**

Prescribers who prescribe for chronic, non-cancer pain in excess of practice guidelines, higher than normal doses, long-acting formulations, and/or large volume prescriptions with limited follow-up may increase the risk of opioid abuse and associated morbidity and mortality among patients.

**Dispensers**

Interprofessional collaboration, often mandated by states, encourages optional and safe patient care. Pharmacists and prescribers should have an open dialogue regarding prescriptions, and pharmacists must be able to obtain further information from prescribers regarding prescriptions that seem unreasonable. Pharmacists can use noninvasive means such as checking state opioid use databases and then contacting prescribers concerning patients.