# Introduction

Menses is the monthly shedding of the endometrial lining within the human menstrual cycle and occurs for approximately 26% of the world’s population.

There are many personal and medical reasons menstruating persons, or their caregivers, if applicable, may opt for menstrual suppression, including decreasing pain and other perimenstrual symptoms, limiting blood loss, lowering the burden of menstrual hygiene, and improving quality of life.

Medication-induced secondary amenorrhea may also be utilized in managing other health conditions such as heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, and menstrual-related blood loss in the setting of bleeding diathesis.

Commonly used hormonal contraceptives may be leveraged to achieve menstrual suppression, including continuous or extended use of the combined oral contraceptive pill (OCP), the combined transdermal patch, the combined intravaginal ring, the progestin-only pill, and injectable depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA), as well as long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARC) such as the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (IUD), and the subdermal etonogestrel implant. Less commonly used options include gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists and testosterone.

Complete cessation of menses is challenging, and success rates and associated side effects vary between methods. Patients should therefore be counseled on realistic expectations for each method and aim to decrease bleeding days and associated burdens rather than achieve complete amenorrhea.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) released a Clinical Consensus on general approaches to menstrual suppression in 2022 to guide clinicians in their patient care and counseling. This review heavily includes and is consistent with recommendations from this Clinical Consensus.

# Anatomy and Physiology

**Phases of the Menstrual Cycle**

Menstrual cycles are described relative to the onset of menses (ie, the shedding of the endometrial lining), with cycle day one being the onset of heavy menstrual bleeding. The menstrual cycle is divided into two primary phases.

The first phase is known as the **follicular phase**in the ovarian cycle or the**proliferative phase**when describing the uterine cycle; it begins at the onset of**menses**and continues until**ovulation**. The second phase, known as the**luteal phase**in the ovarian cycle and the**secretory phase**in the uterine cycle, begins at ovulation and continues until the onset of the next menses. These cycles are regulated by the interplay of estrogen, progesterone, follicular stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) within the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis.

**Physiology of the Menstrual Cycle**

In the follicular phase, GnRH pulses trigger the anterior pituitary gland to release FSH, which stimulates ovarian follicles to mature and produce estrogen. This estrogen stimulates the growth of the endometrium and provides feedback inhibition at the level of the pituitary (meaning that as estrogen levels rise during the follicular phase, FSH levels begin to decline). As FSH levels decline during the follicular phase, most developing follicles undergo atresia, and (usually) a single dominant follicle persists. At the end of the follicular phase, estrogen's effect on the pituitary switches from inhibitory to stimulatory, resulting in a surge of LH from the pituitary, which triggers ovulation.

After the release of the oocyte and under stimulation from LH, the now-empty follicle is transformed into the **corpus luteum**, which begins secreting progesterone. Generally speaking, natural progesterone causes maturation and stabilization of the endometrium. While the follicular phase may last a variable amount of time until a follicle matures and ovulation occurs, the persistence of the corpus luteum (and thus the luteal phase) is generally much more consistent in duration, lasting about two weeks. If pregnancy does not occur within the first few days after ovulation, estrogen and progesterone levels decline in the second half of the luteal phase (approximately days 21 through 28), and this hormone decrease ultimately triggers menses.

Without exogenous hormones, periodic menses are essential to prevent "build-up" and hyperplasia of the endometrium.

**From Menarche to Mature Menstrual Cycles**

The start of menstrual cycles and menses is deemed menarche and typically begins between 10 and 15 years of age.

Despite this, up to 90% of cycles will still be between 21 and 45 days long.

**The Physiology of Medication-Induced Secondary Amenorrhea**

Suppression or cessation of menses is achieved by inducing significant structural changes to the endometrial lining through glandular atrophy or decidualization. Combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs), which include estrogen and progestin, such as OCPs, the transdermal patch, and the intravaginal ring, prevent the growth of the endometrium in two significant ways.

First, they inhibit the release of FSH and LH within the HPO axis; the suppression of FSH decreases estrogen, depriving the endometrium of its primary "growth factor."

Additionally, synthetic progestins do not have the same effects on the endometrium as natural progesterone. Synthetic progestins tend to be more androgenic, and continuous exposure generally leads to endometrial glandular atrophy.

Given these mechanisms of action, there is **no**"build-up" of endometrial tissue within the uterus with contraceptive use. Any bleeding occurs from hormonal withdrawal or breakthrough bleeding from a "fragile" atrophic endometrium rather than true physiologic shedding of the endometrial lining.

The classic use of a placebo week with non-LARC contraceptive methods to precipitate withdrawal bleeding to mimic the "natural lunar cycle" of menses is a historical remnant based on the social and cultural norms of women during the era in which hormonal contraceptives were developed – it is not based on biological need, nor is it required for health.

By causing endometrial atrophy, menstrual suppression may also be beneficial in treating heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, and menstrual-related blood loss in the setting of bleeding diathesis, as discussed in Indications.

Upon discontinuation of CHCs or LARC, normal HPO axis function returns, and endometrial growth resumes, though this may take several months.

The uses and efficacies of each suppression method vary (see Techniques).

# Indications

If desired, individuals who menstruate or their caregivers may choose to pursue menstrual suppression for personal or medical reasons. Notably, a study revealed that as many as 59% of women in the United States expressed a desire to eliminate their monthly periods.

For average adults, reasons for suppression include decreasing bleeding, pain, and other perimenstrual symptoms, improving quality of life, managing certain medical conditions, lowering the burdens of menstrual hygiene, and decreasing the use of disposable hygiene products.

**Management of Menstrual Symptoms**

Menstrual-related symptoms such as heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea (excessive pain associated with menses), and premenstrual syndrome impact up to 2.5 million biologically female adults annually and may lead to absenteeism from school or work and decreased participation in social, athletic, professional, or recreational activities.****

Therefore, individuals may prefer to suppress menses to decrease the burdens of pain, bleeding, and other symptoms such as bloating, fatigue, and mood changes. Some individuals may also desire to control when and where their menses occur rather than experiencing regular monthly or irregular menses.

Several studies suggest that individuals may prefer to delay, suppress or completely stop their period for an improved quality of life, including up to 65% of female college students and up to 86% of female military personnel.

**Management of Other Medical Conditions**

Menstrual suppression may also be utilized for other health conditions, such as managing endometriosis, decreasing blood loss related to bleeding diathesis (particularly von Willebrand disease), and reducing the risk for or worsening of present anemia.

**Lowering the Burdens of Menstrual Hygiene**

Decreasing menstrual hygiene's contribution to global inequality and environmental degradation is also important to consider.

Approximately 800 million individuals menstruate on any given day, requiring them to have reliable access to menstrual hygiene products (pads, tampons, menstrual cups, or panties), clean water, and private sanitation facilities.

If access to menstrual suppression options can be achieved and the number of bleeding days decreased, it could decrease these burdens on populations suffering from period poverty. For example, in well-developed countries, an individual without a reliable income may have access to hormonal contraceptives through a government-sponsored health plan but may lack dedicated funds to purchase menstrual hygiene products.

Additionally, several populations may face unique challenges associated with menstrual hygiene, including deployed military members, people working in remote locations, those who struggle with housing insecurity, or incarcerated individuals.

There is also significant monetary cost and environmental waste associated with menstrual hygiene products. Decreasing bleeding days may assist in lowering this personal cost and reduce the global environmental impact of single-use synthetic materials used and disposed of during menses.

**Special Populations**

**Adolescents**

Adolescents are at high risk for menstrual dysfunction, especially in the first 1 to 2 years post-menarche.

Adolescents, with or without the involvement of a parent or caregiver, may opt for menstrual suppression for several reasons. Menstrual suppression may be useful in helping regulate the HPO axis and prevent highly irregular cycles and associated stress.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) does not recommend a routine pelvic exam before initiating menstrual suppression in individuals younger than 21 years if normal menstruation occurs.

**People with Developmental or Physical Disability**

Clinicians should discuss menses and menstrual management with adolescents and adults with developmental or physical disabilities and their caregivers, if applicable, ideally before menarche.

A 2021 retrospective cohort study of adolescents and young women with disabilities found that the primary reasons for seeking menstrual suppression were irregular menstrual bleeding, heavy menstrual bleeding, hygiene burden, inconvenience of menses, dysmenorrhea, and assistance in managing comorbid conditions such as behavioral issues and catamenial epilepsy.

Menstrual suppression should not be initiated before menarche to ensure the appropriate onset of menarche and pubertal development.

Medication reconciliation is also key in this population. Some medication classes frequently utilized in the setting of developmental or physical disabilities can have significant drug interactions with hormonal contraceptives (see Contraindications).

Other considerations include a person's mobility, ability to swallow pills, cognitive ability to understand menses, and menstrual hygiene. For example, when individuals have limited mobility, their risk of venous thromboembolic events (VTE) may be uncertain, they may have lower bone mineral density, and even small amounts of weight gain may impact their ability to transfer themselves from a wheelchair. For these reasons, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends careful individual assessment and joint decision-making to determine the most appropriate menstrual suppression method for adolescents with disabilities.

Lastly and importantly, clinicians should evaluate the risk of pregnancy and assess the risk of sexual abuse (by caregivers or others) in all adolescents and adults with developmental or physical disabilities before initiation of menstrual suppression.

**Transgender and Gender-Diverse Individuals**

In transgender and gender-diverse adolescents and adults, menses can be a significant source of distress; therefore, menstrual suppression may be an important intervention in gender-affirming care.Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes), which may begin before menarche in this select population.

Understanding the motivation for and desired outcome of menstrual suppression is important, as it will guide the treatment method. Often, the goal is to achieve complete amenorrhea to help reduce menstrual-related gender dysphoria, though individuals may also desire contraception or management of menstrual-related symptoms.

**Military Personnel and Athletes**

As of 2020, nearly 17% of US Army service members are biologically female, and as of 2016, all combat jobs are open to both male and female individuals.

Up to 86% of menstruating military personnel report a desire for amenorrhea during deployment for these reasons; however, as few as 7% utilize menstrual suppression methods, and only a third report being counseled by a healthcare provider regarding menstrual suppression options.

Competitive athletes may face similar challenges in managing menses, such as the need for high performance, elevated stress levels, frequent travel, and the inconvenience of menstrual symptoms during competition. Menstruating athletes, including adolescents, may choose to manipulate or suppress their menstrual cycle to maximize performance.

In these populations, clinicians must carefully consider the effects of continuous hormonal contraceptive use on bone health and the risk of bone stress injury due to the higher risk of low bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures (see Complications).

**Active Malignancy**

Individuals with active malignancy are at risk of thrombocytopenia from malignancy and chemotherapy, radiation, or stem cell or bone marrow transplantation.

These individuals will most likely require a progesterone-only method (progestin-only pills or LARC) or a GnRH agonist for suppression, as estrogen-containing products are generally contraindicated in the setting of an increased risk for thromboembolism (see Contraindications).

Notably, persons with a current or prior history of breast cancer should not utilize estrogen-containing contraceptives (see Contraindications).

GnRH agonists (primarily leuprolide acetate and triptorelin) are preferred for adolescent oncologic patients due to demonstrated amenorrhea rates as high as 96%.

# Contraindications

Contraindications to menstrual suppression align with the general contraindications for hormonal contraceptives.

**Contraindications to Estrogen-Containing Contraceptives**

In the setting of medical comorbidities that may increase the risk of thromboembolism (including pulmonary embolism [PE], deep venous thrombosis [DVT], or stroke), estrogen-containing contraceptives are contraindicated. These conditions include:

- Hypercoagulable disorders (such as Factor V Liden deficiency)

- Active liver disease

- Migraine with aura

- Active smoking (particularly if over the age of 35)

- Valvular heart disease

- Diabetes with vascular sequelae

- Peripheral or cerebrovascular disease

- Prior history of PE, DVT, or stroke.

Additionally, estrogen-containing contraceptives are contraindicated in the setting of current or prior history of some hormone-sensitive cancers, especially breast cancer, due to the risk of cancer recurrence or growth stimulation.

These methods are also contraindicated in uncontrolled hypertension or known coronary artery disease due to the risk of worsening hypertension and increasing risk for adverse cardiovascular events, respectively.

In these clinical settings, patients should be counseled on progesterone-only alternatives, which are safer and equally effective.

**Contraindications to Progestin-Only Contraceptives**

Progestin-only pills have very few contraindications; the primary absolute contraindication is active breast cancer. Use is also relatively contraindicated in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with antiphospholipid antibodies, severely decompensated cirrhosis, liver tumors, and a history of bariatric surgery with malabsorptive procedures.

Initiating the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD is contraindicated in the setting of known anatomic abnormalities of the uterus, such as a septate or bicornuate uterus, active genitourinary infection, and current active breast, endometrial, or cervical cancer.

Injectable (and possibly oral) medroxyprogesterone acetate is relatively contraindicated in the setting of known low BMD, known risk factors for BMD loss, or in those with high risk for sequelae of BMD loss.

It is also relatively contraindicated as a first-line agent in adolescents who have not yet reached peak bone mass within the first few years after menarche.

**Interactions between CHCs/POPs and Anticonvulsant Medication**

Special consideration should be taken when selecting a menstrual suppression method for people prescribed anticonvulsant medications due to their known interactions with systemic CHCs and POPs.

Many anticonvulsants and other neuropsychiatric medications (including phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and, to a lesser extent, topiramate) induce the hepatic cytochrome P450 system and interfere with contraceptive efficacy and cycle control reliability.

In general, hormonal contraceptives do not affect the efficacy of anticonvulsant medications, except lamotrigine, which can have decreased efficacy when taken with estrogen.

**Before Menarche**

Except for care for transgender youth, menstrual suppression should **not**be initiated before menarche; adolescents must first demonstrate normal anatomy and typical pubertal development.

# Technique or Treatment

Commonly used hormonal contraceptives may be leveraged to achieve menstrual suppression, including continuous or extended use of the combined OCP, the combined transdermal patch, the combined intravaginal ring, the progestin-only pill, and DMPA, as well as LARC methods such as the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD and the subdermal etonogestrel implant. Less commonly used options include GnRH agonists and testosterone.

Complete cessation of menses is difficult to achieve, and success rates and associated side effects vary between methods. Therefore, although complete amenorrhea is possible for some, patients should be counseled on realistic expectations, with the typical goal being to decrease bleeding days and associated burdens.

**Combined Oral Contraceptive Pills**

Continuous or extended use of monophasic combined OCPs is the most well-known method of menstrual suppression among adults and adolescents. Suppression is achieved by taking a daily pill continuously without pausing for a placebo week to precipitate withdrawal bleeding.

Numerous monophasic formulations and brands are available, though they all contain ethinyl estradiol (EE) in combination with a progestin (e.g., norethindrone, levonorgestrel, norgestimate, or drospirenone). Different formulations have varying doses of EE combined with different progestins, though, in monophasic formulations, the dose of hormones is the same for each pill in the pack. Triphasic formulations are not utilized for menstrual suppression because the varying hormone levels throughout the pack increase the risk of breakthrough bleeding.

Higher doses of EE (>20 mcg) are associated with lower rates of bothersome breakthrough bleeding (see Complications).

Benefits of using OCPs include ease of use, wide accessibility, a large body of data on safety and efficacy, generally high provider knowledge on and comfort with use, and associated improvements in perimenstrual symptoms, including dysmenorrhea, fatigue, bloating, and headache.

The downsides include the need for daily patient compliance, the inability to utilize OCPs in patients with contraindications to exogenous estrogen (see Contraindications), and the risk of breakthrough bleeding, which is of variable annoyance for patients.

**Combined Transdermal Patch**

The transdermal combined contraceptive patch can be used continuously, similarly to OCPs, for menstrual suppression.

The main advantage of this method is weekly rather than daily dosing. Data on prolonged use is limited, as only the EE 75 mcg/norelgestromin 6 mg version of the patch has been studied.

This method cannot be used in persons with contraindications to exogenous estrogen (see Contraindications).

**Intravaginal Ring******

Like the patch, the combined intravaginal contraceptive ring can be used continuously for menstrual suppression. The ring is typically replaced every four weeks without a hormone-free interval. Only the monthly EE 0.015 mg/etonogestrel 0.120 mg ring has been studied specifically for menstrual suppression.

This method demonstrates "excellent" amenorrhea rates: a 2008 study demonstrated up to 89% of users had no to minimal bleeding at six months of continuous use.

Monthly rather than weekly or daily dosing may be advantageous for compliance and convenience and increase patients' perceived control over their menses.

The most significant downside and common reason for discontinuing the ring is bothersome breakthrough bleeding. Although full menstrual-type bleeding days decrease with extended ring use, spotting days may increase compared to cyclic use.

Another disadvantage is the requirement for refrigeration of the rings if they are to be stored by the patient longer than four months, which may create a barrier for those who do not have access to reliable refrigeration or electricity. The newer EE 17.4 mg/segesterone acetate 103 mg ring is a longer-acting effective contraceptive that can remain in place for 12 months and does not require refrigeration or repeat prescriptions. However, data is limited regarding rates of amenorrhea achieved with continuous use of this method, and more research is necessary to understand its efficacy for menstrual suppression.

This method cannot be used in persons with contraindications to exogenous estrogen (see Contraindications).

**Progestin-only Oral Pills**

Oral progestin-only pills (POPs), including norethindrone, norethindrone acetate, and drospirenone, may be used for menstrual suppression, particularly in persons with contraindications to exogenous estrogen.

Amenorrhea has been reported in up to 76% of users at two years with standard doses of norethindrone acetate (5 mg). However, rates are as low as 10% with standard doses of norethindrone (0.35 mg), and data on rates with drospirenone (4 mg) are limited.

The main advantages of progestin-only pills are the ability to use them in individuals with contraindications to exogenous estrogen, the ability to adjust the dose and frequency easily, and the ease of use and start.

However, the disadvantages are significant, including low and inconsistent rates of amenorrhea, higher prices compared to combined OCPs, the need for strict adherence and timed daily dosing for adequate suppression and contraceptive efficacy, and irregular breakthrough bleeding.

Progestin-only pills are not typically recommended for use in adolescents.

**Injectable Depot Medroxyprogesterone Acetate (DMPA)**

DMPA is a longer-acting contraceptive option that may be leveraged for menstrual suppression; it is injected either intramuscularly at a dose of 150 mg or subcutaneously at a dose of 104 mg every 11 to 13 weeks.

Advantages include infrequent dosing, ease of administration, and high amenorrhea rates.Complications).

Disadvantages include initial excessive prolonged uterine bleeding with the first dose as the existing endometrial lining is shed, the need for an in-person clinic visit for repeated injections four or more times per year, weight gain associated with high-dose progesterone, and loss of BMD (see Complications).

**Levonorgestrel-releasing Intrauterine Device**

The levonorgestrel-releasing IUDs (52 mg, 19.5 mg, or 13.5 mg) are progestin-only LARC methods that can effectively achieve menstrual suppression. The 52 mg device demonstrates the highest rates of amenorrhea: up to 50% of users will be amenorrhoeic at 6 to 12 months, and up to 60% will be amenorrhoeic at five years.

The devices are used for 3 to 8 years at a time, with the duration depending on device dose and brand; the 52-mg device is approved for contraception for up to 8 years, and menstrual suppression rates appear to remain high throughout that time.

Benefits of using the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD include excellent contraceptive efficacy (<0.2% failure rate), lower volume of menstrual blood loss, long duration of the use for a single device, reliable compliance (no individual user variability), ability to utilize the device in individuals with contraindications to exogenous estrogen, and treatment benefits for other medical conditions such as heavy menstrual bleeding, endometriosis, adenomyosis, leiomyomas, and hemostatic disorders.

Disadvantages include insertion-related pain and fear, the need for a provider trained in the placement procedure, difficulty accessing the procedure, lack of provider knowledge, up-front expense, breakthrough bleeding, and the potential for mechanical complications and expulsion (see Complications).

Breakthrough bleeding is most likely during the initial 3 to 6 months after placement and improves with time; as few as 11% of users will experience spotting at two years.

The levonorgestrel-releasing IUD can be safely used for menstrual suppression in adolescents, and ACOG supports its use in this population.

There are many misunderstandings and fears regarding the IUD that decrease its popularity for menstrual suppression and contraception in general, including perceived lack of personal control over menses, fear of pain or complications associated with placement, fear of having a foreign object inside the body, and fear that not having a predictable period will decrease personal certainty that pregnancy has not occurred.

The copper-containing IUD is inappropriate for menstrual suppression, as it does not alter menstrual cycle physiology or the endometrial lining.

**Subdermal Etonogestrel Implant**

The subdermal etonogestrel-containing implant is an extremely effective contraceptive device (<0.05% failure rate) and an additional method to consider for menstrual suppression.

It is not typically recommended for menstrual suppression in adolescents because up to 22% of adolescent users request removal for breakthrough bleeding.

**GnRH Agonists**

GnRH agonists are non-contraceptive medications that may be utilized for menstrual suppression by creating a hypoestrogenic state.continuous presence of GnRH inhibits the release of FSH and LH (these hormones typically respond to intermittent GnRH pulses).

The most common formulation is depot-leuprolide acetate 11.25 mg IM injection given every 12 weeks, though it may also be given once monthly at a dose of 3.75 mg IM or via subdermal implant or intranasally at varying doses.

GnRH agonists are utilized in transgender and gender-diverse adolescents for delay or blockade of puberty in support of gender-affirming care, in individuals with malignancy, or in individuals with endometriosis or severe heavy menstrual bleeding with anemia which is refractory to other hormonal treatments.

However, several significant disadvantages are associated with the hypoestrogenic state induced by GnRH agonists, including perimenopausal symptoms and a decrease in BMD (see Complications).

Additionally, GnRH agonists are very expensive, ineffective as a form of contraception, and may be less accessible in the primary care setting due to lower provider familiarity.****(such as norethindrone acetate 5 mg once daily) can help reduce this risk and minimize other bothersome symptoms.

**Testosterone**

Among transgender and gender-diverse persons, testosterone can be used for menstrual suppression. Testosterone acts directly on the endometrium, causing atrophy.

Testosterone can be administered via topical gel, subcutaneous injection, or intramuscular injection. Intramuscular injection is the most common with testosterone enanthate or cypionate. A typical starting dose of both formulations is 100 mg every two weeks intramuscularly.****Amenorrhea is achieved in a dose-dependent response to testosterone, with higher or more frequent doses achieving amenorrhea sooner.

It is important to note that testosterone is not an adequate contraceptive method, and pregnancy has been reported while actively using testosterone.

# Complications

**Breakthrough Bleeding**

The most common adverse effect of menstrual suppression in all patient populations is breakthrough bleeding (BTB) at unexpected times. This bleeding is benign, though it can be distressing or inconvenient and is a common reason for treatment discontinuation.

All patients should be counseled regarding the expectation for possible benign breakthrough bleeding and that rates decrease with a longer duration of continuous hormonal contraceptive use, particularly if used longer than six months.

Several strategies per method are offered by the ACOG 2022 Clinical Consensus on menstrual suppression for the management of BTB.

When BTB occurs while using **CHCs**, including OCPs, patches, or rings, clinicians can consider the following:

- Consider cyclic cycles for 3 to 6 months, then transition to extended cycles (e.g., use CHCs for 12 weeks, followed by a 4 to 7-day hormone-free interval)

- Completing a 3-4-day hormone-free interval

- Intermittent supplementation with estrogen.

When BTB occurs while using **POPs**, clinicians can consider the following:

- Counseling that breakthrough bleeding may decrease with consistent daily dose timing (e.g., taking the dose at the same time each day)

- Increasing the dose

- Completing a brief dose taper of norethindrone (increase to 0.7 mg for 7 days, then returning to normal 0.35 mg dose).

When BTB occurs while using **DMPA**or the**etonogestrel**implant****, clinicians can consider the following:

- Use of combined OCPs or oral estrogen alone for 10 to 20 days

- A course of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for up to 7 days

- Increasing injection frequency of DMPA to rapidly achieve amenorrhea (up to every 4 to 6 weeks for 2 to 3 doses), then consider returning to regular dosing.

When BTB occurs while using **levonorgestrel-releasing IUD**, clinicians can consider the following:

- Preferential use of the higher dose device (52 mg levonorgestrel)

- A brief course of combined OCPs or progestin-only pills, scheduled NSAIDs, or oral sub-antimicrobial-dose doxycycline

- Watchful waiting for up to 6 months

- Counsel patients on alternative methods

**Complications Related to Estrogen**

Complications specific to estrogen-containing methods include thromboembolism (DVT, PE, stroke), new or worsening of prior hypertension, cardiac events when used in patients with cardiovascular disease, and hepatic hemangioma.

Previously, concerns were raised regarding cancer risk associated with the long-term use of OCPs. However, a 2017 study of over 46,000 women demonstrated a decreased risk of colorectal, endometrial, ovarian, and hematological cancers in those with OCP use within their lifetime.

**Complications Related to Progestins**

Injectable (and possibly oral) medroxyprogesterone acetate is associated with decreased BMD when used for two years or longer, though this loss is largely reversible.

However, BMD loss may level out beyond that, with a significant portion of the loss being reversible. One prospective cohort study of 248 new DMPA users showed a BMD loss of only 5.4% compared to their baseline after five years of use.

The main concern with this effect is the possibility of a higher risk of osteoporosis, bone stress injury, or fulminant fracture. This may be of particular concern among individuals who already carry these risks for other reasons, such as athletes or military personnel with high-volume weight-bearing physical activities, athletes with low energy availability, individuals with nutritional deficiency, those in middle age, those with chronic steroid use, or those with immobility.

Some evidence suggests that age-appropriate supplemental calcium (1200 mg daily) and vitamin D may decrease BMD loss for adolescents if taken concurrently with DMPA.

Despite the concern for BMD loss, the benefits of preventing pregnancy or suppressing menses may outweigh this risk, even in adolescents. There is no recommendation from ACOG or AAP on limiting the duration of use to 2 years.

The etonogestrel implant and LNG-IUD are not associated with BMD loss. Additionally, in general, progestins do not have any strong evidence to suggest an increased risk of breast cancer, cardiovascular disease, or thromboembolism.

**Complications Related to GnRH Agonists**

Adverse effects specific to GnRH agonists stem from the induction of a hypoestrogenic state. These include BMD loss, the risk for cardiovascular disease, headache, and menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes, mood changes, and fatigue.

**Impact on Fertility**

One of the common fears associated with menstrual suppression and hormonal contraception, in general, is the fear of alteration in baseline fertility after use. Baseline fertility rates do not appear to be affected for any of the methods beyond normal age-related fertility decline.

There may, however, be a delay in the resumption of ovulation and normal menses, depending on the method and duration of use. For this reason, within the first several months of discontinuing hormonal contraception, fertility rates in people using hormonal menstrual suppression methods may be lower than fertility rates in non-users. This initial delay is more likely seen in DMPA and CHC users than IUD users. However, there is no significant difference in pregnancy rates between methods by one year after stopping the method.

# Clinical Significance

Up to 26% of the global population menstruates.Indications, 800 million people menstruate on any given day, and bothersome menstrual-related symptoms (heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, premenstrual syndrome, bloating, fatigue) impact up to 2.5 million people annually.

Negative symptoms associated with menses may lead to absenteeism from school or work, resulting in loss of education and income, decreased participation in social, athletic, professional, or recreational activities, embarrassment or social ostracization, excessive income spent on menstrual hygiene products like pads, tampons, menstrual cups, and panties, increased risk for genitourinary infections, and excessive blood loss and associated anemia. These consequences may disproportionately impact those living in poverty, adolescents, persons with developmental or physical disabilities, gender-diverse persons, military personnel, athletes, and persons with malignancy (see discussion of "period poverty" and "Special Populations" in Indications).

By utilizing menstrual suppression methods, amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea may be achieved, and the described negative impacts of menses may be mitigated (see discussion of the impact on special populations in Indications).

Rates of amenorrhea per method are as follows:

- OCPs: 88% by 12 months

- POPs: widely variable depending on formulation and dose, 10 to 76%

- DMPA: up to 71% by 2 years

- Levonorgestrel-releasing IUD: 50% by 12 months, 60% by 2 years

- Subdermal etonogestrel implant: 13 to 22%

- GnRH agonists: up to 96%

- Testosterone: undefined

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Menstruating individuals may seek menstrual healthcare in various settings, ranging from community health clinics to large medical centers. These settings include primary care offices with family medicine or internal medicine physicians, general pediatricians, physician assistants, or nurse practitioners, as well as specialty care clinics with gynecologists, nurse midwives, adolescent or developmental pediatricians, or adult or pediatric endocrinologists. It is crucial for healthcare team members in these settings to have a comprehensive understanding of the indications and methods of menstrual suppression and to offer this option to their patients if desired.

Individual beliefs about menstrual suppression being "unnatural" or "unhealthy" create a barrier to menstrual suppression implementation.

There is no current evidence to support these beliefs. These beliefs may reflect a general lack of understanding or access to information among menstruating persons regarding the physiology of the menstrual cycle and hormonal contraceptives, as well as the absence or poor quality of counseling by clinicians on menstrual health. Clinicians may not have substantial knowledge or exposure to hormonal contraceptives for menstrual suppression or may only be familiar with the historical 28-day cyclic method.

**Parent and Caregiver Involvement**

For adolescents, the involvement of a parent or caregiver can be considered. Clinicians should encourage prioritization of adolescent autonomy when counseling adolescents and parents or caregivers on menstrual suppression options.

In individuals with developmental or physical disabilities, caregivers may be involved in decision-making or the sole decision-maker. When individuals with disabilities are cognitively impaired or have unclear decision-making capacity, clinicians should discuss management plans with those who have legal guardianship or medical decision-making power for the patient.

**Multi-Disciplinary Teams in Caring for**Transgender and Gender-Diverse Individuals****

As discussed in Special Populations, transgender and gender-diverse individuals should be cared for by an interprofessional team with medical and mental health professionals specializing in gender-affirming care.

**Disclosures**

The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy of Evans Army Community Hospital, Womack Army Medical Center, the Department of the Army, the U.S. Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government.