**Shooting Incidents in Hospitals in the United States**

Since 2000, there have been 154 hospital-related shootings involving 148 hospitals.  The events resulted in 235 injuries, some of which include deaths.  In the last decade, the incidence of the hospital-related shooting appears to be increasing annually. Hospital shootings have been known to occur in hospitals of all sizes.  Over the past 2 decades, at least 51% of shootings have occurred in hospitals with less than 40 beds.  However, as the number of hospital beds in a hospital increases, the number of shootings drop, perhaps indicating that small hospitals are easier to maneuver and have less stringent security.

About 60% of shootings have occurred inside the hospital and 40% outside the hospital.  The most common locations for the shootings include the following:

- Emergency department (highest)

- Outpatient clinic (second highest)

- Parking lot

- Patient rooms

- Intensive care unit (ICU)

**Who is the Shooter?**

In more than 90% of cases, the shooter is a male.  While many shooters have been young males, in some cases, shooters have been seniors.

**What is the Motive for the Shooting?**

- Grudge

- Treated poorly

- Revenge

- Ending life of an ill relative with terminal cancer or severe dementia

- Ideology

- Political beliefs

- Suicide

- Prisoner escape

- Mentally unstable patient with false beliefs such as paranoia and delusions

- Complications from a medical procedure or surgery

**Who are the Victims?**

In the majority of hospital incidents, there is one active shooter and one victim.  Only in about 10% of incidents were there more than three victims.  Tragically when they are multiple victims, at least 60% to 80% have been innocent bystanders.  The rest include physicians (3%), patients (13%), and nursing staff (5%).

After the shooting, nearly 50% of the shooters committed suicide.  Less than 10% of the time is the active shooter captured alive.

**Relationship Between the Shooter and Victims**

In many incidents, the shooter already knows the target, or he had some relationship.  Over the years the following relationships have been identified between the shooter and the victims:

- Active personal relationship (32%)

- Estranged relationship (25%)

- Current or former patient

- Current or former employee

- No obvious relationship

Unlike non-hospital shooting events where close to 25% of victims have no prior relationship to the shooter, in hospital settings, more than 50% of the time, the shooter and the victim have known each other.  Hospital shootings are not random and are often personal and targeted. Many hospital shootings are due to a personal grudge against the ex-spouse, doctor, nurse, or a colleague.

**What are Behavioral Indicators of Potential Shooters?**

- Individuals with a personal grievance

- Individuals who have a fascination with weapons and have a large collection of weapons

- Individuals who have recently enrolled in weapons training and visiting gun ranges for target practice

- Fascination with explosives and constantly talking or watching related videos

- Individuals who are angry, volatile, and find fault at everything

- Individuals with rigid beliefs that someone is out to get them

**What Weapons are Used by the Active Shooter?**

In most cases, the active shooter will use a firearm.  In rare cases, the active shooter may use other weapons and/or even improved explosive devices that cause more injuries and act as an impediment to law enforcement and emergency responders. Some of these improvised explosive devices may detonate immediately or may have delayed fuses.  Thus, no attempt should be made to go near or handle these devices.

**The Hospital Environment and the Shooting Incident**

Most health care facilities have a large number of visitors, patients, and important medical staff on hand, and thus any shooting incident can result in mass casualties.  Thus, to someone determined to cause mayhem and chaos, the hospitals are soft targets. Most hospitals are rich in targets, and if there is an active shooter in a critical sector, it can lead to a cascade of events with a high number of deaths.  For example, a shooting in the emergency room can paralyze the hospital as it is the core area where patients are resuscitated. Without a viable emergency room, injured individuals have nowhere else to go for help.

**Challenges in Hospitals with an Active Shooter**

Presence of an active shooter is a hospital can be challenging in many ways, and they include the following:

- The hospital is often a large complex with many sections/divisions.  Often one can have difficulty knowing where the event is taking place

- When an active shooting takes place, should the doctor leave the patient? What happens if the doctor is in the middle of a procedure or surgery?

- What should be done about the visitors?  How can they be informed of an active shooter and what safe place are they allowed to enter?

- How can patients who are bedridden, old or incapacitated be evacuated?

- What if the shooting is in a mental health ward that usually has locked doors? How can anyone get out? Most mental wards need a password to exit or enter, and this only allows staff to leave, but what about the patients?

- If there are many injuries or patients, which patient should healthcare workers save first, or evacuate? Who makes that decision?

**Special Areas of Consideration**

When an active shooter is present in the hospital, many critical places need to be considered.

- The emergency department usually has many patients waiting to be seen or admitted.  This is the main area of the hospital, and if any disruption of activity takes place here, then it can be very difficult to manage any injuries.

- Intensive care units (ICU): it is almost impossible to evacuate patients in the ICU as many are critically ill and some may even be hooked to machines and ventilators.

- Other areas of concerns include the laboratories were chemical spills, and exposure to a microorganism may occur if there is a shooting incident or explosion.

- MRI Suite

- This imaging suite has a machine with high-powered magnets which can create a missile effect. Any iron containing item can be quickly drawn into the MRI with a sudden force that they can become airborne. This effect has resulted in many accidents and can readily jeopardize the safety of staff and patients as well as the MRI equipment itself.  Previously reported that a delivery person walked into an active MRI with a tank of oxygen.  The magnet created a missile of the oxygen tank resulting in rupture of the canister and death of the individual.  There are several reports where guns have been pulled out from the hands and holsters of law enforcement officers, hitting MRI machines, and in some cases result in an accidental discharge.