There are 3 main surgical approaches for subglottic stenosis, including endoscopic, open neck surgery, and tracheotomy. Endoscopic techniques include dilation either by balloon or rigid dilation. It also includes radical incision using a carbon dioxide laser and scar excision using a cold knife, without dilation. Finally, it often involves stent placement, as well. Adjunctive therapies for endoscopic surgery also include topical mitomycin and glucocorticoid injection. Mitomycin has antifibrogenic and antineoplastic activity. The goal of these approaches is to improve the patency of the airway in the long term and avoid dyspnea symptoms.

Patients with idiopathic subglottic stenosis are mostly managed endoscopically, and inter-dilation intervals may be increased with corticosteroid injection.

Mature and severe laryngeal stenosis in pediatric patients can also be treated successfully in patients with balloon dilation. In most severe cases with a prior tracheotomy, stenting is a must. Balloon dilation with stenting can also facilitate laryngotracheal reconstruction.

In an infant born with subglottic stenosis, traditional management is to do tracheostomy and access the child’s airway every 3 months to decide for the need for reconstructive surgery. The second option is to perform anterior or posterior cricoid split under general anesthesia to enlarge the cricoid lumen. The optimal treatment for acquired subglottic stenosis is laryngotracheal reconstruction. In laryngotracheal reconstruction, a separate incision above the tracheostomy at the level of cricoid is made, and the larynx is exposed from the hyoid above to the tracheostomy below. The lumen is entered above the superior thyroid notch, and the larynx is incised strictly in the midline. The graft is taken from costal cartilage and inserted to widen the cricoid ring. A silastic stent is used to prevent the collapse of the graft. During the closure of the incision, it is very important to oppose the anterior commissure accurately.